A TRIUMPHANT ARCH ERECTED and CONSECRATED to the Glory of the FEMININE SEX:

BY MONSIEUR de SCUDERY:

Englished by I. B. Gent.

Dum Spiro Spero



LONDON, Printed for William Hope, and Henry Herringman, at the blew Anchor
behind the Old Exchange, and at the blew Anchor in the lower Walk in the New
Exchange, 1656.

To the LADIES.
Illustrious Ladies,
THese following Harangues are so many pillars of that Triumphant Arch, erected
by the skilful hands of the renowned Monsieur de Scudery, to the glory of your
excellent Sex; which I, not only out of those common principles of Civility,
which obliges all men to render you service; and in obedience to the commands
of two most noble Ladies, which were sufficient to prompt the dullest spirit;
but out of that earnest desire I have to proclaim my infinite respect and
veneration to your Illustrious Sex, have adventured to translate, and do now
prostrate them before you with the most profound respect that can be. And
though my dis-joynted and unpolished version does so abate their native luster,
compared to the Original, as might deserve your censure; yet when you shall be
pleased to consider of what importance it is to your fame and honor, and that
none abler have yet remembered to undertake it; I do not believe only, that your
natural sweetness will be persuaded to grant a pardon, but am induced to think
it were a sin to doubt of your fair acceptance. Look but on it, Illustrious
Ladies, as it truly is, a glorious Trophy, composed of the Arms, Scepters, and
Crowns of so many Monarchs, which your beauties have subdued; and no doubt but
it will become as grateful as it is magnificent; and be received with as much
delight and satisfaction, as it is tendered with desire and passion.

THE SUBJECTS Of the following HARANGUES.
The first Harangue.
HElena to Paris: That beauty is no real good.
The second
Angelica to Medoro: That Love proceeds from the inclination.
The third.
Amarillis to Tityrus: That the Country life is to be preferred before living
in Cities.
The fourth.
Clorinda to Tancred: That the affection ought not to die with the beloved.
The fifth.
Erminia to Arsetes: That the affection ought not to go beyond the grave.
The sixth.
Cariclia to Theagenes: That those who never suffered troubles, cannot truly
tell what pleasure is.
The seventh.
Polixena to Pyrrhus: That death is better than slavery.
The eighth.
Penelope to Laertes: That absence is worse than death.
The ninth.
Briseis to Achilles: That one may be both Slave and Mistress.
HELENA TO PARIS.
I Know full well (o too lovely, and if I may say it, too much beloved Paris)
that you will not easily condescend to the discourse I shall now shape; that
you will hardly suffer I should condemn that which you approve; that I blame
that which you have so much praised, and that I slight that which you do even
yet adore. You believe, without doubt, that I cannot offend my beauty, without
offending your judgment; and that since I owe all my glory to it, in owing it
your conquest, I have no reason to make an assault against that. And truly he
that looks on the thing but on this side, would ever be a stranger to my
opinion: but as they have all double faces, if you will, your self, consider
both the one and the other without interest, and preoccupation; I assure my
self that your sense of it will not be at distance from mine: that you will
break down the Altar where you have committed Idolatry, that you will
acknowledge that you have taken an Idol for a God, that you will subscribe to
my opinion, and that in fine you will say as well as I that beauty is not a
real God. But to prevent you from making me any objections, I will propound
them my self; yes, my dearly beloved Paris, I my self will range all your
troops in battalia, that so I may defeat them afterward: and to remove all
subject of complaint, I will not speak till after I have made you speak: I am
not then ignorant, that the partisans for beauty, say that it is the chiefest
work of nature, and its last effect: that the planets, and the sun it self have
somewhat a lesser brightness; that from that admirable mixture of colors, and
for that exact proportiof features which compose a beauty, there results
something that is divine: that there are none but the blind can deny this
truth, and those statues which feel not its power: that that mavelous and
proud object continually triumphs: that Kings take a glory in following its
chariot: that they prefer its chains to their crowns, and that the most
brave take a vanity to sigh at its feet, and to cast down their trophies there.
They say likewise that the Empire of this beauty is far more noble and more
glorious than that of the great Monarchs, since they reign over the bodies
only, and this reigns over the spirits. They say that they are her eyes only
that may be called King of Kings, since they alone subject them, and that only
they make those dye slaves, who were not born but to command. In fine, they
establish this beauty Queen of all the Earth; they make her reign soveraignly
over all the rational world; and maintain with as much ardour as they resent;
that she is alone the sovereign good. Nevertheless, O my dear Paris, how
deceitful are the appearances! and how true it is at least, that if beauty be
a real good for those that see it, it is an evil to those in whom it is seen. To
make this pass for a solid advantage, were to make blossoms pass for
flowers: flatterers form it of lilies and roses, and do not dream that the
lilies and the roses are of no durance, and that the fairest flowers are of no
price but amongst the curious, that is to say amongst those that are not wise.
And then who does not know that we accustom our selves to behold beauty, as we
do all other things? that after that it moves our eyes no more than the most
vulgar? And that as soon as it has lost the grace of being new, it has almost
lost all?

Can one behold a light more resplendent than that of the Sun it self? Is
there any object in Nature so mavelous as that, and whose pomp and
magnificence can come near it? Nevertheless because his luster is ordinary,
and that it is seen every day, few people mind to consider it, how worthy soever
it be of it: Whereas if in a sad night a Comet make his threatening beams blaze
in the air, all the world runs forth to see it; all the world beholds with
admiration; so true it is that things, which are common, moves but little, and
that extraordinary ones do powerfully attract our minds. It is thus (Paris)
with those admirable flowers of which we spoke already; of that fair ornament
of the spring which nature paints with so much art, and which she enamels with
so rare a diversity: they seem always beautiful to us, because we do not
always see them: it being certain, that if we beheld them continually, they
would not seem so to us. One season bestows them on us, another ravishes them
away, and another brings them again: and from thence it is that our eyes are
never glutted. Add again to these reasons, that the flowers, which adorn the
Earth, and those which compound the skin, are but a shadow of beauty; but a
pleasing vapor; and but an illusion which delights. It is of beauty as of the
rainbow, it is somewhat, and it is nothing; it appears what it is not; and
equally deceives him that admires it, and that lets it be admired. Lawful
Reigns may be long, but Tyranies are ordinarily short. The most faithful
slaves do sometimes remember their liberty, and when the chains are not strong,
they seldom fail of weakening them. Judge then whether this forsaken queen be
very glorious, and whether one can fall from a throne so elevated without
falling dangerously? Suppose likewise, that those slaves are wiling to be so,
that their chains be of diamonds, and that is to say, as durable as they esteem
them precious; do you not know that it is a general order established in
nature, that the effect cannot subsist when the cause is ceased? Beauty passes,
the love which it engendered passes with it, and they are after left both
without lovers or beauty. The glory which is left us, is the glory of an
Epitaph: They say she obtained a thousand victories, she gained a thousand
Trophies; she appeared in a thousand Triumphs; but after all, she is no more:
here lies the beauty of Helena, although Helena be not dead; she sees her self
intombed alive; she hears her self spoken of as of another person, and by a
particular unhappiness she seems to be obliged, to enter twice into the grave.
Ha me Paris, lets tell the things as they are; the privation of that glory is
more sensible than that glory it self ever was. It is more supportable to miss
always some good, than to loose it after we have had it: and without doubt
it is better to be borne unhappy then to become so. It is better (I say) to have
always been in the mire, than to fall therein from the height of the throne:
and those which are borne slaves are not half so unhappy as those Kings which
become so. Now if to fall from the throne be a great misfortune, Judge what
that is then to be cast from an Altar? To loose the Incense is more than to
loose the Crown; and to see ones self slighted by those which adored us, is
without doubt a displeasure which must be insupportable. You may possibly tell
men, that this inevitable evil is so far off, that one cannot perceive it:
that nature shall change its whole face fifty times before this beauty change,
and that the sun shall see its glory a thousand and a thousand times before it
shall behold its disgrace. O Paris, how if you measure the time, if you measure
it thus! a thousand accidents may ravish it from us every day; It is exposed to
a thousand dangers; and there are not more eyes which see it, than there are
evils which can make that it never more be seen. And if yet it could reach as
far as can be; that it should last to the utmost limits which nature has
prescribed it; and that this sun should yet be unclouded at its setting: there
is so little space from the cradle to the sepulcher, and from the beginning of
the life to its period, that one cannot without a strong injustice set any
considerable price upon so frail a thing. In a word it is to take glass for
diamond, and to make that esteemed for precious, which is not at all so, though
it appear so.

I know you will tell me that the true lover does not derive the cause of his
passion from the beauty only of the body, but that the mind has its share; and
that thus this last subsisting always his love may subsist in despite of the
others ruin. But Paris, how rare are these Philosophical lovers! and how few
men are found which behold a Mistress only in the beauties of her soul! there
are found some indeed, which swear that nothing is able to shake their
constancy, which protest that their fidelity is above the power of fortune, and
more strong than time it self; which maintain that this beauty shall change,
and yet we shall not see them change; and that in fine they shall yet think the
ruins handsome, and will even adore a Temple, though destroyed. But Paris,
when they say all this their Mistresses are not yet decayed; nor can their
imagination conceive, that they can become so. They promise, without knowing
what they promise, and without intent to observe it; and all those unprofitable
speeches proceed, rather from the weakness of their minds, than the meaning of
their hearts. But suppose yet that they think all what they say, and that the
lips do express only the pure intentions of the soul: she whom they deceive in
deceiving themselves, is not much the more assured, since by the revolution of
time and and things, there is often more difference betwixt us and our selves,
than there is betwixt us and some other: And that thus we cannot promise any
thing on our faith, since we cannot tell our selves, what we shall be. O how
much easier it is to imagine brave projects, than to put them in practice! The
poorest architect, so long as he traces his design but upon the sands, finds
all his lines with a great facility; notwithstanding when it comes that the
mass of stones must be piled, and the solidity of the marble must be hewn,
the most skillful finds himself troubled. It is easy to those who have the
art of speaking with a good grace, to make fair pictures of constancy, as of
other virtues; nevertheless all painters are not virtuous, because they are
painters: and when they draw those handsome Images, they do not always make
their own pictures. Now my dear, and dearly beloved Paris, do not imagine, that
it is but only in the fear of the future that we must seek the disadvantage of
beauty: that sun has eclipses in its highest elevation: that queen has her
disquiets under the purple, and on the throne: her scepter, as it is of gold,
is heavier than Iron; and her Crown has not so many flowers as thorns. I know
well that to judge of her by the pomp, and by the splendor which environs
her, it is impossible to have any other than very high thoughts: her beams
dazzle the judgment and the sight; her majesty strikes fear; her sweetness
inspires love; she is pleasing to those whom she murders; she finds all
submitted to her will; her imperious looks makes a thousand illustrious slaves
to tremble; she imposes laws and receives none; in short she sees nothing above
her self but heaven. Do not however judge, I conjure you, by these false marks
of greatness; believe that this queen elective is not without trouble; and on
the contrary, the least of her subjects is more happy than she is. Yes Paris it
is with her domination as it is with those great Empires which are only
compounded of Conquests, and of usurped promises; and which for this reason
require so much care to keep them, that their Conqueror becomes a slave, as
soon as ever he makes himself King. In all other states few rebels are
found: and in this of beauty all aspire to tyrany; all will from subjects
become masters; and not one resolves to serve, but with the unjust design of
commanding. I know, lovely Paris, that you are the exception to this rule; that
I should be unjust my self, if I complained of your respect; and that in you a
shepherd worthy to command Monarchs, has always taken a glory in obeying me.
But as you are incomparable, do not draw any consequence from your self of
others: and without opposing your self against reason, or my discourse, suffer
me to continue it. As the Planets shine as well upon the dunghill as upon
Jewels, and the most stupid see the sun as well as others; so beauty makes
shameful conquests as well as honorable; and its power extends sometimes
farther than she desires: a thousand importunate people persecute it: a
thousand displeased assasinate it; and all oppose its good. One comes and
praises it unhandsomly; the other comes and rather extolls himself; the one is
always musing by her, the other is so gay that he has lost his wits; the one
is jealous, another is desperate; one laughs at what the other sighs; one
comes and sings her praises, another powers forth injury; the one calls her
divine, the other says she is a tygresse; the one offers her incense, the
other, if he durst, would throw dirt at her; one raises an Altar to her, and
sets her up an Image, the other afterward endeavors to raze both the Altar
and the statua; in fine, to consider these things well, hell it self has not a
greater nor more strange torment than beauty which so many enemies besiege.
Nevertheless (can you believe it?) these enemies are not the most to be feared,
if they assault the quiet, there are others which assault the honor: and by an
unexampled cruelty, beauty it self endeavors to destroy beauty. O Paris, you
will easily expound this riddle, and will easily know my thoughts, if you
observe what envy makes my sex to do for the interest of this unhappy beauty.
As soon as ere a woman considers this, she no more considers any body else;
the most holy amity is not inviolable with her; the bonds of consanguinity are
not strong enough to hold her; and of all the devoirs which bind us to one
another, and which makes society, there is not one which she does not despise;
slander (that poison as secret as dangerous) expands its self insensibly on
the reputation of a person who has no other defect than that she has none,
than that of being too handsome. She receives a thousand wounds which she
feels not; they ruin her when she cannot perceive it; they strike her when
she cannot see the arm nor the blow; and all these disasters happen to her
only because of her beauty. From thence more tragical events yet draw their
detestable source: from thence proceeds the quarrels of rivals, the division of
families, irreconcilable hatred, bloody and woeful cumbats, and the utter
desolation of houses: But my dear, and as I have already said, my too dear
Paris, you, and likewise my self know it but too well what the effects are of
this fatal beauty! you cannot cast your eyes from this very place toward the
sigean gate, nor toward the banks of Xanthus without beholding the deplorable
works of those evils it can cause. It Is this alone (to speak rationally) which
covers this sea with the enemies galleys; it is this alone which pitches so many
tents and pavilions about this famous City; it is this alone which diggs the
deep trenches that begirt her, and which robs her of her liberty; and it is this
alone which raises to an equal height with our walls the proud and high
ramparts which cover the Grecians Camp. Yes Paris, it is this alone which has
caused the first blood to be spilt, with which the fields are died which has
disturbed the quiet, and the old age of Priam; which has caused the affliction
of Hecuba; which has engaged the valiant Hector in the perils of combats; and
to say somewhat yet more sensible to my heart, which has endangered Paris.
It Is from this alone, that the Mycenian Mothers, and that the Trojan Women will
equally demand their children and their husbands; and by an unhappiness as
strange as particular, it is this alone on which both the parties will look as
an enemy; whether the rashness of a Grecian, or the inconsiderateness of a
Trojan makes them perish amidst the armies; the beauty of Helena (if it be true
that Helena have any beauty) will always be the only cause of it. She shall
answer for all the events of the war, and as if she made the destiny both of
the one, and the other; the one and the other Nation will always demand
satisfaction of her for the calamities they have suffered. Yes the Trojan
people murmur against her; those of Argos curse her; offended Menelaus
threatens; Cassandra calls her the fatal torch of Illium; and to ruin this
unfortunate beauty, those people, which are at variance in all other things,
agree in this: Nay I fear, (and this is the greatest of my fears;) I say I fear
(o my dear Paris) least the disgrace become contagious; and that you be accused
of its crime; and that in fine they may hate you because you love it. Nature
will complain of you and of love: the interest of your Country will strive to
oversway that of your passion: Priam will demand obedience of you: Hecuba will
claim your tenderness: Cassandra will ask for observance from you: the people
will desire your compliance: and the very Greeks will demand Helena of you, to
be revenged, and to punish her. Well then, content all the world in her loss,
and content even her own self, if so be her loss may serve any way to
content you. Extinguish this fatal torch, which may inflame your City, reduce
your Palaces to cinders, and r'anverse your walls, this so flourishing an
Empire, at least if you will believe the predictions of Cassandra, and the
dream your mother has had, render to Menelaus who does desire it, a guest
which is so dangerous; follow no longer what you ought to fly; look on the
perilous luster of this beauty, as on those false lights which lead into
precipices, and be no longer dazzled with such obnoxious beams. Consider that
its most resplendent lights may perhaps prove to you the shining of a Comet,
which do threaten Princes and their States with disorders and misfortunes.
Consider that all that pleases should not please: and that the victory of ones
own passions is not the least glorious conquest, one may obtain, as it is not
the easiest. Confess as well as I, that beauty is no real good, and reject it
as an evil. Do not listen either to pity or inclination, which never counsel
faithfully, and do but flatter to deceive. Follow, follow that severe beauty, I
mean reason, and prefer it to that of my face. Hearken to Priam, hearken to
Hecuba, hearken to all the Trojans, nay hearken to the very Greeks, and hearken
no more to love, which speaks to you in favor of this beauty. Helena who
knows it, and ought to know it, does once more protest to you, that she is
nothing less than what she is believed to be; that she has nothing precious
but in appearance; and that she is of too small value to be preferred to
Crowns, or to sacrifice your quiet to her. Loose her then to conserve your
self, that fatal beauty; and if Troy will make an ominous present to the
Greeks, let her make no other than what themselves demand. Of all those flames,
which from the battlements of your ramparts, you shall cast into their Camp, I
dare say that those of my eyes will be the most hurtful to them; and if they
knew what it is they desired, they would give as many battles not to have it,
as they give to obtain it. Believe me then, and do not believe your self, o my
dear, dear Paris, and expose not either your State, nor your Parents, nor
your quiet, for a thing which cannot be esteemed a real good, no not in the
very minds of those, which do possess it. But when you have followed my
counsel, and reasons, remember at least, that Helena has spoken against her
self to speak for you, and that it is no slight act for a woman to avouch
ingenuously that beauty is not a real good. Remember (I say) that Helena has
more than once preferred your satisfaction before her own glory; and that the
same cause, which obliged her to follow you, does now oblige her to leave you.
Never forget this last testimony of my affection I conjure you, since it is the
most difficult I can give you; and how low soever the price is that I set on
this beauty, which I will loose with my life to preserve you; remember that
your self have often esteemed it beyond Thrones and Scepters; and that in this
manner, though I bestow on you but little according to my own judgment, I give
you very much according to yours.

FINIS.
The effect of this HARANGUE.
PAris was persuaded enough of the love that Helena had for him, but he was not
so of the disesteeme of her Beauty. He hearkened to this reason as a Paradox,
and judged without doubt that this fair Grecian spoke of her going, but only to
oblige him the more to keep her.

For mine own part, I who have made her speak no less against my own thoughts
than against beauty; I acknowledge that since I have finished this hard task,
for which I have had so much repugnance, I believe that now when I list, I may
maintain that snow is black, and that Mores are white; so true it is, that what
I have said has little truth in it, and is so little consonant to my belief.

ANGELICA TO MEDORO. The Second HARANGUE.
The Argument.
ANGELICA, that fair Indian queen who made so many generous lovers run after
her, and disdained their affections, could not in fine, hinder but that the
beauty of a simple Soldier triumphed over hers, and her pride: and revenged
the unjust disdain that proud one had made of the loves of so many kings, and
of the vows of so many Hero's, whom she had scoffed, and never truly loved.
Now we suppose that after the happy Medoro had subdued her heart, she had some
shame for her defeat, and judging that so extraordinary a passion would be
condemned of all the World; seeing the inequality of their conditions; one day
when they were under the pleasant shades, where they passed so many sweet
moments, she undertook to maintain, through a desire of glory, and with her
usual Eloquence: That love proceeds only from inclination.

ANGELICA TO MEDORO.
WHen ever (lovely Medoro) you shall undertake to entertain me with the
grandeur of your affection, never speak to me neither of my birth, nor of my
merit, nor of my obligations, nor of the glory you meet in serving me, nor the
advantages nature has bestowed on me, nor those I enjoy by fortune; but to
satisfy me in this occasion, say only to me that you love me, because your
inclination prompts you on to it, and because you cannot hinder it your self.
Believe me Medoro, it is neither to my birth, nor to my merit, nor to the
obligations you have, nor to the glory you find in serving me, nor the
advantage I have received from nature, nor to those I hold by fortune, that I
will owe all that tenderness which I expect from you, and to say all, it is
not neither from your reason, nor from your acknowledgment, nor likewise from
your will that I accept of the love which you have for Angelica. If the chains
which I have given you were no stronger than those, I should believe you
capable to break them easily, and should think my self but ill assured of my
conquest. But for my own satisfaction, I am persuaded of the contrary, and I
verily believe, that though I should not re-ascend the Throne again whereon I
was borne, that although I had fewer good qualities than I have, though you
were not obliged to me, though there were no glory in being my slave, and
though neither Nature nor Fortune had given me neither beauty nor riches, yet
you would not cease to love me as perfectly as you now do, provided that your
Inclination did prompt you, as I now know it compells you. It Is an error to
think that love can be an effect of the Reason, or the Will. No Medoro, that
passion would cease, being a passion, if it were bred ^n our souls by knowledge
and judgment. One may, and one ought to choose their friend: but one cannot nor
ought not to choose a Lover. We must love them almost without knowing them, the
first instant of their sight must be the first of our servitude, where we
engage our selves we must find our selves quite laden with chains, before we
have had the leisure to examine, whether or no it be glorious to receive them:
the Judgment must be blind, Reason must be banished, the Will must be
enchained, and in fine, the Inclination we have for the person beloved must
triumph imperiously over all the powers of a soul, which is touched as it
should be with a sincere and true passion. It Is from that alone that love must
take its birth, and not from that great number of things, where a particular
interest would sway us sooner than Inclination. And truly I can assure you,
that in the mind I am in, I should rather receive a Crown from your hand, than
give it you, as I do intend; I should rather see you despise all the Princesses
in the world for love of me, than to despise, as I my self do, all the
greatest Princes of the Earth for love of you; since in fine, if things were
thus, I could never doubt, but that your amity were rather an effect of your
Inclination than of your Choice. Nevertheless, since that cannot be, I am not
unwilling to let you see, that my own cannot be for by-interests, but that it
is voluntary in effect: if reason might freely have counseled in this business:
Medoro had not found Angelica's heart in a condition to receive now his Image;
so many Illustrious Captives which her beauty or her good destiny had bestowed
on her, would without doubt have engaged her soul before. Yes, of so many
Princes, of so many Kings, of so many Hero's which have loved her, and which
have followed her; there would have been found some which her reason would not
have judged unworthy of her. If ambition could be a path for love, I should
reign over the Tartarian Empire; if valor could subject the spirit, Orlando
would be the Conqueror of Angelica; if wisdom, virtue, birth, and courage
could suffice to inspire that ardour, or to maintain and preserve it, I should
yet love Renaldo more than my own self; if the testimonies of a violent
affection were powerful enough to produce its semblable, I should not have
resisted my brother, when he would have made me accept of that of Ferragus the
King of Spains son; in fine, if this passion came into ones heart without fear,
and with judgment, the Circassion King had not left mine in a condition to be
given you now; and it would have been almost impossible, that of so many Crowns
which have been laid down at my feet, I should not have found some which I had
thought fair enough to have suffered them to set it on my head:
notwithstanding, because all those princes, all those Kings, and all those
Hero's have only satisfied my judgment, and have not touched my inclination I
have despised them all, and the only Medoro without Crown, without Kingdom,
all covered with wounds, and extended almost dead upon the earth, has had more
power ore my soul, than all those who by their riches, by their birth, or by
their courage have endeavored to conquer me. It Is true that one may perhaps
tell me that I have found more merit in you, than in all the others: and that
he who came from shedding his blood, and exposing his life to give burial to
the body of his King, deserved to be King himself, and to inspire such
sentiments into the heart of Angelica, which others could not infuse. However
to tell things as they are, that Heroic virtue which you testified in that
occasion, did not give you the Empire of my soul: and if that puissant
inclination of which I speak, and which is the mother of all loves, had not
constrained me to affect you, I should only have had compassion and esteem for
you. But that superior power which inclines us, or rather which forces us, to
do what it pleases, made that without knowing you, and without hardly having
seen you, I had mrore care for your life than for my own, and did believe I
found in your person, that which I had not found in any other. All that you at
the first instant, called compassion, and generosity in me, was already an
effect of love; I did not that which I would, but that which I could not
forbear to do. I sought the herbs which should heal your wounds with too much
earnestness and care to believe that I had no other interest in your life, but
only for compassion, and generosity. No Medoro it was not so, I had no sooner
seen you, but without the help of my judgment, I loved you as much as one can
love, although I my self knew not whether that which I felt in my soul for you
were love. And in effect, reason is rather wont to war against love than to
beget it, or to cherish it when it is borne, That severe and imperious Queen,
far from approving the bonds the chains, and the follies of lovers, speaks
nothing but of liberty of our franchises, and wisdom. She will have all our
senses subjected to her, and our wills follow her intentions, our memory must
receive nothing in store but what she judges worthy to be preserved, and the
imagination must present her with things only that are serious and very solid.
A lover at his Mistresses feet, is to her an object worthy of laughter and
pity: she scoffs at his weakness: she condemns all he does: and in fine, she
would were it in her power, destroy all the Laws of Nature, banish all
passions from men's hearts, and reign; She alone over all the Universe. Judge
after this Medoro, whether reason can introduce love in a soul, and whether I
have not reason to say, that there is something in us more powerful than she
is that attracts us, sInce in spite both of her counsels and power, we often
act quite contrary to what she would have us? there is this difference betwixt
reason and inclination, that one for the most part will oblige us to do things
that displeases us, and this later never tempts us to any thing but what is
grateful to us. It Is that without doubt which makes its power so great, that
the other cannot resist it; she must needs yield, how clear sighted so ere she
is, to this amiable blind guide which leads and conducts us as she pleases,
who makes us love and hate according to her fancy, and who alone inspires love
in the hearts of all men. When reason would sway us to any thing (though she be
so imperious as I have said) yet she must employ both time and artifice to
persuade us to obey her: she shows those whom she will expose to great perils,
the glory they shall meet with; she represents to those who find an occasion to
be liberal, that to give to ones friends, is to put ones treasure in security:
in fine, she discourses the ill favourdnesse of vice, and the amability of
virtue, that we may shun the one, and follow the other with the more ardour.
She does not therefore act with so absolute a power as the inclination, which
without pointing out to us either the good or the evil, which can happen by
those things whereto she leads us, presses us on, or to say better, constrains
us with such violence that we cannot resist. Those natural aversions, which we
see amongst reasonable persons testifies sufficiently that our judgment is not
absolute master of our actions: those that hate roses, acknowledge that their
color is fair, and that the smell it self is sweet; and yet for all the
knowledge they have of their beauty, they turn away their sight with care, and
fly from them as another would from some fearful object. This imbecility of
their temperature is the same thing, with that which is found in our soul, when
the inclination constrains it to do what she will, and not that which its self
pleases. When I ceased to love Renaldo, I did cease knowing that he was yet
worthy of my esteem; and when 'twas his turn to cease from loving me, yet I
believe he did acknowledge that Angelica had some beauty. Notwithstanding
because it is not the judgment that begets affection, we know one another to
be lovely, and yet love not; and perhaps we did love without knowing whether
we had any lovely qualities or not: So true it is, that reason acts but weakly;
and so certain is it, that inclination is altogether powerful. The first makes
us obey only, by the same means legitimate Monarchs employ against their
subjects; but the other makes her self to feared and followed, as victorious
Tyrants use to do. She imployes naught but force against us; but as that force
and violence is almost inevitable, and that she has no less sweetness than
power, there is hardly any thing which resists but she overcomes it. Honor,
glory, private interest, and virtue it self, are many times too weak an
obstacle to hinder her designs, she makes Kings love shepherdesses, and that
shepherds raise their looks even up to their Sovereigns Thrones; and without
distinction either of qualities or of merit, She makes a mixture of Scepters
and sheephooks, of Crowns and chains, of free persons and slaves; and by these
extraordinary effects, sufficiently testifies, that we are not masters of our
own will, of affections; or that our reason is not always so strong as to
overcome her. In effect, should we act but by her counsels, should our love
follow only our knowledge, and were it by her consent only that we should wear
our fetters; it is certain that we should wear but one in all our lives. That
which we had once found fair would always be so to us; we should love till
death, what we once thought lovely: and inconstancy in fine, would never be
found amongst lovers.

Since the beginning of the World, the Sun has given admiration to all men,
gold; pearls, and diamonds, have never found any that questioned their beauty:
briefly, all things universally known, remain constant: why then, if love took
birth from perfect knowledge, and by the operations of the judgment, should it
not always remain in the hearts that possess it? Ha, no, no, Medoro, that
cannot be so: and therefore it is that all those, that are unfaithful, are not
so worthy of blame as is believed: nor those that are constant merit, so much
praise as is bestowed upon them. The one and the other do what they are forced
to do: some break their bands, and others preserve theirs, because they are
constrained to it. You see some, who after they have broken their chains, do
rivet them together again with care, and bind themselves again more closely
than they were before. There are some others, even weighed down by their
burden, who sigh under the load that presses them, and who might nevertheless
disengage themselves, but will not, preferring their servitude above liberty.
Do you believe Medoro that these bizare effects can proceed from a
clear-sighted reason, and a free will? Or do you not believe on the contrary
that the sole inclination is that which unchains us, or unties us, which makes
us inconstant or faithful, and that which makes us either love or hate? Let
none wonder than any more, if we behold queens descending from their Thrones to
place their Lovers there, though they be not of a royal birth: Let none wonder
then any more to see Princes despised, Crowns rejected, and Hero's unfortunate
in their amors; since it is not neither from reason, nor from interest, nor
from ambition, nor from glory that this noble ardour derives its birth.

But (you will ask) what obligation has a lover to his Mistres, if it be true
that she loves him only because she is constrained and cannot choose but love
him? None, my dear Medoro, none, and it is for that in my opinion that love
passes for the most noble of all passions, because it is not mercinary. In
common friendship and amity it is permitted to count the services we render or
receive; and to name a thing, that we do willingly, an obligation: but in the
actions of lovers there should be no such thing. The persons which love owing
all things, there are no thanks owing in return again, so that though I had
given you my Crown, as I have already given you my heart, I do not pretend you
should be the more obliged to me, since amongst those that know how to love,
who ever bestows their affections, do at the same instant bestow both their
Scepters and Kingdoms, and to be short, all that they possess. And if by
misfortune it had happened, that your inclination had been contrary to mine; that
you had hated me as much as I have and do love you, do you think, my dear
Medoro, that I should have blamed you? No, I would have bemoaned my self
without accusing you: and as by my own experience I know one cannot love
through reason, I would not have murmured against you, though you had refused
Angelica's love, with as much rigor as she has refused the services of all the
Kings in the world to accept those of the amiable, and generous Medoro. Some
might perhaps say to me that I am not very ingenious, but rather very ill
advised, to entertain you with these discourses: that I take off your fetters
by persuading you that you may leave them without a crime: and that I instruct
you in ingratitude, when I avouch my self that you owe me no obligation;
although for the love of you I have done all what I was capable to do, in
giving you my kingdom, and which is more my affection, which I prefer before
the Scepter that I mean to give into your hands. But to answer that objection,
I must tell you, that seeing the condition, wherein I found you, and the
difference of your birth from mine, if I could have hindered my love to you, I
should be guilty if I had not done it: and being so rational as I know you to
be, you would your self secretly have condemned my affection, though it were
advantageous to you. You would have more esteemed in me the quality of Queen,
than that of Lover: and have rejoiced more for conquering my kingdom than my
person. So that to persuade you all at once, both of the greatness of this
affection, and that I am not unworthy of your esteem no more than of your
love, I shall never be weary with telling you, that it is a superior power that
causes us to love; that all the wisdom, and all the human prudence cannot
bring any obstacle; and that in fine, it is only the inclination alone, which
may be said the true mother of all loves. There is I know not what secret
charm, which passes from the eyes of the lover into the heart of her whom the
destinies do choose him for her beloved, whose power is inevitable, and as the
moon governes the Sea, the north attracts the loadstone, and the sun forms
the metals in the bowels of the earth, by means which are unknown to us, so
does the inclination conduct our judgment, attract our will, and forms the
love in our souls, by ways of which we are utterly ignorant. She makes that
we often love, that which we do not know; and oftentimes to, that which is not
very lovely, and which we would not love if we could help it. From whence
think you does arrive so many strange events in the world, of which Histories
are filled if it be not from that puissant Tyrany, which surmounts all others?
If Anthonies Galley (whose adventures I have told you, and whose amors I
learned since I left Asia, and since my being in Europe) could have (I say)
been governed by reason, and that it had not been whirled away with violence,
by the inclination that that Roman had, for the fair Egiptian whose charms
he did adore; do you believe he would not have stayed in his army at the
battle he lost, or that at least he would not have disputed that victory with
his enemy? Yes Medoro, he was too wise, and too valiant, not to endeavor to
win, or to fly ignobly before those, whose conqueror he might have been.
Nevertheless, though he were ambitious, though he were almost assured to have
all the advantage of that day, and though it concerned and stood upon the
Empire of the whole World, his inclination was more puissant in him than the
desire of glory, or of dominion. One may say moreover, besides the illustrious
example, that it is by the power of this inclination that so many brothers have
become enemies, when they became Rivals; that so many subjects have revolted
against their Princes; that so many Citizens have betrayed their Country; and
that so many Hero's have committed faults of judgment, or done actions which
were unworthy of them. All those people Medoro, had not lost their reason in
the things which did not concern their loves: they spoke after the same manner
as they were wont before, they were tainted with so great a malady; they acted
in the same sort, they thought of their own affairs, and of their friends
with the same prudence: wherefore then should not the same reason be found in
their love, if there had not been something in them more powerful than that
was? Ha, no, no, Medoro, this truth cannot be doubtful: and though I seem to
prejudice my self in persuading my self in satisfaction, that I find
nevertheless so much satisfaction, that I cannot omit. For as I think I am
certain that you love me, in the same manner as I would be; I hold my self
more assured of your affection than I should be, if I believed that I held it
by your acknowledgment rather than from your inclination. I love rather that
you should love my person than the throne whereto I will lead you: and I had
rather you should esteem the tenderness of my amity than the conquest of my
kingdom, which I call no more so, but only to let you see that I can bestow it
on you. But (may one say perhaps) this same inclination, which makes you love
to day, may also make you love no more too morrow: since in fine, you have been
seen to love and hate Renaldo successively, and that Renaldo has likewise been
seen both to love and hate Angelica. I acknowledge ingeniously; that this
objection is stronger than the other; and I confess likewise that this thought
has given me some trouble in the first days of our amity. What (said I in my
self sometimes when I considered the power of this inclination, which caused
me to love you) should it be possible, that one day I should no more love
Medoro? Should it be possible that Medoro one day should love Angelica no more?
and that this same inclination which unites our hearts and wills, should
disunite them for ever? After so troublesome a meditation, there succeeded a
more pleasing thought: for coming to consider, that all those that love, do not
change their inclinations always; I persuaded my self, that we should be of
those chosen lovers to serve as an example to posterity. Yes Medoro, I believed
that our affection never should diminish: and I believe at present that in
making you King, I do but only augment the number of my subjects; that by
bestowing my Crown on you, I gain a faithful slave; and in giving you my
heart, I receive yours, never to be disposed of again. It Is in this manner
Medoro, that we must at least flatter our selves in such things to which we
cannot absolutely answer: for if it happens as we wish it, it were a wrong to
afflict our selves, without cause: and if it happen that the inclination do
change its object, there is no need of being comforted for the loss of that,
which we do no longer esteem to be worth our love. Lets then enjoy in peace
the present felicity, without putting our selves in trouble for the future: let
us leave the knowledge of things to come to destiny, since as well we cannot
prevent them, neither by our fears or endeavors; lets employ all the moments
of our lives to speak advantageously of the power of this inclination, which
has created all our felicity, since it has created our love; let us leave some
mark of it in all places we pass by; lets make all the trees which lend us
their shade, lend us likewise their barks to engrave the names of Medoro and
Angelica, that all those which see it, may admire and envy our happiness; and to
be short, never let us speak but of the pleasure there is in hearts thus
united, which inclination alone does beget; in comparison of that, where reason
or interest do mingle themselves or contribute any thing. Such who love only by
those two sentiments, do not at all know the sweets of love; reason is too sage
to suffer any of her subjects to set all their joy, in the possession of a
mistres: how perfect soever she may be; and interest is too mercenary to suffer
any one to make his greatest treasures consist in the least favor that can
come from a Lady. If I were beloved by any of those sage lovers, who always
consult with their judgments, and who oppose their inclination as much as they
possibly can, whithout doubt they would love my Crown, rather than a bracelet
of my hair, and would prefer the luster of my throne before that of my
looks. O Medoro how little do those people know the nature of love? and indeed
to speak rationally, they ought not to be put amongst the number of true
lovers. All men are ot always equally touched with all passions: those which
are borne covetuous, and who sometimes think they love, do wrong themselves:
for if we examine the thing well, we shall find that they love their
Mistresses money, and not the charms of her person. They follow their
inclination I confess, but that which that inclination regards is not love,
but it is avarice. An ambitious man acts in the same manner; a valiant man will
wish for many rivals, thereby to have the glory of fighting and overcoming
them; and briefly all those, which are believed to be lovers, are not so
ordinarily but in appearance: and it is this without doubt which makes so many
be inconstant and faithless. For as their strongest inclination is not that
which makes them love, there may happen a hundred things, which satisfying
their covetousness, their ambition, and their vanity by other means makes them
forsake their Mistresses, as useless to their felicity. But those, who above
all passions, are strongly inclined to love, are more assured of the duration
of their affections, and more happy in their service. They part neither their
cares, nor their hearts; Scepters and Crowns are not the ends of their
desires; but the certainty of being perfectly loved is the only thing they
pretend to. Think a little (lovely Medoro) on the happy life that we have led
in these woods, ever since that by the force of our inclination, we began to
love. This cottage has served me in lieu of a Palace, the freshness of this
grass has seemed more convenient to me than the magnificence of the Throne,
and the melody of these birds more charming than all the music that ever I
heard in Europe. I have preferred the sands of these rivulets, which environ
us, before the mines of Gold in our Country: and the dew which we behold on
these flowers: before the fairest pearls that ere the Orient did produce. And
all this Medoro because I love you, because we see together all these things,
and because both my inclination, and that which you have for me, makes me, that
I can see nothing with you which does not please, and which does not produce
some joy. It Is that is (my dear Medoro) the true mark of an ardent passion:
whoever can find any part of his pleasure elsewhere than in the person he
adores, is not at all capable of this noble weakness? and whoere is beloved
and not being absent from what he loves, does not think himself happy, ought to
be blotted out from the number of lovers. For to speak of things as they indeed
are, those that be lovers after the manner as I understand it, I mean in spite
of their reason and wills, can never do so; wherever they find their
Mistresses, they have nothing to desire, and wherever she is not all is
wanting, and nothing satisfies them. They would be weary in the greatest and
most splendid Courts, although they were even seated on the Throne: and would
esteem themselves happy in a horrid desert, were they but blessed by the light
of those eyes they adore. Now as the object of their content is more limited
than that of others, it is likewise more facile to content them; but for the
rest of men which cannot love, whose minds are a prey to so many passions; they
need almost that every part of this world should contribute something to
satisfy them fully. The Covetous, would have in their disposing, all the gold
which the sun has produced since the beginning of Age: the Courageous would
have overcome all the Hero's, that nature ever brought forth in all the world:
nor would ambitious Conquerours have lesser then the Empire of the whole
Universe. To satisfy the people there must be very much; or to say better,
they must have either enchantments or miracles to make them become happy. But
as for those that know to love, and who lock up all their felicity in the
hearts of a servant, or a Mistres they never have nothing to fear but
themselves. For, provided their Inclination do not destroy their felicity by
changing its object; they neither fear the malice of men, nor the capricios of
Fortune, nor any other of those misfortunes, which may happen in the course of
their lives; so true it is, that their minds are disintangled from all other
thoughts, but such as directly concern their love. By this you may see, (my
dear Medoro) of what nature that is, which I have for you. and that which I
believe you have for me. You are to me instead of Parents, of Kingdom, and
Crown; and if I had not a design to place it on your head, I think that
without any desire of re-ascending the Throne, I should oblige you to pass the
rest of our days, in this pleasing solitude. But since I am confident you will
more esteem the hand that shall crown you, than the Crown it self, how
glorious soere it may be; we must think of leaving this lovely desert; we must
return to the Kingdom of Cataya, we must make all the earth to see what the
power of this Inclination can do; we must show it what that is which ought to
be called love; and make it behold in you, a lover without ambition, which this
love has made a King; and in my person, a Queen not imprudent, which yet this
same love, has made to become a subject.

FINIS.
The effect of this HARANGUE.
ANgelica was too witty not to persuade, and Medoro too Amorous not to be
persuaded. So that although Ariosto has not told us what happened to them in
the Indies; and though he have hardly mentioned, that they Embarked to go; we
may believe that the power of Inclination, rendered their love eternal; and as
that alone had given it birth, so that alone made it last ever after.

AMARILLIS TO TITYRUS. The Third HARANGUE.
The Argument.
THe great Virgil introducing himself in the Eclogues of his Bucolicks, under
the name of a Shepherd called Tityrus; does regret Rome and the Court of
Augustus, from whence he was absent; and testifies he is little pleased with
the woods and plains. That has given me place to introduce, likewise the
shepherdess Amarillis his Mistres, who surprising him in this thought
reproaches him of the disesteeme he makes of their abode; represents its
beauties to him; and comparing them to the defects of what he regrets, strives
to make him acknowledge, that the Country life is preferrable before that of
Cities.

AMARILLIS TO TITYRUS.
CEase Illustrious Shepherd, cease to regret the magnificence of Rome; do not
disturb the tranquillity of our woods by unjust and inutile complaints; and be
persuaded, that whether for the pleasingnesse of persons, for the purity of
manners, for the innocence of pleasures, for the felicity of life, or for true
virtue; our villages ought to be preferred before the pomp of the fairest
Cities; and the simplicity of our Cottages, to the seats of the proudest
Palaces. I acknowledge that the picture, which you have made me of that proud
one, which dares vaunt to subject all the earth, is very different from that
which I design to show you this day. In the one we see naught but Scepters and
Crowns, and in the other only Garlands of flowers and Sheephooks. In the first
we see every where glistering the gold, pearls, and diamonds; and in this I am
going to show, you shall behold no other gold, than that of the beams of the
Sun; no other pearls, than those the dew drops on the ennamel of our meads; nor
other diamonds, than the liquid crystal of our fountains. But (o Tityrus) how
pure is that gold! how grateful a luster those pearls do cast! and how
delicious is that morning crystal to those, who do not let themselves be
deceived by deluding appearances; who can discern as they ought, the beauties
of art and nature; and prefer with judgment a lasting felicity before a
fading one! You will tell me (perhaps) that hearing me speak in this manner,
it would seem that I have but little considered that magnificent daughter,
which you have showed me, of Augustus Court; because I do not condescend to
agree, that you have cause to complain for being absent from it. It is true
notwithstanding, that I have taken notice of every stroke; and I confess
also, that at the instant those great buildings of Marble, of Jasper, and of
Porphiry brought me in doubt whether I should not prefer them before our
Grotts. But I was not long in that error; and although without doubt the
portrait is a little flattered, that has not hindered me from finding that you
are in the wrong to speak of Rome, as of a place to which nothing is wanting
that may render an honest man happy; and of our forests, as of a dwelling
where one can find nothing which might reasonably satisfy a man of spirit. Let
us examine all these things in order, I conjure you: and to oblige you to hear
me more attentively, and to persuade you with greater power, I shall let you
see that Rome is in my Imagination, such as you have described it to me: that
so by the opposition of the life at Court, and the Country life, I may by
making you see the advantages and defects, draw you with the more facility to
my judgment. You have told me (unless I am deceived) that the beauty of the
places we inhabit, does serve very much to render men happy; that brave objects
does elevate the spirits; and that this being so (as I confess it) Rome is the
most charming abode upon earth, since it is there that the greatest riches are
found. You have (I say) assured me, that all the Temples are filled with the
workmanship of the best Masters of antiquity; that all the houses are placed;
that all the furniture is stately; that all the public places are adorned,
either with brass statua's, or triumphant arches; and that in fine, she
incloses within her walls, all that art can produce as mavelous, and all that
is most rare in the universe. Lets see after this, unjust Shepherd, if in our
solitude I can find ought wherewith to make you forget those gallant things;
and wherewith to make you confess that the Country life is to be preferred
before that in Cities. I perceive that you find my design too bold, and that
you are troubled to comprehend, (you I say, who are out of love with the place
where you were borne, and who have forgotten them) that out of Rome one can
behold any thing that is wonderful. Nevertheless it is certain, that there is
a notable difference betwixt all those ornaments which imbellish that, and
these of the places we inhabit. But is all that makes them brave, contrary to
us, who enjoy all the beauties of nature. In fine that is but the works of men,
and our abode is the master piece of the Gods. It is true, we have no Palaces,
but if our Cottages be less magnificent, they are by their low roofs, the more
distant from thunders, and storms. And then to say the truth, whoever shall
stand to consider the mavelous structure of that rich Canopy which covers our
heads, will not regret the proudest seelings which are at Rome. But (you will
tell me) it seems by your speech, that the stars, and the sun do not shine on
the Capitol each in their turns; and that Rome, is only a place of obscurity,
and darkness; I acknowledge it shepherd, I acknowledge it, and to make you
acknowledge it your self, suffer me to show you that, which without doubt you
do not now remember to have ever seen; I mean therising and setting of the Sun
in our plains, either when we are in our woods, or that we walk along the
margent of some of our rivers. Ha shepherd, if it be true, that brave objects
raise the Spirits, and that the marble, the jasper, the porphiry, pearls,
diamonds, and gold, raise pleasing thoughts, what should not the arrival of
that fair planet do, when he appears in the horizon, he which has
communicated to all those things, the little beauty they have? In effect, is
there any thing more lovely in the whole Universe, than the magnificent
entrance he makes each morning toward us? At Rome he is hardly ever seen
without clouds: the foggs and the smoke veil a part of his beams: one would
say he were angry, to be employed in that place, only to give light to cheats,
flatterers, and to voluntary slaves. One would think (I say) that he hides a
part of his light, because his heat serves but to dry the mire in the streets;
whereas with us, when he begins to appear, he has nothing to do, but to
dissipate the innocent vapors which arise from the earth; and to dry up the
pearls of dew, which moisten our fields; to make our Roses to blow, to give a
fresh enamel to all our flowers; to paint the wings of our butterflies; and to
receive the wishes of all the Shepherds of our Village. And indeed it appears
to us every day, with so much magnificence, that nothing can equal his
triumph: no sooner do the first of his beams begin to shed the purple, the
gold, and azure in some places of the sky, but all nature seems to rejoice.
The obscurity of the night does dissipate; the stars with respect disappaer;
the birds awake singing; our flocks are willing to go forth to the folds, and
all our Shepherds and Shepherdesses, who are never wearied to behold the same
thing, when it is handsome, always admire more and more, that wonderful
treasure of rich and lively colors, which overspreads the clouds at his
arrival. They admire (I say) those fair impressions of light, which he
communicates to all the objects which are capable to receive them: he guilds
the crowns of our luminous beams, he pierces the thickness of our forests,
only to make them more pleasant, and not to take away their freshness, or to
dissipate our shade. In the morning he permits us to look on him; at noone he
suffers our woods to defend us from his scorching; and in the evening he shows
us his Image in the rivers, and in our fountains, but so sparkling, and so
wonderful, that all the diamonds in the world cannot equal the beauty of the
least of his beams. When he renewes the day, he puts us in hope we shall
quickly behold him by the proud preparation which fore-runs him: and when he
robs it from us, he seems to assure us by the abundance of his riches, which he
imployes to paint the heavens with Roseat, shaddowed gold, and with all the
colors the most lively, and others most shady, that his absence shall not be
long; and that in few hours we shall behold him again as bright as ever.
Acknowledge now shepherd by this weak draught I have traced, that there is
nothing in Rome which is so handsome as this which I have represented to you.
Yet this is not the only thing that renders our habitations pleasing; there
are places into which the sun never comes, and yet they give delight; we have
Grotts sunk so deep into the concavity of works, that the day hardly arrives
there, and the night, who mingles her sable complexion with his luster, is
never quite banished thence. They are only tapistred with moss, and yet the
silence and coolness which one meets, creates a pleasure. There are muses with
tranquillity and with sweetness: and if one were alone in Nature, may peaceably
enjoy all the charms of solitude. At the going forth from thence, you shall
always find a fountain, whose water is so pure, it permits through its streams
to behold the diversity of pebles, which are in the bottom of its bed. It
makes but a weak murmur, fitter to rock asleep with voluptuousness, than to
keep awake with anger. The waters which flow thence from a rivulet, which
serpentinely creeps with a soft tread amongst the pebles, reeds, and flowers,
till it steals into a mead, where confounding it self amongst others, which
likewise moisten it, they unite, and with their mingled waters, make a great
and large river, whose stream and brink, cause a new divertisement: and whose
purity without doubt ought to be more grateful to the sight, than the muddy
waters of Tyber. Now if from these peaceable beauties you will pass to those
whose charms are mingled with I know not what that is terrible, and which
strikes a horror in their divertisements; we have fearful precipices; we have
rocks, whose heads do reach the heavens; and from whence such furious torrents
descend, that their fall makes as great a noise as the thunder, or the Sea. One
would say that they are mountains of snow precipitating themselves upon one
another, so much those waters foame, and to see them roll, and bound with such
abundance and impetuosity would make one believe they would overflow the whole
earth. Nevertheless, they are no sooner disgorg'd into a gulf which is at the
foot of that rock whence they Issue, but they hide themselves in the cavernes,
to go and render their tribute without doubt to those, from whence they
proceed. Going from thence, shepherd, shall I conduct you into one of those
meadows, where we find a large tapistry of different flowers that overspreads
it; where you may see a hundred cristal springs; where on the one side is seen
a delightful river; and on the other many willowes, Alders, and Lote trees,
which by their shadow make their sweet abode pleasing, though the sun scorch
all besides, and invites the shepherds to sleep securely? But perhaps you will
not stay so long, lets go then (shepherd) lets go into one of those forests,
whose obscurity, silence, and antiquity seems to imprint respect in all those
which walk there. If that shady forest were at the gates of Rome, it would be
filled only with thieves, or fugitive criminalls: whereas here we shall find
none but staggs, hinds, roe-bucks, and deers, you may guess also by their
numbers, that we do not often make toiles to catch them, and you shall see by
the small care they take to hide themselves, that that place is a sanctuary for
them. All those great spaces, whose deep shade is such, that in the day you can
hardly distinguish colors, and where one may almost doubt whether the foliage
be not black rather than green; are not yet destitute of somewhat wherewith to
divert the mind, and sight of a melancholy shepherd; and when by some windows
where the trees are less thick, the rays of the sun appears and dissipates a
part of that pleasing night; there was never any thing so lovely as those long
twists of silver beams, which seem as if they would force the obscurity to
yield place to light. One would say by the agitation of the leaves, that they
press together, to hinder its entrance; but the more the wind makes them
tremble, the more easy passage do they give to those enemies of darkness.
Going from this Forest, will you let me guide you to the brink of a great
pond, whose tranquillity seldom fails to give rest to those minds which do but
stop to admire its beauty? Zephirus only curles its billows; and he stirs them
so softly, that one may with ease behold all the fishes which are at the
bottom of those waters, as clear as they are smooth. Some of them swimming
with precipitation to seek their food; the others bound, and raise themselves
above the water: and others more timorous, run to hide themselves at the
least noise they hear. If from the bottom of this cristal, you ascend to
consider its surface, you shall behold it all covered with swans: admire
(Shepherd) the whiteness of their plumage; the gravity they keep in swimming;
and the noble pride which still appears in their looks: would one not say, they
despise all they look on? and would not one Imagine also, that at some times
they have a design to please; when they make sails of their wings only to
delight; and swim about only to be admired? Ha, Shepherd, how far are the
inhabitants of Rome from these innocent pleasures, and what delights does their
troublesome life rob them of! Nevertheless I am not yet at the end of the
description of the places we inhabit; I must needs lead you up one of those
great mountains, from whence at once we discover the Rivers, Forests, Plains,
and Pastures; where the sight is so unlimited, that the objects may seem to
steal from our view by their great distance, and the sky to kiss the
furthermost parts we behold. But perhaps you do not love an object of such a
vast extent: let me then show you the way on our banks, and in our valleys,
that so I may make you acknowledge that their fruitfulness should be preferred
before the sterility of Romes seven hills. Those little corners of earth are so
much favored by heaven, that they seem to be ever sheltered from all the
injuries of the air: the wind does hardly breath there; the hayle does not
destroy the vines: the green is eternal: and I truly believe, that if one
should not manure them, the Sun alone would produce and ripen, all what ever
Agriculture brings forth elsewhere; not without much trouble and care. Now that
we may not yet forget that which makes the liberality of our Shepherds; and
that which is the innocent love of our shepherdesses: can you compare the
Perfumes of Rome with the sweeet odor of our Violets, of our Roses, and our
Gilliflowers? At least there is this difference, that the one does but satisfy
the smell; and that the other, besides its grateful perfume, pleases the eye
infinitely. In effect, was ever any thing more fair to behold than this
prodigious quantity of flowers, which fills our Gardens; either for their
form, for the brisk and lively colors, or the variety there is amongst them?
Believe me (shepherd) the magnificent Tapestry which is at Rome does not show
any thing that is so wonderful. The purple is not so fair, as the Incarnat of
our Roses: the Pearls of our Crowns Imperial, are more worth than Orient
pearls: and the least of our flowers deserves more admiration than all that
human art can invent. Now after I have made you behold that which I call the
suns masterpiece follow me into this neighbor grove; it is there that you
shall find that which is not to be found at Rome; it is there that you shall
hear, that which is not heard in any City; and it is there you will be forced to
confess, that you must be insensible of pleasures, if you prefer not the
Country life before that of the Court. Behold then (I conjure you) that great
number of shepherds, and shepherdesses, who daring the heat of the day, have
led their flocks into the shade under the closeness of this grove: and without
admiring the handsomeness of some, or the beauty of others; since it is not in
this place that I intend to speak of that, hearken only to what they listen
too; I mean that great quantity of birds, who by their different tones, make so
pleasant a consort. Hearing them sing so early, one would say they did strive
together who should obtain reward of the victory. But amongst others admire
that learned master of music, who surpasses them all by the least of his
notes. And indeed they are all ashamed of their unskilfulnesse; they leave off
through impuissance and respect; and only the Nightingales his fellows try
with equal arms to vanquish him, and to overcome each the other. Hearken how
admirably this does pass his cadences; how he lets fall his voice; how he
maintains it, how he renews it, and with what regularity he animates his song.
That other which answers him, has a particular charm, he is more languishing
and more amorous; but as he is more feeble, so I believe he will be vanquished.
Listen how they redouble their strengths; and you may even discern a kind of
joy, in him that finds he has the advantage, and sorrow, and anger in that
which finds his strength diminishes. Look ye (shepherd) he can sing no more;
his strains are not so equal, though they be more frequent, the sweetness of
his voice does change; he sings now only out of despair; I can discover
through those leaves, that he staggers, his claws can no longer graspe the
branch, which upholds him; I see him tumble with vexation, and he in falling
murmers yet some languishing notes, and does almost loose his life before his
voice. Those (Shepherd) are the only ambitious ones of our Country: compare
those with them of Rome (I conjure you) and although the destiny of this poor
Bird be worthy of pity; acknowledge that it is better ambition cause only the
death of Nightingales, than that it should ranverse Thrones and Empires. Yet
more (Shepherd) it is not in the spring time only, in summer, and in autumn,
that we have the advantage above Cities, winter it self, how fearful and
sharp soever it is discribed, has somewhat amidst its rigor which is fine, and
magnificent in our fields. The snow, which in the Cities, looses all its
whiteness, as soon as ere it is fallen, ot at least conserves its purity only
on the house tops; does here make rich and curious plumes of the branches of
our Cypress, Cedars, and Firres. Those trees (I say) whose leaves do not shed,
mingling their verdure with its whiteness, makes without doubt as pleasing an
object, as the summer can bestow: and then, when the frost, and sharpness of
the cold has converted all our rivulets into Cristal, we behold likewise all
our trees laden with diamonds. You will tell me, (it may be) that those
diamonds do not make us the richer: and that the Sun deprives us of what the
cold bestows. But (shepherd) if those diamonds do not enrich us, however they
do not make us become guilty: We cannot corrupt the fidelity of any one with
them: nor employ them in so many unlawful uses as you know they do at Rome.
There is one thing more yet in the Cities, which seems to me not to be endured:
which is, that one would say there is but one kind of season all the year long,
to those that inhabit them. They always behold the same things; they have the
same employments; their houses are always alike; their pleasures do not vary:
and except only that they have cold and heat, according to the diverse
temperatures of the air, there happens no change in their life: contrary to
us, to whom nature every year renues four times, all the beauties of our
dwellings. Each season gives us a different occupation: The spring with its
flowery chaplet calls us to take care of our meadows and flocks. The summer with
its Coronet of wheatears, obliges us to the reaping of our harvest: Autumn with
its garland of vine, invites us not to leave our grapes any longer exposed to
the pillage of passengers: and the winter all covered with ice, will have us
nevertheless, render to the earth the tribute which each one owes it: that so
another time she may return with interest those grains, which we have sowed
in her bosom. O Shepherd, how innocent is this usury; and how little it
resembles that which they practice in Cities, this beggars no body, by thus
enriching ones self in this manner; one cannot either envy you for it, nor
reproach you, nor accuse you of any crime: but far otherwise, the more you
are careful, the more you are praised: whereas the others care is always
blameworthy, if they are not always blamed. They have more pain and less
pleasure; that which is acquired by unjust ways cannot be without doubt,
possessed without disquiet. They fear their enviers, their enemies, and
thieves; but for us we have neither enviers, nor enemies; Nor do we fear any
other robbers of our riches, than the birds, which steal some of our fruits:
and which for all this, we would not banish from our Campaniaes, so much those
innocent criminalls, do give us delight in other reencounters. But to let you
see, that for all your magnificent structures of your Temples and your Palaces;
for all your Marble, Jasper, and Porphirie, which adornes them; and for all
your aqueducts your Statuas, and your Triumphant arches we are however the true
possessors of the bravest things of Nature. You need but consider, that Rome
beautifies it self but with that which the earth locks in her bowels, and
which she conceals from the eyes of men: whereas we enjoy all that wherewith
she dresses her self, and with all that she sets forth to the view of the
whole World. No Shepherd, they are not her treasures, those metals which are
now a-dayes the Tyrants of the minds, and the corrupters of the most wise: If
that were so, we should behold trees laden with gold, with pearls, and jewels;
she would dress her self with her fairest ornaments; and would not leave
imperfect, that which you call her chief works. The gold should not need to be
refined; we should need no lapidaries to cut the diamonds; nor no people which
knew how to polish the pearls. All those things would be in sight, and would be
as well finished, in the instant they were produced, as are our flowers, our
woods and our fountains: Cease then (shepherd) cease to maintain that the
abode at Rome, is pleasanter than that in our Country: and prepare your self
in the remainder, to see the magnificence of your divertisements, yield to the
simplicity of ours. Of all the public festivalls with which you have
entertained me, those of the triumphs, and the combats of the Gladiators, are
the most celebrous: But (o Tityrus) those feasts, and plays, have somewhat
that is tyrannical and woeful! and how hard it is to reasonable people to
rejoice, in seeing so many unhapy! that which is called delight, ought not to be
mingled with bitterness. Smiles and tears should not be seen together: and
blood spilled in a battle it self, should not delight how much less then in
pastimes. Nevertheless the most pleasing which they have at Rome, is to see
Kings in chains; and four thousand gladiators cut one another throats for the
pleasure of Roman people. O Shepherd, what must those people be, who delight to
see rivers of blood and mountains of carcasses! for our parts, we who afflict
our selves, when any of our lambs are sick, we should be far from rejoicing to
behold those miserable ones dye so cruelly: or be satisfied to see Princes, and
Princesses laden with fetters. For my part (Shepherd) should I see such a
spectacle, I should have more compassion for the vanquished, than esteem for
the vanquishers: In fine, to tell you the things as I believe them, I can see
no innocent pleasures in Rome; they insulte over the unhappy, and they cause
the unfortunate slaves to perish: they lead Kings captives, after they have
usurped their Kingdoms: and they hear, and they look on, not only without
horror, but with satisfaction, the last complaints and actions of dying men.
Caesar (as they say) wept after the Pharsalian Battle, over those great numbers
of bodies, which he beheld without life, and motion; but in Rome they laugh at
that which made him weep; and they call it a feast of rejoicing, which rather
should be named a public mourning. See Shepherd, I entreat you, whether we are
cruel or innocent in our pastimes; and whether in reminding you of them, you
will not acknowledge that if there be less pomp, there is more wit, more
skill, more equity, and also more pleasure. Repasse then in your imagination,
one of those general holidayes of all our hamlets, or one of those sacrifices,
after the reaping of our harvest: did you ever see any thing more pleasing,
than to see, not Kings manacled in fetters; not Gladiators all covered with
blood and wounds; but an innumerable number of Shepherds and Shepherdesses,
with coronets and garlands of flowers; with such a joy in their countenance, as
is communicated to all that behold them? some have their bag-pipes, others
their flutes; some of them lead the victimes, the others carry the consecrated
vessels; the one raises an altar of turfs, the other puts the fire which
enkindles it; and almost every one has sheephooks imbellished with mottoes,
figures, and ribons. The neatness of their clothes, serves also to make them
the more amiable; it is not proud indeed, but it is gallant. The purple and the
jewels do not shine there; but their pure whiteness, and those fading jewels,
which the spring, the summer, and autumn, bestows each year upon us, does make
amends enough for that want, and for the rest, the beauty of my companions (if
I am not deceived) ought not to yield to that of the Roman Ladies: you will
tell me (perhaps) that though it were true, that the features of their faces
were as sweet, and their countena^ces as pleasing; at least I should not deny,
that the tan of the fields spoils their skins, and destroys its fresh color.
But besides that the thick umbrage of our forest, defends them from that
enemy; I must also tell you, that the tan is more becoming, and supportable,
than painting, and that nature is more charming than artifice. For our parts,
Shepherd, we appear such as we are: we have no other looking lasses than our
fountains, no other Fucus than the dew; and yet there are maids amongst our
woods, whose complexion is so wonderful, that it out-vies, and sullies the
whitenesses of the lilies, and the incarnate of the fairest roses. The modesty
of their actions; the sincerity of their discourse; and the serenity which
appears in their looks, are such things as are only found in our filds, Every
where else there is nothing but dissimulation and art; they see to be seen;
they make no conquest without design; that which appears fair, is not so; and
one is sometimes as much deceived in the person as the mind.

But let us return, Shepherd, let us return to that fair assembly, where our
sage Pastors, who are the witnesses and judges of our sports, do already
prepare the rewards for those which shall overcome in this holyday. You shall
know by the simplicity of their worth, that it is not through a desire of
coveteousnesses, that they desire to win: since those prizes, which are
ordained for the Shepherds (as you know better than my self) are only baskets,
and sheephooks, and pipes, and bag-pipes, and darts: and for the Shepherdesses,
crowns of flowers, cages of reeds, nosegeys, and ribons, and yet we take as
much care to win, as if it were to conquer the whole world. But Shepherd, we
need no weapons to obtain this victory; we need not spill blood to defeat these
enemies: we do not lead those in triumph, over whom we have had the advantage;
on the contrary, we embrace them, instead of enchaining them; we tell them they
are the sillfullest, though they were not the happiest; and in fine, we strive
to comfort them of this small disgrace. Running, wrestling, dancing, poetry,
and music (if I be not deceived give more divertisment, than all the combats
of Gladiators. He whose course is nimble; he that wrastles with the greatest
slight; he who dances with the best grace; he who makes the bravest verses;
and he who sings the truest, gives without dispute more satisfaction, than
those combats of Tigers, and Panthers, of which you make so much. Think
Shepherd, think seriously, whether you should not love rather to see the
Shepherdess Galathea dance, or to hear the fair Lycoris sing, than to behold a
lion tear out the throat of a Tiger, or an Elephant overthrow a Rhinoceros? Yes
Shepherd, you would love it better, I read it plain enough in your face, that
you will agree to what I say; and I think likewise, that you had rather see
those two handsome maidens (although they otherwhile captivated you, than to be
spectator of the most magnificent Triumph that ever Rome did show, though
Augustus self were Conqueror. Do not blush Shepherd, for that little reproach
I make you; do not repent you of all the brave verses, which you have composed
for their glory; and be not ashamed that you have so often carried away the
prizes of our exercises against the cunning Melibeus, the active Coridon,
against the daring Menalcus, and against the ingenious Mopsus, in the sight of
our sagest shepherds; and if from the public holy days, you will pass to
those innocent wars, which makes one of our greatest pleasures; I mean our
hunting, and fishing: you will again be forced to acknowledge, that Rome is
not acquainted with all that is capable to please; since she cannot give these
grateful occupations, to those which inhabit there. And yet it is certain,
that one can hardly find any thing fitter to delight, than to behold many
Shepherdesses with angles in their hands, and all keeping a profound silence,
for fear least the noise they should make should fright away the fishes they
would catch, and make them shunthe shore. The one makes ready her bait on the
brink; the other casts her line into the river, and appears almost her own
statua, so attentive she is to what she is about. This by an action as quick as
it is pleasant, lifts up her arm, draws the line, and rejoiced at her prey,
casts a fish upon the shore, which bows it self, stretches, turns, winds, and
beats, makes diverse leaps and bounds upon the grass, and makes its rich silver
scales to glister, amongst the emeralds of the field. The other hoping for the
same success of her fellow, draws hers without drawing any thing; at which
the rest laugh or are comforted, for having a like fortune. But that which is
the most delightful, is to see our Shepherds laden with nets, to draw some
fish pond; there it is that when they are happy, you shall behold when they draw
their nets a living wave which spreads upon the brink, by the multitude, and
the diversity of the fishes they take; some of them skip up above the net;
others break it; some bound upon the green; others more happy save themselves;
others again entangle themselves the more by striving to disengage themselves;
and altogether do their utmost to save their lives, and to escape from that
which does detain them. But it is in vain they beat; as soon as they have
changed their element, they must dye, the freshness of the grass is not to
them, such as is the freshness of the water. This pastime how simple soever it
is, is not yet so poor, but that queens as well as shepherds have employed
themselves with it; Cleopatra, who had had the glory to catch the hearts of
Caesar, and Mark Antony in her nets, did not scorn to fish, to cast the line,
and made it one of her most ordinary gallantries. But Shepherd, if there be any
pleasure in deceiving the innocent fish, there is no less, in deceiving the
birds; sometimes in hiding from them that which should take them, under the
heap of grain which is thrown to them, that so in coming to seek wherewith to
live, they find their death; sometimes in shooting them with bolts; and
sometimes in surprising them on the trees, by lyming the branches, which hold
them by the wings, the more they flutter and strive to fly, the more they are
entangled amongst those dangerous twiggs. After these harmless exercises
either of fishing, or bird-catching, you shall see the one and the other return
with their prey; the Shepherds returns with great osier baskets filled with
fish; the Shepherdesses carry cages of reeds, where they have kept alive some
birds which have pleased them; and altogether not forgetting the care of their
sheep, return to their cottages. Those which have been successful, though
laden with their spoil, do not omit to sing some Eclogue, or play on their
pipes; the flocks follow their masters, or their mistresses; the dogs by their
fidelity, take care that no sheep straggle; and the sheep and oxen, by their
loud clamours, advertising those that are in their cabins, that the fishing, or
chase is ended; they all come with much haste and joy to know the success. But
it is too much, Shepherd, it is too much spoken of our innocent war, which (if
I do not deceive my self) ought to be preferred to those which have caused the
proudest Trophies to be raised, and whose Conquerours have obtained the most
magnificent Triumphs: Let Us come then (if you please) to somewhat that is more
solid; and let us compare the vices of Rome, to the virtues which are seen
amongst us. First, Rome is filled with adulators, and we know hardly what
adulation is: at Rome, falsehood, and medisance reigns; and in our woods the
truth appearing always, we never fail to praise that which is praiseworthy:
at Rome all men are slaves, either to their ambition, or avarice; and in our
campaniaes, we possess more goods, than we desire to have; nor are we
covetous, but only of time, which we would always well employ at Rome, there
are those people which make their treasures of the greatest poisons which are
in nature, either to make away their enemies, or to make away themselves, if it
happens that they are to be punished for their crimes; and amongst us, we make
our dearest treasures, of salutary herbs, which can heal the bitings of
serpents, or any other venomous beast. At Rome, all the world thinks only upon
their own interest; here, they only think on their own pleasures, provided it
be harmless. At Rome all those which inhabit it seek to aproach near the
Prince: in our woods we only seek our equals. At Rome, they will have no
Masters, and yet deny not to kiss the hand that inchains them; and in our
hamlets, we obey our ancient Shepherds, with as much affection as freedom. At
Rome those which make the Laws scoff at them, and do not observe them; and in
our forests, the sagest Pastors instruct by their examples, rather than by
their words. Yes we do what they do, sooner than what they tell us: nor do
we know amongst us, any infringers of our laws, or our customs. At Rome the
riches alone, makes the difference twixt men: and in our Groves, vetue and
merit only makes the price and the distinction. In fine Shepherd, at Rome, all
the world is busied to deceive others; or at least to hinder that they be not
themselves cozened; whereas we are only careful to seek the occasions to
serve our selves. If any of our Sheperdesses have sometimes stragled that
sheep from her flock which she loves best; you shall see all our Shepherds with
care, and earnestness seek to recover again, that which she lost. They enquire
with diligence; they tell to those whom they meet, all the beauties of that
pretty creature, that thereby they may know if they have not seen it. They
describe its whiteness, its marks, the flowers and the ribons which are tied to
its horns, and forget nothing which may serve to their design, and if it
happens that they find it, they return with as much joy, as your Consuls, when
they have gained a battle; so true it is, that we ardently love to serve, not
only our friends, but all those that have need of it. As for Rome, without
doubt it is not so there; all the world rejoices at another misfortune: those
whom the Prince does not behold with a pleased eye, are forsaken by those whom
they have most obliged, what virtue soever they have: and those on the contrary
whom he favors, should they be the most vicious, and imperfect of men, shall
not want however, not only to have friends, but adorers and slaves. It does
not go in this strain in our Campaniaes; we see nothing above us but the
heavens; we have neither Princes, nor favorites to fear, or follow; we live
with equality; we love those that love us, and hate none. For the rest, I had
always heard say, that the Shepherds were the Images of Sovereigns; that they
ought to govern the people as we govern our flocks; and that the Scepter and
the Crook, ought to have much resemblance. Nevertheless after the manner that
things are reported to us, there is a notable difference betwixt them; or to
say better, there is nothing at all alike. We love our flocks with tenderness;
we have no other care than to make them happy; we choose them the sweetest
pasture, the clearest waters; we give them a courageous and faithful keeper,
which is our dog; and we defend them our selves with the hazard of our lives,
when the wolves do assault them; we take care not only to nourish and keep
them, but to hinder them likewise, both from the extreme cold and the extreme
heat: in winter we leave them sometimes in the folds, when the frost has
glazed all the pasture: and in summer when the ardour of the sun scorches them,
we seek such shades as may defend them from all inconveniences. When they are
sick, we get such remedies as are proper for their maladies: and when they are
healthful, we adorn them with ribons and flowers. It is not thus with many
Princes, who ought to be Pastors: they will not love their flocks, nor care to
be beloved by them, provided they be feared; they make use of the sheephoke
rather to affright than to assemble, or defend them; in lieu of choosing the
pasture, and waters for them, they make their flocks seve their needs, and
their magnificence: instead of keeping them as we do, reversing the order and
rule; it is the flocks that must keep the Sheperds; whereas (I say) it should be
their parts to preserve them from all harms; it is they who on the contrary are
the cause of all evils every day unto them, when they are sick, they are so far
from seeking remedies for them, that they augment their trouble by their
tyrannies: and when they are sound, they do not use to adorn them, but rather
strip them even of their natural ornaments. We endeavor our flocks should be
fat, and they will have theirs lean and feeble; in fine, Shepherds, not content
to take off their fleeces, wherewith they after make their richest robes, they
tear them from their bodies with so much violence, that one may say, the purple
which adornes them borrowes its color from the blood of their flocks, rather
than the industry of those excellent artisans, of whom they make so much esteem
at Rome. Ha, Shepherd! If we had such Pastors amongst us, we would banish them
from our meadows; we should esteem them worse than the wolves, which are the
declared enemies of our sheep; and we would degrade them from that honorable
employment, by taking away their sheephook, their scrip, flute, bag-pipe, and
all the glorious marks of our innocent profession. Ha, Tityrus (yet once more)
what a dangerous thing it is for one to be a Sovereign, that is not a good
Pastor! and how much better it were to take a simple shepherd to be King, than
to have a King that could not be a Shepherd! I know you will tell me, that we
have now gotten a Prince, whose sweetness, clemency, and goodness, deserve that
we should give him the name of Pastor, rather than Tyrant: and that Augustus,
since he has gathered his flock, is one of the best Shepherds that ever bare a
Sheephook. But tell me a little, how many flocks has he desolated, to make this
one? How much blood has he spilt, how many Pastors has he throatled? how many
Wolves, Panthers, and Tigers have bin employed to make deserts of the fairest
meadows of this Empire? and how many innocent lambs have felt his fury, before
they tasted his clemency? Speak Shepherd, I conjure you, and answer me
punctually. No, no, I perceive by your silence, that you cannot contradict me;
and that you are constrained to acknowledge, that there might be found more
Pastors which would be good Princes, than Princes capable to be good Pastors.
In effect, the felicity of the country life, has not been so much unknown in
Rome it self, but that those whom she files in the ranks of her most
Illustrious Hero's have embraced it, with ardour. Yes, those who after they had
gained battles (as you know better than my self) have manured the ground with
their own hands, and have also in the pressing affairs of the Republic, been
recalled from thence to rule the reyns of the Empire; and from the plough to
the head of an army; and from their solitude, to the Court. And yet, those
people, what ever they have done, that is great, or good, have never been
praised more, than when they had governed the public, taken Cities by force;
lessened the bounds of the Roman puissance; gained Battles; and merited the
honors of triumph, they have been seen to refuse those honors, return from
the government to their sheepcoat; from the head of an army to the plough; and
from the Court to their solitude again. After this Shepherd, complain no more
of your destiny: and be not so unjust as not to think any thing so pleasing as
the magnificence of of Rome: since our simplicity, is as much worth as their
artifice. And if from their manners in general we pass to the passions in
particular; you shall find, that of all those that use to cause the grandest
disorders, we know but one only, and which produces none but grateful effects
amongst us. First, ambition does not torment us; we are Shepherds Children, we
will be only that, and can be no more. Our desire having no object, we wish for
nothing, we live without disquietnesse as without pride; and seeing nothing
beneath us, nor nothing above our heads but the Heavens; we are free from anger
as from insolence; nor would we exchange our sheephooks, for all the Scepters
in the world. It is easy for you to judge that not being ambitious we know not
either, avarice, nor envy, since these are two passions, which are almost
inseparable from the other. Choler is but little more acquainted with us: nor
does hatred find any entrance in a Country where all deserves to be loved. But
(you will ask me) what is then that passion, which uses to produce such
strange disorders in the Cities, and makes known no other than pleasing effects
in your Campaniaes? For as for me, it is so long that I have not lived there,
that I have lost the remembrance? It is Tityrus the most powerful, and noblest
of all: it is that which made Hercules spin; which fired Troy; which has
r'enversed so many Empires; which has caused so many ruins in all the corners
of the world; which has made so many wars; which gave Antony to Cleopatra;
Augustus to Livia; and it is in fine, that passion, which is borne amidst
delights flowers, woods, brooks, meads, Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, with more
innocence, and less bitterness, than on the Throne, and in the Palaces of
great Kings. It Is in those elevated places, that this passion which they call
love, is almost always dangerous: a lover that gives law to all the world is
not very fit to receive it from a mistress. He will have the things which he
desires, more magistically than others: and when he encounters any obstacle in
his design, that crowned slave that is not accustomed to obey; and is wont to
be obeyed of all that approach him; that slave (I say) quits his chains,
revolts, remounts the throne, and becoming a Tyrant to her, whose captive he
was, he oftentimes makes her suffer sad and funest adventures. But amongst us
on the contrary, that little god, whose puissance has no limits, never appears
in our woods, but with the society of his Mothers graces: he inspires none but
reasonable desires in the hearts of our Shepherds; we see them kiss their
chains, even when the rigor of their mistresses makes them seem most heavy to
them; they receive their favors with ravishment; and when they are ill
entertained, their discretion and patience, does oblige them to undergo that
misfortune, with respect and submission. They are always our slaves, and by
consequence they never are our Tyrants. We have Shepherdesses which are
rigorous, but we have no Shepherds which are indiscreet; they dare hardly
proclaim their complaints, with their bagpipes and on their reeds; their
verses, their songs, and their entertainments, are filled only with our
praises; all our trees are engraved with their inscriptions, and ours mixed
together: and all their speeches, gives us every day new marks, either of their
esteem, or of their affection. Constancy (that virtue which so few practice in
the Cities) is most commonly found amongst us; the equality of our conditions,
and of our riches, makes that the weakest do remain constant; there is neither
scepter, nor gold, nor diamonds, which can dazzle, or bribe them; the wise
amongst us despise them, and the rest do not know what they are: We do not see
a husband here repudiate many wines as at Rome, the lovers do not cease to be
such even after marriage: they will not obtain us to slight us afterward; they
take a care of the conquest they have made, and think themselves glorious to
wear but one chain in all their lives. Nor are our Shepherdesses likewise more
unfaithful: their simplicity, and their freeness is the cause they do not
disguise their thoughts. They are modest and sincere; and if a little jealousy
(in spite of so many virtues which should hinder it from springing) did not
disturb the tranquillity of our meadows; all our Roses would be without
prickles, and al our pleasures would be without mixture, and without
bitterness. This passion nevertheless does not act here, as at Rome; in that
place, they have recourse to violence. The poisons, and ponyards are put in
use; and sometimes serve equally against the Rival, and against the Mistress
also. But here, the greatest hurt which happens to us, is that we perceive the
complexion of the fairest maids to become pale; and the flocks of our
carefullest Shepherds, to feel the trouble of their Master; who passing away
their sorrow in the darkest forests, abandon them to the care of their friends.
Yet how-ever this retreat does not make us see many mournful events; and for
the most part, some complaint, some song, and foam few Poems, is all the
revenge, and the reconcilement of the most jealous. If it be the Shepherdess
that is displeased, her lover is again brought to her feet, sad and changed as
he is, She hears him, receives his justification, if he be innocent, and
pardons him if he be guilty, if so be, he repents, and implores his pardon
hadsomely, and with a good grace. And if on the contrary she be in the wrong;
we condemn her to make with her own hands a garland of flowers for him; and
sometimes also we consent, that he should robb her of a bracelet of her hair,
after that, their felicity is founded more solidly then before; and the
innocence of their life, justifying all their pleasures, they remain the
happiest in the world. The Shepherd takes care of his Mistresses flock they go
almost still together on the same pastures; they seek out the same shades; and
the same fountains; their sheephooks have the same devices painted; their
baskets tied with the same ribons; their sheep adorned with the same colors,
and their very dogs seem to have contracted together a particular amity. This
happy state considered, as it should be, is it not true shepherd, that the love
of Rome, ought to be portray'd otherwise than ours; it should be represented
like a fury; he should have more than one bow, and more than one torch given
him, seeing the disorders he causes: he ought to bear a Scythe, as well as
Saturn, and death, since he destroys all that time and death destroy. He
orethrowes all as well as they; he never inspires the desires of love in a
heart; but that hatred, jealousy, and anger, steps in presently after. But for
that love which inhabits our woods, he never must be represented but upon
flowers; his wings must be enameled with the same colors of the Rainbow, and
his eyes should be hoodwinkt with a very thin vail, his shafts and quiver
adorned with roses and pesseminds, his skin must be white and incarnadine, the
pleasures and graces must not abandon him, his innocence must appear in all his
actions, and his torch seem to be in his hands, rather to lighten than to annoy
us. Judge, Shepherd, after all this which I have said now to you, whether Rome
ought to be preferred to the Country life? we inhabit natures fairest seats,
we possess all the true riches, we enjoy the fruition of all innocent
pleasures, we are not too distant from the most solid virtue, our customs are
not unjust, we are free from ambition, and behold nothing above us; what can we
wish for more, or what more can you desire? yield then, Shepherd, yield to
reason, to my prayers, to my persuasion, and to your own knowledge, who without
doubt would not endure, that I should give you the quality of Shepherd, if you
did not esteem it glorious. So many Verses and Eclogues which you have made do
justify better than I can, the advantages of the Country life; it will
suffice, to remember one day, that Tityrus, after he has sung the great acts
of Aeneis, (as he has designed) has not disdained to accord his Reeds and
Bag-pipe with our skilfullest Shepherds: do not then remember any more to be
persuaded of what I desire you, neither the Sun which I have described so
luminous, nor our Rivers whose waves are all silvered, nor our Fountains of
Crystal, nor the Emeralds of our fields; nor those lofty Mountains, whose
prospect is so pleasing; nor those Torrents, whose falls, although they seem
fearful, do yet afford divertisement: do not so much as think any more, I say,
of our gloomy Forests, nor of those ponds covered with Swans, nor of our
Hillocks, nor of our Valleys, nor of the lovely diversity of our Flowers, nor
our Woods, or the Music of our Nightingales, nor of the advantage we have
above the Cities in all the Seasons of the Year. Forget, I say, if you can, the
beauty of our Shepherdesses; cancel the memory of our holidays, of our
sacrifices, of our Chaces, of our Fishing, of the innocence of our Manners, and
of Amaryllis her self. But remember at least, that you may never speak any
thing against the Country life; that at your departure from Rome you become a
Shepherd as you were before. That you have born the Scrip, and Sheep-hook; and
that with the same hand with which you are going to write Dido's complaints,
and the Trojan Princes praises, you have written Tityrus his moans to the
Shepherdess Galatea, and the praises of the Country life.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
THe Reader may believe that this Discourse was persuasive; since Virgil, who
is the same with Tityrus, regrets Rome but only that one time in all his
Bucolicks, though he were 3 years composing them. He employed again afterward
seven more in composing his Georgics, a Work of the same nature, and the which
contains all the Country Occupations. Thus may one (as I have said) without
putting our Imaginations on the rack, believe that Amarillis did in some sort
persuade Tityrus: and that the diversity of this great Land-scept artificially
painted, and boldly traced, displeased not his sight.

CLORINDA TO TANCRED. The Fourth HARANGUE.
The Argument.
EVery one knows that in Tasso's Jerusasalem Tancred kills his Mistres Clorinda
without knowing her. But every one knows likewise that she knows him not
neither, and dies without hardly speaking. I do not doubt therefore but that I
shall be accused of falsifying the History (if at least a fable may have that
name) and that I shall be found strangely bold, to dare to make a Heroine to
speak, which so famous an Author has silenced. Besides that it is to say that
which he never said, they will find him yet more judicious then I, for not
having put so long a Discourse in the mouth of a dying person. But I confess,
that maugre all those objections on the which it is apparent that I have
thought, since I make them my self before any other offers them; I was not able
to resist so pleasing a temptation. It always seemed to me in reading this
passage of that mavelous Poem, that Tasso had not entirely drawn all that
might be drawn: and that since he was the Master of Clorinda's destiny, he
might have allowed her some moments of life, to render the adventure more
tender; and the unhappiness of Tancred more pitiful, by the things that she
might say to him. May the Reader then suffer, that as Bayardo and Ariosto often
said, that it is Turpin which has said what they invented. I may say also, that
another Historian than Tasso assures, that the wound with the sword was less
great; that Clorinda lived some hours, and that she spoke very near in these
terms to the Generous Tancred to persuade him, That the Love ought not to die
with the Beloved.

CLORINDA TO TANCRED.
YOu have overcome, illustrious and valiant Knight; I resign my sword to you
with my life: and you have moreover this advantage, to hear from the mouth of
that person whom you have vanquished, that you are worthy to be her vanquisher.
But whence comes the sadness which appears on your face, and in your actions?
Is it possible there should be found a man so generous, to weep for his own
Victories, and to mourn the death of his enemies? Cease, courageous Knight,
cease to regret my loss; and remember that I wanted but little of being the
cause of yours. But once again, that which I behold, and that which I hear, can
it be true? Ha! I do not doubt it, I now remember my deliverer; I hear that
same voice, which in the midst of battles has often appeared to me, so
terrible and so charming: nor do I wonder now to see him weep at my death, who
had saved my life. Yes, generous Prince, I do remember that great day, which
gained you so much honor; where, prompted by that noble ambition, to overcome
in you the valiantest and most courageous of all men, I pursued you so
obstinately, that my boldness, or rather my rashness, gave you an esteem for
me: you did not only forbear to assault me, and neglect to defend your self
when I assaulted you, but you defended me from all those that came against me;
you became contrary to that party of which you were before, only in
consideration of me; you pursued your own, as your enemies, because they were
mine; and all your actions did confirm to me better than your speeches, that
either by the power of your fate, or by your inclination Clorinda had touched
your illustrious heart. Ha! may the heavens grant me some moments of life, to
return you thanks for so much generosity, and to comfort you for the sadness I
have caused in you. I perceive well, Tancred, I perceive that you think of
going to seek some remedies for the wounds which I have received from your
hand: But if it be true, that I have any power over you (as your tears seem to
persuade me) do not abandon me, I conjure you, to the insolence of your
soldiers, at this time, when the miserable Clorinda has no other arms to
defend her self, than her complaints and sighs. Also the wounds I have received
are such, that there is no share in life more for me. Ha! would the heavens yet
once more prolong it in me a little, for some instants that I might testify my
acknowledgment. It seems to me my prayer is heard; for although I feel that the
hour of my death is near, it seems to me, I say (if I deceive not my self) that
I have cause to believe I shall not expire, till I have related to you a part
of those thoughts that are in me: Do not fear, that I shall complain of you, or
of fate; I have too great a soul, too firm, and too reasonable, to have a
ressentment so vulgar, so weak, and so unjust. I know that in Battles one finds
as often death as victory; that one must equally prepare for the one and the
other; and that if so be we be overcome without shame or baseness, we should
lose such a victory without despair, and die without murmuring. I do not then
regret the portion of life which I might yet have had: mine has been long
enough since it has been unspotted: I have lived little, I confess, but I have
lived with glory, and I die with honor. If Clorinda must be vanquished, it
must needs have been by him who uses to overcome all others: it is no small
thing for her to have disputed with him for that illustrious prize as she has
done; and not to have yielded, but only because nothing can resist him. Do not
mourn for me then, more than I mourn for my self; rule your ressentments by
mine; comfort your self as I am comforted, and be not more sensible of my
misfortune than your own interest. If you behold me as your enemy, you will
rejoice at my loss; all Godfreys army will give you thanks for this action,
for though I be of that sex from which ordinarily men can draw no advantage to
fight and overcome us. I think nevertheless without vanity that Clorinda's
name is famous enough, to dare believe as I do, that all your Knights would
think themselves fortunate, not only to be her conquerers, but even to be
conquered by her. Do not therefore cast that crown upon my Tomb, which you have
acquired by my defeat, as if unworthy of your temples; do not disdain the
victory, if you will not disgrace me: On the contrary, proclaim it to all the
world, let all the world know what it has cost you; do not hide the blood
which you have lost, only hide your tears from Clorinda, that her death may be
more quiet, since it cannot be more honorable. And to testify, that she
pardons it with a willing heart to you, she conjures you (if it be true that
you have any affection for her) to conserve it even after she is dead: let not
her ashes extinguish that noble ardour, which her Heroic actions have kindled
in your soul; you have loved her an enemy, love her in the grave; you have
loved her when she was armed against you, love her when she shall be dead by
your hands; you have loved her, even when she hated you; love her also when she
shall have ended her days, in assuring you, that she has esteemed your valor
and your virtue even so far, as to suffer her death without murmuring, and to
think it a glory to lose her life by the same hand that had preserved it for
her. I die nevertheless with the sorrow of not having implied it for the
service of my deliverer: but as that ingratitude is not voluntary, so let it
not hinder you to look upon my death as if I suffered it to save you, though I
suffer it, because I would have lost yours. Imagine that all the blows I made
at you were directed against your enemies, and not against your person; let the
blood which I lose serve for a price for the tears which you shed: and in fine
believe, that seeing the generosity I have found in your soul, if Clorinda had
lived, she would have testified to you by her actions, that she could no longer
reckon you amongst her enemies. But since things past cannot be revoked, and
that shortly there will no more remain of Clorinda but her name, her ashes, and
her Monuments (if you have the goodness to afford her one) have a care of all
those, heighten her reputation if you can, that so yours may increase, and that
you may also justify at the same time your affection and your sufferings. Be
not so weak as those persons unworthy the light of the day, which cease from
loving their friends, as soon as ere they are incapable, or not in a condition
to acknowledge their amity: Be not (I say) of those in whom the grave strikes
an horror, who dare not follow the persons they love into the shades of death.
Those that are so weakly interested, they seek only but for the recompense of
their affections, and who loves only pleasing things are not worthy the light
of the Sun: the great and generous souls are not wont to do thus; and to tell
things as they are, it is only within the grave, and 'twixt the very arms of
death, that we can assure our selves certainty of the good will any has for
us; all the services which are rendered to the living may be suspected of
self-interest; the honors done to the dead cannot be ill interpreted, but
merit to live eternally in the memory of all men. This is the true mark of
Heroic love, and of true virtue, it is (as I have said) the infallible Character
of a soul great, noble, and generous, it is loving for love, and not for the
reward; and it is in fine, the right means (as I have also said) to become
worthy of all imaginable honors, to honor the memory of those, who during
their lives have merited to be esteemed by us in a particular manner. Is it not
enough that we lose a person so dear to us, unless we blot her Image from our
memory? Ha! no, no, too generous Prince, you will not do thus, you will visit
her Tomb with respect, and her name becoming inseparable from yours by her
deplorable adventures shall fly 'ore all the world with luster and glory: you
will conserve this love which was so pure, that hope it self, has had no
share: for truly it would not be just, that Clorinda ceasing to hate when she
descends into the grave, you should begin to wish her ill, when she ceases to
live, and when she begins to know you; and by consequence to esteem you very
much. After you have been my enemy, be my Champion, I conjure you; defend
against all the world the beauty of those advantageous Pourtraits which fame
has made of me over all the earth: maintain that she has not flattered
Clorinda: speak of the grandeur of her courage, of her experience in her youth,
of her success in combats, of the purity of her soul, of the innocence of her
life, and of the glory of her death. It concerns me little, that you should
publish how I was born upon the throne; it suffices that you persuade them I
was worthy; and that your self be persuaded, that my defeat is honorable to
you. I perceive that this discourse redoubles your anguish, and that you had
rather not have vanquished, than buy the victory by my loss. Do not however
regret so much an unhappy person, neither accuse your self to have committed so
great a crime. The Clorinda whom you fought is not she who^ you behold. The
other was an infidel, an enemy of all Christians, and by consequence yours; and
this on the contrary is at present better instructed, more enlightened, and
more rational, since she dies with a great esteem and acknowledgment for
Tancred. But however (you will tell me) she dies by the hand of that Tanered:
it is true (I shall answer) but she dies for her glory. None amongst mortals
ought to have been her conqueror, but him that was so generous as to weep for
his victory. The blood she should have lost in any other encounter would have
sullied her reputation; it must needs be then for the honor of her arms that
she lose her life by your hand, that so she might live eternally: and then,
illustrious Prince, if the hazard of the war had not made us meet; and chance
and your valor had not brought me to these conditions I am in; never had
Clorinda given you any marks of her acknowledgments; she had an austere virtue
which would always have obliged her to treat you like an enemy; you have
sweetened the haughtiness of her soul by overcoming her: her pride has been
weaker than your civility: and the death which she receives from your hands
causes her to entertain your love without anger and hatred, which she would
never have done at any other time. Do not then complain of the rigor of the
adventure, since to it you owe a part of my esteem. I had admired your courage
in battles, but I confess that I had not so perfectly known your generosity
after the victory. There be more valiant soldiers than merciful and debonair
Conquerours; and more men that are able to spill the blood of their enemies,
than to shed tear upon their graves. Cease then, cease from afflicting your
self, and complaining for me: death not being harsh to me, methinks you should
comfort your self like me: and in fine, you ought to resolve to that which you
cannot possible shun. If I had lived longer, what happiness more could you have
expected? you should never have seen Clorinda, but with her weapons in hand; is
not it better (since heaven will have it so) that you never see her more? her
Idea will be more pleasing to you, than she her self would have been in such a
posture: and in the humor she is of, she is content you should love her
memory, but perhaps she would not have had you love her person otherwise.
Acknowledge with me therefore the advantages that this victory gives you; and
do not murmur inconsiderately for that which you cannot hinder. Moderate your
sorrow, that it may last the longer: I receive my death with tranquillity,
suffer my loss with patience: but never lose the memory of what I was. You
will restore my life, in preserving my image in your heart; but a life more
noble and more glorious, and for the which I have so often hazarded the other.
All that Clorinda has done, has been but to immortalize her name; hinder then
by your cares that it be not buried in oblivion: and if it be true (as I cannot
doubt it) that your soul is altogether generous, do not change your mind,
since I am going to be in an estate, which suffers no more change. I die with
much admiration for your virtue; live with a great esteem of my courage; bear
even from my grave to your own the affection which you say you have for me;
and when misfortune will have you quit this life, let it be ordained, that an
Image of Clorinda be enclosed in your Tomb; let her be yet found imprinted in
your heart, and that nothing be so puissant as to deface and blot it out. It Is
in vulgar souls that time and absence destroys the fair opinions which virtue
alone had impressed: but amongst Heroic persons, time, absence, nor death it
self, are not able to change their inclinations. They love in the grave that
which they loved in the world; the remembrance of that pleasing object serves
in lieu of their persons; and as they have loved without hope and interest,
they preserve without infidelity, and without trouble, the amity which they had
promised. Certainly, there would be somewhat of cruel and unjust to lose
together the life, the light, and the affection of our friends: we do revive
again, if we live in their memory: raise up therefore your Clorinda in this
manner, and do not make her die yet once more in so cruel a manner, far worse
than the former. The first is an effect of your skill, of your courage, and of
her fate: and the second would be one of your forgetfulness, of your
indifferency, and (if I may speak so) of your ingratitude. Yes, generous
Prince, I may make use of those terms; and I dare believe, that you will not
think it ill, if Clorinda believes she obliges you sensibly, when even she
imploys the last moments of her life, to testify to you the true esteem she
has conceived of your extreme virtue. Do not then be wanting of
acknowledgment, since you see I am not wanting in it: receive the regret I have
for not having served you, as an undubitable proof, that I should have done it,
had I lived longer. But render also to my ashes, and to my name the honors and
the cares which you would have rendered to Clorinda, had she survived longer.
Do not fear that her ghost shall affright you, when you shall visit her grave:
nor that with a querulous and moaning voice she will reproach you for her
death. No Tancred, you shall behold no more, neither Clorinda nor her shadow:
you shall hear no more, neither her voice, nor her plaints. But alas, I know I
increase your sorrow in thinking to cure it! that the testimonies of amity
which I render you do cause more affliction than they bring joy: that I am so
far unhappy as to trouble you, even when I would serve you: that I pierce your
heart, when my own is ready to expire: and that I am more dreadful to you
dying and dis-armed, than I was to you in the midst of Combats. I shall
therefore tell you nothing more that may augment your tears: I will hide a part
of my mind from you, for fear of stirring yours, and for fear likewise lest
your imbecility should take hold of me. Ha! no, no, I repent me of that
thought; and since I have no more than a few minutes to live, I must wholly
give them to him, who otherwhile did save my life; to him who at this time does
weep my death, although it has hindered his; and to him whose cares should
immortalize me. As well I do not think that my silence would stop your moans:
and I also believe, that you will never be more afflicted, than when this
silence shall become eternal. Prepare your self however for it, for I feel my
fatal hour approaches, my strength diminishes, my voice fails; and I shall
hardly have the time to tell you, that Clorinda dies without any other sorrow,
than that which yours does cause in her. That she esteems the end of her days
for the most glorious of all her adventures; that being born upon the Throne,
she does not care though she dies on the dust, since it is with honor: that
having lived with innocence, and reputation without stain, she regrets nothing
in the world, but only that she cannot retaliate that which she owes to you:
and that in fine, she esteems her self happy to have found in the same person,
an enemy so courteous, as even to save her life; a Knight so valiant, as to
make her death illustrious; a Conqueror so compassionate as to weep at his own
Victories; and a lover so passionate and so heroic, as to make her hope, that
he will conserve that affection very pure, even to his last breath. Adieu then
Prince, too unfortunate to be so generous: My voice fails me, I lose my sight
and breath. But if it be possible, forget not this remembrance, That the Love
ought not to die with the Beloved.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
THe ressentments that a like Discourse might have inspired, did not miss of
finding place in the afflicted spirit of Tancred: he wept, and wept a long time
for so extraordinary a misfortune, and for so fearful an adventure; and we may
believe that he wept ever. Since Erminia (how lovely, and how much a lover
so'ere she was) could never comfort him for the death of Clorinda.
Nevertheless, be not you persuaded, that he was so, That the affection ought
not to die with the beloved; but suspend at least your judgment, since this
other Princess has somewhat to say thereon. Hearken better to her than
Tancred did hearken: for in truth she is too worthy of compassion to be
suffered to die for a dead one, or at least for not hearing of her.

ERMINIA TO ARSETES. The Fifth HARANGUE.
The Argument.
AFter that Tancred had killed Clorinda, as you have seen before; the Prince
appeared inconsolable: and hardly could that famous Hermit which follows
Godfreys army separate him from that fair body, whose soul himself had
separated; so that Erminia, daughter to the King of Antioch, who had a long
time loved that generous, but affllicted Prince, despaired of ever seeing her
affection recompensed. I was in that unhappy condition, that meeting one of
Clorinda's Domestics, who maintained that Tancred had reason to do so; she
end avoured to make him confess, to ease her sorrow, That the affection ought
not to go beyond the grave.

ERMINIA TO ARSETES.
THose which say as you say, that the power of death ought not to destroy love:
that one must love in the dark regions of the air those whom we loved whilst
they enjoyed the light of the Sun; that not to conserve our affections very
pure toward them, is to be unfaithful; that it is inconstancy to be capable of
any other flames after they are separated from the living; and that in fine,
whoever is so unhappy, as to see his Mistress enter into the Monument, never
ought to have any thoughts of making any other conquest. Those people (I say)
are equally ignorant, both how far the power of death, and the power of love do
extend. They know not what that is which we call love: they know neither
fidelity nor constancy; and judge of things either by their own capritious
fancies, or for their own interest. As for you, sage and faithful Arsetes, I
have no reason to find it ill, that you bestow your tears to the memory of the
valiant Clorinda: I consent likewise, that the generous Tancred mingle his with
yours; and I shall further testify to you by my sighs, that the destiny of
that illustrious person has caused grief in me; and that I was her Rival, but
not her enemy. But I will also persuade you, that without being either
inconstant or unfaithful, that Prince who loved her during her life, might now
recompense my affection by his own, since she does cease to live. Death (that
fearful monster that destroys all that breaths upon earth) will not that love
should enterprise any thing against his power: those which he once bears away
are no longer obliged to any thing: he separates those amities that are the
closest united; and unties the strongest alliances. In making Kings to tumble
from the Throne into the Sepulcher, he dispences their subjects from all
obedience; their power ends with their life, and there remains no more of those
Monarchs, but the memory of their vices, or of their virtues. If they have been
evil, they are blamed with boldness; and if they have been good, they are
praised without suspi^ion of flattery; their Tombs are carefully looked to,
their names are immortalized by the Histories which are made of their Reigns
and their Heroic actions; but the services which they were wont to require of
their subjects are not rendered to them: So true it is that death brings a
change in all things. That which I say of Kings may be said of those whom love
had made Queens over their Lovers, and whom death has subjected also to its
Empire; as they are not in a condition to command any more, we are dispensed
from obeying them; the laws of Reason and Nature will have us weep their loss,
and cherish their memory, that we never forget them, that we raise stately
Tombs for them, and that we forget not any thing which may add to their glory;
but Reason and Nature will likewise tell us, that time cures the sharpest
sorrows; that the deepest spring of tears must be dried up at length, and that
all afflictions must diminish. In effect, there is no means to be found in
these occasions; we must enter into the grave with the beloved person, or we
must keep within the limits which wisdom prescribes to the most violent
griefs. All the ornaments of the proudest Mausoleums are but extinguished
torches, and sad marks and tokens that those that rest in them have now no
share in the light; and that by consequence, the living should have no share in
their ashes and urnes. That eternal sleep which reigns in the graves, and
which the tears and the sighs of the most passionare lovers cannot dispell,
evidences enough, that it is not to the deceased we owe our love and constancy.
The change which happens in them justifies that which happens to others; and
then to speak truly, the most despairing do abuse themselves, when they think
yet to love the ghosts of their Mistresses, as if they were still alive. That
which can cause no longer, neither desire, nor hope, nor disquiet, nor
jealousy, cannot be called love: They cease to love therefore, and yet do not
apprehend it, and mistake an effect of their grief, and sometimes of their
temperature for a mark of passion. Notwithstanding it is absolutely impossible,
that love and death can ever reign together; they think to love their
Mistresses, and indeed they love only their memory; they say they are faithful
and constant, and yet all their sentiments are changed: for of all the
tendernesses which true affection inspires, there remains nothing in portion to
them but grief; besides that with time does ordinarily become only a
melancholy habit, rather than an effect of their loss, or the ressentment they
have of it, they accustom themselves to sadness, as to joy; their fighes do
ease them, their tears fall without bitterness; and the recital of their ill
fortunes, instead of increasing their torments, and renewing their
displeasures, serves them for a pastime and a pleasing divertisement. Believe
me, Arsetes, those are not the signs of a violent passion: Nevertheless it is
certain that the wisdom of nature works in us, whether we will or not, this
advantageous change. Death is an evil too inevitable and too common amongst men
to be left without a consolation for the losses it brings; and indeed we find
it to be so: and reason has not left us without giving the just limits to the
greatest sorrow. Ever since the beginning of ages death has made men shed
tears, which time has wiped off again: all the children have been comforted
for the death of their fathers; all the fathers have not despaired at the death
of their children; the most faithful husbands have attended their wives to
their graves, without descending therein themselves: and the most constant
women have buried their husbands, and yet did not lie down with them in the
same bed of earth. In fine, Arsetes, as there is no joy permanent in this life,
there ought to be no eternal affection. You will tell me, that the bands of
blood and those of love are things very different; and that for the most part
the interest of the person beloved has more power in our hearts than any other
consideration. You will add to this, that we would forsake our Country, and
all our Parents to serve her; and that likewise when it happens that we lose
her, she causes as much affliction, she alone, as if we lost all together, both
our Parents that gave us birth, and our fortunes; and in short, all that is
left us to lose in the world. Though I should agree touching that, yet we must
still come to my argument, which is, that either we must comfort our selves
after the death of the person whom we love, or we must die with her. For to
think that love is a thing compatible with the darkness of the grave is a
belief of small appearance; it is a thing without reason, and without example;
and which can never happen, unless they lose their sense and understanding with
their Mistresses. As we do not affect what we never see, neither ought we to
love what we shall never behold more; one may preserve the remembrance, but we
cannot love the beauties, since they are no longer in being: one may still love
the chains and shakels which they wore; but as these chains and bands are
broken for ever, we may without inconstancy or infidelity retake some others,
provided they be not unworthy of the first. We must not break down a golden
Statua, to put a brass one in the place: But amongst some Christians it is
usual to adorn the place with more than one Image. I do not therefore desire
that Tancred should raze out that of his Clorinda entirely from his heart; I
have more respect to her, and more complacence for him: I would only have him,
since he has not renounced all humane society, for we know he does both give
and receive Orders, go to the wars, defend his life, and employ the same hand,
with which he cut the bands that tied him to the service of Clorinda, against
those whom Clorinda has always served; I would (I say) that having never
ceased to be faithful to his party, having never ceased to be valiant in
battles, and having never forgotten to be generous, he may not now omit to be
an acknowledger of my affections. In the state as things now are he owes
nothing but compassion to Clorinda, but he owes love to Erminia. Clorinda can
now no more either love or hate him; and Erminia has not only loved him before
he knew Clorinda, but she loves him still, even whilst he prefers Clorinda's
ashes before Erminia's chaste flames. Heavens be my witness, if I nourish the
least thought of hatred against that illustrious person: as long as she lived,
I held as great an esteem of her virtue, as I had affection for the Prince whom
I loved: no, Arsetes, her death did not rejoice me; on the contrary, it did
grieve me. I honored her enough to weep her loss; and I loved Tanered enough,
to desire almost that he might not have such a sad misfortune, although
according to appearance, it might be advantageous to me; and if after their
interest I may have leave to think of my own, I dare avouch again, that I
believe, that I should be less unhappy, if Clorinda were not dead, than I am
now, though she be equally incapable to give either love or jealousy. Did she
yet live, I should not take it ill, if Tancred would give me but his esteem and
friendship, and preserved his entire love and passion for her; I would say in
his defense, he loves that which cannot be beloved too much; Clorinda is young,
fair, virtuous, and valiant, and his inclination does prompt him to adore her:
let us bemoan our fortune then without accusing her that causes it, since we
can find nothing to object against his choice. But now that Clorinda is no
more but a little dust, that her youth does subsist no more, that her beauty is
destroyed, that her virtue cannot appear, but only by the relations of those
that know her, that her valor can be no more either useful or hurtful to her
friends or enemies; and that in fine, she is as far distant from us as if she
had never been. It is not just, that Tancred should have more fidelity for the
ashes of his enemy, than acknowledgment and regard for her who began to love
him from the first instant she ever beheld him, although that first instant
cast her from the Throne to slavery; and that the hands which enchained her had
torn a Crown from off her Fathers head, yea a Crown which should have been
placed upon her own temples. But perhaps, generous Arsetes, you do not know all
the rights which I have in Tancreds affection, by the birth of that love which
I have for him: it will not then be out of our discourse and way, if I tell it
you in a few words; that so if it happens one day, that he hear my reasons with
more sweetness than you believe, you may not accuse him of infidelity and
injustice, if he do prefer Erminia before the ghost or shadow of Clorinda. It
is likewise necessary for my own glory, that you should know, that without
ceasing to be virtuous and reasonable I could begin to love Tancred, though he
were my Fathers conqueror; that I might continue to wish him well, though he
have not answered my amity; and that I am in the right at present to wish from
him, that he would be content only to honor the memory of Clorinda, and begin
to love Erminia. You must know then (sage and wise Arsetes) that when the
Christians had pulled down Antiochus his throne, and that they had taken away
both his scepter and life who gave me life: you may know (I say) that by the
fortune of war I fell into the hands of the Conqueror, who (as you cannot but
know) was the same Tancred of whom we now speak. But alas! why was it that the
Conqueror was not more rigorous to me at that time, since he will not be
merciful now? wherefore was it that he did not treat me like a slave then, if
it be true that he will not treat me like a Mistress now? Wherefore was it that
he rendered me all the treasures of the King, my father, then, if he will not
now render me my own heart again, or give me his in exchange? and why did he
give me my liberty so freely and graciously, since he now refuses so cruelly to
accept these chains, which are less ^ude and heavy? Yes, faithful Arsetes, I
acknowledge with some confusion, I began to love Tancred then, when in
appearance I should have begun to hate him. His virtue, his moderation, and his
clemency touched my heart sensibly: I was his Captain, and he respected me as a
Queen: by the right that Conquerors have over the conquered, all our treasures
were his, and he restored them to me, or rather gave them: I was his prisoner,
and he restored me to liberty: it is true, that loosening those chains which I
wore, he put me on some others more strong than those which I was freed from. I
beheld my liberty as an evil, and regreted my servitude as a great good; and
though I did not know my self (in those times) wherefore I had such thoughts
which seemed so void of reason, I know now that the extraordinary generosity of
Tancred had already ushered love into my heart, although I were then of an age,
in which love is unknown. Since that, what have I not done, sometimes to love
him no more, sometimes to love him dearlier? I have beheld him sometimes as an
usurper; I have considered him as an enemy, who had taken away Antiochus's
Crown; and which is more, who had taken away all the quiet of my life by a
passion which his generosity had bred in my soul, and which I could not
overcome. But shall I tell it, faithful Arsetes? after I had beheld him as an
usurper and an enemy, I always loved him, because he was both virtuous, and my
deliverer, and my beloved. I have seen him from the walls of Jerusalem shedding
the blood of our soldiers, without shedding a tear my self: I desired the
victory, but however would not have Tancred be conquered. I had found him too
merciful a Conqueror, not to desire to have him still in a condition, to make
known his virtue by doing good, rather then in suffering evil. Nor could I hear
of the peril he was in, by reason of his hurts, without having a design to save
his life, who had saved my honor, and had given me my liberty. You know as
well as my self, that I made use of the valiant Clorinda's arms to get out
from Jerusalem, and to execute my enterprise: But in taking her arms and
weapons I did not put on her courage, so that I was quickly forced to quit my
sword, and betake me to the sheep-hook to secure my self. I have then been
Cavalier and Shepherdess for the insensible Tancred: I was also Armida's
prisoner in his consideration: and that which I find to be more happy for me,
is, that by that mavelous art, which all the Kings, my Predecessors, have
left me in possession; I have had the satissaction to render and save the life
of my deliverer, to dress his wounds, and to heal him, in such a time when
none but ERMINIA could relieve him. You see then, Arsetes, that the birth of my
affection is not criminal, since Tancreds sole virtue did breed it. You may
judge likewise that its continuation is excusable and the design of saving him
did contribute much to it: and you should also know, that Clorinda not living
any longer, he is obliged to recompense my amity with his own. Clorinda, who
at this present causes all his grief, and possesses all his thoughts, had never
employed her arms, but to assault him, and to pursue him: and I stole the
armor of Clorinda, but only to save his life. Clorinda, from whom he had
taken neither Crown, nor Scepter, has always beheld him as an enemy: and I,
from whom he had ravished all, even to my very liberty, I have always beheld
him as a Prince, which could and should be my lover. I have already told you,
Arsetes, that if your illustrious Mistress did live yet, I would not so much as
have a thought to dispute her conquest; but her misfortune having laid her in
her grave, you may judge after all that I have said, whether it be reasonable
to prefer the sepulcher of Clorinda before Erminia? for in fine, it is not
unfaithfulness to abandon those which do abandon us for ever. What Arsetes, can
you apprehend that one may keep a love for that which cannot receive it any
more? That pleasing interchange of will and desires, which is made betwixt
lovers, can that be made between Clorinda's Tomb and the Prince Tancred? No,
Arsetes, that cannot be so; all things in the world have their limits: so long
as the beloved person is living, we must follow her over all the earth, we must
partake of her fortune how unhappy so'ere it be; nay, we must even die for her,
if there be occasion: but if it happens that she dies, we must (as I have
already said) either cease to live, or cease to love her; it is so absolute a
necessity that nothing can oppose it; all the ages have showed us examples of
what I say; all that despaired have killed themselves with their own hands; and
those that were wise have comforted themselves with their own reason. In
effect, there would be great injustice in the order and course of nature, if
every time that death does cast one person into the Grave, there should be
another that must renounce entirely all the society of the living, and pass the
remainer of his days in shedding of fruitless tears, and vainly walking about
the margent of the grave; for truly to speak with sincerity, there are scarce
any people that die, which should not expect those last devoirs, either from
their friends, or from those for whom they had any affection, if it were true
that reason did authorize such a strange proceeding: by this means such a third
of sorrows would run through all the world, as would render the lives of all
men unhappy, and destroy the Universe. Or else we must (not to be exposed to
such troublesome adventures) refuse the amity of all honest men; never have any
love for any, nor be obliged to any, but take all care to make our selves
become hated, and rather look to the health of those for whom we have any good
will, than to their deserts or worth: for fear, lest their constitutions being
weak, the end of their days happening it may be before old age, should oblige
those which love them to spend the rest of their days in mourning about their
graves. Seriously, Arsetes, it is not to be easily imagined, that there are
rational souls, which believe that death does not destroy love; time and
absence, which have nor so much power as that, do every day make too many
become constant, to leave a belief, that after death has ravished the object
away which gave birth to that passion, we should yet preserve a love for it. We
cannot continue to love that object, since it is destroyed; nor ought we to do
it, since we should equally resist both Reason and Nature, which will not have
it so. Those who are said to have been in love with a fair Statua, or a
Picture, are more excusable than those that love a grave, or the ashes which it
incloses: the eyes which are wont to seduce the imagination and will by the
advantage of all fair objects, betray them, and gives them some kind of delight
in sweetly deceiving them; but to preserve a love for an object that is so
horrid, for that which can never behold without tears and affright, nay for
that which we shall never behold again, it is that which cannot, which ought not
to be, and it is that which makes me with boldness maintain, That the love ought
not to last but to the grave. All men that have not lost their judgments,
neither do, nor ought to do any thing without a design: It Is so general a rule,
that there are hardly any which miss it; the covetous know wherefore they
guard their treasures; all the ambitious know whither they would climb; all
that are of vindicative spirits know for what end they molest their enemies;
nor are the lovers ignorant what they intend, when they weep and sigh at the
feet of their Mistresses. They know (I say) that love is the price of love; and
that in fine, we love to be beloved again. But should we ask the Prince
Tancred, what he pretends by continuing to love the ghost of Clorinda, as much
as he love her person; I believe he would be somewhat troubled for an answer.
To say that his tears and sighs have for their principal design, to touch and
move her heart, would not be believed, since it is impossible it should be so. Or
else to think, that he preserves his first flames to animate the ashes of his
Mistress, he is too wise to have such a thought: or again to imagine, that he
has no other end in what he does, but to make himself unhappy needlessly, is a
thing without all appearance. Nevertheless it is certain, that the love which
you so much praise in this Prince can produce no more advantage to him, nor to
me, but either my own death or his. Ha! if it were possible, that the
illustrious Clorinda could hear his moanes, and my reasons; and that from the
midst of her grave she could make him hear her commands; how she would blame
his proceedings, and mourn my unhappiness! she was other-while too generous,
to think it now just, that Tancred, being no longer obliged to be faithful to
her, should be still ungrateful toward me. You may tell me, perhaps, that her
last desires were not as I persuade: But, Arsetes, she then lived yet, when she
declared them to Tancred. That imbecility which is common to all those that
are dying, is not to be found in them after they are dead; all their passions
become tranquil in the grave; the deceased desire neither the love nor the
constancy of any, they have no share in our fortunes, they do not care whether
others meddle with their destiny; and as they are separated from all things,
they do not trouble themselves whether we separate also from them, or yet still
follow them. Believe me, Arsetes, it is enough to be constant during our lives,
without being so after death: it is (I say) enough to do what we ought, without
doing what we ought not: and then, to say things as they are, so long as we are
alive we are obliged to serve to the public society; it is not permitted us to
be ungrateful; it is not permitted us to be unjust; and this being so, it is
not permitted to Tancred, to love Erminia no more, and to love Clorinda still,
though Clorinda be no more, and that Erminia be in a condition to love him to
his grave. Besides, if we do likewise but rightly expound the last desires and
will of your illustrious Mistress, one shall find that they were ill understood
by this Prince: for whatso'ere commands she gave him to reverence her memory,
she made him none more pressing than those by which she enjoined him to be
comforted. Now what means is there for this Prince to be ever comforted, if he
retain the love he had for her? What Arsetes, can a true lover live happily,
and know that he can never be seen, nor be beloved by his Lady? Ha! no, no,
let us not abuse our selves in expounding Clorinda's last speeches; for without
doubt she is agreed to what I say, she will willingly remain in Tancreds
memory, but she will not be angry, if I reign in his heart; she will be willing
to have him respect her name, but she will not be displeased if he love my
person; she was willing that he should shed some tears upon her grave, but she
will not murmur, if reason, time, and Erminia dries them up again; she has
consented that her death should make him unhappy for some few days, but she
will consent likewise that he should make me happy for all my life. Do not
therefore, Arsetes, resist Clorinda's will: persuade the Prince, her lover,
that which I would persuade you; tell him he disobeys his Mistress and yours, in
not comforting himself; and that if it be permitted for any one to pretend a
part in his affection, it can be only to me. As a friend to Clorinda, I have
some right to the amity he had for her; as his slave, which I have been, he
should let me wear his fetters; as a Queen, which I ought to be, he should give
me the Empire of his heart, instead of the Crown which he has made me lose:
and, as his lover, he ought to leave Clorinda's grave to follow me even till my
death. That is the term that I prescribe to the love which I will have him have
for Erminia; I do not desire that he should forsake Clorinda's tomb to come and
walk about mine, if I happen to die before him: No, my pretentions are not so
unjust; if he die not for the sorrow of my death, I will have him live, and be
comforted. For in fine, whether I hearken to reason or nature, I find, that
the love ought not to endure beyond the grave, or after death.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
AS Tasso has not told us, whether Tancred were comforted, and whether he had
pity of Erminia; so neither can I tell it you: and because Arsetes was an
ancient Domestic of Clorinda, I dare not neither assure you, whether he did
agree to this Discourse. You have the reasons of the one and the other.
Consider them at leisure, and judge soveraignly, if you are so bold as to judge
of Queens, and so dis-interested as to undertake it.

CARICLIA TO THE AGENES. The Sixth HARANGUE.
The Argument.
WHen after the suffering of all those illustrious misfortunes, which compose
the Ethiopian History, CARICLIA and THEAGENES beheld themselves on the Throne;
that lovely and famous Heroine, in a particular conversation which she had with
her lover, recalled to her memory all her past troubles; and comparing them to
her present felicities, it seemed to her that that pleasing remembrance did in
some manner increase them: So that in her transportation of joy, she spoke in
this sort to THEAGENES, to prove to him, That those that never had evil, do not
know true pleasure.

CARICLIA TO THEAGENES.
IN fine, my dear and beloved Theagenes, we have run a glorious Race, at the
end of which we find a Crown, which is no less glorious: it is good to remember
the storm, when we are in a safe harbor; and amidst the rest and tranquillity
of the earth, with what pleasure we revolve in our minds the fury and agitation
of the Sea. Those images, though troubled and tumultuous, do nevertheless
please the mind: they are disordered and confused, but it is delightful; and as
diversity is the greatest charm of nature, those mavelous events which
compose so intricate and cross a life as ours has been, never fails to excite
joy in that soul that remembers its former sadness and misfortunes. It Is
certain every thing appears best by their contraries: and it is only by the
opposition that their differences are noted, and their advantages sensibly
discovered. The light owes its luster to the shade; and it is from the night
that day does draw its brightness; the Sun makes known the splendor of its
rays by the tenebreous darkness; it is the rigorous sharpness of the Winter that
heightens the amiable sweetness of the Spring; the prickles makes the rose more
esteemed; and briefly, it is from misfortunes without doubt that felicities do
arise; it being very true, that those who have not undergone some evils, can
never truly know what pleasure is. In effect, those who have never had but
fortunate adventures; who never have proved the inconstancy of fate; and whose
most sensible contentments have never cost them a sigh, nor made them shed a
tear, do possess them without being possessed; enjoy them without enjoyments;
and make that an object of their froideur and disdain, which might be the
object of all the worlds desires. They are rich, and know it not; they have
treasures, and cannot tell their value; they have good things, and do not taste
them; and their abundance makes them poor. Such a long series of felicities
does benum a soul rather than rouse it: and the frequency does no less take
away the delicacy of the pleasure, than it does take away the sharpness of
pain. One is accustomed to a Scepter, as well as to an iron chain; the Throne
is no better to those people than an ordinary chair; and there are those that
wear a Crown upon their heads, who yet hardly know whether they have it on, or
are adorned with it or no. Those Princesses, who being born in the purple, and
have always worn a Royal Mantle; who, even from their cradles to their graves,
have always stood under the Canopy of state, within the Ballisters, and amidst
the Pomp and Majesty, cannot compare their satisfaction to Cariclia's; she who
was exposed at her birth, she who was not known to any, she who did not know
her self, she who was not adornd but with her natural graces; and she in fine,
who from extreme misery has past in a moment, to the supreamest grandeur. For
my part (I acknowledge to you Theagenes) it seems to me, that I have conquered
the Kingdom which Fortune restores to me; it seems to me, that I hold it by my
virtue, and not by my birth; and it seems to me, that my merit has given to me,
all that which my love will make me give your merit. Now as that which we gain
by our industry, or generosity, is infinitely more precious, than that which we
hold from nature; you must not wonder, if I prefer a glory which has cost me
an hundred labors to that glory which others have without trouble; and if I
find that it is only through difficulties, that we attain to sovereign
happiness. No, my dear Theagenes, it has been by my disgraces that I have
obtained my welfare; 'twas only by my banishment that I got your acquaintance;
and only my leaving Ethiopia, which saw my birth, has made the birth of my
affection to be seen in the temple of Apollo at Delphus. Thus cannot any deny,
but that my good has proceeded from my evil, and that my repose is sprung from
my traverses. Who would not have said, when we left the Grecian rivage, and
that the Pirat Trachinus had made himself Master of our Vessel, that there was
no more any felicity for us? Who would not have said, when that Pirat became
enamoured of me, that we must have lost our reason, if we had had the least
hope left? who would not have said, when there rose so great a tempest, that
the waves lifted us even to heaven, and afterward let us sink again to the
very center of the earth, that the Sea was going to swallow us, and that its
fury was going to dash our ship against the points of the Rocks? who would not
have said, when those infamous Pirates were arrived at the mouth of a great
River; and that they began a combat amongst themselves, of which I should have
been the prize, that Fortune was going to decide their difference, and give to
one of the parties both the victory and Cariclia? who would not have said,
seeing me upon that desert shore, amidst so many slain, and clasping your
wounded self in my arms, almost as dead as they and you were; that we were
going to find our graves, on that part of an arm of the River Nylus, called
Her acleetick; and that the illustrious race of Perseus, from whom I am
descended, and the noble blood of Achilles from whence you sprung were at the
point to perish inevitably in a savage, and not inhabited place?
Notwithstanding, by the goodness of the gods which protected us, nothing of all
this befell us, but we are yet in a condition to comfort our selves for those
misfortunes past, or rather to rejoice for our present felicities. But lovely
Theagenes, tell me the truth, I conjure you, and do not disguize it, no more
than I do these thoughts of mine; can you remember the horrid countenances and
minds of those first robbers which ceased on us, or the extravagant equipage of
the second which took us from the first, without feeling some joy in your soul,
for being freed from so eminent peril? Do you not yet behold them as well as I,
issuing from between those Rocks, their faces tanned and Sunburned, their hair
long and tangled, their bodies half armed and half naked; and do they not now
give you as much pleasure, as they then gave me fear? It Is here that we may now
with liberty consider, without any affrights, that fair Isle of Shepherds,
which so long a space of Marshy earth, and which so great a quantity of Reeds
and Canes separates from the firm ground, hiding it from the sight of those
which are there. Did you ever see any thing more pleasing, or more industrious
than that labyrinth of water, which so many small enterlaced paths does form
amongst those Reeds and Canes, through which the vessels of those Thieves make
their passage, and can find out a way, which none other but they can discover?
Did you ever behold a Rustic object, that was more grateful than that Island
was, after we had in a boat traced out all the concealed turnings of which I
speak, which seems as it had hid it self amidst so many aquatick herbs, and so
many plants which never grow but in Marshes? Did you ever see any thing more
artificial and more pretty together, than were those Cabbins, made with
enterlaced branches of Palms, and covered with other long branches mixed with
laurel? and this object being joined to so many different arms and weapons
which those thieves hung on all the trees about, would it not make one think,
that that little mountain were one of those great and proud Trophies, which the
Grecians raise when they are victorious? I know that you will tell me, that
those innocent pleasures could not possibly be sensible to us, and that the
love which Thyamis conceived for me, (he who was chief of those robbers) made
us suffer strange troubles; I know that you will tell me, that I saw my self
separated from you, and buried alive in a profound Cave; I know that you will
tell me, that when the Egyptians and the Persians came to assault those
Thieves: Thyamis's jealousy had almost made me lose my life, and that he would
without doubt have deprived me of it, if the obscurity of that den had not made
him take the unhappy Thisbe for me; I know that you will tell me, that the
flame devoured almost in an instant all the Canes, the Reeds; all the Plants,
the herbs, all the arms and the Cabins of those Robbers: and that one would
have said, that by some enchantment that pleasant object vanished, and left
nothing in its place but flame, ashes, and smoke: I know that you will tell me,
that you were infinitely troubled, when you thought me lost, and that was
redoubled, when taking Thisbe for me, you thought me dead: but I must tell you,
that that sorrow could not come near to that joy of yours and mine, when you
beheld me living, and that I found you safe. Recall, my dear Theagenes, recall
to your memory, I conjure you, my ravishments, and your transports in that
occasion; trace well in your memory that image which time and a long series of
other misfortunes have perhaps blotted out: Examine your heart well, as I
examine mine; and tell me after that, if you ever felt a more sensible content;
if the pains you had suffered did not augment your felicities; and in fine,
whether it be not true, as I maintain, that those who have not felt some evil,
cannot tell what pleasure is? but perhaps you may reply again, that those
felicities were so short, that they could hardly pass but for a pleasing dream:
that Fortune which had reunited us did re-separate us presently again by
Mitranes cruelty; and that that last separation, finding our souls wholly
disposed to sadness, that sadness entered our souls with all the fury of an
insolent Conqueror, who ravages and subverts all in the place he surprises. It
is certain, (and I acknowledge) that nothing can compare with the sense of
those afflictions we then felt; and that to know them perfectly, one must have
proved them; for the greatest and most persuasive Eloquence can trace but an
imperfect draught of them. I beheld my self separated from all that I loved;
you saw your self separated from all that you passionately desired, and
separated for ever. You beheld me in the power of a Barbarian; and I saw you
under a cruel Master; and immediately after (which was the most inhumane) you
saw me no more, Theagenes, nor could I see you. Without doubt those funest
moments were so sad both to you and my self, that those themselves who suffered
it, cannot have so much art as to relate it: and if from this woeful adventure I
pass again to the apparition of that dead Corpse which I saw both move and speak
by the power of Magic, and by her mothers impiety, whose unnatural tenderness
troubled the repose of her grave, and violated the last of natures laws; I
doubt not, but that I do almost affright you as much as I was at that
adventure, and make you participate of my fear. For imagine to your self a
Maiden, and the good Calasiris, alone in the midst of a great plain, covered
all over with broken weapons and arms, with Chariots o'returned, sprinkled
with blood, dead soldiers, and all others tragical objects, which are wont to
be seen in those sad places where a battle has been given. Imagine (I say)
that you beheld me, and that you beheld all these doleful objects by the gloomy
light of the Moon, whose weak beams did sometimes pierce the clouds, and made
us confusedly perceive all these things: and sometimes wrapping its self in
those clouds again, left nothing in those Campanias but horror and obscurity.
Represent to your self, that you saw me amidst this fearful disorder, and that
from amongst those massacred soldiers you behold on a sudden a dead body, with
motion as quick as unnatural, arise as one should raise a Statua, and stand
sometime upright. Twice I beheld it arise, as if alive; twice I beheld it fall
as if dead; twice I beheld her face pale and disfigured; twice I beheld her
eyes quite extinguished and turned inwards, though they appeared open; twice
her mouth opened it self, dead as she was; and twice she spoke, but with fewer
words than sighs, and with an accent capable to appal with horror the stoutest
soul. Nevertheless, my dear Theagenes, all this affliction and all this fright
served afterward but to augment our joy, when by the bounty of the gods we met
one another before the walls of Memphis. 'Twas there that I once more
experimented, that they which never had no evil, do not know pleasure: 'twas
there that I knew sensibly that the absence makes us afterward find the sight
of the beloved object the more pleasing: and it was there, my dear Theagenes,
that I learned by experience, that those which are always happy, are not half
happy. In effect, those who never lost a treasure, are ignorant of the joy
there is in finding it again, and hardly know that which its possession gives.
It belongs only to unfortunate ones to speak of a good fortune: and as we must
be in the profound and deep valleys to judge well of the heights of mountains;
so we must have been in miseries and afflictions, to know perfectly what is
felicity and abundance. In such a happy moment of an unlookt for accident,
there passes certain invisible beams from one lovers eyes to the others, which
carry with them into the hearts a certain I know not what, not to be expressed.
The words of content, of joy, of satisfaction, and of glory, are too poor to
express so tender and delicate a sentiment; and the eloquent silence of those
two happy persons does tell it far better than can any words, or than it can be
represented by all the figures of that imperous art, which vaunts it self to be
the Master of all free spirits, and the Tyrant of the will. But Theagenes, as I
have said, that the eyes of a lover are eloquent, and that they can make
themselves be understood; so yours do confirm me in my opinion; and I
understand, though I do not speak a word, what they would have me comprehend,
and what they would remember me of. No, no, I have not forgotten the unworthy
love of that object worthy of my hatred and your disdain: in a word of Arsace,
that cruel sister of the Persian King, who caused so much trouble to us, and
thought to make us perish; I know that in her I had a Rival to be feared; I
know that she made you wear iron chains, you who deserved to hold a Scepter; I
know that having discovered our innocent passion, her guilty artifices would
constrain me to espouse Achemenes, one of her slaves; I know her fury caused
you to be buried alive in the obscurity of a deep dungeon; I know you received
such outrages as struck me with horror, and which highly signalized your love
and constancy; I know that the despair of that enraged woman exposed my life to
poison; and that if the Justice of the Gods had not made Cibele to take it her
self, who would have given it to me, your Cariclia had been lost; I know that
the fearful malice of that Persian accused me of that death of which she was
the cause, and of which I was innocent; I know that I found my self a prisoner
as well as you, and that I did partake of your chains; I know that men who were
at once both Judges and Slaves, did condemn me to the fire, to content that
furious woman; I know that I beheld my self upon the pile of wood, ready to be
consumed; I know that the flames encompassed me round about, and that love and
innocence were never exposed to so hard a trial; but I likewise know, that by
the assistance of the gods, and the virtue of that stone I wore about me, which
you Grecians call Pantarbe, I marched upon the brands, as on a bed of flowers;
and that that infamous pile of wood became the Throne of my glory. O my dear
Theagenes, tell me (I conjure you by our amors) whether my triumph were not
caused by my condemnation? and whether after your mourning for me as dead, any
thing ever equaled your contentment, when you beheld me alive; or to say
better, risen again from death? for my part, I confess to you, that after that
Miracle, which the gods, and love, and nature wrought together in our favor, I
was so transported with joy, that I cannot express it: and I was liberally
recompensed by them, for all the pains which I had undergone; yea, even for all
troubles that I was yet to suffer. You know moreover, that as felicities are
ordinarily linked together as well as misfortunes; so this same (although very
great) did not happen alone to us: for we came from Arsaces prison, by the
order of Oroondates, to whom by a spirit of jealousy, of despite, and
vengeance Achemenes was gone to, to advertize him of his wives impudicity. You
know also, that we had the satisfaction to learn that heavens justice had made
use of Arsaces own hand, to punish her crimes, in the fear she had that her
husband would punish her: and that thus all our traverses increased our
contentments, and served only to make us know their grandeur the better: and
if you tell me that presently after we found a new affliction, being surprised
by unknown people, who took us away from Bagoas, and would have conducted us to
his Master Oroondates; I shall reply, that immediately afterward we also found
a new joy, since those soldiers who took us were of Ethiopia, where we desired
to go. In effect, they presented us to Hydaspes, who at first seemed as if he
would favor us, since by his order our chains of iron were changed for chains
of gold, and we were entertained with much respect. Nevertheless, my dear dear
Theagenes, it is here I must confess that our hopes were deceitful, and that we
beheld our selves anew in such displeasures, which had nothing equal to it, but
the danger which we underwent. For in fine, if they adorned us, it was but like
victims, which they meant to sacrifice; and if they had any respect for us,
'twas but because we were the offerings which they had allotted for their
Deities. Truly, I cannot deny but that in this occasion my trouble was
incomparable; and I could not but murmur a long time against the Oracle which
had sent me from Ethiopia, and which absolutely seemed to be false, since we
found a grave there where it had made us hope that we should find a Throne.
But Theagenes, how mavelous and concealed is the providence of the gods! and
how weak is humane reason in discovering it! at the moment that we were at the
foot of the altars, where we were ready to be immolated; at the point when
Hydaspes had his arm lifted up to stab his own daughter, thinking to do a pious
act; briefly, at the very point that we were both going to die, and to die in
so pitiful a manner; fate changed the face of things, I was discovered and
known to be what I was before the City of Meroe; my Sacrifier was found to be
my Father; the victime was found to be his daughter, Hydaspes and Persina found
and heiress, the Ethiopians found a new Queen; and Theagenes and Cariclia, who
know that those which have not had any evil cannot know what pleasure is, found
themselves almost happy. I say almost, (generous Prince) because our
apprehensions did not yet cease; and that my fathers scrupulous devotion
believed that nature was too weak, to hinder him to acquit himself of what he
owed to the gods. But if that too nice zeal did give us trouble, the public
cry which made it end, did no less rejoice us. You will tell me (perhaps) that
this unhop'd for good concerned me only; that that which saved me, did not save
you; that the hand which spared me, would yet sacrifice you; that you combated
a Bull, whose rage was terrible; that you fought a Giant, whose strength was no
less; that they would constrain me to marry Meroebe; that at the same time in
which they put the royal Bandeau about my temples, they would have put the
mortal Scarf over your eyes; and that I was fain once more to walk on burning
coals, wiehout any other assistance than my own purity, having before left my
Pantarbe. But in fine, Theagenes, this happiness became equal to us; you were
spared, as I was saved; the hand which shielded me did not strike you; the Bull
neither frighted nor hurt you; the Giant did but increase your glory; Meroebe
was the captive that adorned your triumph; the flame by its luster imparted
some both to your virtue and mine; Cariclia and Sisimithres finished our
prosperities; and from the feet of those altars of the gods where we then were,
we presently were raised up gloriously to the Kings Throne, where we now are.
Acknowledge then (my dear Theagenes) as well as I, that it belongs not but to
those that have been unfortunate, to say they are happy; that it is but only
after our disgraces that our felicties are sweet; that by troubles only we can
come to judge of quiet and rest: and that those who never have undergone any
evil, cannot truly know what pleasure is. For my part, I find so much
satisfaction in remembering my troubles, and the memory is so grateful and so
precious to me, that far from banishing it from my soul, I wish not only that
it may be always there, but that this glorious Image may always be in the
memory of all men. Let there be found a Painter, both faithful and skilful, and
happy enough to trace a picture of it, that Posterity may behold it; that our
adventures may be known wherever the Sun gives light; that our amors be talked
of in all the languages of the world; that the Ethiopian History be not hid
from any; that we may have an hundred Imitators of our pleasures and
sufferings; that we may be the rule and model of all other lovers; and that
from age to age the whole Universe may always admire Theagenes and Cariclia.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
TRuly one may say, that these last wishes have obtained the effect of this
Harangue; since the reputation of this brave Romance will never have an end,
and that there are few others which do not owe something to it. Its Author,
who preferred the preservation of this pleasing Book before his Bishopric, did
no bad office to those who since himself have meddled to compose the like: and
they and I are obliged to acknowledge, that though we have not servily imitated
him, it is never thelesse certain, that we owe much to this great example.

POLIXENA TO PYRRHUS. The Seventh HARANGUE.
The Argument.
As the Grecians were returning to their Country, after the taking of Troy,
the ghost of Achilles appeared to them, which with a fearful and threatening
voice reproached their ingratitude and forgetfulness; and in fine, demanded of
them for recompense of his grand exploits, and the life which he had lost in
that long and famous siege of Illium; that Polixena, the daughter of Priam, of
whom he had been enamored, should be sacrificed upon his Tomb. Though this
demand were infinitely cruel, the fear of a dead man, whom the Grecians had so
much dreaded living, made him obtain what he demanded; so that Pyrrhus his son
went and took her, to immolate her to his fathers pittiless ghost; and 'twas at
that sad instant that we do suppose, that this beauteous and generous Princess
made this discourse to him, as you are going to see, by the which she pretended
to prove to him, That death is better than servitude.

POLIXENA TO PYRRHUS.
FEar not that the desire of life will make me have recourse to tears, thereby
to excite compassion in your soul: Polixena's heart is too great to fear death;
and her spirit is too reasonable and too generous, not to prefer it before
slavery. Those who are forced to descend from the Throne withviolence ought not
to apprehend their descent into the grave: it is better they should cease to
live, than that they should begin to become slaves; and it is better to become
nothing at all, than to survive their glory and their happiness. Do not fear
therefore, that the Victime will escape from the foot of the altar; she desires
her death which you are going to give her; she beholds without horror the
knife which must pierce her breast; nor does Achilles ghost demand the end of
her life with more are dency, than she her self does crave it. What do you stay
for then to perform this funest ceremony? there is no need you should busy
your selves with all the preparations of an ordinary sacrifice; for I do not
think there is any one of the gods that can favorably receive that which you
are going to offer this day. The Victime is pure and innocent, I confess; but
if I am not deceived, it will stain that hand that shall shed its blood; the
Sacrifier will become criminal, and the sacrifice will be of no advantage but
only to the oblation it self. But what shall I do in this occasion! it seems
hearing me speak in this manner, that I would withold the arm that should
strike me! No, Pyrrhus, it is not my design; on the contrary, I seek to irritate
you, thereby to hasten my death. It Is with impatience and disquiet that I
perceive, that my birth, my youth, and my present condition inspires you with
some sense of tenderness; nay I fear also that my constancy does make you take
some compassion; and apprehend in fine, all that one less generous than my
self would desire. But remember not to let you bow to any pity, that you are a
Grecian, and I a Trohan; that you are Achilles son, that I am daughter to
Priam, and Paris sister; who, to revenge the death of generous Hector, killed
that cruel Achilles, your father, and my enemy. For let them not tell me, that
he was become my lover ever since the sad day wherein he saw me at my brothers
funeral; or that it is yet through a sentiment of affection that his ghost will
have me sacrificed upon his Tomb: No, Pyrrhus, no, Achilles was but my enemy,
and never was my lover; however I shall say, that for my own part at least, I
had rather be his Victime, than to have been his Mistress. Polixena's eyes would
be guilty, if they could have infused love into her brothers murderer; and she
would esteem her self very unhappy, if any could suspect her to have
contributed any thing to such a kind of conquest. I have wished to pierce his
heart, I confess, but never to subdue it to me; I have desired his death, but
not his love; and I in fine, have had all the hatred that one can have, for the
enemy of ones blood, the destroyer of ones Country, and for Hectors murderer.
That if nevertheless you will publish to all the world, that the great Hectors
vanquisher has been vanquished, not by the beauty of Polixena, bu^ by her
sorrow only; proclaim also that Polixena has not been overcome by the
submissions of Achilles; that the tears he has shed has not washed off the
blood her brother lost by his hand; and that when Priam, and all the Trojan
Princes would for the public good have immolated her to Achilles passion,
thereby to obtain a peace; proclaim, I say, that she did oppose it with all her
strength, that she never consented, and that the death she prepares her self to
receive this day is the only complacence she has ever had for Achilles
passion. O gods! who ever beheld such a token of love, as that I shall
presently receive? Achilles (as it is said) was Polixena's lover; but let us see
a little what testimonies he has given her of that passion and respect he has
had for her. So long as he lived, he has employed his valor only against all
whom she did love, and against all those whom she ought to love; I have seen
him, that cruel Achilles, pursue all my friends with such spleen, that it had
more of fury than of true courage. I have seen him an hundred times from the
top of our Rampires bathe his hands in my blood. But, o pitiful spectacle! I
have seen him fight the valiant Hector: or to say better, I have beheld all the
gods incensed against us, making use of his arm to surmount him, who surmounted
all others. Yes, I have seen the invincible Hector fall to the dust, by the
will of heaven only, and by the only cruelty of Achilles; I have seen that
Achilles, not only sight my brother, not only make him lose his life, but I
have seen him by an inhumanity which never could be paralleled use many
outrages on that body of his enemy, quite dead as it was: I have seen him load
himself with his spoils; I have seen him give him several wounds, when he had
no more sense of feeling; I have seen him tie him to his Chariot, he who should
never have gone but in a Chariot of triumph; I have seen him compass our walls
about three times, dragging that illustrious Hero, bound by the feet, his head
hanging in the dust and blood. But what do I say; could Polixena behold all
these things without dying! or that which is most strange, could Polixena cause
any love in the cruellest of her enemies? Yes, Polixena has lived, and her
tears, as it is said, have softened the heart of the pitilesse Achilles; he wept
with her at Hectors funeral; he desired a peace with Priam, and demanded his
daughter of him. But at the same time (o prodigy of extravagance as well as
cruelty!) he did yet once more wash his hands in that unfortunate woman's own
brothers blood, whom he intended to make his wife; he has slain Troilus with
the same hand with which he slew Hector; and with that same hand he would
afterward have taken Polixena for his spouse, if she had been so unworthy as
to consent to it: Are those the marks of love, or of hatred? Is it a lover, or
an enemy that acts in this manner? Or to speak more truly, are not those the
actions of a man furious and distracted? For my part, I confess to you, all
these things are incomprehensible to me: for if Achilles were but my enemy, why
should he weep at Hectors funeral? and if he were become my lover, why did he
yet tear in pieces one of my brothers with a Tigers cruelty? But that which
astonishes me, and wrongs me most, is, that he could imagine that I was capable
to hearken to his complaints and sighs, to forget the deaths of my brothers, to
be their enemies Mistress, and their murderers wife. This thought is so
injurious to Polixena, that she cannot possibly comprehend it should ever enter
into the heart of Achilles, how inhumane so'ere he was. She cannot imagine, I
say, that he could have believed that Hectors sister were so unworthy to do it:
for, had he been but her adversary, as all other Greeks are, she would not
easily have believed, that he had any love for her, nor would ever have
consented to his unjust passion. Judge then, if after that which I have told
you she could have been persuaded that Achilles was her lover, and far less
consent to his affection? But let us see a little the sentiments he preserves
for her in his grave; it is there that the Grecians and the Trojans should end
their differences; it is in the grave that all the world becomes of one party,
and that love and hatred ought to cease. Notwithstanding it seems that Achilles
is not satisfied with the utter ruin of Priams whole Empire. The burning of
Troy is not a sufficient pile for his funeral, nor is his ghost contented with
all the blood the Trojans have lost: His ashes must be sprinkled with
Polixena's; and for a token of the love he had for her, his son must needs
become her executioner; and since he could not have her for his wife she must
now become his victime: Truly, to love in this manner one must be both a
Grecian and Achilles together. Do not think how'ere that I complain of this
cruel proceeding: on the contrary, I render thanks to the gods for their bounty
in shortning my third by this means: in the condition of my present fortune
death cannot but be advantageous to me: and to make it welcome, they could not
choose better than to make me lose my life on the tomb of Achilles. To die in
this manner is to die triumphant; it is to behold ones enemy at ones feet; it is
to be revenged for all the outrages and affronts one has received; and it is to
climb the Throne, when we descend thus into the Grave; and if against my will
you perceive some marks of sorrow in my countenance, do not believe it is any
effect of my fear, or of the trouble I have in losing my life: on the contrary,
I feel joy in it. But if it be permitted me to express all that I feel, the
only thought of the affliction which the unhappy Hecuba will receive, is that
which causes all my grief. She brought me forth on the Throne, and I leave her
to die in chains: I go to regain my liberty, and I leave her in slavery; and
even now whilst I am to her in lieu of Husband, Children, and Empire; I deprive
her of all things, in depriving her of the consolation he found alone in me,
and which she can find no where else. Ah! would the Heavens measure out her
constancy to her sufferings; or shorten her days, to shorten her misfortunes.
Alas! is it possible, that I can wish no better advantage for her that brought
me into the world, but to see her in her grave? No, there is no power on earth
that can make her less unhappy: and the Gods themselves, since they cannot
recall things past, cannot afford her a more favorable destiny, than to give
her her death before she hears of mine. For I do not doubt, though I were
assured to pass my life in slavery, but that unfortunate Princess will regret
me with as much affliction, as if in losing the light I lost all the diadems of
the world. The sentiments of nature will be more prevalent in her than the
power of reason; and the desire to increase her sorrow will make her that she
will find nothing which may comfort her for my loss, but the hope of her own.
At least, Prince, to whom I speak, be not so inhumane to refuse her the body of
her daughter, or not to let her have it without paying a ransom. For what can
a Queen give you, whose Empire is destroyed, whose City is consumed, and to
whom there is only left in possession the ashes of her children? So long as
she had treasures, she has bestowed them prodigally, to redeem the bodies of
her sons from the hands of the cruel Achilles; but now that she has nothing
remaining of all what she has had, but only the remembrance of her passed
happiness, thereby to increase her present misery, be satisfied with her tears.
It Is the only ransom you should exact from her; and that only which she can
give you. So that if all compassion be not entirely extinguished in your soul,
you will esteem the tears of an unhappy Princess to be inestimable; you will
think the prayers they make when they are even laden with fetters, ought not
to be refused when they are not injust: and those slaves who have worn Crowns
ought not to be treated with inhumanity. Suffer then the unhappy Hecuba to put
all those in their graves whom she has brought forth into the world: return
Polixena's corpse to her, when Polixena shall be no more; and do not refuse this
sad courtesy and grace, to her whose Kingdom you have invaded, slain her
children, and stabbed her husband. Have a care, lest abusing of your Victories,
you one day merit to find as harsh Conquerours as your selves have been. The
gods who oppress us at this time, will be perhaps awearied of protecting you
and punishing us; and it may be also that the blood which I am going to lose
may be more favorable, to the Trojans than to the Grecians. Do not therefore
despise the counsels which I give you, although I be your enemy; and respect in
the persons of those whom you have vanquished, those who assuredly had been
your Conquerours, if the Heavens had seconded their courage. For my self, who
have no longer portion in this life, but only to die with constancy, and in a
manner not unworthy of so many illustrious Hero's, from whom I am descended: I
ask you, wherefore you do not suddenly finish that which you intend to execute?
Do you wait till the Ghost of cruel Achilles come once more forth from Hell to
redemand Polixena? or do you think to make my death the more cruel, in making
me expect it a long time? whatever it be, hasten you to satisfy both Achilles
and Polixena together. If you stay longer, perhaps pity may surprise you;
perhaps all the Trojan slaves may break their chains to deliver me; perhaps
also that the Grecians will love rather to see me captive, than to see me die;
lift up your arm therefore, and plunge your poniard into my heart: I present my
breast to you; and without fear, as without regret, I am resolved for my loss.
Do not prepare therefore neither irons, nor cords to hold me: I shall not
(surely) fly that which I would go to seek for; nor is it difficult to
sacrifice a Victime which willingly offers it self, and which would sacrifice
her self, if she had the power.

It Is the least favor which you can grant to a Princess, to die freely: As
daughter to Priam, and as Hectors sister, I ought to obtain this which I
demand: for what avails it Achilles Ghost, whether I have any bonds, or whether
I have none, if so be I lose all my blood, if so be I expire on his ashes, and
that in fine, I remain in the power of death? But let not that cruel ghost
imagine, that mine shall be his companion in the dark regions of the grave: No,
I shall always be his most mortal enemy. I Will go (if the Gods will permit it)
from grave to grave about the ruins of Troy, to seek the sepulchers of my
parents: and uniting my self inseparably to Hectors ghost, Achilles shall then
know whether Polixena's heart were generous or not; whether it were capable to
listen to his complaints, and to answer to his passion; or if rather, she were
not a worthy sister to Hector, and a worthy daughter to Priam. Alas! why must
Illium's ashes cover the ashes of so many illustrious persons? O would the
immortals, that the blood which Polixena is going to shed, could withdraw them
from underneath those famous ruins, and that her death could give them life
again. But it is no time now to make these fruitless wishes; the Gods change not
their resolutions, nor can the fate of Troy be revoked. It belongs to us only
to submit to what our destiny ordains: and whether we be conquered or
conquerours, we are equally obliged to obey without murmuring, and with an
equal visage to receive either happiness or misfortune. It Is by these
sentiments (o Prince and Priest together) that I remain so tranquil at the
approaches of death; and if I do not deceive my self, I discover more trouble
in your looks than you can behold in m^ne. For there is this difference betwixt
what you are going to do, and what I do now; that I obey Heaven, and you obey
the Ghost of the cruel Achilles, who will have her sacrificed to him, whom he
pretended he loved, during his life. But, O Gods, what could his hatred be,
since even his love produces the death of her whom he loved? Was ever such a
thing heard of before? without doubt it is, if not a generous, yet at least an
ordinary and natural sentiment, not to be sorry for the death of an enemy: but
to desire it to those whom we love, that is a thing against both reason and
nature, and a thing which no age nor people ever saw: and indeed I am strongly
persuaded, that it is more through hatred than love that I am sent to my grave.
So long as Achilles lived he has desired that I should be his slave, and now
he ceases to live he will have me for his victime. Lets satisfy this last
desire, since we may do it without shame; and lets rejoice that we have neither
been his wife, nor his Mistress, hor his slave. Whoever goes out of this life
with glory, ought ever to esteem themselves happy; principally, if we leave a
chain in leaving this world; what matter is it whether they unlose the chains
that binds us, or whether they break them? however it is, it is still to set us
at liberty.

Be then my deliverer, and fear not for your particular that I shall wish you
any hurt. The hand that frees me cannot but be grateful to me; and he that
hinders me from being a captive, cannot be hated by me. But what do I! and what
is it I say, unhappy that I am! I do not think to whom I speak. He whom I behold
is not only a Grecian, not only my enemy, not only my sacrifier, but he was
likewise the executioner of my father. No, Pyrrhus, it is neither as Grecian,
nor as my enemy, nor as Achilles son, nor as my sacrifier that I look on you,
even when I change my thoughts, and that I make imprecations against you; but
it is because you were my fathers murderer. What Pyrrhus, could you so hatefully
pursue that venerable old man to the very feet of the altar, where his sought
his refuge, to thrust a dagger even into his heart! Did your hand not tremble
at the aspect of that great Prince, Father of so many Heroes, truly it should
have done so; but those that do not revere the gods, have no reason to respect
men. Ha! truly that act has acquired you a great deal of glory: and it is a
difficult thing to kill a Prince worn out with age, feebleness, and misery;
and who seeks his defense only by the protection of those sacred places, which
ought to be inviolable. Methinks there was no need of staining your arm and
name by so barbarous an action: the flames which have consumed our City would
have sufficed to take away the life of that deplorable King, and the least you
could do was to let his Palace be his Funeral-pile to be consumed in. But you
are too nice an observer of Achilles his cruelties, not to observe them
exactly: 'Twas not enough to have usurped an Empire, and to set Illium all in
one flame: the altars must be profaned, they must be sprinkled with humane
blood; and that not only with the blood of vulgar ones. It must be the noblest
blood in all the earth that must be spilt; it must be a royal person that must
be trampled under foot, despising in him, and with him all that was holy, or
sacred in our Palaces, and in our Temples: after such an unnatural action, I
was in the wrong to fear lest any pity should enter your soul, and defer my
death: that is a sentiment which the Grecians in general are unacquainted with,
and of which the son of Achilles cannot be capable possibly. That dagger which
I behold in your hand, and with which you are a going to pierce my heart, is
perhaps the same which has gone through the King, my Fathers heart. O sad
spectacle! O too cruel torment! why is it that I did not perish in the flames
which have devoured so many illustrious persons; and that I have been reserved
to behold such horrid things? am I guilty of Helena's crimes, or of Paris his
failings? No, Polixena is innocent, and if she have outlived so many
misfortunes, it is to die with more constancy, and with more glory also: it is to
let the Grecians which did not come to this siege know, what the sons of Priam
might be, since even his daughter dare encounter and confront death, without
any the least fear.

If those flames which consumed Troy had put a period to my destiny, I should
have had no witnesses of these last sentiments of my soul: Posterity might have
doubted of Polixena's virtue; and might have believed, that since Achilles had
had the temerity, after he had made her Country desolate, and slain her
brothers, to demand her for his wife, and to say, that he was in love with her;
that she had not done as she should in so strange a business. But as things are
now, I die in publishing, that I am an utter enemy to Achilles, that I have
ever been so, and that I shall be so eternally; let the ghost of that cruel one
come once more forth of his sepulcher; let it appear to all the Grecians, and
let it declare whether Polixena does err from the truth. To justify what she
says, you need but consider the animosity which he retains for her, even after
his death: and one may easily know that which she had for him so long as he
lived. For although what ever comes from the Grecians ought to be suspected by
the Trojans; this apparition of Achilles is not one of Ulisses deceits, as that
was, whereby our City was betrayed. No, it is a perfect hatred, which makes him
come forth of his grave, to make me enter into mine; and this sanguinary ghost
did rebehold the day, only to make me lose the light for ever. Why do you stay
then, O Prince! unworthy of that title? and why do not you end this woeful
sacrifice? Do you respect the daughter more than you have done the Father? and
does your hand rather tremble to stab Polixena, than when you massacred the
deplorable Priam? hearken to that subterranean voice which issues from the
hollownesse of that grand sepulcher with an horrid sound, and which with
threats commands you to immolate me to his fury.

Behold that earth which opens it self, behold the ghost of Achilles, which
appears to me; or rather Achilles himself, who is leaving his grave. He is
pale, and disfigured; a terror inflames his eyes, even dead as they are; and I
behold him just such as he appeared to me on the sad day when he fought with
Hector; unless death (or perhaps the remorse for his crimes) have changed his
skin and color.

Behold, Phyrrus, behold that hideous spirit, which arises little by little;
and who to his threatening actions, joining his horrid voice, does for the last
time ordain you to sacrifice Polixena to him. Make this Ghost to vanish by
obeying it; the Victime is ready prepared, the poyniard is in your hand, and
you are accustomed to shed the Blood Royal. Strike then; as your Slave, I
conjure you; and as the Daughter of a King, I command you.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
This fair and unhappy Princess drew the tears of all the Grecians: Pyrrhus
himself was moved; nor could his eyes behold the crime which his hand
committed. He struck her nevertheless, barbarous man that he was; and that
young and deplorable creature had so much modesty, that even in falling, struck
with the deadly blow, she was careful to lay her hands upon her lower garments,
for fear lest after her death some indecent action should offend her modesty.

PENELOPE TO LAERTES: The Eighth HARANGUE.
The Argument.
PENELOPE, that virtuous wife to ULISSES, whose reputation yet lives after so
many ages past, and who from the borders of that seldom frequented Island
where she lived, has made her renown spread over the whole world, finding her
self one day extremely afflicted for the absence of her Husband, who after the
siege of Troy had strayed almost ten years, at the mercy of the winds and
waves, without possibility of seeing his Country; would ease her sorrows by
her plaints, and make her dear Husbands Father acknowledge by the discourse you
are now going to see, That absence is worse than death.

PENELOPE TO LAERTES:
HE that undertakes to maintain that death is the most sensible and greatest of
all evils, is surely such a one, as either never loved at all, or at least has
never under one the unhappiness of being absent from the person beloved. No,
my Lord, that monster which desolates all the earth; who by the succession of
time changes the face of the whole Universe, who treats alike both vice and
virtue; who strikes with the same fatal dart the Kings and Shepherds, and whose
very portraiture alone fills the stoutest soul with horror and amazement, is
not yet that thing which I believe we ought the most to apprehend. Absence,
which we may truly say is the commencement of all sorrows, and the end of all
joys, has in it somewhat that is more harsh and insupportable: for if the
first be that which destroys our prosperity, the second is that which makes us
unhappy, even in the midst of abundance, yea, on the Throne it self. There is
nevertheless a great deal of difference betwixt them, for death ravishes
equally from us, both our felicities and misfortunes; if it rob us of any
flowers, it does not leave us the prickles behind them, it crushes with the
same hand both our Crowns and fetters: and in a word, when it deprives us of
life, it likewise utterly extinguishes in our hearts all the flames of love and
anger, all the resentments of hatred, vengeance; and in fine, all other
passions. It causes, I say, both our joy and trouble to expire together at the
same moment: whereas absence not only robs us of all the good that ever death
deprives us of, but likewise causes all those evils to fall on ^s, to which the
other puts a sudden period. Our life it self in this occasion is left us, but
only to make us the more sensible of the most piercing pain that can be felt:
and if there be sometimes such people, who prefer the absence of the beloved
person rather than death; it is because they suffer themselves to be deluded by
false appearances; it is because that mournful dress in which it is represented
affrights them; it is because they contemplate it more with their bodily sight
than the eyes of the soul; it is because they only consider it in what is most
terrible; and it is in fine, because they love themselves better than they do
their Mistresses, and prefer the rays of the Sun above the luster of her eyes,
and had rather not see her at all, than be deprived of their sight. Ha! how
ignorant those people are of the true sentiments which love inspires! But (you
will say to me, my Lord) perhaps you do not seriously consider, how great that
violence must needs be which separates so close an union, as that of soul and
body: But I shall answer you, you do not truly consider, your self, what a
greater violence that must be, which for a long season separates that which
love, reason, and inclination seem to have joined with an eternal and immortal
chain. Death, sage Laertes (as you know better than my self) is as natural to
us as life: if it be an evil, it is at least an evil that should not surprise
us: as soon as we begin to live, we ought to begin to learn to die; at the
first opening of our eyes, we should already look on the opening of our graves;
and every Monarch in the world that has not renounced common sense, cannot be
ignorant, that as he mounts up to his Throne, so he shall once descend into his
sepulcher. It Is not thus in the things of love; that passion being altogether
divine, seizes so imperiously on those whom she possesses, and the sight of the
beloved person does so absolutely fill all the soul of her adorer, that this
absence is an evil which still surprises him, and comes so unawares, that by
consequence it renders him more unhappy than death can, which we ought always
to expect. That amazing instant, which parts two persons perfectly loving one
another, is a sadness beyond my expression, though I have proved it more
cruelly than any other; but to make you in some manner comprehend it, Imagine
to your self, my Lord, that you were ambitious, and that your Crown were torn
from you; imagine your self were extremely coverous, and that your treasures
were all stol^ from you; imagine you were victorious, and that your victory
were ravished out of your hands; imagine you were shakled with chains, whose
very weight were insupportable; imagine you lost all that is dear to you in the
world; imagine you were deprived of the light of the day, and that you remained
in horrid darkness; imagine your heart were torn forth of your bosom, and you
not yet dead: and imagine in fine, that I not only suffered all these pains,
but that even death, how terrible so'ere it be, was the utmost of all my
wishes, at that sad moment of Ulisses departure. Ha! my Lord (yet once more)
how grievous that funest minute was to me! death is rather the lulling asleep
of all our troubles, than any sensible evil, and it has nothing troublesome but
the way that leads to it. But absence is a chain of misfortunes which finds no
end, but at the end of our lives, or the return of the beloved person. The
first sigh which death does make us breath, has always the advantage of being
the last: but the first, which absence obliges us unto, is followed with so
many others, and accompanied with so many tears, so many disturbances, so many
torments; or to speak better, so many deaths, that its evil suffers no
comparison: and then to speak rationally, death and absence may be taken for
one another, since both the one and the other equally deprives us of all that
we can love: but as it is impossible, that the loss of all the riches in the
world can be so sensible to us, as the absence of the person whom we dearly
love, since she is in the stead of all unto us; so also it is impossible, but
that that which deprives us of it, must be more harsh than death it self, which
can only take away that good from us which we esteem far less than she. But
(you will say again) that death which snatches away a Crown, which pulls down
your Throne, which deprives you of the light, does also rob you from the person
whom you love: she does not forsake you (it is true) but you leave her; and in
this manner you do as well lose the sight of her, as in absence, and likewise
lose her for ever. I acknowledge (sage Laertes) that this objection is strong;
nevertheless it is not impossible to clear it. To die before the eyes of those
we love, is somewhat more comfortable than to remain alive, separated from ones
lover and husband together: to mingle our last tears together with his, is less
insupportable than to be left alone to weep continually: and to leave ones soul
betwixt those arms, is rather a stricter union with him, than a separation. In
fine, (to say all in a word) after the having given him the last adieu after
the having had the satisfaction of knowing the greatness of his amor, by the
greatness of his sorrows; after the having (if it be permitted to speak so)
resigned our soul into his hands; we have always this advantage, to cease to
live, in ceasing to see him; losing the light for ever with his presence; and
to become insensible of grief, as well as of joy. The repose and obscurity of
the grave are better in this occasion than life and the light of day: that
funest and mortal Lethargy which for ever rocks all our senses into a deep
sleep in the cradle of the Tomb, is the only remedy which could charm all the
evils I now suffer for the absence of my dear Ulisses; and as sleep does every
night make the happy and miserable to become equal and alike, as it does the
greatest Princes and the meanest Subjects; So death likewise places in the same
rank those lovers which enjoy the presence of their Mistresses, with those
which are deprived of it. The thickness of those shades we meet withal in the
grave, hinders us for evermore from distinguishing any of the things of this
world; and death, how pitiless so'ere it is described to us, is not so cruel, but
that it promptly heals us of all the evils it causes. If it make an ambitious
man lose his Crown, it deprives him at the same instant both of the diadem and
the ambition which rendered it so pleasing to him: if it rob the treasures from
the possession of the covetous, it likewise steals away that avarice from his
heart which made him cherish wealth so much: and if it disunite two persons
dearly loving, the least unhappy is he without doubt who loses his life, since
in losing that he loses both his sense, knowledge, and memory at the same
moment. It is not thus in absence; we die thereby indeed unto all pleasures,
but it is only to live unto all pains. As soon as ere we lose the sight of the
person that reigns in our souls, all other passions throng in to tear and
torture it; Love, Hatred, Anger, Vengeance, Jealousy, Fear, and Hope it self,
does persecute and war against us. We never love more, than when we lose the
sight of the object of our affection; we never hate any thing with so much
violence as that which robs us of our beloved: we are never more irritated,
than when our felicity is destroyed, we never wish more ardently to revenge our
selves, than when we are reduced to the terms of despair: we are never more
jealous, than when we cannot be the witnesses of their actions who owe all
their fidelity to us: we never deserve so much to be pitied, as when we fear
the death of our lovers; and one may likewise say, that we are never more
unhappy, than when we are reduced to that point of having no other consolation,
than an uncertain and doleful hope, which ordinarily serves rather to increase
our miseries, than to assuage them; so true it is, that absence is a terrible
and fearful evil; and so true it is, that it converts all the remedies which
are presented to it into poison. Do not you imagine (my Lord) that I have
learned what I now say, either from the example of others, or from reason,
which oft-times teaches us many things, which we have never experienced. No, my
Lord, I tell you nothing, but what my own trial has verified: and would to
heaven I were yet ignorant of such sad truths, and that death were the only
evil which I might apprehend. When my dear dear Ulisses was resolved to part,
and that overswayed by the power of his destiny, he separated himself from me;
love (to render this separation the more cruel to me) represented him more
lovely to me than ever I had beheld him: his sorrow augmenting his charms, his
silence caused by the affliction he endured in leaving me, rendered him more
grateful to me, than his sweetest eloquence had ever done, although that
eloquence have enchanted all the earth: in fine, sage Laertes, I then know
better than ever I had known till then, the price and value of what I had
possessed, and of what I was then ready to be dispossessed of. My love
increased, I acknowledge it; and though I had believed all my life, that I
could not possibly love my husband more ardently and tenderly than I did love,
yet nevertheless I cannot deny but that I found my affection redoubled in that
sad instant. But when after I had lost his sight, the Image of Menelaus
presented it self to my mind, who had caused his departure, hatred seized so
powerfully on me, that there are no unjust wishes which I made not for him.
Anger followed hatred, and the desire of revenge immediately stepped in after
hatred: I desired he might not regain Helena; I wished he might suffer all his
lifetime that which I now suffered by his means; and I think likewise, that in
the heat of my resentment I should have made prayers, to obtain from heaven,
that he might have been beaten, and his army defeated by the Trojans, had I not
remembered that he could not be vanquished, but that my dear Ulisses must be so
to, since he was engaged in the quarrel. But, my Lord, will you think is well,
that I should show you all my troubles and discover all my imbecilities? Yes,
since it is only by that means that I can prove to you, that absence is worse
than death. After then that I had resented all the most violent effects of
love, anger, hatred, I found my self again assaulted by Jealousy: Ulisses went
to a place, where they might take such prisoners as were capable to enchain
their vanquishers and masters, as the examples of Agamemnon and Achilles has
since taught us. Imagine then the trouble that this thought excited in my
heart: it was so great, that if the fear of Ulisses death in so dangerous a
voyage had not moderated its violence, I believe I should have accused him in
my thoughts, as if he had been already guilty: I should have made him some
reproaches, and perhaps for some instants should have hated him. But the
consideration of the perils he was going to expose himself unto, did no sooner
come into my mind, but that tumult was appeased: but I was not the less unhappy
for all this, since there is no danger which I did not apprehend for him, and
which by consequence I did not undergo. I imagined that I beheld him ready to
make shipwreck; I beheld him in the combats; I beheld him wounded; I saw him a
prisoner; I beheld him ready to expire; and I think truly, that the only fear
of his death had made me die, if hope more to make me suffer than to ease me
had not preserved my life. I hoped then, my Lord, but to say truly, 'twas so
feebly, and with so much uncertainty, that that hope was rather a trouble than
an help unto me. That ill founded hope had no sooner inspired my heart with
some pleasing thought, but presently my fear quenched it again: if the one made
me imagine Ulisses returned victorious, the other persctaded me, he might be
then perishing in the waves: if one made me behold the harbor, the other
showed me nothing but tempests and wracks: in fine, I always thought him
either inconstant or dead: and the successive reign of two such contrary
sentiments tyrannized so fiercely in my soul, that to be in a condition not to
fear any more, nor to be flattered again with hope, I wished more than an
hundred times for death. You may know from thence (if I do not deceive my self)
that absence is more to be feared than that, since it is desired as a remedy for
those evils, which this last makes us suffer. Truly, my Lord, they are so great
and so sensible, that if it were possible to comprehend, that there could be a
sharper pain, or a greater misfortune, than the death of the beloved person, we
might yet say, that such a loss caused less affliction, than the torment of
an absence, whose duration is uncertain. Yes, my Lord, those which do not love
their husbands so well as to follow them into their graves, and who have
courage enough; or to say better, insensibility enough, to suffer that
separation without despairing, have more rest than I have: they have this
advantage, to know that they are unhappy alone, and that those whom they mourn
are at quiet: they fear neither their inconstancy, nor their death, which is
already happened: nor can they any more apprehend ought, either from that
pitiless monster, nor from inconstant fortune, since there remains no more for
them to lose but their own life, which is no longer pleasing to them. But what
do I say, insensible as I am! No, no, my Lord, do not give ear to what my
sorrow makes me speak, nor believe, that I could ever prefer the death of my
dearest Ulisses before his absence, how rigorous so'ere it is unto me. May he
live, and may he also live happy, though distant from his Penelope, rather than
I should hear that he lives no more: I had rather never behold him, than to
behold him die; and I had rather hear he were inconstant, than to hear of the
end of his life. O heaven, to what a strange necessity do you reduce me, to
make wishes against my self! Now, my Lord, is not absence worse than death? and
have I not reason to say, that I am the most unhappy person of all my sex?
those that die have this sad consolation in losing their lives, that they may
consider that from the beginning of ages all men have undergone what they do,
and as long as the world shall last, all those that are born must undergo the
very same: but of all the Grecian Princesses, whose husbands have followed
Menelaus, I am the only she that have heard no news of mine; I am the only she
that yet does sigh; I am the only she that have no share in the public joy;
and the only he alone, that dares not prepare Crowns, not knowing whether
those Crowns should be made of Laurel or of Cypress branches. The victory has
been woeful only to me alone; and Polixena, yea Hecuba her self (though the
unhappiest amongst the Trojans) are not yet so unhappy as poor Penelope. The
first died with constancy, and by consequence with glory: and last had at least
this advantage, that she could weep over the bodies of her children, and
revenge the death of her son; whereas I weep, and do not know what object my
tears should have. Perhaps alas! thinking only to weep for the absence of my
dear Ulisses, I am obliged to weep for his inconstancy, or it may be for his
death. For, my Lord, how can I think him living, and not criminal, since he
does not come? he knows he is King of this Island, and that his subjects have
need of him; he knows you are his Father, and that you wish for his return; he
knows Telemachus is his son, and that he desires to know him, he being so young
when he departed, that time has effaced the memory of him; he knows in fine,
that Penelope is his wife, and that upon that happy return depends all her
felicity; nevertheless it is now almost twenty years since he went; it is near
ten years since the Grecians conquered, and yet we do not know whether we
should bemoan him as unhappy or guilty. However it be, it is certain that I have
cause to complain, and to despair; on what side so'ere I turn, I still find
new subjects of sorrow; your old age afflicts me, my sons green years disquiets
me; those that would comfort me increase my troubles; those which bear no part
with me in my woes, anger me; and both the discourses of the one, and the
silence of the others are equally insupportable to me. But that which
nevertheless is the most cruel to me, is, that neither time nor affliction has
sullied that little beauty on my face, which hereaofore charmed Ulysses: it is
not but that if I must see him again, I shall be joyful to have preserved it;
but in the condition I am, I find that it is shameful to me to be yet able to
make any conquests. Nevertheless you are not ignorant, what a number of
importunate persons do persecute me, though I despise them: for my part I am in
doubt whether I ought to hide from them, my person or my tears: for to say
truth I think verily I have now no other amability, nor any thing worthy of
esteem, but only my excessive regrets and sorrow for the absence of my dearest
Husband; and yet Helena hardly ever had more slaves than I have capt^ves,
though Helena and Penelope are persons very different, and although I take as
great care to break their chains, as she did to manacle them. O heavens! who
ever heard such amorous discourses, as these indiscreet people make, to court
me to an approbation of their fond passions, and to gain my belief that their
intentions are legitimate? Ulysses is dead, (say these impatient men) and by
consequence our love does not offend you: ha! if Ulysses be dead (do I reply
then with tears) nothing but a grave is fit for Penelope; and if he be not, you
are cruel, and not judicious, to come and sigh at her feet, who sighs for his
absence, and who can never behold you but as her cnemies, rather than her
lovers. Judge after this, my Lord, if any thing can be added to the troubles I
suffer? leave me then the liberty to prefer death before absence; the one
makes the body suffer more than the spirit, and the other torments the spirit
more than the body; the one puts a period to all misfortunes, the other gives
birth to all miserios; the one is an evil which indures but an instand, the
other is a despair which may last all the life; the one does but extinguish all
our passions, the other is a Tyrant which makes them rule successively in our
souls: in fine, death is but only death, and absence is a series or chain of
murders, torments, disquiets, fears, jealousies, angers, despairs, and
continual deaths. In absence we make vows which contradict one another; ve
make wishes, for which we repent again; we expect always to behold that which
we fear we shall never see again; we hope and apprehend at the same time; we
fancy dangers which never were; we accuse with unjustice those whom we bemoan
and cherish with reason; we sometimes hate our selves; we blame our own sorrow,
and yet will not be comforted; we hide our tears, and yet desire not that time
should wipe them from our cheeks, we envy another happiness, we fly from
society, and solitude is insupportable; portable; we behold all what we would
not see, and cannot be so blessed as to see that which we would ever behold; we
seek after that which we are assured not to find; and in a word, we find our
selves in a condition to wish for death, and prefer it before absence; yea, to
make supplications to obtain that which all the world fears, and from which
all the world does fly.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
ONe may believe that Ulysses return was the effect of this Harangue, and that
the Heavens did grant it to such tender and passionate sentiments: since after
he had strayed so many years on the Sea and Land, he returned to the embraces
of his wife Penelope, his father Laertes, and Telemachus his son; and this wise
and illustrious persOn beheld him again in that Isladnd where she so much
longed for him.

BRISEIS TO ACHILLES. The Ninth HARANGUE.
The Argument.
AChilles becoming inamoured with Polixena at Hectors funeral, would, to
facilitate the happy success of his love, make a peace betwixt the Trojans and
Greeks; and that he might behold his new Mistress upon so fair a pretext, he
came even into Troy whilst the truce lasted. So extraordinary a thing caused
all the people to murmur in the Camp, an rendered him suspicious to the whole
Army: but amongst others, Briseis a captive Princess, whom Achilles had much
loved, before this infidelity, received thereby an affliction beyond compare.
So that for her own interest, and likewise the Princes, whose glory she was
obliged to preserve, she took in fine, the considence to represent unto him the
wrong he would do her, and that which would likewise accrue unto himself. Now
as he was of a violent humor, and a spirit apt to be moved, this remonstrance
did but stir his anger; insomuch that he treated Briseis as a slave, and spoke
to her with a Magisterial accent, that is to say, very imperiously. This unjust
proceeding brought this Lady to despair; and as despair makes weapons of all
things, and that from exeream timidity, one runs sometimes even to audacity;
she undertook to maintain in his presence, That one may be both Slave and
Mistress.

BRISEIS TO ACHILLES.
YEs, yes, cruel Achilles, I see my chains, and feel a slave: though I had
never beheld the one, and had always been ignorant of the other, the usage I
have received this day would teach me but too much what my condition is, and
also both what the misfortune is that accompanies it, and the shame that waits
upon it. You are without doubt my master, your actions and your words do
testify it enough: and passing very far beyond the limits of the legitimate
power of my Master, you become my Tyrant, and make me suffer a punishment,
unworthy both of your self and me. But what ever Pride you have, and what ever
humility you would have me to have, I cannot forget in wearing your fetters,
that I should wear a Crown; that I was not born such as you would have me die;
that my hand was destined for a Scepter, not for a chain and that in taking
away my Throne you have not taken down my heart; as we receive Kingdoms and
Empires from the hands of fortune; so she being avaritious and capritious, can
take away again what she had bestowed: but as we have our generosity only by
nature, who is too wise to change her counsels, and too liberal to take away
her gifts again; so we preserve that even to our graves; we can show that at
liberty in the midst of slavery; and make it, in fine, triumph over tyrants as
well as tyranny. Do not expect therefore, that I should continue to complain
poorly of your infidelity; that I should let fall any shameful teats; or that I
should shed them needlessly; that I should give such satisfaction to my Rival,
as to behold my shame in the day of her glory, and my sorrow amidst her
pleasures: Or briefly, that I my self should add to my disgraces, that of not
being able to undergo them. No, Achilles, no, I will complain no more of your
inconstancy, I will call you ungrateful no more, I will not say you are
wavering; nor will I any more reproach you, that either you heard not, or that
you heard but in fury. Continue to betray me, if you think good, pass from the
Grecians to the Trojans Camp, from our Trenches over their Ramparts; and if
this be not yet enough, adore your enemies: Kiss (I say) Polixena's hand, if
she be so unworthy as to incure, that his who murdered her brother Hector,
dare to approach so near hers: neither forget any thing that can satisfy her
of whatso'ere may cause affliction to me, or dishonor to your self. I consent,
Achilles, I consent. whether perforce, or voluntarily, no matter, if so be you
are pleased; if so be you appear my mastet, if so be I appear your slave; and
that I voluntarily endure your inconstancy without murmuring. But do not expect
that I will suffer you to go on from inconstancy to pride, and from pride to
disdain; that you should reproach me of my chains, which only your cruelty
makes me wear; and that you should treat me unworthily, because I am not free,
because you are not generous, and because I am unfortunate. No, I tell it you
once more, and shall tell it you more than a thousand times; I cannot suffer
that baseness; and though your inhumanity should condemn me to torments, I had
yet rather fuffer than deserve them. What, Achilles! do you remember no more
already, that I have seen you kiss my chains with respect, and not dare to kiss
the hand that ware them? that I have known you think it a glory to obey her,
whom you might have commanded? that I have found you entertaining her as a
Queen, whom now you use as a Slave? and finally, that I have beheld you
captivated by your own captive? whence comes then so strange an alteration? was
I more at freedom than I am, or am I more a slave than I was? were you less
Sovereign than you at present are, or are you more absolute than you were then?
have we interchanged our conditions one with another, or have I changed my
vifage? were you blind, barbarous Achilles, or are you now become so? did you
want judgment at that time when you adored me, or do you want it now, since you
adore me no more? In a word, were you an Idolater then, or are you impious now?
Ha! no, no neither of all these things has happened so; I am still what I was,
you are still the same you were, at least, for your fortune: and if there had
happened no more change in your heart, than in my face, and in your condition,
I should yet behold him at my feet, who would hardly suffer me to cast my self
at his; I should yet hear him make his Petitions, who now pronounces naught but
injuries against me; I should yet receive submissions from him, from whom I now
receive affronts; I should yet behold his humility, and not perceive his pride;
and briefly, I should yet have in you a respectful lover, and not a vaunting
Tyrant. You believe then (as I comprehend by your pitiless and haughty answer
which you have made me) you believe (I say) that command and servitude are
things incompatible in love, as well as they are in war; that one cannot give
laws, and receive them; and that one cannot serve and reign together, But how
you are abused, if you have that belief! and how little do you know the power
of love, if you make it to rise from the power of fortune! if those from whom I
had my birth had only carried sheephooks, and never seen the scepter but in
another hand; if I had been born in a Cottage, and not within a Palace; yea
more, had I been born with these chains on me, in which you will make me die;
if I were not only a slave, but the daughter of a father that had been such
himself; and on the contrary, though your Empire were as great as the whole
Earth, though your Province were the Mistress of the whole Universe; and that
Peleus, or Achilles himself did command all men, as they do the Mirmydons, that
could not hinder but that Briseis would be Sovereign, if Briseis were beloved;
and Achilles would obey her, if Achilles could truly love. It Is one of the most
illustrious marks of love puissance, to abase Thrones, and elevate
Shepherdesses; to place the Crown upon a fair head, whose temples never kissed
but only garlands of flowers; and in a word, to make us behold Queens in
fetters, as well as Kings in chains, when two amiable persons are truly touched
with this noble passion; neither the one nor other has any thing which does not
become common to both; they make a glorious exchange of the marks of the ones
misfortune, and the others grandeur, that so nothing may be separated, nor any
thing render them different. The lover takes his Mistresses fetters, the
Mistress takes her lovers scepter; he who commanded, obeys; and she that obeyed,
commands: and as the obedience is voluntary, the command is not rigorous. He
trembles now himself, that Conqueror that made whole Provinces tremble, he
observes the least glances of this elective Queen; he is complacent, he is
humble, yea even respectful; he fears to offend her, he seeks to please her;
and as he loves, so he desires only to be rewarded with love again. He prefers
the least of her favors above the gold of his Scepter, and the jewels of his
Crown; he believes himself rich, when he bestows all; and briefly, he thinks
he reigns, when he thus serves. Thus, proud and haughty Achilles, thus do true
lovers live, and such as are truly generous. They never let fall any
reproaches, no aigreur ever mingles with their discourses: on the contrary, the
least injury would seem blasphemy unto them, and the least insolence a
sacrilege beyond all pardon, and worthy of death; and if any other had the
boldness to dare to anger their Mistress, far from offering it themselves, one
passion would excite another, love would lead them to hatred, hatred would draw
them unto fury, and fury would prompt them to revenge: they would be prodigal
of their dearest blood, as they had been of their greatest riches; they would
expose themselves for her glory, and believe they ventured for their own; and
though they should lose both their Scepter and life to defend her, they would
yet believe they gained by that loss, and triumph in their overthrow, as having
done what they could and ought; so true it is that love renders those equals
that were different, and confounds particular interests. In effect, as wise
persons should nor cherish a blind affection, but ever love with knowledge, as
well as inclination; the beauty of virtue should ravish them, as well as the
beauty of a lovely face; and the perfections of the mind charm them as
powerfully as the perfections of the body; their hearts should be touched more
by the qualities of the soul than by the gifts of fortune; wherefore then,
after they have loved that which they judged worthy of their love, should they
cease from loving her still? wherefore do we see them change, since virtue
changes not? and wherefore should they lose even their respect, since that same
beauty which made them respectful, has lost nothing of its luster? believe
me, Achilles, whether virtue either reign or obey, whether she be on the throne
or in fetters, or whether it have its birth in the purple or in rags, it is
always alike lovely, and always equally worthy of respect and veneration.
None but the dull and stupid multitude will judge of things by the luster that
invirons them, and dazles the sight; or will make the difference of persons
according to their different conditions. All those borrowed ornaments have
nothing that is either essential or solid; and if it be only the gold or
diamonds in the Crown that renders one esteemable, we should rather esteem the
Goldsmiths or Lapidaries, which make them so glistering; or at least, the earth
which produces them. Ha! no, no, all those things which the vulgar call
precious, are too poor to be the objects of a great and reasonable
understanding; and that which comes from fortune is too low of value to make
virtue be less esteemed, though she be no longer adorned with it, or with any
justice to hinder, but that one may be both slave and Mistress. But let us
suppose (though falsely, and without reason) that her birth must needs be
illustrius, that will pretend to the glory of retaining him still an
illustrious prisoner, who is already become so to his slave, that the chains of
that happy captive must have been forged of the same gold the scepter was of,
which otherwhile her father ruled; what do you find in this, that can make
Briseis unworthy of Achilles love, or worthy of his hatred? You are the son of
a King, I confess, but was not my father a King likewise? there are Crowns in
your family, I acknowledge it, but has there not been some in mine also? you
ought to ascend the Throne, I cannot deny it, but have you not made me descend
from one your self? you have overcome us, it is true, but might not we have
vanquished you? I am become your slave, that is certain, but was it not possible
you might have been ours? I wear your fetters, all the world sees it but so
might you have worn our chains? you may treat me cruelly, I do not doubt it,
but will it not be barbarous if you do? you may abandon me indeed; but are you
not unfaithful if you do? you may love Polixena, I know it but too well, but
would it not be unreasonable that you should love your enemies? you may go
into Troy, I grant it, but will it not be a madness to trust the Trojans? you
may likewise betray the Grecians, who does not know it; but will it not be a
baseness to betray them? Ha! I perceive, cruel Achilles, that this last
reproach is more insupportable to you than all the rest; that you can hardly
suffer it; and that it is not without some difficulty, that you in some manner
retain that fury which is so natural to you. It Is no matter, however, it is no
matter, for though you should let the cloud of your anger break upon my head,
yet the care I have for all that concerns you, obliges me not to conceal from
you that which others dare not reveal unto you. Know then (if you be so blind
as not to perceive it) that the whole Camp murmurs against you, that Agamemnon
whom you have offended, makes use of this opportunity to revenge himself, and
to cry you down amongst the Grecians; that Ulysses imployes his eloquence upon
no other subject, and his facility of speaking, and speaking well is a
dangerous enemy to you; that the sage Nestor loudly blames you, though in all
other occasions he has ever testified much reservednesse; that Ajax himself,
who is no small friend, is reduced to the sorry necessity, either of not saying
any thing to defend you, or to quarrel for want of better reasons with those
that condemn your proceedings; that Thersites by biting jests strikes at your
reputation, making all the world merry at your cost; and Idomeneus, Diomedes,
and all the other Grecian Princes are resolved not to endure so unreasonable a
thing. Every one observes you watchfully, each one remarks all your words,
every one considers all your actions; and you are now esteemed in our Camp,
rathar a spy for the Trojans, than as one of the chief commanders of the
Grecians. I perceive that you will answer me, by the fury which inflames your
eyes, that you know the art to make them hold their peace; that your hand is
more to be feared than their tongues; and that if they can affront you, you can
yet better punish them, and revenge your self. But Achilles, you must then hew
in pieces all our Troops, combat all our Captains, and slaie all our
soldiers; that is to say, you must do that which the Trojans cannot, nay dare
not undertake; you must go and take Hectors place; you must go and dishonor
your self. Perhaps you have no such guilty thoughts, perhaps you will only
retire your self into your tents, as you did heretofore; that so by the
disadvantage which the Grecians shall have, when they must fight without you,
they may know and feel the wrong they do themselves by vexing you, and not
approving all that pleases you. O Achilles! are these fit actions for an Hero,
who has no other object but his glory, and who by a thousand brave
performances aspires to immortality? Should any one prefer his particular
interest before the common good, or his unjust passion above equity it self, or
the enemies good beyond his own countries? should any one believe himself
wiser than all others, when indeed he has no wisdom at all? should any one be
Judge in his own cause? should any one listen to his own desires, and not give
ear to reason it self? and if it be so that one had truly loved (which I
cannot believe) should he proudly maintain afterward, that one cannot be both
slave and mistress? certainly, Achilles, there is somewhat that is so strange in
your proceedings, that one cannot well comprehend it; the more one considers it,
the less it is understood; and I think you hardly understand it your self. For my
part I acknowledge that it is inco^ceivable to me, nor can I imagine by what
fantastical motives you can be drawn to do so: for wherefore should you quarrel
so outragiously with Agamemnon, when he plucked me out of your hands, if you do
not find me wherefore retreat within your Pavilions, and sigh bitterly there,
since you do not love the cause of your retreat? wherefore did you behold our
Battslia's defeated, and not assist them, if they only took away from you what
you have a mind to lose? wherefore did you suffer Hector to break down our
barracadoes, and not oppose him, if this cause of your difference be so
indifferent to you? wherefore did you suffer him to fire our Navy, without
hastening to quench it, if that flame of affection which you had for me be
extinguished in your heart? wherefore did you expose Patroclus, the dearest of
your friends, and be the cause of his death, if my life be not dear to you? and
wherefore in fine, did you take me out of Agamemnons hands, if I am no longer
welcome to you? answer, Achilles, answer to what I desire you: I entreat you
with humility, if I be yet your slave only; and if I am yet both your Slave
and Mistress, I command you. Have you taken me to your own self again but only
to employ me about mean and servile offices? Have you many captives that wears
chains, whose fathers have worn crowns? do you believe that an hand ordained
for a Scepter can help its self with a needle? or that she that was accustomed
to command, can accustom her self to obey? Do you believe when you treat me
thus, that I can see it, and live? Do you believe I am destitute of courage, as
you are of reason and pity? Do you believe your fetters can enchain the soul
as they do the body; or that a generous stab cannot free me from this slaverie
and your Tyranny? Ha! if you believe thus, how little do you know your own
cruelties, and how ill are you acquainted with Briseis! how little do you
conceive what death is; or how little do you confider what I suffer! Though it
should present it self to my sight in all that funest and bloody equipage,
which the most barbarous Tyrant can dress it withal; though I should meet it
accompanied with executioners, with scourges, and with flames; though there
were new tortures invented to please you, and to afflict me withal; I should
yet prefer all these before the miserable condition I am now in: and should
sooner resolve to suffer them all, than to suffer your outrages and disdain:
for in fine, one may be both Captive and Mistress; bur one cannot remain a
captive without being Mistress, after the once having had the glory of being
so. I could have lived without that glory, but I cannot live and lose it; I
could have resolved to have lived in your chains, but I cannot resolve now to
return to them again; I could have endured the anger of my Conqueror, but I
cannot endure the disdain of my lover; I could then have remembered that I was
your slave, but now I cannot forget that you have mine: in a word, you may be
barbarous and inconstant, but I cannot be insensible and have no resentment. O
cruel and unreasonable Achilles! are you not also cruel enough to believe, that
I should be yet too much honored in serving the new and fairer object of your
flames? have you not so much blindness as to hope that I shall become her
captive, as you say I am yours? do you not expect from my complacence and
willingness, that I should take the care to choose her an habit that may adorn
her, and the pains to curl her hair, to imbroider her head-attire with jewels;
and to endeavor besides to add new graces to those she received at her birth,
that thereby art may finish in her that which nature has so gloriously begun?
will you not have me extol her perfections, tell you of her charms, make you
remark the luster of her eyes, the pureness of her skin, and beauteous face,
thereby to increase your affection and your delight together? will you not
afterward make me go and entertain that fair Phrigian of the rare qualities
that are in you? must I not vaunt of your courage, and speak to her of your
skill, and above all value your constancy which I know so well, that so I may
inkindle her soul with the bright flame which consumes yours? But will you not
have me tell her, to prove your valor, that you have besieged Troy, that you
have vanquished the Trojans a thousand times, and that you took away her
brothers life? Will you not have me declare aloud your liberality, when you
took money for Hectors corpse; and your civility, when you threatened Priam, who
came to your Tents to demand it of you? O barbarous man that you are! are those
your intents? but o faint-hearted as I am my self! am I not ashamed of what I
do? and should I not blush, since contrary to my design and first dicourse my
very anger it self is become a token of my passion, or rather of my error?
No, no, do not listen to me any more, neither listen to love, who speaks to you
even as I do; nor to reason, which says the same that love does: Be gone,
since you will go, and pass from this Camp to the other, where glory waits
for you, as well as Polixena: Leave your ancient friends, and run to the
embraces of those whom you have fought withal, and whom you ought to fight
withal again: forget the interest of your own Nation, and lose all even to
your very honor, to behold your Mistress again; look upon Briseis tears with
smiles, and scoff at her troubles, if at least her troubles do not provoke
your anger: Join her chains to Hectors arms, and carry both the one and the
others to that Trojans feet: and in fine, go and marry an unworthie sister
upon the tomb of her most generous brother. You will have it so, and Fate will
have it so likewise; and although I would not, if I could help it, yet I must
needs consent to it; for who can withstand Fate and Achilles his obstinacy? But
remember, cruel and blind as you are, that a God has told you by my mouth,
(yes I swear, that I feel a God inspiring what I now tell you) that you shall
find hatred, where you hope to meet with love; that you shall have nothing but
regret, where you expected nothing but pleasure; that you shall be betrayed by
the Trojans, as you now betray the Grecians; that they shall have as much
craft, as you have simplicity; that if Polixena do wait for you, death does
wait for you also near her; that if you approach near Troy, your fatal hour
does approach likewise; that the first day of that fatal Marriage shall be the
last of your days, and that your death must quickly make me die.

Behold what Heaven has inspired me with, and this is that which you ought to
believe; this is that which you will not believe; and this is that insensible
and mad man, which will be the cause both of your ruin and mine. Just Gods, he
hears me no more, he is going! the power of his destiny drags him away; I shall
behold him no more; nor shall he 'ere see me again; he leaves me, he is going
to die, and I my self am going to die likewise.

The effect of this HARANGUE.
THe unfortunate Briseis obtained nothing of the patilesse Achilles, but her
prediction was not untrue. He went to see Polixena, that he might see the day
no longer; and every one knows, that one of Paris's arrows sent him to his
grave, for not having believed this lovely slave, who without doubt deserved to
be together both Slave and Mistress.

FINIS.

