A SEA-CABBIN DIALOGUE, Between two Travelers lately come from HOLLAND.

Translated out of Dutch; And Dedicated to all those who desire to understand
things rightly.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. 1652.

A Sea-Cabbin-Dialogue, Between two Travelers, lately come from HOLLAND.
Viz. Kitt and Boulton. Kit. WIll it not be imagined that these Butter box
Flemings are enfatuated for their weighing Anchor, and hoising their Sails
toward England, to do Penance there for their brethrens misdemeanors at
Amboyna, and to pay an after-reckoning for the once Cautionary Towns? As also
to be talked withal concerning the Fishing in that Sea, which without the
permission of the English Nation, must be to them Mare clausum, and not
Liberum, notwithstanding late Grotius his opinion and Rethorick. Besides, all
the due af-recknings, and liquidations for several injuries, depradations,
detentions, spoils and the like. Truly, it seems to me a mere riddle (I say)
why those wise and grave Statesmen, who have so manfully with-stood the Don
Deigos de matta-mores, and all the power of the Austrian adherents; should be
induced to submit themselves to any other law save the Cannon? And why they
should not make use of Dunkirk (that second commodious Algier Pirates Nest)
whence they might have lanched forth Squadrons of Fireships on the
English-fleets, and might have taken the opportunities of Winds, Tides, and
dark nights to send them into the very Seaports, nay up as high as
London Bridge.


Boul. Why not? Canutus the Dane did once do the like before, for all the ships
watched that Rode in the River: And what did not those States Admiral Hemskerck
attempt and go through within the Bay, and under the Fort of Gibraltar?


Kit I marry: And why should not they blow up the ships on the coast, by such a
like engine, as Cornelius Drebbell invented? which was to swim betwixt two
waters; and the which is practiced by too many wicked men in this age. It is
apparent that the Commonwealth of England is as subtle as Jacob: But why
should the Hoghen Mogen sell their Birthright? For (I pray you) what would the
English get by a breach, naught save blows?


Boul. And what would the Hoghen Mogens get by the bargain?


Kit. By a Peace with the Hoghen Mogens, I confess the English will have made
just such a Feast as the Fox and Crane did; and it would be but according to
the Dutch old saying; They would shear the Sheep, and leave the shearing of the
Hogs to the Hollanders. But since they have bought up all the Westphalia bacon
(to make fireships withal) they will be such guests unto the English, as
Sampsons Foxes were to the Philistines; for that they would be soon constrained
to change their entertainment: They may therefore amuse the English with a
pratie, or a tale in a Tub; that so whilst they are a feasting on Custards and
Bag puddings, the Butter-box-Flemmings may have time to buy up all the Pitch,
Tar and Masts, from the frozen parts; that so in the mean while their landsmen
may get off their goods.


Boul. I, and all the Timber from the Black-sea, where the grand Signior builds
his Galleys.


Ket. Nay, you need not to jest? I am in earnest.


Boul. Nor do I; for that I am fully persuaded, in case the English agree not
with them; they will as then have had time enough to be possessed of all such
things, whereof the English stand in need; and the present want whereof would
for ever make the English incapable to supply, and make good their Fleets.


Ket. And they must expect as aforesaid to meet naught save blows: For that
Kees knelessen will fall too his Sable-cutter, and his Gravesand Cheese
buckler, and will pay it home with a Te mere den hoop te mere smiit^ick daer
doot, the more in number, the more I shall be sure to kill; for in a word, it
is but too appear, that in case the English be let alone, they will become so
mighty, as that they will enforce Laws on others, and that new Laws too; do we
not already see that they speak in a known language, and not at all in heathen
greek? The Hollanders have hitherto said, Striike end set; but the English
will strike at the best of the traffiques, profits, and so set out laws for
their Neighbors? Are they not become such skillful gamesters, as that they
have given check-mate to King, Queen, and what not?


Boul And I pray you, have the Hoghen Moghens done much less?


Kit. The Duke d' Alva, the Cardinal Gramvel, and Don John of Austria were the
causes thereof, by their cruel and tyrannical forcing of the consciences of
men; by their entrenching on the Liberties, Lives, and Estates of every
rational breathing soul amongst them. For my part, if I were to determine this
case, I would have the Hollanders stand it out at any rate, since of all
Nations that ever made wars, they alone have enriched themselves thereby: Now
suppose the English be at Peace with them, why as then they will sweep away all
the profits of the traffic? But if the Hollanders stand it out, it will
remain theirs; and they will likewise have a concourse of all the best English
Seamen, who affect the Royal Party; besides, the French, Danes, and who not?
All which will be Striike end Set, with them.


Boul. Truly, me thinks your discourse savours much of an Arch-fire-brand; and
not as that of one who should have learned to practice the Hollanders too
ancient main sayings, viz. Houdt vast end beleght; that is, hold fast and
contrive: Secondly, Het is goet met even ghesondeheigt te bed te gaen; it is
good sleeping in a whole skin. And as for the Hoghen Mogens, they are wise, and
know by a long experience, what Nation is best to live in peace withal; so
likewise do they know, that Saw-dust and Sand cannot make good Mortar; Even so,
any Nation that is of a contrary Religion cannot compose so firm an amity, but
they will always be subject to change.


Kit. What talkest thou of Religion? that is a pretty toy indeed to reflect on
in this age: would not many at the present say as an eminent Person during the
last Baricadoes of Paris did, to wit, Le Dieu de ces temps sont de venu trop
vieux ill en fault Mouler d'autres; That the gods of those times (meaning the
stone idols in the Papists Churches) were become so old, as that they needed to
be new molded.


Boul. But I pray you interrupt me not; I have not stopped you in your carreare:
The Hollanders, I say, are well acquainted with the power of the English
Nation, both by Land and Sea.


Kit. By Land! they are fierce blades indeed, and a plain knock-down,
pell-mell, is their greatest skill, as Count Harcourt observed of them; as long
as they might lie in beds, have their good-ale at their Noses, and their
Night-caps on their heads; so likewise has experience manifested their great
exploits at Sea, viz. Cales and Rochell.


Boul. I, but these are old stories; that was a fooling age, wherein men and
their followers were charmed by love toys; even as Ulysses his men were by
Circes. The English present warriors, think more on the laying of their
enemies in the dust then of powdering their hairs; they fight and pray, as
Moses and the Israelites did.


Kit. In this kind, you seem to talk of Saints, but I pray you, does not the
world conceive the contrary of some of them?


Boul. Puf! the world is a Fools-cap; there is no gold without some dross,
before it be seven-times refined.


Kit. I, but when will that be, at Doomsday think you?


Boul. I beseech you let me proceed, (and stop your fierd-brand vain) Do not
the English as they lie in their beds, see through their Windows the Hollanders
fleet sailing too and again along their Coasts? Were not the Hollanders
constrained to advise their Indian Squadrons to sail about; when the business
of Amboina was first reported? May they not be taken every where, and every
day? Have the Hoghen Moghen so many Shires of firm ground as the English? And
whereon Nations may live happily, and may make the Seas the parting-wals
betwixt that great Nation, that cares not whether any come amongst them or no?
In England all the Elements are good, among the Dutch all the Elements are bad;
the English have within themselves whatsoever they need; the Dutch have nothing
of all they want, save Butter, Cheese and Fish. And for all the fire-brand-like
expressions of the firing of Fleets at Sea, in Ports and Harbors, nay, the
very Stairs of London Bridge Tavern; though it be granted that all the Canon
shot from the Block-houses at Gravesend should do no harm against such Barks
as might take the opportunity of Winds, and Tides, and dark nights; though
Men-of-war riding on the River, and be lovingly linkt together with
Cable-bracelets, should not be capable to hinder the passages of such Boats no
more then the Damiaten chains could impedite the Belgians fetching away of the
silver Bells which are at Harlem: Finally, suppose that men should be so
moapish as to believe the old stories which Mother Shipton recounted in a
Chimney-corner, or such like which Almanac makers have divulged on the same
score, when as they wanted money to clear those which they had made in
Alehouses and Tobaco-shops. In the mean while, I pray, have not the English
Bacon to make Fireships withal, as well as the Hollanders? can they not make
use of Drebbels or such like inventions, to drive between two waters, and to
get under any of their adverse parties ships? And when as you talk of Dunkirk,
cannot the English stop up that Harbor, or any other they shall have a mind
unto? As it was intended, during the late breach between Spain, France, and
England. Really, I am of an opinion, that neither the English nor the Dutch
will be so far overshot in the true principles of State, as to be diverted by
bravado's, far less by scarecrows; viz. the pretended impossibility of an
agreement betwixt them; The General States may ever remember their own saying,
Concordia res parvae crescunt, magna dilabuntur; they have done well, wisely,
and like themselves in going for England, where they may try what may be done
in a friendly way: when as the English will also doubtless be so wise as to
remember the Scripture saying, viz. Beati pacifici, and to accept of
possibilities, as well as of conveniences. Moreover, I am confident that this
will fall out according to the Marquis of Spinola's usual saying, who was of an
opinion, that Treaties ought never to be refused, viz. Entretenemos a essa
platica; let us entertain this parley: so likewise, do the Dutch also say,
Tuschen loven end bieden, vergaederen end vereenighen de lieden, between
asking and bidding chapmen assemble and agree: The rigor of the law, (it is
true) demands the life, but the Judge does for the most part suffer the party
to be freed by a more easy satisfaction.


Kit. It seems then that you mind an agreement, and not to say as the French,
viz. Il fait bon pescher en eau trouble, Its good fishing in muddy water.


Boul. Why, truly I ever minded, it according unto the Italian saying, Qui
pissa chara gaba el medico, He that makes clear water may laugh at the
Physician. I did ever endeavor to persuade all men to agree, and when as I
found parties to be at such a distance, and at such an enmity together, as that
it was requisite to use art in the reconciling of them, as then I endeavored
to deceive them both by a lawful stratagem, only to make them friends.


Kit. But how could you make that good, since deceits is always to be abhorred?


Boul. Deceit in such like punctilo's is not only lawful but very necessary;
as for example, When a Spanyard is to be treated withal, he must be made
believe (by reason of his haughty humor and high spirit) that his adverse
party seeks him: And truly, the Hoghen Moghen, (be it spoken without offense)
were so well acquainted with their own strength, as that they would hardly have
been induced to yield unto a parley with the Spaniards, had they not been made
to believe that Speck-John (as they call the Spanyard) was out of breath; and
were glad to lay their heads, as it were, on the block: To instance herein, I
shall only allege the effects of some words, which unfortunately were uttered
by the Chancellor of Brabant, Peckius, in a Speech which he had intended to
make unto the General States, at the expiration of their twelve years Truce;
when as he only said thus, viz. That it was conceived, those States had as
then had time enough to bethink themselves, whether or no, it were not fit for
them to reunite themselves with the King of Spain. At which very words, the
Assembly rose, interrupted his speech, and rejected the Treaty; Declaring unto
the said Peckius, that all the favor they could show unto him, was to save him
from the Turff-wives rage at Delft, as he past through that place in his
journey homewards.


Kit. According unto your computation therefore, the Hoghen Moghen and English
must needs agree; for you would as I perceive have the one to offer fair, and
the other to take less, and thereby gull all the firebrarnds whatsoever: a
match it must needs be to your thinking, but say you so? why as then for all
this the Hollanders will be too hard for the English howsoever.


Boul. Less of your brags, I pray.


Kit. What I urge stands with common sense and reason, and I will make it good.


Boul. I shall laugh at that heartily.


Kit. They may agree, that I grant you; and remain in possession of Esau's
Pottage to boot: and yet nevertheless the English shall never attain unto
those advantages which the Hollanders possess.


Boul. I should wonder if you could clear me that point?


Kit. I shall easily do it, and though I may prove to be very plain with you;
yet you shall find that I shall strike home to the marrow: therefore do but
observe what I shall relate unto you, viz. The old Princes of Orange, William,
Maurice, and Frederick Hendrick, (that complete number of admirable Patriots)
who having taken a survey of the united States General affairs, pitched at first
on those expedients, whereby they might make them Potent, Rich, and Secure for
ever; which they effected, and gained the peoples love to boot: First, by their
settling of the public Security, or Faith; and secondly, by the reducing of
the value of moneys; and in this manner they secured themselves, and attracted
all Nations; I say, all Nations, and not so only, but their Substances and
Stocks to boot. Moreover, they settled a Record Office, whereby they prevented
all kind of cheats and deceits whatsoever, either in Sales, Transactions, or
Morgages, and whereby they also got in a little space of time many millions of
pounds in ready moneys, as also a considerable yearly revenue, and the love of
all men. They permitted Liberty of Conscience, the contrarys whereof lost the
King of Spain those said Province. They established Banks of Loan, and of Sale,
whereby all needy persons were relieved; they thereby abollished and extirpated
all Lombards and Jewish Brokers, who (as the English Usurers do) take 30, 40,
and more per Cent. Use, and who gave such excessive rates for money, as that
none could be had at any reasonable condition. They established a Bank of
payment, whereby the credits of all Negotiants was raised. They imposed easy
customs on all manner of Importations and Exportations by Foreigners; like
unto the French, who permitted strangers to export their Salt for eight
shillings the Bushel, when as the Natives pay four pounds sterling for the
same. And by these means they reduced the valuation of moneys, and its Use unto
3, and 4, per Cent. whereby they got such a vast stock of moneys, as that they
were able to buy and sell all kind of Wares at far better rates then any other
Nations could do. And these are the main causes, why the English, nor any
other Nation whatsoever, shall not be able to outvie them, by reason that they
are not in a capacity to equal them therein: Besides, their thriftinesse in
manning their ships with a less number of men then others, and also their more
sparingnes in Diet. And as by these courses they have made themselves potent,
rich, and secure: so have they also from time to time made use of several main
advantages, which were not so much reflected on by others; nay, which is worse,
wilfully neglected: Ha! Dunkirk, Ha! Hollanders and French, for having gotten
the hand of the English in the Cloth commodity? And have they not made all
Nations to be even doting on their Clothes: As for Fullers Earth, alas they
want not that neither!


Boul. And what have you else to say, I pray?


Kit. Why? naught. save that Dunkirk that same Dunkirk will pay the English
home one day.


Boul. I profess unto you, I am grieved to see you so much mistaken, and so
exorbitantly to continue your brags in this kind; and since they are merely
such, I shall take a little further pains to undeceive you hereon; for that you
must needs take notice how that the Commonwealth of England both can, and will
at their own convenience settle all such establishments, as the Hollanders have
made use off; besides many others which may stand with the good and honor of
the English Nation.


Kit. I, but when I pray? Has there not been a Bill discoursed of long since
for the establishing of a Record-office, and have any of the Propounders ever
as yet acquainted the Parliament with the many millions of pounds, which will
thereby accrue within the very first six weeks time of its erectment, together
with the love, ease and applause of the People; besides, one hundred and forty
thousand pounds sterling yearly revenew to boot? True it is, that something
has been spoken of small Fees unto Clarks, but what is that to the State?
Moreover what course has there been all this while taken against the
transporting of Fullers-earth? as if a public theft were not as punishable by
death as a particular robbery?


Boul. These things its true touch to the quick, so likewise need you not to
fear but that they will be heeded.


Kit. I, but what say you on the particular of Dunkirk?


Boul. I profess unto you, that I have not said half of that which lies on my
heart, nor the least part of that which is even at my tongues end.


Kit. I see you would fain shift off the satisfying of me on the Cloth-trade,
and on the particular of Dunkirk.


Boul. There is an expedient in reserve, whereby the Cloath-trade may be made
more worth unto the English, then the golden mines are to the King of Spain;
and the resolves thereon may be of as great a consequence as any thing that
has as yet been debated; And as for Dunkirk, were there many such like, they
might be curbed, nay gained: but I shall skip over Dunkirk, and tell you that
whenever the English Company shall be weary of Rotterdam, it may be settled
at Bridges; and hereon I could tell you more of my thoughts, were it not a
secret. And that you may judge how considerable a bargain it will be for any
man to be possessed of the Town of Dunkirk; besides, what I have told you of
stopping up of its Port; you must know, that whosoever shall be master thereof,
the same town and themselves may be called upon for the payment of seven
millions of pounds, which are due unto the English Nation, the said Town being
one of the Cautionaries which stands bound for the said Debt; and thus, I
think, I have satisfied to the purpose.


Kit. I, now you say something! and here me thinks you tell me several
considerable particulars all at a clap; as the settling of a Cloth-staple at
Bridges, the stopping up of the Port of Dunkirk, and the demanding of seven
millions of pounds; now all these will serve to curb and vex parties.


Boul. Thou art soon moved to thy teastish humor I see.


Kit. Not so neither; but I would have such men as will not do things by fair
means, be wrought upon; by a, You shall do it: yet howsoever those seven
million of pounds make a pleasing noise in my ears: why should there not a Hue
and Cry be made after them? for that in case they can be found out; as then
many ill husband soldiers, would not be so overhasty as they are to sell
their Debenters at four shillings in the pound: But I pray you, does not this
savor of the Queen of Fairies story? and is there such a thing in rerum natura
as the Flanders Debt? is it not a fair nights-dream?


Boul. I can assure you thus much of it; that when as I past of late through
the Neatherlands, I was told, how that there were those, who had proffe^ed unto
Sir Balthazar Gerbier (the late King of Englands Resident in those parts) no
less then thirty thousand pounds for a gratuity, only to move the said King
to have granted a favorable Composition unto the Debtors, for the total.


Kit. What say you man? Was there thirty thousand pounds proffered unto him;
and had not that Resident learned the Bribing trade, which was so rife in that
age? And is there not at present a wise man for himself (among such as may be
able to prosecute the Debtors) who can obtain leave from the State of England
to be employed in such a fair business? Why, what is become of that Resident?
Can he not speak? Can he not be wished to discover unto a fit Person how those
monyes may be come by? And by what means a nimble Lad might compass that
Gratuity? Truly, this particular seems to be a Riddle unto me; Nor can I find
any impediment, why this State should not look after the same? What remarkable
cause can there be to let it lie dormant? Is it not a Debt for Monyes which
were Lent? are there not good Bonds exstant for the same? And has not the Debt
been formerly claimed? Nay, are there not several considerable Persons in
England, as well of the Gentry as among the Merchants, who have sustained great
losses both by Sea and Land, by the Spanish Subjects? And cannot these be so
wise to themselves, as to obtain that the State of England might permit them to
endeavor the said Debts recovery? And to crave the benefit of the Parliaments
Act; which allows a third part of concealed Debts; and the which might serve
toward their reimbursments? Is there not a Nimble Clark that has Ears and
Eyes that way? Truly, it passes my understanding that such a considerable
thing should lie dormant: Nor can I persuade my self that the English Nation
should be more Spaniolized now, then they were in Fistolo Gundamor's days; but
grant they were, why should they not demand their own due? For my part, were I
an English man, I would have all the World to know, that its not in this age,
as it was formerly; when as a Venetian Ambassador returning from the English
Court homewards, and meeting his Successor, who was making thither; he gave
him this advice, how that he was not to expect to find any English men in that
Court; but to the contrary, Spaniards, French, Dutch, and an unexpressible
number of such like Factionaries: And truly since thou have awakened me by the
sound of those seven Millions of pounds, I would have the Don Diego's put to it
rounly, and pay they should with a vengeance.


Boul. Fie upon thee; thou would still have me to be quarrelsome? now with
these, then with the others: fie thou know it is not my disposition.


Kit. Thou art mightily mistaken in me, Man, quarrel say thou; Think thou
that I am ignorant of the Spanish Maxim, and of their saying, viz. que paralas
conveniencias se hazen loscosas: Thou full well know how thou did put me
beyond my Byas, when as I discussed the matter between the English and the
Dutch; and finally how thou wroughtest me into a well liking of the Dutch
Ambassabours coming for England; and how that we concluded: that they will do
better to strike the Nail on the head by a good agreement; and in this manner
thou have made me a Convert in that regard

But do thou all this while think that I can be taken with lindas
Reverentias; or with smooth words? do but observe their own saying, Palabras y
plumas elviento las lleba. And have they not by words shifted off the
administering of Justice for the blood of a Gentleman who was employed by the
State? and have they not forsooth shifted it off upon their Sancta Inquisition?
which would torment them even in purgatory (as they suppose) should they not
maintain their Sanctuaries Prerogative.


Boul. But all this while I wonder what harm the Spaniards have done unto thee.


Kit. Truly none at all: Nor do I bear them any particular grudge; a man may, I
hape, discourse freely must it needs be confessed that there are many gallant men
amongst them: their King is a brave Prince, and I do highly esteem that Nation:
But experience has taught such men as delight in observations to distinguish
betwixt those things which are fit, and others which are not warrantable;
Besides there are diverse of my acquaintance whom they have most egregiously and
abominably abused.


Boul. Well, I must needs tell thee in one word, how that (although I have been
much pleased all this while with thy discourse) thou art mightily mistaken.


Kit. Wherein I pray?


Boul. By reason thou conceivest the Spaniards are to be called upon, for the
seven millions of pounds abovementioned; when as the inhabitants of Brabant,
Flanders, Artois and Henault are the Debtors; For that the money was lent unto
them in Queen Elizabeth's time; since which those States and People have made
it their particular Debt.


Kit. Nay, and if the case stands so; as then I have sundry expedients in my
Budget, to procure satisfaction thereon, and that without any brags at all.


Boul. I but I pray you; what were those horride and abominable abuses, which
thy acquaintance and friends have sustained by the Spanish subjects?


Kit. Why, even as many as the millions of pounds; O that ye had seen the
miseries which a world of English have suffered in the Spanish and Flemming
Dungeons, after their ships and goods were detained from them:


Boul. Do they not observe the Articles of Peace?


Kit. What talk you of Article of Peace? they were special ones indeed.


Boul. Why say thou so? were they not contrived by wise and juditious men?
and were they not sworn too on the Gospel?


Kit. Now talkest thou most like a Ninnihammer, did thou never hear who was
the contriver of those Articles? why, marry i will tell thee: The once Conde Duca
d'olyvare, the Spanish Kings favorite; and one who was more Spaniolized then a
Castillion Vieso; viz. Francis Cottington; who by his fair contrivance of some
part of the said Treaty; did cut the Throats of sundry English Negotiants and
sea-faring-men.


Boul. In what manner I pray?


Kit. Why if we were not on so short a journey; I could tell thee a thousand
things herein; but I perceive we are near the lands-end.


Kit. However continue thy discourse as long as we are aboard.


Kit. In a word therefore (mark well what I say) there is nothing so sure as
that in case the Commonwealth of England does not oblige the Spaniards to
reform and amend the said Articles of Peace, the many bleeding hearts of a
great number of good English men, will not conceive their condition to be
better in these times, then they formerly were: I mean such as have by their
Traffic; for that I have seen their intolerable and innumerable greevances.


Boul. Can you exemplify herein?


Kit. Marry that I can, and it is that the Spanish and the Flemmish (which were
wont to be called the pyrating Dunkirks) do use a game called have at all; and
for the most part do (as the Italian Robbers, who first kill a man, and then
pick his pockets) imprison, torture and slay those they light on; and then make
sale of their ships and goods.


Boul. But what said the Merchants hereunto? and those who were Copertners in
the Ships ladings?


Kit. Why, this was their course, to the Admiralty Courts they went, first to
that of Dunkirk, next from that of Pontius they are sent up to Pilat at
Bruxels; where for the most part they are sure to be condemned: for that those
Grandees, the Governors of Towns, and the most eminent'st men in those parts,
have their shares in the Booty; being so interest adventuring Pirates, (as the
Barron of Wakken was,) in so much as that its an impossibility for any English
men to be righted there.


Boul. Tell me, I pray, wherein all this while the Treaty of Peace is defective?


Kit. In several particulars, which I could specify in; and yet I must be
brief; although there might be much said hereon, had we time; to instance in
one, And it is the 25. Article of that Treaty, which runs thus, viz. That if
during this peace, any thing be attempted, or done, by the Subjects of either;
the attemptors and such as offend therein, shall be only punished and no
others.


Boul. Why, this seems to be just and consonant to the word of God.


Kit. You should say, answerable to the Cottingtonian law-giver's meaning,
which by your leave, I shall make appear thus, It is unpossible for any men
especially the English, to be indemnized by the attemptors or offenders, by way
of justice; for as I told you before, the several Grandees have a share
therein; besides, the impossibility for an English man who is wronged in the
Indies, and those remote parts, to obtain any satisfaction at all, from those
diminutive Vicegerents, whose will is a law, and whose interest is their
Mammon: Nor can these wilful Pirates be hindered in their pursuance of the
English even into the very Ports of the Land. Of these impossibilities to
obtain justice, Cottington was not in any wise ignorant; and therefore his
contriving of such an Article, was in favor of the Spaniards, whose Pentioner
he then was, and its no wonder, he is still so.


Boul. And if so be, the Spanish and Flemmish Seamen of War (or any others,
under what pretense soever they may be set forth) do so egregiously abuse the
English, and that there is no justice to be had; besides, that the substance of
many Widows and Orphans (who have lost their Husbands and Fathers; together
with their Ships and Goods, as abovesaid) has been exhausted in the like
fruitless pursuances: It therefore seems that the granting of Letters of Mart,
is the shortest way.


Kit. This may prove to be as bad a remedy as the evil it self; for that in
the first place, those who intend to man out Ships on such an expedition, must
be at vaste charges; secondly, they run the hazard of a lost Voyage; thirdly,
its a question, whether that which they take will countervaile the cost, when
as the charges are deducted. Moreover, the Owners may pretend, that its a hard
case to have their Ships and Goods taken, when as they have not done the wrong;
And what would not several soldiers think hereof? when as very often for a
punctilio between Princes, whole Countries are laid waste, Cities, Towns and
Villages are reduced to ashes, both old and young put to the Sword; Virgins and
even Girls ravished, with many the like cruelties.


Boul. As then me thinks it might prove a very fit expedient to seize on the
Ships and Goods of such a Nation, whereby the English may (in so high a nature)
have been prejudiced, and the which may be effected in the very Ports of
England, and even in the Merchants Warehouses.


Kit. I marry, why, now thou speak common sense, for it was the same course
which Queen Elizabeth took; and whereby she got the love of the people; and
caused her self to be feared by all Nations. Other States have done the like on
the same occasions. The righting of subjects being a Maxim of State, which is
not to be gainsaid; and which the Spaniards themselves do not deny, but to the
contrary they have confessed, and must avouch the same.

That whereas it is the public Faith; which does make good reciprocal Bonds;
so can there not be a true and firm peace, save upon such just and inviolable
principles, as that by virtue of them, every particular subject may be righted;
for that otherways, a Peace would be far more dangerous then open war; during
which, parties can better stand upon their guards, then in the time of a
professed friendship.


Boul. I do remember several examples, of what I have alleged; when as
Foreigners have on the like occasions seized on the English-ships and goods
within their jurisdictions.


Kit. You may easily remember them, for that they are of a very fresh date;
even since the last Parliament of England has been assembled.


Boul. Doubtless you mean, one Peter le Duke, who being authorized by the
French Council of State, to arrest such ships and goods, as belonged to the
English Subjects in obedience to the Parliament; by Virtue of which order, the
said le Duke did force open the English Merchants Counting-houses at Saint
Malos.


Kit. So likewise do I remember, how that the King of Denmark, did in the year
1643. seize on a ship belonging to the English Merchants Adventures, as it past
Gluckstadt on the river of Elbe, and the which was bound for Hamborough; as
also four other ships belonging to the East Land company, as they past the
Sound: All which ships together with their ladeings were confiscated, without
any suit at all in the Admiralty Court. And this ceisure was undergone by the
said King of Denmark; because the Parliaments ships had taken a Denmark ship
called the Christian Ark.

Nay the Spaniards themselves have done and daily do more then what is above
specified; for that they seize on such ships as chance to be in the company (by
mere accident, and not having any relation at all to them) of such others on
which the said Spaniards pretend to have a right; and to instance herein, we
shall only allege Captain Davis and Freeman's case, who were lately abused in
the like manner by the Spaniards. Moreover as there are an infinite number of
such like examples, so does it behove those, whom the great Judge of Heaven and
Earth has has placed in authority; to remember (on such occasions) when as
those who live under their obedience are wronged; and that its impossible for
them to be otherwise redrest; To do them justice in the like manner as is
before specified: unless they expect that the old woman's ghost (who stopped
Adrian the Emperor in his way, saying, Cease to be, or do Justice) should cry
in their Ears, Do Justice to those that are true unto you, or Take not upon
you that function which the Lord has permitted you to exercise. And thus I
shall conclude with the last part of that which is to be said on a business of
this nature, viz. That whenever a State is in possession of any ships, goods,
or monyes, appertaining unto the Subjects of any Nation, from whom they may
have received an injury; The best and speediest way to right their own Subjects
so offended, and endammaged; is to dispose of those said ships, goods, and
moneys unto them; and to leave it unto that Prince, whose Subjects have wronged
the others, to satisfy his said Subjects, which committed the said outrage,
out of those specialties, ships, goods, and monyes, as the said Prince may be
in possession of: (by them so unjustly taken.) And thus there is an end of an
old Song.

Let us therefore hasten to shore, and there observe whether the Hoghen Moghen
Ambassadors will agree; and thereby make good their old saying, viz. Houdt
vast eude beleight; or whether they are come over in such a Crafty way as the
late Marquess of Spinola was used to practice (as aforesaid) and whereby he
overreached such men as were subject to be drawn in by smooth speeches; when
as he said, Entretenemos a essa platica; although he had no mind to conclude
any thing at all; only out of a subtle vein, to gain time; according to the
Italian saying, Per art eper ingano, si passa la mitta del Anno etc. Nor can
it be believed that they intend to make use of the French Policy, viz. If fait
bonpescher en eau trouble, But rather that both parties will be just and wise,
and observe the saying, That the greatest Craft is to have none at all, etc.


FINIS
The Second Part, OF THE Holland-Sea-Cabbin-Dialogue; CONSISTING, In a sharp
dispute between a stout English Sea Captain, a Dutch Merchant, and a Masty
Freeze-lander; who in his last coming over from Holland, betroathed himself
under the Decks unto Goody Drigle-Drag-taile; Whose Hogs at his landing he sold
to buy himself a gaudy Coat, wherewithal he at present Swaggers on the Old
Exchange.

Whereunto there is added, Gooddy- Drigle-Drag-tailes, pitiful lamentation to
Wabbity Clonters, and Jannety Stronts, her Goships; all of them lately come
from Holland by the Fleet which was conceived to be in sight of Portsmouth.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. 1652.

The Second Part of the Hollanders Sea-Cabbin-Dialogue.
Mer. WHo of us three, I pray, shall prove himself to be the wisest? and
reflect on a Gig, which was acted by the Harlemmers Rhetoricians: Whenas a
single man appearing on the stage, uttered his mind in this sense; viz. Three
and five is nine, which he continually reiterated as he walked up and down; a
while after, a merry Grig starts forth at the other end of the Stage, and says
thus; To meddle with nothing, is best; and these two might happily have
remained uninterrupted till this very day, had not a third party interposed;
and hearing the first man's note, that three and five was nine; he endeavored
to persuade him, that he was in an error; for that to all men's knowledge, three
and five were but eight: At which the five and third man being displeased, and
falling into a rage, seeing himself thus abruptly controled, he gave the other
(who endeavored to rectify him) a sound box on the Ear, saying, that is nine
with a vengeance, at which our third party capered to some tune laughing
heartily and repeating his first lesson viz. To meddle with nothing is best;
Whereas the affirming party was sufficientiy ashamed, and the assembly not a
little pleased: As also all busy bodies, partly instructed; carrying so
emphaticall a lesson away with them, viz. How that, to meddle with nothing, was
the best and safest way.


Cap. Thou hintest very well; and if so be that Meddle with all-party, had
performed his part on the Old Exchange: Marry as then, he would have learned
more wisdom, then to spread brags of the buying of Dunkirk, and all the
Westphalia bacon: As if we English were children, and to be scared by such a
mock-show, and could not make fireships as well as our neighbors: nay, as if
we wanted Spades and Pick-axes, to level your Hontsbosch, your Cadykes, and
your Slapers; and to make the Sea overrun all thy Country.


Mer. Nay brother, that is such another brag as was lately vented in a
Beer-sellar, amongst such mad Sea-blades as thou art.


Cap. I would have you know, that we Sea-Captains are as wise as Moses was, and
not at all so foolish as Pharaoh: For that he passed the Sea, and tasted not a
drop of it: But Pharaoh and his drunken crew were so mad as to drink their
bellies so full on it, as that they all kicked up their heels. And though we
trade on the water, yet we drink good wine: I would have you to know that we
are rational men, as well as others; and do understand our selves in such a
manner as shall appear unto all the world. And as for the particular of Beer
drunkards, apply that to your own country men; especially, to the nasty Freeze,
who would not resolve on the saving of their souls, their lands, lives, and
liberties, when as William of Nassau represented unto them the distressed
estate, wherein their Countrymen were (before their attaining to be the mighty
Kaes Copers, from Kaes knee-lessen, dry brochelde Necus Schipper:) until they
had first drunk with him, and permitted them to salute his wife the Princess,
opsie-Freeze, by a slovenly great bearded fellow: And as then, it was William,
thou art a good fellow; they stroked him on the shoulders, and told him they
would make a man of him; telling him thus, Willem, Willem, wy sullen even man
van uw maken, so ghy wilt deughen: Englished thus, William, William, we will
make a man of thee, so thou will prove honest: I marry, would they; and I marry
as then should he have moneys. And as then John van old Barnavault, with two
others of the brethren lineally descended from such Schoomakers and Brewers, as
never were acquainted with the wearing of a pair of Cuffs; and these forsooth,
were sent over to the great and matchless Queen Elizabeth; who at first dash
gave them a flat denial; telling them that she could not with a safe Conscience
assist Rebels, such as were the subjects of a King, her dear brother; unto whom
she was particularly obliged; concluding with a Quere, how they could imagine,
that she should suffer the bodies of her Noble English men to be their stop
dykes; and for the which they might perchance one day pay them with
ingratitude: A thing which is but too much practiced now a days, by such as
have been obliged above reason. Whereupon Barnavalt, (who had a groates worth
of Pedantical broken latin in his poutch I should say Rhetoric Though it was
a little polish't over in Erasmus style) why as then he could crouch, stoop,
fawn, and flatter in this manner; (returning the Queen this answer;) To your
sacred Majesty, we have made our addresses, as to a dear Mother, we like little
children imploring for Milk; and if so be our fate should be such as to be
denied, why as then we must starve; and in the like terms they moved that good
Queen to compassion, the which it seems God would permit: And she answered them
that they should not only have milk from her royal breasts, but even the very
last drop of her blood; and how is this, I pray, repaied? Why marry, even by
the blood of our true English at Amboyna; and whether heaven should not send
down to know whether it be so or no; and do according unto the cry which is
lately gone up from Portsmouth? Let all the world judge; and likewise let
Heaven judge? whether all the water which might over-whelm thy ungrateful soil
(by the piercing, as aforesaid, of thy dikes, the Honts-bosch; the Slapers,
Cadikes, and the like) might be capable to wash off so great a guilt.


Freez. Sir Captain, if thou will drink with us; up sin Freeze, we will make
thee an Hornest-man.


Capt. Right, this is even as I said before of William Prince of Orange.


Freez. Sir Captain, I would have thee to know, that I have a brave green
Cheese, colored by good sheeps dung; and a good pickle Herring: Nay better
then all this, I have a couple of lusty freeze Mares to bestow upon thee, to the
end that if so be thou art furious enough, thou may Cover them thy self, and
thou may term their Foals Beschie: nay Elizabeth, if thou be as plain as
we are, for so we call our Mares; ha, ha, Bessie, ha with a whip we make them
fly, faster then Ship sails when the wind blows at the highest, and though
you make all your sails.


Capt. Why how now Good man Furcoat, and Furcap? sir sir say you? thou that
walk on the Exchang, and struttest even as if the present being of the Hogen
Moghens Ambassadors amongst us, did make thy Dice to run naught but Sisse,
Cinke; whereas thou art but a mere Duce (Dunce I should say) nay a mere Ass,
and a Fool in Grain.


Drible-D. Truly sir Captain, he has made a Fool of me indeed; alas, I can
assure you 'twas my Sow, and Pigges that paid for this brave Coat, and for his
ranting in lieu whereof, I now hear by Jannetie Stronts, and Wabbetie Clonters
reports, that we must all return from whence we came; and that which is worse,
we must return not half so wise as we were, for that we thought we should
have been coupled.


Jan. Stronts. Thou should rather say, be married together, that so the
state of Holland might have been the Wife, and the Commonwealth of England
the Husband, and that by so lovely a copulation, they might not only have
produced Herrings, but Whales, to make good store of Oil for our cloth; for
that you must know we have an art to make cloth far better then yours? and the
Mounfiers, the Signiors, the great Min-Heeres, are all of them in love with our
cloth; besides we know how to make Fools of you English, by getting away your
Fullers Earth: Moreover we have another expedient (though it lies Dormant) and
the which we will put on foot with speck John, the Don Diegos; for that we are
great comrades at present; although its not unlikely, but that they should
gladly see us fall foul, and take one another by the throat, that so they
might have an opportunity to have at us again.


Freez. So ho, goodly Driggle-Draggle-tayle, have a care of thy troffe, for
that thy Hogs and Pigges are gone.


Jan. Stronts. Hark I pray how this surley stallion snarles? marry come up,
this would be a hot match, and a fair copulation indeed.


Freez. Why? that we shall, and agree in spite of all the Firebrarnds in the
World; and now I will take a turn amongst the English, since I see my walking
amongst my own Countrymen is carped at; am I not a free borne Man? shall there
not be free quarter between us Captain? I pray you tell me; shall we rake
coals out of the ashes? give me leave Captain, we are all Adam and Eves
Sons; we are of one and the self same Religion, take my word for it, such as
would have us to fall foul; do not mind any good to either of us; still I
say, a green Cheese thou shall have, and a Mare to boot: Nay thou shall ride
me if thou wil'st, and my gooddy Driggle Draggle tail too, for I must plainly
tell you, it was but a Match under the Decks.


Capt. How now sir? I tell thee, I scorn thee, thy Generation, thy Nation,
thy Coat, thy Cheese, thy Mares; and far more thy infamous goody
driggle-draggle-tayle bitches.


Marc. Good sir Captain, let us talk like Brothers.


Capt. Brother? I scorn thy Motion, Brothers say thou? what Brothers? Cain
and Abel were Brothers; and the Hollanders may happily prove to be the Slayers
of Abel.


Freeze Well said brave Captain, still you grant us to be the elder brother.


Mer. Pray sir Captain, let us talk as brothers, in him who has made us so.


Capt. If you were Christians, that were somewhat; but you seem to be worse
then Jews and Devils


Mer. Good Captain, although we were what you suppose us to be; yet however let
us talk like brothers; let me entreat you to pass by this S. Christophers
Hircanum; Let us I pray you discuss and ponder the case; and I pray you what is
it that raises the storm, save your abundance of matter: I perceive you are
incensed. First, by your remembering the barbarous proceedings of a company of
drunken knaves, who were on the other side of the world, too far from their
Masters to have their hands held from abusing of the English: were not, I pray
you, the Holland Ambassadors two years together dancing an attendance on the
late two Kings pleasures, proffering their Majesty's and the Nation
satisfaction? Shall a wrong done by a company of knaves, during the reigns of
foreigners, who are dead and forgotten, be so much resented by those, who will
not acknowledge them nor theirs, although they should come on earth again?
besides, the wrong which was acted, was happily done against such, who if they
were alive might perchance not be in a possibility of deserving this
Commonwealths justice or favor: For that it may be they might have proved
arch-malignants. And grant all this were not so, yet what shall we say? They
are gone and cannot be recalled* and if satisfaction must be given for blood,
then let us remember the free grace, which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
has offered to all mankind; rather then to call upon the ancient laws, which
seem to be the summit of Rigor, as life for life, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth; And if this must needs be urged; would it not prove a piece of high
injustice, if so be for the striking out of one tooth of a man's head, that has
his double range of teeth complete, the tooth of the offender should be plucked
out, although he had but one in his head; certainly you would judge this to be
a great deal of cruelty. Amboyna business, I grant you must be cleared; the
right of the English Seas must be acknowledged; for that is most notorious, how
that when as King Philip the second of Spain, was married to Queen Mary, yet
could he not claim any Prerogative in the English Seas, in the behalf of his
Subjects: Ferdinando Tursis its true did fish in the English Seas, but it was
on a License for 22. years, Signed by Queen Mary, as well as by Philip the
second. But you will say, what other injuries have there been done you? Why,
such things as are both possible and convenient must be effected, to which
purpose we conceive the Ambassadors are come over, accompanied with such
orders as may conduce thereunto.


Capt. I marry, they are come indeed, for what I pray? to out-brave us with a
Fleet, and to kill the good People? I must needs tell you that these are not
times, wherein a Cat might not look upon a King; for that as now a King
(undisguised) dares not look upon an English Cat; nay, not so much as on a dead
Cat; nay, not so much as on Tom VVhittingtons Cat, which is hung up for a
Sign: And must they forsooth, come with a Fleet on our coast? O, were there
not a prohibition on the importation of Oaths by Hollanders as well as by
English, why I could even swear and swagger at this horrid abuse.


Mer. Good brothers, let me entreat you to give way to the exportation of
Oaths by strangers, although they should not pay any custom at all for it.


Cap. I will have thee to know (and all the world to boot) that we can set out
two hundred Men of War; and by our dividing of them into four fleets, we
shall be able to master the Seas; and so we shall not need to think on such
utterances, as the cutting of dikes, which we scorn, and abhor the thoughts
thereof; being not so over-presumptuous as to contradict the Lords Decree, by
making a second Flood. For that all the Nations of the earth shall find us to
be answerable to the Etymology of our name, viz. Angelical. That which is fair
and just must be expected from us; we will do as we would be done by; amicable
in times of Peace; and fair quarter if it must needs come to a War: and thus
much may suffice for the principal. But as for accessaries, I pray thee tell
me, good sir Merchant, can thou persuade thy self, that we Sea-Captains, and
such others of us as do resent the blood-sheddings of our countrymen, of our
brethren and friends, can be dissuaded from the begging of our Rulers (even on
our knees) that we may have liberty to put to Sea: You must know that the whole
Nation has but one tongue, and one heart in this regard; can we not at our
ease take all the Merchandises wherewith the Holland ships are fraughted? Need
our English men venture one groat in Merchandises? Does England consist in
Harlemmer meeres? In Zuyder Seas? and in Rivers? Your country men have no Lands
nor Parcks; Do but cut off their Traffic, and as then God be with you,
ungrateful Generation; And all this while you would have us repeal an Act: I
marry, an Act of Parliament: which must be as inviolable, as the decrees of the
Parthians and Medes.

And moreover it seems by your discourse, that you would feign have us to
believe, that the Parliament has been misinformed by some self interessed
Men, who may perchance be accused of some secret Monopoly; and the which may
tend to the ruin of a number of Merchants, Artists, and Tradesmen.


Merch. If I do not prove it to be so, nay if I make it not appear unto you,
that it is one of the greatest Monopolies that ever was hatched against this
Nation, as then call me Fool, Nitty-breech, Ninny-hammer, Cocks-cumbe, or any
thing what thou will.


Cap. Say you so? Why, I do very much question whether thou will not prove to
be the Actor, who troubled himself to maintain that five and three were but
eight; and that forgetting the merry Grigs Axiom, viz. To meddle with nothing
is best: thou at length may chance to get a sound box on the Ear for thy
pains.


Mer. Hold there sir Captain; you may be mistaken, for that our discourse
infers no consequences.


Cap. However, I know thou art a Penman, and have the liberty and prerogative
of thy Counting House; and as thou wilt'st not transgress the Law of Nations,
so will not I please my self, by asserting unto that which is before
mentioned, viz. that five and three are nine: yet however I shall be content to
hear what thou can say, against that unquestionable truth: How that the Act
which prohibites the Importation by strangers, of such Commodities as are not
of their Countries growth, tends to the advantage of our Negotiations, and to
the main curtailing of all Forrayners, especially of the Hollanders, who (had
not this been) would not have been so overhasty, as to harp upon that string.


Merch. Why truly, let me tell you, it may be the States of Holland have been
made to understand, that the said Act was rather published in a threatening
manner then otherways; and the which I would have you know, no power in the
World could ever yet brook; for that every Cock (althoug his feathers be never
so Hoary) conceives himself to be Master on his own Dunghill: so likewise
know you the French Proverb, Amouret seignieuri, n'endure point de Compagnie:
although its granted, that comparisons do for the most part halt, and offend:
wherefore we shall proceed to the point, and that we may enjoy our selves with
the better Freedom, let us ere we enter on our discourse, turn homewards
these homely Gossips, gooddy Driggle Draggle-tayle, Wabbetie Clonters, and
Jannitie Stronts, who seem to be alarmed by the noise of a breach; and as for
the plain down right Freeze-Lander, we will leave him to take a walk, and air
himself, whilst we, (laying aside all particular interests and passions,
especially that killing and destroying humor; for that you must needs grant,
when men have fought it out to the last; yet must they (after many losses on
both sides) come to an agreement at last, go on with our discourse.


Capt. I but yonder comes our importunate Freeze-Lander again; how shall we
shift him?


Freez. And why shift me sir Captain? I would have thee know that now I have
taken a turn round the Exchang; I am resolved to interrupt the Gentleman that
spoke last, and also to tell thee to thy face, that thou art either a great
Imposture, or mightily mistaken, as touching the Sea proceedings; for that it
will be proved, h^w that the Hollanders my compatriots have been first set
upon, and most Egregiously abused, which truth, shall be made good by
substantial proofs, and well grounded evidences, and the which our Ambassadors
will not be backwards to represent. And how that the English have committed
such spoils and outrages upon us, as are not to be paralleled; For is it not
public, how that one English man of War, who set forth with a Letter of
License (or Mart as you may call it) has taken more then thirty Holland
Merchant men; and I pray you how can this stand before God and Men? that by
reason of a particular pretense, a whole Nation should suffer so general a
damage: Moreover was it ever heard of, that Sovereigns and States do break,
on the occasion of every particular persons falling foul? that would be just
as if Neighbors should set each others Houses on fire, when as their Servants
or Domestics chance to disagree.

And as to thy former question, whether the Hollanders were not worse then
Jews? what an unhandsome language is that? and how injurous? since all the
world knows them to be honest plain dealing men, that their word is more
binding then all the English Lawyers clauses, for, too, and, and which they
insert in their Beds-sheets like Indentures, deeds and covenants: The
Hollanders you must know mean right to the English; and love them so well, as
that they offer to join with the English Nation against any party that shall
not keep a fair correspondency with them: Now that it stands with the
interest of the Enlish Nation, to keep a good quarter with the Hollanders,
has been proved by twenty undeniable Arguments.

Besides who can gainsay, but that they are Christians? Nor do they (as it is
scandalously surmised) profane the Lords day; nor in the least omit his
service: have they not set a deep forfeiture on any person that shall be found
to sell any thing on the Sabbath day? And sure I am, that amongst them, thou
shall not see such a spectacle as Paul's Church is in, at present; for that they
would either pull it down, or build it up again; to the end that strangers
should not have occasion to question their Christian profession. Therefore
sir Captain let me advise thee to leave thy crackings, quackings, and
Fulminations, as also thy grinning at my Coat, the which I must tell you, is
lyned with a good Fur: For though I do sometimes talk of a green Cheese, and
of Freezeland Mares; yet am I of such a constitution, as not to blush at any
Nicknames of Butter-box, Flemming, or the like; to which I have a reply at
hand, and that in Ryme too; For that it is granted we do love Butter, and we
do find it to be good, according to the saying; Buttertie voor, en buttertie
naer, doet Even Men's leven hondert Iaer; which I will thus english you, Butter
before meals, and after repast, will make a man hundreds of years out-last.
In this sense it was, that Prince Maurice of Orange outvide the Marquess of
Spinolas Quible, when as he feasted the said Marquess during the Treaty of
their Truce; and at which time the said Marquess took an occasion to commend
his Country, preferring it before Holland; inferring how that Lemmons and
Orenges did grow there twice a year, whereunto Prince Maurice said, that
Holland must needs be a far better Country, for there Butter and Cheese did
grow twice a day: and whereby his Soldiers were maintained fat and lusty; and
thus much I think sir Captain may serve your turn, in lieu of our
Butter-box-Flemming Title, which you so unhandsomely brand us with.


Capt. Be shrow my heart thou have hit the Nail on the head now; in good
sooth, I did always respect this Dromidary Freeze-lander to be some disquised
Rhetoritian, purposely sent to walk about our Exchange, for to observe the
dispositions of Men: you see how he has wit at will, and can speak to the
purpose too, most like a cunning Logitian; however to the point Merchant I pray
you.


Merch. Truly if it be so, as that the English Seamen have first abused the
Hollanders, and that all the bruits which are come from Portsmouth, are not
well grounded; why then it concerns every one of us to be circumspect and
watchful, for to discover what Firebrands these are which go about to put
strife between these two Nations, that so they may make the Devil keep a
Holy Day; nay that the Turks and Infidels may laugh at us, when as they shall
see those, which profess one and the self same Religion, sheath their Swords
in each others bowels, Cui bono? for that this question will certainly be made
by all juditious honest and well meaning persons. And as then, will not all wise
Statists conclude, that the great Devil of delusion has blind-folded us, even
in a time, when as our most assured intelligences do^ confirm unto us from all
parts, that our Adversaries do greatly combine against us; and that in case
we do not hasten to prevent them, they will venture ere long to bang us by
Bell, Book, and Candle, since its too apparent that the Spaniards and French
will be necessitated to agree; and their discontented Princes may as soon be
moved to put up their Swords, which if they do, shall we not, I pray you be
the object of their sa sa.

But now to the point, in reference to that which is bruited concering the
instances which are said to be made for the Parliaments repealing of their Act,
concerning the prohibiting of the Importation of Goods for strangers, and the
which is supposed to be an unquestionable means to undo the Hollanders, and
to increase the English Navigation: For (as some conceive) were it otherwise,
why as then should the Hollanders be so solicitous (as they are said to be) to
have that Act repealed?

Herein I shall ingeniously declare unto you, what I have learnt by experience;
and I shall prove it unto you, how that the prohibiting of Importation of Goods
by strangers, will neitheir increase the English Navigation, nor undo the
Hollanders; but on the contrary, it will be extreme prejudicial unto the
English Nation.

As for example, in the first place; The customs will be diminished by the
half: for that strangers pay double customs; Nor will the waste of
Commodities be greater then formerly, whosoever the Importers be.

Secondly, Suppose that from London there be 40. 50. or 100. Ships more set
forth to fetch Commodities; yet it must be granted, that there will be 500.
Ships less employed from the other parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
which were used to fetch all manners of Wares from Holland.

For all the Sea Towns in England carry one or other Commodity constantly for
Holland, Zealand, and other parts beyond the Sea, yea diverse Towns, as York,
Hull, and all the Countries, Yarmouth, Norwitch, and all that Country; and so
likewise of Colchester, Sandwich, and other has the chief Sale, and vent for
their Commodities, and they go over not half freighted, yet commonly all of
them return full of all manner of Commodities from thence: In stead whereof
they must all return for the most part empty, because most of what they bring
from thence, are Commodities of other Countries growths, whereby Trading will
cease, Merchants will be constrained to stay for returns till their
Commodities be sold, and their moneys received, for to make them over by
exchange unto London, and return thither with their empty Ships: So likewise
will they be constrained to return their moneys thither in such Commodities as
they want, at much dearer Rates (even for their ready money) then they could
have had them for in Holland upon time, and would have made two or three
returns from Holland, before they can make one in this way.

Besides that some wares are cheaper in Holland, then at the place where they
grow, and where they are made. Moreover it will prove a great loss to all the
Towns in England, that they may not take this opportunity, but must he forced
to go further to buy Hemp; To Danzick for Corn, to Venice and Zant for
Currens, run great hazards, especially in these times, (when as the Seas are
beset with numbers of men of War) and loofe many months time to buy their
wares dearer.

Besides that all these Towns commonly save half of all their exchanges by
the return of those Commodities, and many get the double of their exchanges by
return of them.

To all which, the experient in the Traffic do add this for a maine Argument,
of the undoing of the Trade of most of the Towns, in England. viz. In that all
other Towns except London, can vent but a little Hemp, a little Iron, a
little Spice, and so of a hundred things more, and therefore its argued thus.

That their Ships must needs lie still, because those small Towns cannot vent
a Ships loading of each, or of two or three Commodities; nor have they money
enough to have a stock lie in Holland, in Wares to be sold; and another stock
to be sent to another place, to fetch home Commodities from so remote Country.

That many Hollanders will go and dwell in Eastland, France, and other places;
and so will bring home Hemp, Pitch, and Tar from Eastland; as also Wynes, and
Salt from France and Spain, the which as it cannot be hindered, will enrich
them, and impoverish England.

And as experience tells, that as by this means all, or many Forrayne
Commodities will be the dearer in England, it will thereupon ensue that the
English Nation will loose a great part of their Trade in foreign parts; and
that the Hollanders will incorporate the same to themselves, by being also to
sell cheaper then the English.

And this for the particular reasons, whereby the Argument is made the more
infallible, in that they have more Money then they can well bestow at three and
four per cent. use; and that as they have more Water then Land, nor any Parkes
for to squander away their moneys on wild Deeres; nor do they marry unto Lords
Sons, or Ladies Daughters, for that they say Sort by Sort: they therefore
employ all their moneys upon Traffic, which they pursue with the more
eagerness; all which considered, I would feign know by what means you intend
to put them out of their Trade, or hinder them to buy and sell Commodities, at
better Rates then the English can buy them, in those parts where they grow?


Capt. I do perceive by thy discourse, that thou have mainly studied this Case.


Merch. I say nothing but what experience prompts me unto, whereby it may also
be made good, how that the sole means, whereby the English Traffic may be
increased, is to pitch upon such beneficiciall establishments, as are mentioned
in the first part of the Sea-Cabbin Dialogue: for that by them moneys will be
reduced to a lower value, and for the want whereof, the English will never be
able to buy and sell at such easy Rates as the Hollanders do.


Capt. Me thinks thou speak of particulars, which are mentioned in the
first part of the Sea-Cabbin Dialogue; so likewise did I hear of other
relations, concerning those advantages which wise Statists have ever found in
the imposing of small Taxes on the importation and exportation of Merchandises:
when as the Merchants do not so much as think on the defrauding of the
customs; nor on the deceiving of each other, by their sundry falsifications of
Wares.


Merch. Hereon I must needs tell you, how that the bare Animosity and
selfe-Interessedness of some persons, have oftentimes caused an interruption in
the good correspondency between Nations. As for instance, The breach between
Henry the seventh, and Charles Duke of Burgundy; with the Emperor Charles the
fifth, between Queen Elizabeth and Phillip the second; as also those with
Spain and France, in the late Kings time: when as at length, after the
several Nations and Parties had sufferd by the like interruptions, it was
found requisite to order things again at any Rate; and thus defective and
disadvantagious Treaties were patcht up.


Capt. But I pray you? what is that which is whispered among curious men,
touching several particulars which are contained (in a Remonstrance; and the
which has of late been proffered to the Parliament, wherein the Author says,
that in case there be not any reflection made on his proffers, he as then
remains a free man borne; and in this states regards a second Colomba.

The foregoing lines, of which conclusion makes mention of one Kelly in Queen
Elizabeth's days, who (to the knowledge of several persons of credit in those
days, especially old Mr. Challoner.) had the secret of producing of gold, and
for the which all the world sought unto him.

Now truly my self have been on some nooks and parts of the golden World,
where I heard that there are certain particular men, who Trade in Gold, and
bring it in lumps to the Spaniards, though they will not discover unto them how
they come by it, and its thought that they have some particular mystery
therein; nay even an Art of Production.

And if I be not deceived, I was also told hereof, in the same leaf of the
said Remonstrance, it is said that the Proponants secrets are of another guess
extent and value then those, whereon Sir Water Rawley and Captain Cavendish,
had fixed their designs.

So likewise heard I another Captain say, that to his knowledge they were of
another guess nature then Sir William Wallers late design.

Now in case this be so, why should we not look after it? for if we should
not fall foul with the Hollanders, or with any other Nations (as the French
who are already together by the Ears) why should we as then be so neglectful
of our own good, as to suffer any other Nation to bereave us of such an
advantage, and take it away even before our Noses? Besides are there not many
Cavaleers abroad, who are able to scrape such a stock together, as may well
serve for so ordinary an equipage, toward the effecting of the same; and
whereof the Proponant speaks.


Merch. Truly as for my part, I conceive that some ill informed person may
think, that a Reply approving of what you say, might savor of an Act, to take
off the edge of your first fury against the Hollanders. But as for my self, I
do speak sincerely, and really as I mean, and as I believe; and therefore I
answer you thus in general terms.

That the safest Maxims which this state may put in practice, are to procure
unto the English Nation all the possible advantages that may be, especially
toward the attaining unto all Christians, glorious and profitable goods: And
whereas many of us do conceive that the Parliament reflects on providence; so
do many of us believe, that the Officers of their Armies, especially their
General the Lord Cromwell, intend the same; not that he reflects on that which
Almanack-makers and other such like Pamphet-writers set forth; How that the
Pope shall be pulled out of his Seat by him, by reason of a Lion which he bears
in his Arms: But that the true Lion of Judah is he, who shall pull all those
out of their Seats, who do possess them on false grounds. Now, in case heaven
has Decreed that this shall be effected in these days; and by a secondary
means, viz. The Parliament of Englands happy Genius, although there were no
such thing in his Arms as a Lion; It might questionless be encompassed without
the influence of the Stars, and allusions of Almanack-makers: For that the Lord
has a regard unto the intentions of men: Cains sacrifice was one as well as
Abels, although not accepted of; and its moreover said, My son, give me thy
heart, etc. Now for as much as concerns the other particular, which you hinted
at; Truly this is my opinion thereon, That it would be a far wiser part to
mind such like Christian, glorious, and beneficial atcheivements as you speak
off; waving the enraged humor of shedding of blood, and setting of the very
Seas on fire; whereby we should but give the Devil an advantage over us, and
would he not thereby have handsomely compassed his own ends?


Capt. Thou say very well, and I do also remember that my friend, who
acquainted me, with the Contents of the aforesaid Remonstrance unto the
Parliament; told me, how that the great Favorite, the late Duke of Buckingham,
had fixed his mind on that secret design; when as he intended his second
Voyage toward Rotchel; to which intent, he had (by a Treaty with the late King
of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus) put himself under the said Kings protection.


Mer. Why, truly as now you do awaken my memory thereon; for that I call to
mind certain overtures, which were once made by one Master Fourbisher, unto
the said King.


Capt. Which mean you? Those which were invented by a Scot, one Sir. Thomas
Dishington (who by a Wit of this Nation was usually termed, a moldy Turd) the
same who when he was in France, under the pretense of being a Scotch
Intelligencer, (though he could scarce Marshal up ten words of sense together)
served the French as a spy.


Mer. The same, the same, it is he himself.


Cap. I marry, that Dreamer vented a world of Chymera's, concerning one
Seignior Pedro, who had been his fellow prisoner in the Bastile at Paris; and
who as Sr. Thomas pretends) had left his wife and children in a place where
gold did grow, as rise as grass; and where (as the supposer said) the sun
had solidated a vein of massiff gold as thick as a man's thigh; which (like a
Bracelet about a Ladies neck) did surround a hill in Cicily, near unto the
Town of Palerma.


Mer. Why, this is a mere Chymera indeed; this was a mere deviding, la pela de
l'orsso, the skin of a Bear, yet untaken: but suppose such a thing were; what a
number of Pick-axes and Mattoks would there not be requisite to dig up that
golden branch? After which, I pray you, how should it be gotten thence? unless
a man could by some mystical conjuration, or by the strength of his faith,
remove that same Mountain: However had Gustavus had as much faith as a grain
of Mustard Seed, he would have removed the said Dishington from England, and
caused him to be hanged at Stock-holm, after the many favors he had conferred
on him, whereof the late Duke Hamilton, and several other eminent persons of
the English Nation being witnesses, did admire; but at length the said King
found himself to be cheated by the said Sir Tho. who had no less then fifteen
thousand Dollers given him by the said King, for the discovery of his pretended
secret, as Mr. Ailsberry the Minister of the English Church at Hamborough full
well knows.


Freez. And must I all this while keep my peace? wrapped up in a Coat, at which
you have so much carpt; O yea wise men of Gotam! could not you all this while
procure unto your selves the discovery of that secret, which a Spanish second,
Anthonio Peers manifested to the Duke of Buckingham, that white faced man, whom
the Spaniards conceived to be the person with gray Eyes; and of whom the
Indians (that can make Gold by their secret way of production) believe a
prophecy, viz. How that there shall come amongst them a Nation with Flaxen
hair, white faces, and gray Eyes, who shall enjoy Kellies secret: at which
time the leaves of the Trees in that Land shall be as Gold? And these are the
words in that Remonstrance which you speak of. Sir Captain, Moreover, I can
tell you, now that the Spaniard, who revealed the said secret unto the Duke of
Buckingham, was for his pains poisoned by the King of Spaines black Fovourite.

And to the end that ye may hear, see, and know, I can speak of other guess
things, besides green Cheese, and Freeze-landers Mares; know you also, sir
Captain, that it is but too manifest, that in former ages there were Seekers,
as well as in this; but which of the two were the wisest Seekers? there is the
question.

So likewise are there sundry propounders, some will go about to Cozen, and
others that mean well; let me tell you, that if so be Sir Water Rawley,
Cavendish, and Sir William Waller, had not been interrupted, they might have
found; But as for such a Seeker as Disshington was, he might have sought to all
eternity, and as then be as far to seek as ever, for he that holds not Lands in
Capite; and he (as the Italian says) that has there Camera Locante, will be
far to seek, although he should have Parret-like, learned a speech to
fore-stall the glorious advantages of making toward such maine ones, for to
make that sure, and for to transporr Colonyes thither; to which purpose fine
things are invented to amuse people withal, especially such as will be
Cozened, according unto the saying, volenti non fit injuria; for that such
things are easily swallowed, if so be they are finely gilded.

Disshington he aimed at a design to entrap some great persons, on a pretense
to transport a Colonie; but the question is; whether he had so much honesty
and understanding, as was requisite for such an undertaking; though it is true,
he had lighted on a Rhetoric, which better wits then himself had vented. viz.
That to move men toward the planting of a Colonie, and to beget in them a
disposition to abandon their natural Soil, to inhabit another: They must be
entertained with the hopes of conquesting some great matter, and the which must
be hard to come by, for that else it would not seem to be a worthy undertaking
for them.

As for instance, The conquesting of the golden Fleece, the obtaining of a Land
promised unto the Israelites, and the like; to obtain Victories against the
common Enemy; unto which if you add the pulling of that dayld beast,
Antichrist out of his Romish seat, it will not be amiss; for that such things
take with the vulgar: as also the enlarging of a Nations bounds on other
Sovereigns and Nations: All which propositions, as they must be pleasing, so
must they be feasiable, for to keep the peoples minds in a longing
expectation, and in a constant resolution,


Capt. How now man? art thou a sleep Freeze-lander, say thou? art thou not
rather some Joseph Scaliger, translated into the lyning of a Coat? art thou not
some Franecker or Leawarden professor? For as now thy language, and discourses
plainly discover, that thy former terms and comparisons were but mere
disguises, and that those gooddy driggle draggle tails with her Gossips, were
but feined persons: have I found you out I faith? I know now where thy Bashs
lie (as the scofts say) why even to make us speak our minds, and thereon to
take thy Raise: are you there with your Bears sir? why now we shall have you
open up to us, the Greek and Latin stories, and expound unto us the two ways
whereby men must be ruled; how Armies are to be managed, and how an Army is to
be embatalled; how they are to be kept on foot, and how by them a man may
attain unto his several ends.

Moreover, I do perceive that according unto the story of the Wine, thou have
studied how to possess the hearts of men, how to master their Forces, and how
to daunt their courages: ha, ha, good Mr. Doctor Freeze, I have discovered thee
I trow.

Thou may happily have made that inscription which a Venetian Ambassador had
placed over his Coat of Arms. viz. Populi, and Regum, nosse ingenium: for that
I perceive its thy Maxim, to endeavor to dive into the bottom of each ones
particular interests: There are indeed but two ways to Govern men by, either
by Force or Love. The second whereof cannot well be practiced, without some
dissimulation, if not deceit; and this in effect has a reference to the two
former sayings, the which I have been moved to utter, on thy sudden discovering
of thy self: my now Latin Freeze, whose Master of Art-like expressions, infer
how that the practical part of a true States-Mans universal principal, is to
offer unto all those who are to be gained, a present and safe preservation of
their particular interests.

The Hollanders Commonwealth, together with several others, have shaken the
Monarchical Yoaks from their Necks, have made themselves masters of Armies, of
Treasures, as well as of the means and lives of men; nay of particular men, as
also of all the state presenting privileges to their inhabitants, they
reformed the Religion; yet with a kind of Toleration even to the Romanists at
first. They conferred glory on the Soldiery, and received the Nobility into
eminent places.


Freeze. I Marry, but he that desires to vanquish by love and fair means,
must avoid the giving cause of suspicion, least they might apprehend, that he
intends to mix his particular ends with their interests: And therefore let him
ever propound that by a third party, which he desires to compass: let him
endeavor to render every one capable of it in particular, that to all
whatsoever he says and does, may tend to that his wished end.

Let him in all his proceedings, show his love unto all men, integrity in all
his Negotiations, mildness in the beginning, courage in the progress, and at
last, his strength in the prevailing; as for example the wine does which we
before spoke of: for that at first it suffers it self to be mastered in diverse
respects, until at last it being gotten into the stomachs of Men, it thence
ascends up unto the head, and so by its strength over-masters the Man its
master.


Capt. Ha, ha, my Freeze, I thought I had found you out.


Freez. The greatest secret amongst Politicians, has ever been to embrace and
establish a Religion, to maintain Justice, and equally to administer the same;
But, and if they had done no more, they had done just nothing: for that you
must know, Religion has two parts; the first is a profound knowledge, the
second is an obedience in the observing of Commands, which last is generally
received by all men. viz By those of the Reformed Religion, the Calvinists,
Lutheranes, Anabaptists, Brownists, Papists, Jews, Turks, and all of them do
generally agree on the point of obeisance and obedience in relation to those
things which are commanded, whether they be natural, moral, or divine: yet
however the first part is dangerous, consisting in evasions, controversies, and
cavils, which are the mere offspring of all disputations, contentions,
Schisms, and divisions.

The people must not be made to learned, but must be kept at work by
Handy-crafts, and liberal Arts, though but soberly fed with knowledge.

Wherefore many have blamed Agrippa de vanitate scientiarum.

Was it not a maine madness in those who thwarted the erecting of an Academy
for all Arts and Sciences: which would not at all have moved spirits to such an
insolent rebellious humor, as your insolent double Night-Capt snivelling nosed
would be States Preachers, have lately done; and whom the Hollanders do
handsomely pay home with a banishing bill of Dismission, whereas they presume
to tell their Rulers, things must be done thus and thus; and you shall do
whatsoever we brawle and roar in the Ears of gooddy Driggle Draggle tail,
Wabbetie Clonters, and Jannetie Stronts, together with such other Turf wives,
and Butter-whores, who they set on to break their Rulers brains.


Capt. Go to my Freeze-lander? I see I have not judged amiss of thee, and I do
heartily thank thee for thy having thus discovered thy self.


Merch. O what a hap is this! 'twas a good wind indeed that put us by our first
conceptions; who would have thought that we should have pitched upon this
discourse?


Capt. Why the very truth is, that when I heard thee utter all those Arguments
on the point of a free importance (it being a business which I have not at all
dived into) I thought it not fit to make any Reply thereunto; besides that the
Parliament is wise, and knows best whether or no it stands with their interest
to leave a free Commerce or no? For that they (heing the quintessence of the
Lands wit) will doubtless take such a resolution thereon, as shall seem most
consonant with this Commonwealths concernment. Nor was there ever any great
General justly blamed for the raising of a Siege, when he could employ his Army
better in another undertaking: and in this sense it was that I reflected on a
better occupation then bloodshedding; and therefore I rather choose to call
unto mind that particular which is spoken of in the Remonstrance lately given
to the Parliament, viz. The profers of great Secrets, and other advantages; For
that truly I have heard much of a thing which has not as yet been revealed.


Merch. Truly if the case be so, why as then Captain it will greatly import
thee to look after those things, both for thine own and the publicks good.


Cap. And why should it not as much concern your self I pray?


Merch. Alas! we Merchants (at least many of us) are like resty Horses, that
neither can, nor will be beaten out of their old Track, according unto our
several vocations; if you tell me of a Balthazar de Moucheron, or a Curtin,
and such like; why they I grant have been fit for such undertakings: but
however, by the by, it seems somewhat strange unto me, that the State looks not
after such things: And on the other side also, it seems as strange to me, that
since the Proponant is a stranger, he has not made his proposals thereon to
the East and West Indie Companies in Holland; and wherefore should a thing,
which may be so great a consequence, as you infer by your hinting on Kelly, in
Queen Elizabeth's days, perish with him? And we talk so much of Loreto,
Civita Vechia, or any other Landing Port, to seek for I know not what; (though
the design were never so good) and neglect to make our selves sure of a
Treasure; after which the men of all ages have sought; and whereby all the
Worlds atcheivements are to be compast and strengthened.

Moreover, why do we hear men talk of a particular, which is contained in the
aforesaid Remonstrance, touching seven millions of pounds due unto this Nation;
and why is there no reflection made thereon, whilst that we let our minds rove
afar off in seeking after things so remote; and in the mean while, none of us
seems so much to mind these concernments at hand, as to say, let us have those
seven millions of pounds, for that they may serve to take off the Assessments
and other charges, and so disburden the People; the rather, for that the
Gentlemen who knows the means to recover the said seven Millions of pounds,
does incessantly crave leave to be thereunto authorized, only in four Words.
viz. Go and get them.


Cap. Truly it is a strange fate which does infatuate the brains of men that
will not hearken to such fair proffers.


Freeze. Good Captain, I must conclude, with that which has proved to be true
in all ages: The weakness of some men is such, as that it does often move them
to neglect such things as are proffered unto them; and to seek after those
which fly them.

And this is one of the maine causes why we in all states find a world of men,
who do so over-practise the saying. viz. To meddle with nothing is best: as
that at length, they prove to be good for nothing, and so farewell.


Cap. I pray you my worthy Freeze, do not cut off so short, let us enjoy thee
somewhat longer, and let us enlarge our conference, since we met for the best.


Freez. What would you have us to discourse of besides?


Capt. Marry, I would fain hear thy opinion on our present case; and what
course (to thy thinking) there ought to be taken concerning the Law?


Freez. Why have you not that, by vox populi?


Capt. What say you of vox populi? that is vox diaboli.


Freez. So also is it vox Dei, if so be the people were confident that they are
worthy of the saying, contained in the 23. Chap. of Deuteronomy. ver. 14. For the Lord
thy God, walks in the middst of the Camp to deliver thee, and to give thine
Enemies before thee: therefore thine Host shall be holy, that he see no filthy
thing in thee, and turn away from thee.


Capt. So likewise do I remember, that in the 17. ver. it is thus said; There
shall be no whore of the Daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a Whore
Keeper of the Sons of Israel: and if the people be free from that sin; then
indeed may their voices be, Vox Dei.


Freez. Have not your Rulers made a decree against this vermin? and I doubt
not, but that at their first modelling of the Law, they will have a care to
provide Emphaticall Articles against the same. Moreover let me tell you, that
your crooked Law makes people run into the crooked paths of sin; and that
it will never be rectified, unless it be squared and angled by the Law of God.
Besides unless your Rulers fix on the modelling of a Law, and not on the
single reforming thereof, observing Gods Commandment unto Moses, to put off his
shoes, which I conceive to be, by putting away sin, the cause of the old
Law, and to walk upon a holy ground, on such principles as are answerable to
the dictates of that Godly Book, and in particular the Gospel: Nay, as a Divine
says very well, that Honest Book, in default whereof this your pretended
settling of the Law will be but lost labor, and as a mere mockshow, or as the
lamentations of a Thief under the Gallows, who endeavors to protract the time,
until some brybed reprieve be brought: and therefore I would have your Law
served as a Judge did a Thief in Queen Elizabeth's days, who receiving a
reprieve for a Malefactor, caused the reprieve to be put betwixt the Thieves
neck and the halter, and then commanded the Executioner to go through with his
part: So would I have the Law to be gone through withal by a setting of such
Laws as are answerable to the will of God, and as may befit the very essence,
resemblance, and being of a Commonwealth: for that otherwise (as I told you
before) it will be but lost labor, and much like the discourses of (a company
of impertinent Logitians) who talking of a Chaos, do persuade themselves, that
God, out of that confused thing (though made by himself as they say, and
whereby they consequently argue him to be the Author of confusion) made the
world by degrees, determining thence, that things were afterward put in order:
according to which sense of putting things in order gradatim, your Rulers,
cannot (to my thinking) pitch upon a better expedient, then to settle an order
which may be conformable unto his orderly disposal, who is the Author of all
orderly perfection, and who has given the several Celestial Orbs their
particular functions. Moreover even as when this grand Artist had atcheived all
his works, he as then created that image of his, for whose sake all those
Celestial bodies were ordained to perform their several functions: He as
then made Man and Femall, the which he did doubtless with an intent, to the
end that the Femall should be of use to the man; and therefore (in my mind) it
may justly be expected, that even this Femall Creature ought to be of a publik
use in a well settled Government, and to bear a fit part in the Commonwealths
concernments; that excepted, which is not allowed of in Israel; not for the
whore keeping Sons of Israel.


Capt. Marry, I like very well of your Proposition, in case they be kept out of
the Pulpits, and out of the seats of Judicature; remember, I pray you, your
Alice Pierce, and that some of them do but too much exercise the patience of
men?


Freeze. Truly, there have been Prophetesses amongst them; and our Lord Jesus
Christ himself preferred some Women even before his Apostles; for that unto a
woman he manifested the truth of that great good which he had wrought for all
mankind: Women, we see, would not leave him; they held him fast by his feet;
they ceased not to kiss and wash them with their tears; they followed him even
unto his death: Nor would they depart from the grave, before they had found
him; Women have instructed and admonished men; and Women may be thought fit to
admonish one another at select times in pious meetings.


Capt. I do confess, that it would be more decent, that they should reveal
their faults to each others, then that they should, as the Papists, fill the
ears of Priests with those infirmities, who do alas, steal upon them, through
the charms and crafty insinuations of wicked men: when as by their imparting of
those slips unto Priests, it does for the most part happen, that as then, the
saying is fulfilled; They confess to the Devil, who makes the sinner worse
then she was before.


Freeze. Wise and Pious Widows, as also such women as have left off
childe-bearing, and childe-breeding, and who have such under them as are
capable to look unto their housekeeping, might be employed in several
directions and functions proper to their Sex; as the Hollanders have several
Establishments, whereof women are the directours, as women had in former ages
the mannaging of great undertakings?


Capt. Let not them order dances?


Freeze. Such dances as Miriam, Aaron's sister, with all the women and maidens
of Israel did dance, could not be amiss; and which I would have both men and
women to practice: but let us break off now, I pray you; for that after
dancing, its fit to betake ones self to rest.


Capt. Stay yet a while, I pray you; for that I have something more to move
concerning women, and the settling of the Law.


Freeze. You may find much of the first, in Charles Gerbier's Elogium Heroinum,
and in Mr. Hugh Peter's, his Good work for a good Magistrate; by the latter of
which, most cases concerning Religion, Mercy, and Justice, may be regulated in
the Commonwealth of England. In the first, (as I say) you will find several
observations note-worthy, touching the useful and laudable qualities in Women.
In the second, you will meet with all those particulars, which are to be minded
by all those, who intend to attain unto a great deal of quiet by a short cut.
In the first, you will meet with many notable examples of the learning and
wisdom of women; of their constancy and courage; of their chaistity; of their
abilities to govern: he moreover tells you, how that Ceres Queen of Sicily was
the first that taught people to live under laws; that Valasca Queen of the
Bohemians, governed her Estates without the Council or advise of any men; he
tells you also of the Piety, and Religiousnesse of women; on the proofs that
Mary Magdalen and Martha her sister, did preach the Gospel of Christ amongst
the Illirians, and converted all its inhabitans, how that the Sara's were
devout, the Maryes humble, and pacified persons: The Elizabeth's Religious,
observing all the Commandments of God blameless; the Priscillas heavenly, and
rich in discourse; the Bathesbis, Loyses, and Eunices, careful in the
instructing of their Children in the knowledge of God; and finally, how that
Catharina, Alexandria, being under the Tyranny of Maxcentius, was illuminated
with divine knowledge from above, and constantly maintained the faith of the
Gospel.

Secondly, you shall (in Mr. Hugh Peter's his short cut to a great quiet) find
that work for a good Magistrate, which may stand with Religion, Mercy, and
Justice: without which there can be no good settlement, nor any Moddel framed,
whereby all men may be found to observe Peace; the main securing whereof must
be settled by the framing of a good Conscience: whereby the grand enemy of
order, will be kept out and debarred.


Capt. Why truly I must needs confess that I have found so many truths,
recorded of worthy women in the said Elogium Heroinum, as that I greatly
marvel how so many injurious Pamplets, have been published against them in
England.

Secondly, I have found so many observable things, in the good work for a
Magistrate, as that I cannot persuade my self, but that if those particulars
which are therein mentioned, were settled here in England, this Nation might be
justly termed a happy one indeed: in the which short cut, if you observe it,
there is also a specification, how a good number of Women may be very well
employed.

Finally, Its my conceit, that in case that honest Book, the Bible, be laid
before those who shall be ordained to prescribe Rules and Laws, as then we
shall no more stand in need of those Catterpillers, called Attorneys and
Solicitors; for that as then all men may be confident, of a short cut to a
great quiet: as also that the Cheat will thereby be confounded to some purpose.


Freez. I must needs tell you that ere long, you may see somewhat in Print on
that subject: in the interim I shall believe that the condition of the English
Nation, will be the more answerable unto the essence and constitution of a
Commonwealth; whereas there shall be a Law, whereby the old Norman Law shall
be extinguished: that every man shall have liberty to debate his own case,
before such honest men as shall hear them gratis


Capt. Since you mention the word Gratis, I must ask you in the first place,
whether you would not have three kind of men to act gratis? viz. Ministers,
Judges, and Physicians.


Freez. Yes indeed, that I would; that is to say, I would have the State to
maintain the Ministers, the Judges, and the Physicians.


Capt. But what say you to the Law it self? unto Clyents, and their manner of
addresses?


Freez. Why marry, I would have the old Law first of all to be so deeply
interred, as that it should never rise again, except at doomsday, when as the
corrupt Lawers themselves shall be brought to their Trial, without any Habeas
Corpus, or reprieve at all.

Secondly, I would have this Commonwealths Judges to be such, as that the
Scripture phrase might be applied unto them, viz. For that now, Saints shall
judge the world. 1 Cor. chapter 6. v. 2. To the end that men might not hear those
reproaches which are mentioned in the fifth verse. of the same Chap. viz. I
speak it to your shame: is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you? no
not one that shall be able to jugde between his brethren?

That so likewise the question in 1 Cor. chapter 6. v. 1. may not be asked, viz.
Do any of you, having a matter against aonther, go to Law, before the unjust,
and not before the Saints?


Cap. But I pray you? where shall there be such found amongst Mortals, who
inhabit flesh and Clay?


Freez. That's a question indeed, though it may be soon resolved; For that
whenever the Rulers shall fix on such a resolution, they may easily find out
such as will make good H. P. his saying, in his short Cut to great ease; and by
the prosecuting of this their design, they may acquire unto their Government,
the true form of a Commonwealth.

For that at the very entrance of their framing a Platform to decide all
controversies, the which may arise between man and man in temporal matters, as
well as in criminal; as also on the point of Meum, and Tuum; they may pitch on
the means to remove all Causes whence the grand controversies amongst the most
eminent's Families do arise: mark me well, and be not startled at it; I say the
causes which proceed, from an elder Lording brothers domineering over his
younger brother, for naught forsooth, save that he has a Title above him, that
he has an Estate, and that he therefore can spend and domineer like a little
Tyrant over his slaves.

1. To prevent all which Fathers give to thy eldest Son a double portion, if
you please but divide the rest of the Estate equally amongst your Children, as
then they will be all Free Commonwealths men, and not Bondmen, as then a
second, third, fourth; nay youngest brother more or less, shall be able to do
the States good service, to live like a free man borne, and not be reduced unto
desperate courses.

2. Moreover let all Fathers, appoint this double proportion to their eldest
Sons conditionally; That is to s^y, in case he proves to be a virtuous man,
in default whereof, let the younger brother have that double proportion, if he
be more deserving then the elder: whereby men will be brought to study
godliness and goodness.

3. The second main thing, which (in my conceit) is to be pitched upon, is the
settling of a general Record office, the practical part whereof will for ever
cut off a world of contentions, dis-inable cheats from going on in their
destructive courses, and settle all men in their proprieties.

In the third place, let your Rulers remove all Arrests whatsoever, or Debts,
and consequently all imprisonments for the same.

4. Let them also abrogate the putting of men to death for Theft; Does not the
Text say, And if any man sue thee at Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have
thy Cloak also, Mat. 5. v. 40.

5. Why should we urge the saying, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,
for that it would seem to be a piece of injustice, to put out the eye of a man,
who has but one, for having put out another, who had two: and so likewise
with the Teeth, in which regard to my thinking, the scripture old Law might be
dispensed withal.

6. Let no Marriages be lawful, without the Parents consent.

And this is all which you shall have from me for the present, least the five
and three man should step in again; and that the merry grig should have cause
to urge his former saying, and to laugh at us by his inferring. That to meddle
with nothing is best.


FINIS.

