Britains Triumph, FOR HER Imparallel'd Deliverance, And her Joyful
Celebrating the PROCLAMATION Of her most Gracious, Incomparable KING CHARLES
THE SECOND, etc.

Defender of the FAITH.

C. R.



Being a happy Forerunner of the Day of his Nativity, and as is hoped of his
Coronation.

London, Printed for W. Palmer at the Palm-treee, near St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1660.

To the Worshipful and truly Honorable Alderman RICHARD BROWN, Major General
of the Famous City of London; AND Alderman JOHN ROBINSON, Colonel of the Green
Regiment: True paterns of Cordial Loyalty to their KING, Faithful Patriots of
their Country, and deserving Members of that Noble Metropolis, in which they
are Exemplary Citizens and Gallant Commanders, LONDON.
Heroic souls, to you belongs of right,
This, whatso'ere it is, I wish it might
Answer my wishes, and your due desert,
But as it is, accept I pray the heart
Of him, who most ambitious is to serve
You to his utmost power, who deserve
Immortal honor, for what you have done
In order to bring back the Heir to's Crown.
Your grateful Country does confess your praise,
London by your help now Triumphs in Bays,
Which formerly did droop, the way was led
By that Great George, who struck our Dragon dead,
He led the Van, you followed in the Rear,
Your Loyalty now shines like Crystal clear.
Accept (great Souls) these ruder lines, which I
Intend, to Celebrate your memory,
Such as they are, my good will may express
The Lady's fair, though in a homely dress.
Worthy and Worshipful Your faithful Honourer Though undeserving Servant G. S.

Britains Triumph.
1.
AWake my Muse, let thy dull spirits be raised,
Shake off thy former drowsinesse, from sleep
Rouse up thy heavy soul, let him be praised
Who from Destructions pit, out of the deep
Of troubles has these Nations three redeemed,
When to all mortal eyes they helpless seemed.
2.
Like to a Ship in storm, three Kingdoms lay
Upon Afflictions rageing Billows tossed:
The Pilot over board thrown, (O dismal day!)
The Rudder of our Government quite lost.
Our Sun of happiness had hid his head,
And darkness our Horizon overspread.
3.
The Birds of darkness every where appeared,
With frightfull shrieks which fluttered to and fro*
Goblins and Elves in every place were heard,
Hagges and Infernal Furies here below,
Had made their Mansion, and resolved to dwell,
Thus England seemed the Suburbs of Black Hell.
4.
After a long Night, lo our Sun appears,
Dispelling Mist and Fogges with his bright beams,
His heat and light, one warmth, the other chears*
Our frozen, drooping spirits, so that streams
Of Joy now wash away the tears of grief,
From him our woes all find their full relief.
5.
Charles! glorious Name! but glorious more by far!
Of it the Subject, our Dread Sovereign*
Son of Great Charles, who now a sparkling Star
In Heaven shines, his Son (long may he reign!)
Our Sun on Earth, let him excel in glory,
His famous Father, matchless in any story.
6.
Rest, Sacred, Royal Dust! sleeping in hope,
Thy Martyred Body Christ's appearing waits,
While thy thrice blessed Soul, with Eyes wide open,
Beholds his glory, thus those dismal Fates,
Which snatched thee from us, did but only lead
Thy spotless, Bridelike sp'rit to Christ her Head.
7.
And thou the Son of an unpattern'd Sire
Who giv'st us hopes that him thou will excel,
Long may thou live, thy Subjects chief desire,
In pride of whom England shall shortly swell,
And bid defiance to her proudest Foes,
Charles! thou alone her bleeding wounds could close.
8.
Skillful Physician! who with Sovereign Balm
Three Kingdoms almost wounded to the death,
Did know to cure, who so great a Calm
After so fierce a Tempest, with thy breath,
(Thy Princely breath) to this tossed Ship could bring,
Which owns no Pilot but her lawful King.
9.
In The Month of May, most pleasant of the Spring,
When Nature seems in her greatest pride,
Latona decked with Flowers, Birds which sing
Sweetly upon each bow in the Woods are spied,
Two days before its Exit, did appear
A Noonday Star in Englands Hemisphere.
10.
That day, O happy day! behold a Son
To Charles our King, (then happy King!) was born,
Three Nations joy and pride, what was not done,
His Princely pomp, (when Christened) to adorn?
He as his Fathers Heir, his Royal Name,
Inherits first, and best it him became.
11.
Charles! Son of Charles, thus enters Englands Stage,
Whose birth (his Savior like) a Star did show,
An Omen, that he first should feel the rage
Of Persecutors, and should glorious grow,
By suffering first, this was our Princes Fate,
Whom Hells Afflictions led to Heavens Gate.
12.
Ten years and scarce six Months this Royal Bud
Had grown upon the Sacred Princely Stock
When sad divisions, like a fearful flood,
Did threaten Majesty, against which Rock
So many swelling waves and billows beat,
That overturned at last the Royal Seat.
13.
His, and his Countries Father by the stream,
Carried with violence into the Deep,
This Infant Prince beholds, (poor soul) a Theme
Too sad to think on, thinking makes him weep,
And every object does augment his grief,
Pit^'d by some, yet finds of none relief.
14.
Thus lives our Sovereign Lord, whom sorrows School,
For twice ten years, had pious wisdom taught,
While Villainous Usurpers think to rule
His Kingdoms by an Iron Rod, which brought
The milder Scepter into due esteem.
When Saints in Title, Real Monsters seem.
15.
Then all men loath Usurped Tyranny,
Wish for their Kings Return in safety home,
Repent their long expressed cruelty
Toward so sweet a Prince, whom only some
(Out of a guilty fear) kept in Exile,
Oppressing all his Loyal Friends the while.
16.
The same Month which the joyful news did bring,
(Before its Exit) of this Princes birth,
Now enters with the Tidings of our King,
(Tidings most full of Joy, and real Mirth)
When thrice ten years over his head had past,
(Our King before) our King is owned at last.
17.
Ring out proud Bells, let these our Joys resound,
In every Steeple through this grateful Isle,
The Ecchoe's from all Countyes let rebound
Back to this Joyful City, and the while
Quite tired Phoebus, in the Ocean hides
His weary beams, let Bonfires be our Guides.
18.
Thus we the darkness of the Night will turn,
To artificial daylight, and each street,
For want of Fuel, shall their Sign-posts burn,
The painted Lamb and Wolf in flames shall greet
Each other, proud thus to express their Joy,
That Charles shall come, whom fiends sought to destroy.
19.
And now the day approaches, which did see
Our Charles (at one view) both a Man and Prince,
A Prince not greater by descent, then he,
Equals his birth by merit, who long since,
Compelled his Foes his Valor for to own,
And yet as merciful, as stout is known.
20.
Charles, that the World may know, how near he comes
Unto his Saviors pattern, thirty years
Passes more silently, Trumpets and Drums
Sometimes awake his Courage, and the fears
Of his aspiring Enemies, who still,
Seem for to prosper, and to have their will.
21.
But when thrice ten years of his Age are past,
Or thereabouts, behold our Royal King
Is owned publicly, and for a taste
Of England's love, and bounty, Bells do ring,
Bonsires shine, Moneys are freely lent,
And for a Present to our Charles are sent.
22.
With Expectation great the Eighth of May
Does add Encouragement to former hope,
This was to London a Triumphant day,
Those who in darkness seemed before to grope,
Now opened have their Eyes, and clearly see,
Englands Restorer can be none but he.
23.
Oh! he that saw the joy expressed that day,
The peoples concourse, and their lively shout,
Who so had heard, how every one did pray
For this Kings Health, could entertain no doubt,
But that as he is Heavens Darling known,
So him (as their chief good) his Subjects own.
24.
This was the Day wherein, (a turn most strange!)
Our Peerlesse Prince, Son of a matchless Sire,
From Pallace-yard, down to the Royal Change
Most solemnly, (by such who did aspire
Him to Proclaim and hear) proclaimed and heard,
Was, our true Sovereign, to all indear'd.
25.
Then might you hear the spritefull shouts, and cries
Long live our blessed King, Charles! pious Prince,
Whose name with acclamations, rent the skies,
And they their kind acceptance to evince,
Let fall at first of Joy some sprinkling tears,
But soon with his bright beams the Sun appears.
26.
Thus Heaven seems with Earth for to agree
In paying this just debt to both their friend,
The sky from Clouds and blustering winds was free,
The streets, (proud of this Office) did attend
On this Solemnity in cleanest dress,
The very houses Joy seemed to express.
27.
Each Shop stood early open, then soon was shut,
Boasting their riches first to grace their King,
On whom such dreadful reverence they put,
That day to work is judged a fordid thing.
Work they that list cries every Prentise Boy,
This day I Will only sing, Vive la Roy.
28.
The London Trained Bands, glad that they might show
Some signal token of their dear bought wit,
Early in Arms appear, at length they know
Rebellions sin, by punishment of it.
All are resolved now to make appear
Their Loyalty, unto their Sovereign dear.
29.
And that they may wash off the stain and blot,
Contracted in these Wars first infancy,
When against their King they took up Arms, whose lot
It was to die his Subjects infamy.
(Though Crowned himself with such a Crown of glory,
Not to be paralleled by any story.)
30.
Now with a different, but better zeal
One heart does seem in each man's breast to dwell,
All willing are a like the breach to heal,
In forwardness all strive for to excel.
So great appearance never England saw,
Charles magnetisme did so strongly draw.
31.
The streets too narrow to receive the throng,
Were of themselves most ready to make room,
Nature our King to gratify did long,
Dispenst with her dimensions law, for whom
A man would think five streets could scarce receive
Find place, yet for the show due space do leave.
32.
Gallant spectators every room do fill
Whose prospect forward lay unto the street,
Each window stored with Ladies, who with still
And silent Eloquence, their Sovereign greet;
Their graceful countenances, beauties choice,
Their cheerful smiles, made even the stones rejoice.
33.
The splendid Servants of these charms divine,
Each one his Mistress stood observant by,
Yet seem regardless of her beauties shrine,
A rarer object, had rapt every eye.
Love charms are idle toys, the only thing
Which all attend, is to proclaim their KING.
34.
The ruder sort of Mankind, that stood by,
Both old and young, servants, both maids and men,
Poor Tradesmen likewise, amongst themselves did vye,
Who should express affection most, for when,
The name of CHARLES did in their ears but sound,
Their Acclamations rent the very ground.
35.
The Soldiers in most splendid equipage
Attend, this Joyful day to Celebrate,
Each one a young man seemed, for elder age,
This news had changed to a younger date:
Among them were so many Volunteers,
Six Regiments, an Army great appears.
36.
You would have thought that every one in Arms,
Had there appeared a Lady for to win;
So called, so cheerful, as if all the charms
Of Love each breast possessed had, but sin
Each man (that day) accounted such a thought,
Thee, thee, O Charles! (none other) there they sought.
37.
Each Alderman who there was in Command,
Exchanged his Scarlet Robe for Warlike dress:
Robinson of the Green, his Trained band
To Fleetstreet led, to be in readiness
The Proclamation to attend, so soon
As it the City entered, which was done.
38.
Stout Brown who led the Horse, was ready there
In this great Solemn Scene to act his part,
And stately did perform it, every where
Throughout his Regiment, both voice and heart
Concur, thy Title just, great Charles! by word,
As to proclaim, so to defend by Sword.
39.
Oh! what a gallant sight, 'twas to behold,
The spritely flower of the London youth,
Outvying one another, in their bold
Defense of Charles their King, whom with one mouth
They all Proclaim their only Sovereign Lord,
And do defy his foes with one accord.
40.
Their Swords aloft over their heads they wave,
God bless King CHARLES the Second, is the cry:
Their glittering weapons, with their clothes most brave,
Do make a glorious object to the eye:
This adds a luster, but the cause of joy,
Is that we hear Proclaimed, Vive la roy.
41.
This cry the hearers so affects, that they,
Echo it back again with such a voice,
As shows a true affection, Happy day
Says every one, the very streets rejoice:
Guns, Drums and Trumpets, rend the skies with noise,
The earth quakes with shouting of the London Boys.
42.
The prancing Horses very richly dressed,
With riders who excelled in gallantry:
Their joy together with their state expressed,
All ravished seem with Charles his memory.
The very houses wondered at this chance,
For joy the pavements ready were to dance.
43.
The old drooping Churches, who had long been robbed
Of their most faithful Preachers, and for fear
Of never having them again, had sob'd,
And in sad grief had let drop many a tear:
Do now rejoice at this approaching show,
The Bells themselves to ring are ready too.
44.
Long live King CHARLES, the very stones would cry
Should men be silent, yea the very Drums,
Trumpets and Guns, to all the standers by,
(Sometimes, though seldom, as to pass it comes,
I know not by what fate) seemed to Proclaim,
(The best of Monarchs) great King Charles's name.
45.
Now comes the matchless show, and it to meet,
Londons Lord Major, and the Aldermen,
In all their Pomp, the welcome Heralds greet,
At Temple Bar, where that was done again
Which was done twice before, at Palace yard
And at Whitehall, Great Charles, our King declared.
46.
The attendants did withal solemnity
Perform their charge, and did such joy express
As might become the dread of Majesty,
Awful by right, yet lovely neretheless.
Now England once more on her basis stands,
She has her King, though yet he want his Lands.
47.
To grace this sight both Houses now combine,
On it who with their Speakers do attend;
While Rumpish Lenthal sat at home, and whin'd
That his longwinded speaking had such end.
Yet one who once abjured both King and Duke,
Repents (as some say) limping, Rumpish Luke.
48.
O that the Preaching Statesman had been there,
And heard Proclaimed his old Masters Son,
Whom basely he betrayed, to have seen his cheer,
How like a patient of Doctor Dun
He' da looked, would doubtless have encreast the joy,
To see him louting, like the Hangmans boy.
49.
Now Lord of Durhams Bishopric! what cheer?
No thoughts now how to cheat poor CoKinwood?
To bribe a Jury? hire men to swear?
To turn the City to a bath of blood?
To fire the houses? and the Goldsmiths plunder?
Poor Arthur's jawfaln, is not that a wonder?
50.
Lord! what a Lord is Monson now become?
The Lord knows what, but every one knows where
He is to go, there is an equal doom
On him, and Harry Martin, who is in fear,
To live in Goal, will be too mild a fate,
The hopes of both are gone with their Free State.
51.
Good Master Cecill, how like you this news?
Cry mercy Sir, I mean an Earl, I think,
But know not well, yet something on you shows
Like to a badge of honor, though it stink
So Rumpishly, that Iabhor the smell,
You have a neighbor by you, stinkes as well.
52.
Oh! fie my Lords you make me hold my nose,
Basely degenerated Rumpish Earls!
Vile self-degrading Peers! I'ad rather chose
To Have been transmuted into Country carles.
Self do, self have, no wise man need to grieve,
A self undoing fool, who would relieve?
53.
Poor Tom, by Nation English, by name Scot,
What shall I say thy chance for to condole?
Some say the have got (privily) God knows what,
And some men guess, at Hockley in the hole.
Had thou but seen the triumph of that day,
'T had made thee quickly Tom of Bedlam play.
54.
What pity it is that Bradshaw went to Hell
So long before his time, upon whose Hearse
So many tears from sobbing Needham fell,
Whose grief made him forget to weep in Verse,
But snivel'd out in Prose his Patrons praise,
'Twas well his own cursed hands cut short his days.
55.
So died accursed Pilate, as is told
By some who write of his deserved end;
Who ignorantly setenc't Christ, but bold
Villainous Bradshaw, like a hellish fiend,
Knew, yet condemned his most guiltless King,
No hands like to his own, his death to bring.
56.
Now Needham get the rod of Mercury
His Caducean Rod, and once more change
Thy Knavish shape, 'thas been thy policy
To turn with times, but this a turn too strange
For thee to turn with, therefore turn aside,
And take with thee the Hangman for thy Guide.
57.
But who appears here with the Curtain drawn?
What Milton! are you come to see the sight?
Oh Image-breaker! poor Knave! had he sawn
That which the fame of, made him cry outright.
He' ad taken counsel of Achitophell,
Swung himself weary, and so gone to Hell.
58.
This is a sure Divorce, and the best way,
Seek Sir no further, now the trick is found,
To part a sullen Knave from's Wife, that day,
He does repent his Choice, stabbed, hanged or drowned,
Will make all sure, and further good will bring,
The wretch will rail no more against his King.
59.
What news from the Ocean, I fain would know?
How does the Rota turn? my pretty Boys,
What hopes Republicans in such a show?
Certainly these are Babylonish toys.
Poor Overton! himself who long did gull
With hopes that Christ would come and land at Hull.
60.
Forsaken Fleetwood who of Fate complained,
Because she threw so great a stumbling block
In The way of his Rebellion, how disdained
He was, and how God seemed his Prayers to mock,
Ninive's Fast he fasted to no end,
God in his face threw dirt, nor would attend.
61.
Despairing Lambert! whither will thou run?
However let him escape he humbly begs:
Hard-hearted Ingoldby, could not be won
To let this Valiant Champion use his legs,
When his hands failed him? O man forlorn!
Who might have pushed, yet did not use his horn.
62.
Okey what will thou do? there is no more Rump,
The Devil lately claimed it as his Fee,
Took it, and picked it to the very stump,
Threw Barebones in his fire, there let him be,
He Is well content may but his windows escape,
Then he will Praysegod, and charter like an Ape.
63.
The rest who thought that Christ would come as King,
And reign among them, but mistook the time,
Which they were confident would be this Spring,
And were providing for to welcome him,
It is but fit they should both weep and bleed,
Who were so confident, yet lost their Creed.
64.
Foolish Fanatics, now at last repent,
What means this Idle Caterwawling Mew,
Who with his Brother Barebones idly went,
With a Petition of the Devils hew:
How escape his windows? Praysegods Boys did souse;
So, thrice, he seemed to keep a Brothell-house.
65.
Like fate, it is pity but that all should find,
Who have so to their Reason bid adieu,
As for to be of such a sottish mind
To leave Old Treasure for Toys that are new,
T'abjure our King, (whom God preserve in health)
To set up a Fanatic Commonwealth.
66.
But now since our Distractions cause is gone,
And all our breaches likely to be healed.
Oh! let this King be dear by whom it is done,
Let former grudges ever be concealed,
Let them no more revive, but buried lie,
And be forgot unto Eternity.
67.
Once more we see our Nobles in esteem,
Who all in state did solemnly attend,
To pay this long due debt, was it not a dream?
Or was it real? to me it real seemed,
And yet a dream appeared, a turn so strange!
Eight Months ago, who would dream such a Change?
68.
Long let thy Name live most hereick soul,
Who of this Change was the grand Instrument.
Let Moncks Name famous be, who did control
That Dragons Tail of Monstrous Government,
Made Lambert jump into a Muddy Ditch,
And made the Rump scratch where it did not itch.
69.
Will. Lenthall spoke so long till he was hearse,
Now he is speechless, Sexton tole the Bell,
If but a Quinsy trouble him, perforce
Let Ropewort cure him, 'twill make him well,
If Haslerig or Vane should chance to faint,
Hemp is a strengthner, fit for such a Saint.
70.
Lawson (it is like) may chance to learn more wit,
Taking Example from some rash men's harms,
Who were of his Fraternity, and split
Upon the Rock of rashness, soft fire warms,
Too great consumes, just so it is with Zeal,
Blind, fiery, makes breaches, mild, does heal.
71.
Let us at length be all united close
And firmly bound to this our matchless Prince,
Let Us grutch him nothing, let not baseness lose
Our choycest good on Earth his love, but since
None but his Art our grief knew to allay,
It Is most just we should for the medicine pay.
72.
Live long Most blessed Sovereign, and let
Thy Birthday (which is coming) see thee Crowned,
God grant this Sun of ours may not set,
Till Olive Branches stand thy Table round.
Thus, when to Nestors years, in peace thou have
Us Governed, and shall yield to Fate at last,
May thy more happy Son ascend thy Throne,
When thou shall change Earth's for a Glory's Crown.
Sic lusit Poemate fausto, ad Calendas May, 1660. G. S.

FINIS.

