ZIONS DELIVERANCE AND HER FRIENDS DVTY: OR The Grounds of Expecting, and
Means of Procuring Jerusalems Restoration.

IN A SERMON PREACHED AT A PVBLICKE FAST, Before the Honorable House of
COMMONS.

By WILLIAM SEDGVVICKE, Minister of FARNHAM in ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy, and Ralph Smith, at the three Golden Lions
in Corne-hill. 1642.

To the Honorable the House of COMMONS, now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THE day of Jacobs trouble yet continues: Yea, grows more gloomy and dark;
clouds of dangers increase, therefore your faith needs all the props, that
prayer or Preaching, Pulpit or Press can afford. If God by this Sermon d^d any
whit kindle your Zeal, I wish you had leisure to read it; it may add a mite
more to our treasury, Your faithfulness and constancy. In this Wilderness
your Souls should be fed every day with a portion of spiritual Manna, That
you may be strengthened with all might according to his glorious power; Colos.
1.11.
And God may be your arm every morning. What is good, Isa. 33.2.
let it dwell with you, and by it you in God: No place so fit for you in these
great affairs, and hard difficulties, as the secret of the most High. You have
been happy in conceiving just and good proposals, be strong and faithful in
maintaining and producing of them: and be not overborne: Christ dyed under the
sentence of a Judge that would have went right if the times had not been bad,
that knew how to propose, but not to prosecute justice; and so left but this to
posterity, He would have been just, but was not. That deserves not the name of
a single virtue, that will not endure multiplicity of trials. I know your
dangers are great, Psalm. 119.109.110.
and your condition as David's, My Soul is continually in my hand; they have
laid a snare for me; Yet erred not I from thy precepts. Your lives are in your
hands; and they are precious, A Diadem in the hand of God: But they are indeed
the least of those jewels that you are entrusted with. There is in your hands
Gods honor, the Kingdom of Christ, Churches, Nations, which you must defend
and maintain, if you would have God defend You. You are yet possessed of a
richer Jewel then life, innocence and integrity; Let nothing purchase it of
You, let no power wrest it from You: Nec Caesar, Job 27.5.
nec Populus. Resolve with Job, I will not leave mine innocence till I dye. You
are the only hopeful means of our deliverance under heaven, an instrument in
the hand of God, in the eye of faith, in the womb of Prayer, and in the
affections of Gods People: my only advise that I shall be bold to present unto
you, is, That You be Faithful to the death, and God will Crown your labors
with a happy success here, and You with a Crown of life eternally. Thus
advises, prays, and believes

he, that if he could be less himself, would be more Gods, the Churches, and
Your Servant, WILLIAM SEDGVVICKE.

A Sermon Preached at a Fast before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
ISAIAH 62.7. And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
THE Prophet in the two former Chapters, foretells the happiness, and
prosperity of the Church: chap. 60.1.2.
Glorious light: ver. 4, 5, 6.
Seas, floods, droves of Converts, and those not small, but great ones; ver.
3.5.
The force of the Gentiles, Kings shall come to her light: Holiness ver. 21.
universal, and glorious; chap. 61.10.
robes of righteousness, together with peace, victory over enemies, joy,
riches, as you may see at large in those two Chapters: So clear was his faith,
and so strong his desires after these mercies for Zion, that he resolves upon
the means of obtaining them, in the first verse of this Chapter: For Zions
sake I will not hold my peace, etc. Never cease Preaching, Praying, never rest
Until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness; and the salvation
thereof as a lamp that burns: The more he did force Zion, the more God let
him see what he intended to do for her. In the 2, 3, and 4. verses, his
expressions are higher; A Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
Diadem in the hand of thy God, Hephzibah, Beulah, etc. In the 6. verse the
Prophet produces the means to effect this great work, by way of a promise:
And to render it the more certain, he utters it in the person of God, I; and
in the preterperfect tense, I have; Set Watchmen, Princes, and Governors, as
well as Prophets and Teachers, it is interpreted of both; Upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, in authority and public place; Which shall never hold their peace;
consult, labor, pray, use all means; Night nor Day, constantly, in good and
bad times. And when this should be, the Prophet calls in the help of All that
make mention of the Lord, all that have any interest in God, or that make any
profession of his ways; that they should not keep silence, should join
hearts and hands, do what they could in their places; and Give him no rest,
till he establish, and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. I shall open the
words first.

Give him no rest, seek him constantly, importunately, endeavor it earnestly:
You may read, silence, or rest.

First, Isa. 64.12. Hab. 1.13.
Silence, Gods not answering our prayers, is in Scripture called silence, as
his answering and delivering is termed pleading, or speaking; Ier. 50.34. Ps.
74.23.
and it notes to us:

First, the easiness of delivering the Church by Gods mighty hand; he can as
easily help, as we can speak.

Secondly, the Justice of God in delivering his people; it is as pleading,
showing the right discovering the truth.

Thirdly, the natural and constant effect of Prayer; we speak to God by
Prayer, he answers by saving us: our language to him is Prayer, his language to
us, is Salvation.

2. But our translation reads it rest; Give him no rest: There is no passion
in God properly, neither rest nor motion; but the Scripture holds forth God to
us in these tropicall expressions for our understanding. When God does not
presently save his people, he is said to forget, verse. 6. Ps. 44.23.
and then his people are termed his remembrancers: sometimes he is said to
sleep, and then his people awaken him: Sometimes to be slow, or delay, and
then we must quicken him, make no tarrying: Ps. 40.17.
Sometimes God seems to lose his mercy, and then his people must find it for
him, Isa. 63.15.
Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, and the sounding of thy bowels? And here
he seems to rest till he be disquieted by our prayers; as if he were passive
to our prayers; as if he could not but help when we seek. The reason of this
expression is to show,

First, the necessity of prayer. God will give, But for all these things I will
be sought unto: God will come, but he will have his peoples prayers lead him
into the field, Dan. 10.12.
I came for thy Word.

Secondly, to stir us up to importunity and constancy, that although God
seem to deny, to be unwilling to help, yet we should follow him close, Give
him no rest.

Thirdly, to show the certain power and effect of prayer; it is as certain,
as if God could notwithstand its force: God says to Moses, Let me alone, Exodus
32.10.

Fourthly, to honor this ordinance of Prayer; when God would give us a mercy,
he gives it into the hand of prayer, and prayer shall seem to do that which
he intends.

Fifthly, it notes the infallibility of the Churches deliverance; as God cannot
always rest, so his Church shall not always suffer: God must arise, and then
his enemies must be scattered. Psalm. 68.1.

Till he establish, till he make firm. The Prophet supposes the work might
meet with dangers and oppositions; the foundations might be laid, and suffer
many shakings before it could be established, therefore he exhorts them to
constancy till the work were established.

And until Jerusalem.

Some interpret Jerusalem literally. And of those, some look upon the promise
fulfilled, viz. by Christ's coming in the flesh; Jerusalem was then a praise in
the earth, when our Savior, the Lord of all, Isa. 61.2.3.
was in it. And it cannot be denied but it was in some part fulfilled then: for
Christ applying part of this Prophecy to himself in his own times, says,
Luke 4.21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. And so in part
it was. But the chief and maine of this, and the rest is yet to come, as we
shall see anon. Others understand it according to the letter, but as to come,
and so expect the calling of the Jews to a happy estate in their own Country,
that they shall again inhabit Jerusalem: but this is subject to controversy,
and therefore we will wave it; and take it in a second sense, mystically,
Jerusalem for the Church; and this is most general, and warranted by
Scripture; in which it is very common to call the Church of the Gentiles
Jerusalem and Zion. Gal. 4. Heb. 12.


A praise in the earth.

The Church is so; First, when the deliverance of the Church is eminent and
notable, such as All the ends of the earth do see her salvation. Ps. 98.3.


Secondly, when the Church derives her light to the world, and when the Law,
Ps. 110.2.
the red of strength goes out of Zion.

Thirdly, and most fully, when through outward prosperity, and inward
spiritual purity, Jerusalem should be the beauty of the earth, or deserve the
praise of the earth; have an eminency of prosperity above all the world.

The general parts are two:

First, mercies to be obtained; And they are of two sorts: First, Establishing
mercies, till he establish. Secondly, Perfecting mercies, make Jerusalem the
praise of the earth.

Secondly, the means to obtain these mercies; Give him no rest.

We will not trouble you with any subdivision, but cast our discourse into
these three points.

First, the Church in the beginnings of her deliverance is subject to dangerous
shakings, till he establish.

Secondly, the Church of right is, and in time shall be a praise in the earth.

Thirdly, every one that makes mention of the Lord, must give him no rest, till
this be accomplished.

We shall handle the first briefly, and by way of Preface; the second, as the
maine point; and the third, as the application of the second.

The Church in the beginnings of her deliverance, is subject to dangerous
shakings. The Prophet lays forth the Church to us in such a condition in this
place: Here was something done, walls built, and watchmen upon them,
Governors, and Prophets, laboring their utmost, night and day, in
Counselling, Preaching, Praying, but all they did was in danger, enemies ready
to surprise them and their work, they could take no rest night nor day; what
they had was imperfect, and that little ready to be lost, so is it often with
the Church, it rises through many enemies, and mighty oppositions, and her
beginnings of deliverance, many times seem worse then her lowest sufferings.
Such was Isreal's deliverance from Egypt: it was long in, and difficult while
they were in Egypt: Nothing but stratagems, plots, taxations, to weaken and
ruin them: after Moses appeared, their burdens were increased; after leave to
depart, many changes and uncertainties: sometimes Pharaoh will let them go,
sometimes not. The last design upon them worst of all, Pharaoh raised Arms
against them. After that great deliverance through the redsea; they were forty
years in the Wilderness, beset with many wants; they want bread, and they
want water, and which was worst, they wanted faith, and patience; they murmr,
and are weary of their deliverance, Let us go back to Egypt: And of their
Deliverer, We know not what is become of this Moses: and weary of God himself,
Let us make us new gods. They were beset with enemies on all sides, Amalek,
Moab, Og, fighting enemies, plotting enemies, conjuring enemies; and sometimes
their sins made God their enemy, he fought against them with fiery serpents,
Plagues. Isreal's deliverance from Babylon, was as full of opposition. Syrus
makes Proclamation for the re-building the Temple, Ezra 1. the work is taken
in hand, an Altar set up, the foundations laid, offerings frequented, Workmen
prepared: some adversaries that offered their help being refused, seduce the
King by their evil counsel; and then the Reformation is counted Rebellion,
they are commanded to cease, and the work rests till the second of Darius.
Ezra 4. ult. In Nehemiahs time, what threatening, Plotting, and scoffing was
practiced by Sand-ballet, and Tobiah? some of the Nobles were wrought off from
the work, and proved treacherous. Nehemiah 6.11. and yet God carried on the
work through many difficulties. When Christ came with salvation into the
world, all Jerusalem was troubled, and He^od their King, Matthew. 2.3. a
desperate wickedness was presently practiced; Herod, that he might kill
Christ, commands that all the male children should be killed: and so their
condition was worse then before; they lost both their King and their children.
When he appeared in his Ministry, what new Doctrine was Preached? Never man
taught as he taught. What miracles were wrought? the whole City receive and
embrace their Savior, crying Hosanna, with such Joy and cheerfulness, as if
Heaven would presently come to the earth: but quickly after, the people seduced
by the Scribes and Pharisees, cries as bitterly, Crucify him, Crucify him: He
is betrayed, accused, condemned, crucified, and buried; all steps to our
deliverance.

The reasons of this point are briefly these.

First, God has no more then he gets by conquest, and that out of the hands of
many mighty, and malignant enemies, which never give up power to Christ, but
with much striving.

Secondly, God suffers difficulties to come in the way, to manifest his own
power, that he is able to carry on his work through the strongest opposition.

Thirdly, God does it to fit us for mercies: what we gain with difficulty we
highly prize, and what we easily obtain, we soon despise. As God fits us for
mercies, so the mercies for us; things of greatest excellency are longest under
the hammer and file; the choycest blessings must pass through the fire of
affliction.

Fourthly, God suffers it for the trial of his people. When the Church
prospers, she shall have many followers more then true friends: therefore God
sends a Sword to pierce, that the thoughts of many hearts may be discovered, as
Simeon prophecies, Luke 2.35. Therefore are the trials God brought upon Israel
in the Wilderness, called provings, I have proved thee at the waters of
Meriba, Psalm. 81.7. In great undertakings God does as he did by Gideons Army:
there was thirty thousand armed against Midian, Judges 7. God discharged as
many as were fearful; twenty two thousand upon second thoughts were wiser
then to venture themselves against such an enemy, and depart, and yet the
people are too many, God has an other discovering device in the 5. and 6.
verses, they that lay down or bowed themselves to drink, men of low spirits
given to satisfy their bellies; or as some conjecture, they that had used to
bow to Baal, and had not forgot their superstition, but bowed to drink, God
would have none of them; only three hundred active men, that lapt their water,
they were fit for the service. So God many times suffers the tree of the Church
to be shaken, that rotten fruit may drop off. To build Jerusalem is an
honorable service, only choice spirits shall have the dignity to have their
hands in it.

To apply this a little, find the Dragon asleep, and so steal away the
golden fleece of Reformation: neither could we imagine that so many cages of
unclean Birds, such beds of Snakes, such nests of Waspes, should suffer the
Refiners fire with patience and quietness; or that such heaps of idle and
superstitious Ministers, such swarms and hives of Papists, such dunghils of
profaneness, such mighty Nimrods and devouring oppressors, should suffer
themselves to be dispossessed without resistance and opposition. It is with us
as it was with the man's son, Mark. 9.26. When our Savior came to cast out
the dumb and deaf spirit, The Devil rent him sore, and laid him as dead,
till Jesus took him by the hand: So is it with us, there have been some
attempts to cast out the dumb and deaf spirit of this Kingdom; but now
Christ comes to do it indeed, he raves, and tears, and foames, and
blasphemes, shakes the very pillars of the Kingdom, crackes the foundation of
Government, and threatens confusion to the whole; but we hope by the help of
Christ's hands, the issue will be good. God seldom does great things without
great commotions. Paul and Silas were delivered, but there was an Earthquake,
Act. 16.26. When the two witnesses were raised, the two Testaments set up to
guide men's lives, and to govern the Church (as some;) or the faithful
Preachers of the Word restored to their office, and liberty (as others;) there
was an Earthquake, Revel. 11.13. When Antichrist falls, another Earthquake,
Revel. 16.18. and therefore though we grieve to see it, we could not expect our
Reformation without earthquakes, Church-quakes, and Kingdome-quakes.

Let it stir you up, as to expect, Nehemiahs eyes, Nehe. 6.13.
as a reproachful sin; we may encourage you, as Caesar did his fearful
shipmaster in a storm, Fear not, thou carryest Caesar and all his fortunes:
So say I to you, Fear not, you carry Christ, his Ordinances, his People, and
their liberties. David incourages himself upon the same ground, Psalm 46. I
will not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the Sea, though the waters thereof roar and be
troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. His comfort
was verse 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved. Therefore, if
storms arise, do not lessen your courage, but double your skill and
diligence. The Arc, though tossed a while, will at last find a mount Ararat to
rest upon. The Churches deliverance was never the further for Christ's
sufferings, but the nearer. When the Egyptian bondage grew heavy, Moses was
borne in that time, Act. 7.20. When God smote Jacob that he halted, he quickly
blessed him: the more heavy and violent the affliction be, the more sudden the
deliverance; therefore hold up your spirits, He that faints in the day of
adversity, his strength is but small. Amalek fights, Moses prays; the wicked
rage, the godly believe; the devils storm, but Christ holds the stern. Let
the malicious Designs of your enemies stir you up to steadfastness, and
unity. Take the Apostles counsel, Philip. 1.27, 28. Stand fast in one spirit,
with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel; and in nothing
terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition,
but to you of Salvation, and that of God. Would you give us an evident sign of
our approaching deliverance, it would be as an Oracle of God; your undaunted
steadfastness. Nothing can more comfort the good, and discomfort the evil,
then this; and the more you are opposed, the more unite: Give me leave to
present our requests unto you in the Apostles following words, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill our Joy, that ye
be like minded, having the same love. being of one accord, of one mind; Let
nothing be done through strife, or vainglory. Nothing can be more acceptable
to us, then your unanimity; nothing more grievous then the thoughts of
division. And while opposition has this effect, to confirm and unite you; it
will be, (as it has been) to your and our advantage. Nothing is more clear
and manifest, that it is with you, as it was with the Apostle, Philip. 1.12.
The things which happened unto me, have fallen out rather to the furtherance of
the Gospel: So what ever has been done against you, has been to the shame
of the practisers: So believe, they can plot nothing but their own mischief;
No weapon formed against Zion shall prosper. God hitherto has, and we hope
still will make that your portion that was a part of Joseph's blessing, Genesis
49.23, 24. The Archers have sorely grieved you, and shot at you, and hated you:
but your bow has yet abode in strength, and the arms of your hands were made
strong, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob: from thence is the shepherd,
the stone of Israel.

Our second point is, the Church of right is, and in time shall be a praise in
the earth. The Church is called Psalm. 48.1, 2. The City of God, the place of
Gods residence; the Mountain of Holiness, Beautiful for situation, the joy
of the whole Earth. And in Psalm. 50.2. She is termed the perfection of beauty;
a high expression, and intended to the Church under the Gospel, for in that
Psalm, God rejects Jewish worship. So great shall be the happiness of the
Church, that it is called Heaven, and the Saints in the Church are said to
dwell in Heaven, Rev. 13.6. For the opening and proving of the point, we shall,

First, Show what this glory is, and wherein it consists.

Secondly, Prove that this of right belongs to the Church.

Thirdly, That this happiness is yet to come.

Fourthly, That upon probable conjecture, we may hope that it is now a coming.

First, For the opening of the first, What this praise or beauty is. It is not
that whorish paint, nor carnal pomp, nor that stately Tyranny, which adornes
the man of sin. You may see great preparations of this in the two former
Chapters, but the consummation is expressed in the beginning of this Chapter.

This praise or beauty, is expressed generally in Chap. 60. ver. 1.19. The
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, it is something that is divine. God is
the excellency of Jacob, Amos 8.7. God conferres upon the Church spiritual
blessings, such as are heavenly and Divine in their Nature; and he conferres
temporal blessings upon his Church; yet so as they have upon them the impresse
of a Divine and Almighty hand.

The particulars of a Churches beauty and glory, are,

First, Clear and shining light, Chap. 60. verse 1, 2.19. God has promised a
large increase of light, The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold. The Church shall have A Crown of
twelve stars, be clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, she
shall have light in all parts.

Secondly, This light shall prevail and spread, abundance shall come unto it,
multitudes of converts, Chap 60. ver. 5, 6.8. They are compared to the flowing
of the Sea, to droves, to a cloud, to Doves flying, to the winds.

Thirdly, Not only many, but great ones shall be converted to the Church,
Kings shall come to thy brightness, Chap. 60. ver. 3. And, the forces of the
Gentiles shall come unto thee, ver. 5. Thou shall suck the breasts of Kings,
ver. 16. Kings shall contribute the life and sweetness of their royalties to
the help of the Church.

Fourthly, Upon these he will power out hollnesse, and that universally; Thy
people shall be all righteous, Chap. 60. ver. 21. her Exactors, her very
enemies shall be holy, Chap. 60. ver. 17. As universal, so excellent
holiness; compared to Robes, Ornaments, Jewels, Chap. 61. ver. 10. by these
spiritual blessings she differs from the sink and Synagogue of Rome.

Fifthly, To these spiritual, God will add many outward and temporal
blessings to the Church; Abundance of peace, Chap. 60. ver. 11. Her gates shall
be open continually. Victory over Enemies, The Nation and Kingdom that will
not serve thee, shall perish; Yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted Chap.
60. ver. 12. And, All those that despised thee, shall bow down themselves at
the sole of thy feet, ver. 14. Abundance of Riches, The glory of Lebanon, ver.
13. for Brass, Gold; for Iron, Silver; ver. 17. and for grief, joy and
rejoicing. But all these are but as preparations: the consummation of the
Churches happiness, and deliverance, is expressed in this Chapter, ver. 3. She
shall be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the
hand of thy God, ver. 4. Thou shall be called Hephzipah, and thy Land Beulah,
for the Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married. Which is not
meant only of a mystical and spiritual union of the Church to Christ, but of
a visible, outward, and manifest declaration of this marriage: Christ will take
his Church by the hand, and publickely own his people.

She shall be a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in
the hand of thy God, ver. 3. Christ and his Church will stand openly hand in
hand: there shall be a public solemnization of the marriage of the Lamb,
Revel. 19.7. When the Church shall say, Lo this is our God, we have waited for
him, Isa. 25.9.
and he will save us. As his people shall see it, Isa. 54.5.
so the world shall acknowledge it, and say, Thy Maker is thy Husband. Men see
it darkely now, Rev. 20.2.3.
and hate them; but they shall see it clearly, and honor them. Satan shall be
bound and cast into the bottomless pit, and with him this Antichristian
malignity, whereby men oppose the ways of God. Wicked men shall be as much
below the Saints in power as in desert: they are dogs, and as dogs shall they
crouch, and bow to the soles of the feet of Gods children, and shall call them
the City of the Lord, chap. 60.14.
the Zion of the holy one of Israel. They shall be as honorable as Joseph was
in Pharaohs Court, they said, Can we find such a man as this is, Genesis 41.38.
a man in whom the spirit of God is? The righteous is more excellent then his
neighbor now, and will be much more, when God shall power out more of himself
upon his servants, and this desperate hatred of Gods people shall be taken out
of the world: Then shall ten men of all languages, take hold of the skirt of
him that is a Jew, Zach. 8.23.
saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

Men shall say, Vercly, Psalm. 58.11.
there is a reward for the righteous, there is a God that judges the earth.

This shall be the happy condition of the Church; and this I conceive to be a
PRAISE IN THE EARTH.

Secondly, Our second thing is to prove that this inward and outward
happiness, of right belongs to the Church, and that in time she shall and must
enjoy it.

First, We will take the rise of our reasons from the last and greatest
happiness of the Church; she is the Spouse of Christ, and herefore, the
highest honor, riches, safety, and all excellent privileges are due to her.
She is the Kings wife, dignified with the title of Queen, and Christ will give
her state and honor suitable to her place: Psalm. 4^.9. Cant. 6.8.
she is black with persecution, her veil and Ornaments rent from her. Ver. 9,
10.
The Daughters shall see her and bless her; the Queens and the Concubins
shall praise her. She shall be fair as the moon, clear as the Sun.

Secondly, The Church is the City of God, the mountain of the Lord, his own
lot, inheritance, portion, and treasure; expressions usual in Scripture; and
all engage God to adorn, furnish, and beautify his Church he promises. Chap.
60. ver. 13. To beautify the place of his sanctuary, and to make the place of
his feet glorious: his own sanctuary set apart for himself; and the place of
his feet, where he walks for his delight and pleasure, that must have some
special beauty and glory bestowed upon it. It is the Kings palace and Court,
there he has put his name, there is he known, worshipped. Psalm. 132.13.14.
The Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation; This is my
rest for ever, here will I dwell for ever, for I have desired it. Every one
desires to enrich their own inheritance; so will God his.

Thirdly, God has given Christ to his people, and in him, Romans 8.32.
and with him all things. That love that gave a Christ, how can he deny us any
thing? that love that was so large as to give us the Lord of all, the
possessor, will give us the possessed. The Apostle argues a good title the
Church has to all from this ground, All are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ
is Gods. 1 Cor. 3.22.23. God will not always keep his people in a bare title,
and aright, we shall in time receive the promise, the things promised: 1 Cor.
15.20.23.
Christ is given as the first fruits now, we shall have the harvest.

Fourthly, The Saints are the heirs of the earth, often styled so in
Scripture; and the heir of the family is the praise, the chief. For him are
all things kept; The world is upheld for the Saints: if they were out of it,
God would speedily ruin it, as he did Sodom when Lot was out of it. It is given
to Christ for his use to bring up his people in it, and he upholds it by the
word of his power: Heb. 1.3.
and when his work is finished he will take down this stage, it is kept up
for their sakes, and shall have its period when they are fit for it; Those
days shall be shortened for the elects sake, Matthew. 24.21. as that place is
ordinarily understood of the end of the world: yea now although all men have a
right to these outward things, yet God in the dispensation of them has a
special respect to his people. Egypt had the plenty of corn, and Joseph to
teach them the right use of that plenty, but Joseph by faith saw it was for
Jacobs posterity; God (says he to his brethren) sent me before you to preserve
you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance;
Genesis 45 7.
Egypt was Isreal's storehouse: Cyrus was advanced, for Jacob my servants sake,
Isai. 45.4. so all the Kingdoms of the world pay a secret tribute to the
Churches, and are entrusted as Guardians for the Saints in whom the inheritance
is, and he will one day call them to an account.

Fifthly, God delights in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm. 35.27. As
Princes delight to heap honors upon their favorites, so God takes pleasure
in the greatness as well as in the goodness of his servants: he suffers in
our afflictions, and rejoices in our deliverances, In all our afflictions he is
afflicted, Isa. 63.9.
he sympathizes with his Children if they are disquieted, he is restles, he is
not satisfied, til his people are satisfied, and see their desires upon their
enemies.

Sixthly, Gods honor and his peoples prosperity stand and fall together: when
his Church suffers, himself and his name is reproached; this considered, we
may wonder that God has endured his glory and people to be trampled upon thus
long: God has resolved to advance his name, and will not suffer another to
wear it, therefore he will pull down his enemies, whose power and greatness
stands upon his glory.

Seventhly, The Church must resemble Christ, as in his sufferings, so in his
resurrection: Christ communicates his death to his people two ways; to their
souls in mortification, and to their outward man in affliction: and so his
resurrection is communicated to their souls in vivification or holiness, and to
their outward man in deliverance: Thy dead men shall live, together with my
dead body shall they arise. Isa. 26.19. And thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out her dead, The Church has its winter of
humiliation, it shall have its spring of deliverance, and its summer of
prosperity and happiness,

Thirdly, Our third work is to prove, that this happiness is yet to come. And
this we shall clear by Scripture, by Reason.

First, By Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.24. The Apostle there speaking of Christ,
foretells that he must put down all rule, and all authority, and power, i.e.
all his enemies, be they of rule, the highest degree; of authority, the middle
or second degree; or of power, the lowest and meanest; all must be subject to
Christ; which the same Apostle speaks clearly of, as yet to come. Heb. 2.8.
But now we see not yet all things put under him: now the body cannot prosper
till the head rules; the wife flourish till the husband reigns, nor are
Christ's enemies under his own feet, till they are under the feet of his Church
too.

Two reasons further yet clear it.
First, The Church never yet enjoyed this prosperity. Christ as yet has
appeared in a mean and despicable way, as in his person, so in his Church:
both have been always buried, as it were under reproach and persecution:
sufferings have hitherto been the Churches portion, first, from the Jews,
then from Rome heathenish, and now from Rome antichristian. Or if the Church
has had some breathing times of peace in some parts, they were but short fits,
of no continuance; and therefore not the prosperity here forespoken of, which
is to be established, as a Sun that should never set, Isai. 60.20.

Secondly, The happiness here promised must be both to Jews and Gentiles, as
appears in the two former Chapters, or at least to the Gentiles by the calling
of the Jews. The Churches spreading her light, may be a means of the Jews
conversion, but the Jews conversion shall perfect the Churches light and
happiness. Romans 11.15.
This is foretold What shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?
It is true, the Church has had some riches but it has been from the fall and
diminishing of the Jews, as verse. 12. But God has reserved her perfect
happiness for the times of their restoration, which compared with her
condition now shall be as life from the dead. Amos prophesying of this
happiness, foretells it shall be then when he shall Raise up the Tabernacle of
David that is fallen, Ames. 9.11.12.
i.e. bring in the Jews: for then shall they possess the remnant of Edom, the
Gentiles that yet lie out, and the Heathen that are called by my name, those
that are already come in: and when these shall be possessed by the Jews, then
will God for altogether close up all breaches, and raise up all ruins, and so
establish them together, the praise of the earth.

Thirdly, the Churches happiness must succeed Antichrists ruin: as Babylon
falls, so shall Zion rise, Dan. 7.21, 22. He prevailed against them till the
ancient of days came; and judgment was given to the Saints of the most High,
and the time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom. Antichrist now sits
in the temple of God, and keeps out the Church, Christ must dispossess him,
before the Saints shall be possessed of the Kingdom. The whore is first
judged, and then follow Halelujahs, Rev. 19.1. The first is yet to come, and so
by consequence, the latter: so much power as he has, so much misery the Church
lies under.

Fourthly, Our fourth work is to clear that the time of this happiness is
now approaching, that that Sun is arising, that shall not go down again.
Isa. 60.20.
We do not undertake determinately to demonstate any thing, Times and seasons
are in the Fathers hands; but shall only endeavor to discover some probable
conjecturall grounds that God has afforded for the quickening our faith, and
the encouraging of our hope. As,

First, That abundance of the spirit of prayer, that God has in these times
powered out upon his people, much praying certainly prognosticates some
special mercy: God does not set his people to pray, but when he intends to
give. When the 70. years were accomplished, and deliverance presently to be
wrought, then he set Daniel on praying, Dan. 9.2, 3. He prayed before, but then
he was set on to pray. And this was not the frame of Daniels spirit only, but
of all the people of God in those times, as God foretold by Jeremiah it should
be, Jer. 29.12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto
me, and I will hearken unto you; And ye shall seek me and find me, when ye
shall search for me with all your heart. Though they had prayed before, yet
they should pray now as they had not done before, there should be somewhat
peculiar in those prayers, they should go, and do it with all their hearts.
And do not the people of God in these times pray, as though they were even set
on to it by God? Are there not gone forth Armies of prayers steeled with faith
and bold importunity, that are not daunted with the greatest difficulties? Are
there not thousands that are resolved, neither to rest themselves nor give God
any rest, till Christ is upon the throne and his enemies under his feet? And
therefore surely our bondage begins to expire, when his people shake off the
spirit of bondage, and having received the spirit of adoption, have learned to
cry Abba, Father.

Secondly, The multitude and continual increase of converts; a comfortable
forerunner of a rising condition, Act. 7.17. When the time of the promise drew
nigh, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt. Cutting of stones, and hewing of
timber is a sign God is about to build, not to pull down. God does not use to
beget children to the murderer, nor increase his fold to fat the sword of his
enemies. When God is framing judgments He takes away his people from the evil
to come; Isa. 57.1.
It is barrenness presages destruction, but when he takes away their
barrenness, he takes away their shame, Isa. 54.2, 3, 4. When the Church has
many children, Psalm. 127.5.
she shall not be afraid of her enemies in the gate.

Thirdly, The multitude of active and public spirits, when God sets Watchmen
upon the walls, he entends not his people for a prey to their enemies. It is not
ordinary for God to raise up singular means, and then to blast it, nor to set
up Moses and Phineas in the gap to save his people, and then to trample upon
them. Spirits zealously affecting the honor of God, and the good of his
people, are too precious to be lost. There is good hope we are going out of
Babylon, when the Hee-goates go before the Floches; Ier. 50.8.
men of public place and authority are active for reformation. When the
Governors of Israel offer themselves willingly Judge. 5.9.
among the people, there is blessing at hand.

Fourthly, The lights increase. This also is a sign of deliverance, Dan. 12.4.
Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased: when the end
should come, then this should be. There is much darkness remains among us,
but the light scatters, and daily more stanes appear in our firmament, and the
truth as readily embraced as it is dispersed. The morning begins to dawne,
and we hope it will shine to perfect day.

Fifthly, We may read deliverance in the enemies rage, their wickedness
speaks the Churches mercy: Their destruction and the Churches salvation ripen
together with their sins. The devils rage when it is violent, it is not long,
Apoc. 12.12. Rejoice ye heavens, i.e. the Saints; Woe to the inhabitants of the
Earth, and of the Sea, i. e. the wicked and ungodly: For the devil is come
down having great wrath. What? can this be matter of joy? Yes, because he has
but a short time. Men that resist the truth shall proceed no further, when
their folly becomes manifest to all men, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. When men's wickedness
makes them public fools, it will not prevail much longer. When men's
wickedness is so notorious that the world can point them out, then Gods
judgment will quickly find them out. And such are there in our times: so
hellish is their malice, their oaths, their blasphemies, that they are become
an abhorring to men; and therefore surely God will ere long case himself and
his Church of them: doubtless the devil rides his servants so furiously, that
they will quickly be at their journeyes end.

Sixthly, The shaking of the German Empire, that great Bulwark of the beast,
speaks the wrath of God bordering upon the man of sin. It is nearer then a
borderer: God has powered out some wrath upon the very Throne of the Beast.
Prelacy is by some late and sound Expositours conceived to be that Throne; and
we have seen it pulled down in Scotland; darkened in England. Yea, may not a
strict observer see the beginnings of dissolution and breakings, in the very
Kingdom of the beast it self? Dan. 2 41.42.
Do not the toes of the feet of the image discover themselves to be part iron
and part clay? the clay, the people, wearyed and worn out with the weight, and
hardness, and roughness of the iron, i. e. papal tyranny and oppression,
begin to unclose and crumble off from them.

Seventhly, Dan. 2.34 44.45.
May we not see the stone cut off the mountain without hands, i. e. the
Kingdom of Christ, scorned and trampled on: but yet firm and strong, as a
stone, growing bigger and bigger toward a mountain? Thus has Reformation both
in England and Scotland hitherto proceeded. Its beginnings were at first
contemptible, and knew no other name but sedition, faction, and rebellion; yet,
as it were without hands, by rare, invisible, and unexpected providence,
beyond what we were able to ask or think, they have stood, and prospered.

Now are not these the buds and tender leaves of the figures, whereby we may
conclude the summer is nigh? May we not say with our Savior, When you see all
these things, know that it is near even at the doors? Are not these hopeful
signs, that the day of the Churches Redemption draws nigh? May we not salute
the Church as the Spirit does, Cant. 6.10. Who is she that looks forth as the
morning? Are not these the mornings of deliverance? Sure if our sins do not
blast these blossoms and Hinder good things from us, we shall soon reap the
fruit of our prayers. We dare not limit the holy one of Israel: but though the
children are come to their birth, he may delay the time of bringing forth, or
make us pay dear for these mercies. We may suffer many throws and pangs, but
we will say as Joshuah, Numb. 14.8. If the Lord delight in us, he will bring us
into this good land. If we were fit for it, we should now see Jerusalem a
praise in the earth.

Our third point is, It is the duty of all that make mention of the Lord, to
give him no rest till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Which we purpose
to handle by way of application to the former point.

We see Zion has right to glorious mercies; these mercies are reserved for
these latter times. God has not left us without some comfortable hopes, that
the work is now begun: these things have been cleared to us.

The next thing will be seasonable to show what God requires of us, what we
must do to obtain these blessings: The Prophet tells us we must Give him no
rest. For the handling this, we shall show,

1. What we must do to make God restless.

2. In what manner it must be done.

3. The subject of our work, the things to be labored for, which will make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth, and so conclude.

1 What must we do that God may have no rest?

First, We must pray earnestly, fervently, constantly. Prayer works upon him,
an engine ordained by himself, to overcome himself, a cord to bind
himself, a strength that he has promised to yield to, yea, an authority that
he has promised to obey: Concerning the work of my hands, command ye me, Esaias
45.11. Prayer will overruled God to any thing that is for our good: It will bow
down his ear, pull his hand out of his bosom, his sword out of his sheath
against his enemies, put up his sword when it is drawn against his people: The
Lord is at the call of his peoples prayers, Nigh unto all them that call upon
him, Psall 145.18. Yea, to do for them what ever they ask, He will fulfill
the desire of them that fear him, ver. 19. Ready to do for them, and as large
in doing, he will do all, satisfy their desires.

Prayer is the work of Gods Spirit in us, and therefore cannot be in vain.
Faithful prayer was never lost, nor never shall while God is true. We have had
experience of the power of it. It has strangely produced means, qualifyed,
and fitted means, wonderfully protected means, united means, prospered
means, wrought through difficulties, discovered and defeated designs. If we
cease not begging, God will not cease giving. While Moses hands are held up
Israel must prevail. Therefore you that make mention of Gods name, every soul
that professes the Lord Jesus, pray; you that have any interest in a God,
improve it now; you that ever found the sweetness of prayer, pray now; if ever
you seriously took the name of God into your mouths, set to the work now:
pray for life, for liberties, for Religion, ordinances; for precious peace, for
establishing and perfecting mercies.

Difficulties are in the way; if we continue begging, God must yield; if we be
not weary of praying, he must be weary of denying: Psalm. 24.6.
We hope there are many of Jacobs generation in this Kingdom. Let us resolve
to lay hold of God, to wrestle with him, and not to let him go, till he has
given us the blessing. If we have Jacobs spirit, we shall have his success,
and amongst other mercies, enjoy this, See the face of our King, as the face of
God, as Jacob saw the face of his brother. Genesis 33.10.


Secondly, As we must pray, so we must do; work in prayer, and work with
prayer. Our prayer must be (...), James 5.16. working prayer: We must Pray
without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Semper or are, est semper operari. Aug. To pray
always, is to follow our prayers with our hands, and to be always in our
actions, what we are in our prayers: it is not all the sense of the place, but
a good gloss. God loves to see our prayers live in our deeds. It is unbeleefe,
base fear, or worse; hypocrisy, to say to God in private, what we will not
act in public. We should show more faith and sincerity in our petitions, if
we would faithfully endeavor what we ask, and sooner obtain an answer of our
desires. And this is a way to give God no rest.

If God be bound to attend the prayers of his people, much more their actions
and labors that are for him: For there is more of himself employed and laid
out in his servants pains, more faith, more zeal, more gifts, more wisdom,
besides the hazard of their persons, estates, liberties, and lives, if the
work be (as they are commonly) dangerous and difficult.

Therefore as we must watch unto prayer; so must we all, 1 Pet. 4.7. especially
watchmen, men of public place, watch, labor, travail, never hold their
peace, consult, speak, write, do all that their place gives them leave to
do, for the repairing of Zions breaches.

David's counsel to Solomon is seasonable, 1 Chro. 22.16. Arise therefore and
be doing, and the Lord be with thee, While we are working for him, he will not
be absent, they may be sure of his presence, and so of assistance, and
success, that set their hands to the work of the Lord.

If yet any shall think that this branch of our instruction does not naturally
flow from the precept of the Prophet here, Give him no rest; yet let him
consider the former verse, which commands action: and withal, that he handle
this, not only as a distinct point, but as application of the former point: so
the ingraffing this instruction, to do, is reasonable, as I conceive, in the
other respect, it is natural.

Secondly, But how must we pray and work, so as God may be affected and have
no rest? That's our second thing, and for our direction in it.

First, We must be such, whose persons are accepted and qualified. Such the
Prophet calls to the work as make mention of the Lord, such they had need to
be, men that make mention of the Lord in Truth, men of particular interest in
God, Esa. 48.1.
and special acquaintance with him. As for wicked men, their Prayers are an
abomination, and so are all their services, God cares not for the help of his
enemies. Such as are admirted to the present work of the Lord, had need be
holy, because they will have often occasion to come into his presence for
assistance, counsel, direction, encouragement; and God will be sanctified of
all those that draw near to him. God smote Uzzah for laying his hand upon the
Arc, for want of a Leviticall and ceremonial holiness: how much more
displeasing will it be for men to intrude themselses upon Gods work without
true and spiritual holiness: you cannot work for God, nor from God, except
you be in God; not from divine strength, nor to divine ends; and so will want
comfort and success. You are to conflict with spiritual enemies, To wrestle
with Principalities, Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickednesses in high places, that I may allude to that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4.
Ephe. 6.12. And therefore you had need of spiritual weapons. You are to help
build a spiritual house, so the Church is called, 1 Pet. 2.5. And therefore
need spiritual tools. You have Church-worke, as well as Common-wealth-worke,
to remove superstition as well as oppression; How can you tender the
consciences of others, if your own consciences be not tender? How will you
provide sincere milk of the word for poor babes, 1 Pet. 2.2.3.
that cry to you, if you have not tasted that the Lord is gracious? You had
need be as patriots of your Country, so friends of Christ, and children of the
Kingdom.

Otherwise, if God should prosper the work in your hands, and enable you to
build up a mountain, of holiness, you would effect that, which when you have
done, you could not affect. Or do, as it is said of them that built Noah's
Arc, that they perished in the flood; you may say a poor Kingdom from
shipwreck, and perish in the condemnation of the world. Grace is honorable,
and fits men for the most honorable service. We may say of parts and learning,
that they have done virtuously, Prove. 31.29.
but Grace excels them all. This is the first, Men that will give him no
rest, must be men that know him, and are known of him: he will receive
petitions by hands of them in office to him, by servants and Secretaries.

Secondly, They that will give God no rest, must pray and work in faith. Faith
works upon his promise, and so prevails with him. It is very powerful, James
5.15. The prayer of Faith shall save the sick. Faith has a strange faculty to
knock at Gods door, yea, at his breast, go into his presence, plead, and
reason with him, require an account of his Promise, Power, and faithfulness;
Where is thy promise in which thou causedst me to trust? Yea, to dive into his
bowels, and search into them; Where are thy bowels? Faith is as necessary in
working as in praying. Faith is mighty, yea, can do what God can do. To
believe is difficult, but to him that believes, Matthew. 17.20.
nothing is impossible. If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall
say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove. And
nothing shall be unpossible unto you. Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, parva,
humilis, small, of no account; but it must be as Mustard Seed, acris, fervida;
it must be lively, have acrimony and vivacity, and then it may remove
mountains. It is an Hyperbole, and here is the sum of it; what ever may be
to the glory of God, or the good of his Church, be it never so difficult, Faith
will effect it. Yea, a little active faith shall do great things, a grain
remove a mountain. Although things be as stout and unyeelding as mountains,
as strong and firm as mountains, as ancient as the everlasting hills, yet
faith may remove them, if they stand in the way of Gods glory. You may read of
the nobleacts of Faith, Heb. 11. Amongst other wonders in ver. 33. By Faith men
overcame Kingdoms. If faith could conquer Kingdoms, can it not preserve
Kingdoms, and reform them? Faith works by that power that accounts the
Nations as a deep of a Bucket, Isa. 40.15.
as the small dust of the balance, and (...) take up the Isles as a very
little thing. Therefore in all your great consultations act in faith.

Faith will keep you to a rule, and so make you exact in justice: Faith will
wait upon God for a command, and so will never be found in any unwarranted
course. It says as Moses to God, Exodus 33.15. If thy presence go not with me,
carry us not hence, Faith will have a finger of direction, and then doubts not
of a hand of protection. It will have a word of precept, and then distrusts not
another of promise.

Faith will go forth in no strength but Gods; not in the strength of parts,
policy, or multitude; as David went out against the Philistine, not with sword,
spear, and shield, But (says he) I come against thee in the name of the Lord
of Hoastes. See now he couches himself under this name of God by Faith, when
he was beset with dangers, Psalm. 118.9, 10, 11, 12. It is better ta^^ust in the
Lord, then to put confidence in Princes. He makes a wise choice. Princes may
err and fail, but I Will take part with God and his cause: being thus resolved
for God rather then men, though Princes, he proposes his enemies, ver. 10. All
Nations compassed me about. No less then Nations against buth, yea all
Nations, and they compassing him about. Well, let the (...), he knew whom he
had believed, In the name of the Lord will I destroy them. They come upon him
again with renewed strength, and malice, ver. 11. They compassed me about,
yea, they compassed me about; he kept to his first strength, In the name of the
Lord will I destroy them. His adversaries are more enraged, ver. 12. They
compassed me about as Bees. Bees for multitude, winged with fury, armed with
weapons, stings; yet they could not afright nor weary his faith: his old shield
was sure, For in the name of the Lord I will destroy them. Faith would make us
impregnable, invincible. Take therefore David's resolution in another place,
Psalm. 44.67. I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me. But
thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us.
Faith only can furnish you with weapons fit for those you have to deal with.
Your adversaries are Antichristian, they that will deal with such, must come
armed with the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, Apoc. 12.11.
And faith only knows how to use these. You should carry the blood of the
Lamb always about you, wear it in your hearts, and think you have to do
with the enemies of that Christ that shed his blood for you, against those that
trample that blood under their feet by their superstition and profaneness,
such as are bloody enemies, that thirst for the blood of Saints.

Faith will strengthen your hearts by the Word of God, and assure you, that in
all your pains, you work in the belly of a promise, and what you do is to
make God faithful; you are doing that which he has promised to do himself,
advance his Son, and pull down his enemies. You want establishing mercies:
If you will not believe, you shall not be established, Isay 7.9. You want
conquering mercies: This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even your
Faith. Nothing can stand against Faith, Resist the devil (steadfast in Faith)
and he will fly from you. If God give more faith, we need not fear more
difficulties. We may say as Paul, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, Philip. 4.13. Dye under enemies, or live to conquer them.
Therefore believe and you shall see the glory of God; Joh. 11.40. and Jerasalem
a praise in the earth.

Thirdly, If you would give God no rest, you must in praying and doing quit
your selves, and seek the glory of God and the good of the Church.

First, you must not seek your selves. Self is too base and low a thing to
move a God with; as at all times, so now especially, self must be below your
thoughts, and not worth your meanest considerations; You especially I speak
to, whom God has taken up into the mount, as Moses, to do his business, and
to bring to us just and righteous laws; You must now do as the Church is
exhorted to do, Psalm. 45.10, 11. Forget thy Fathers house, think not of
raising your estates, advancing your selves or your posterity; So shall the
King greatly desire thy beauty, The King of heaven will take pleasure in you,
and he will make the King on earth delight in you. Would you overcome
difficulties without? labor first to overcome your selves. You can do nothing
great and honorable, so long as self has any power in you. Self and
sinister ends would blast and undermine your consultations, and divide you into
as many ways as you are men, (If every man should seek his own, and not the
things of Jesus Christ:) which would be a mischeife that hell it self could
not parallel; to speak our thoughts, we fear no treason but self. If you
continue all to seek the glory of God, you will be too strong for any power
either to divide or break. The first step of Isreal's deliverance was Moses
stepping out of him self: Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. He refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter. God would not employ him till he had learned to
refuse Court offers; Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. A good pattern for
public persons; rather be poor with honesty and a good cause, then rise by
Apostasy. And had he not continued faithful and constant in selfe-denyall,
Israel had been lost. Exodus 32.10. It was a hard pull. God was angry and would
have consumed Israel; there was nothing lay in the way but Moses his sincerity
and faithfulness to the cause. If he could be wrought off, the business was
at an end. God himself tries him, Let me alone, etc. and I will make of thee a
great Nation. I will make thee great, and raise thy house to a Nation. But
Moses is deaf to such offers, he will not be taken off so, he pursues his
work faithfully, nothing will serve him but Isreal's deliverance: such
faithfulness to the cause of God had you need have. The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and asnare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction.
If you will be rich or great, you will have temptations, and fall and drown
too in perdition. You, and Cause, and Kingdom, and all will drown and perish,
if selfe-ends bias you. Saul went right a while, till fair Agag, and the fat
of Amaleh lay in his way, till a rich booty turned him from his obedience, see
the story 1 Samuel 15. and the dangerous consequence of it. What ever pretense he
had for his sin, in sparing those wicked enemies of the Church, that the
people would have it, and it was for sacrifice; yet says Samuel to him, ver.
26. Thou have rejected the Word of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected thee
from being King over Israel. Neither people, nor false piety, nor pity, can
excuse neglect of Justice in Governors. If you would do great things for God,
Ier. 40.5.
you must not now seek great things for your selves. Indeed you must be above
the world and your selves. You had need be more then men, such as John Baptist
was, your work is like his, to pull down mountains, and exalt valleys, to
make crooked things straight, and rough things smooth. And as he had, so you
have to deal with a generation of Vipers. Now our Savior shows by way of
question, what he was not, and what he was, Matthew. 11.7, 8, 9. What went you
out to see? a reed shaken with the wind? No, he was no light unstable man, that
would fluctuate and vacillate at every wind of threatening greatness. What went
you out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? No, such they are in Kings
houses. John was no such man: he could not suite Herod's humor, nor flatter his
sins. He would not alter his habit of Camels hair, the Court could not
change him. What then went you out to see? a Prophet? Yea, I say more then a
Prophet. Such should you be, neither shaken with threatenings, nor won by
softness, men steadfast in justice, yea Counselors, and more then Counselors.

As you may not seek your selves, so you must seek the honor of God: that is
the way to be more then men in our actions, to be divine in our ends. All other
ends are too low for the meanest man, much more for so great a Council. This
is the way to prevail with God: ^he readily embraces any proposition this way.
If any man have a design to advance his name; what ever be the impediments, it
must prosper: for you cannot have a thought this way, but God will second it.
He can as soon desert himself, as those that work for his glory. If you find
any thing that may exalt his Majesty, and he give you a heart faithfully to
desire it, be it what, or where it will, you need not despair: though it lie
under mountains of Kingdoms, you shall thresh them to dust: Isa. 41.15.
though it be buried under Nations, and Empires, customs; antiquities, he will
drive the Nations usunder, scatter the everlasting hills, Hab. 3.6.
nothing shall stand in his way: where ere he finds his glory, he will seize
upon it; and if they yield not speedily, it will cost them dear. For he has
said, Mine honor will I not give unto another.

Seek the good of Zion, this is the next to his glory, yea his glory is in
Zion, there has he put his name. This is a sure way to move him: all that you
can say or do for his Church, is acceptable to him. What good designs come
into your heads, are they for Irelands help, for the relief of his people,
there or here? go and present it to God first. See what his thoughts are Jer.
31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Is it for
my dear people in Ireland you pray and labor? for my pleasant children in
England? I was angry, but I remember them still, you did well to put me in
mind, come, I will do any thing for them. Oh! carry the Churches miscries and
distractions continually in your bosoms. That made the Prophet so earnest and
claborate, v. 1. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace. We have an excellent
pattern of a public spirit in Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning: if I do not remember thee,
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem
before my chief joy. If my right hand do not act its utmost for the Church,
let it never act more; if my tongue do not speak what is for the good of the
Church, may it cleave to the roof of my mouth: may my estate waste and
consume, my parts be blasted, my wisdom be turned to folly, my time be nothing
but distraction, if I do not employ all for the Churches good. Look above
your selves to Gods glory, and his Churches good, and then God and you drive
one design: you shall be co-workers with God; when it is too hard for you, you
may expect his help: do you but what you can, it is his own business, he
will do the rest.

Fourthly, If you would give God no rest, you must be bold, a bold beggar will
prevail.

Let us break in upon Gods retirings, thrust our petitions into his ears,
challenge mercy from him, urge his promises. God himself has warranted and
allowed boldness in prayer, Ephe. 3.12 Heb. 4.16. And none fare better then
such beggars. God admits his people to a strange height of boldness, to an
impudency, (...), Luke 11.8. some read it (and the word signifies so) propter
improbitatem, as if we might be unmannerly with God in a holy affection to his
glory and his Churches good. Let me go, says God to Jacob, Jacob says, no,
Thou shall not.

As we must be bold in prayer with God, so bold and courageous in our actions
toward men. It is said of Joseph, that he was (...), An honorable Counselor;
hewent in boldly to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. And he did like an
honorable Counselor, that durst say and do what he thought to be right and
just: he hazarded all in a good cause when it was at worst: he would own
Christ crucified. What favor he showed to him being a condemned person, the
law would interpret a justifying of his crimes, and an opposition to authority
and Justice, and yet he boldly did it; and if he had not been bold in it, he
might have lost it. Courage has an excellent power in it: it alone will do
great things, Act. 4.13. A company of Rulers were astonished by the zeal of
the Apostles. The Text says, When they saw the boldness of Peter and John,
and that they were unlearned men, they marvelled, and took knowledge of them,
that they had been with Jesus: As if boldness had something of the image of
Christ in it: and certainly it has a Majesty in it; the Rulers were at their
wits end, ver. 16. What shall we do to these men? zeal vanquishes where it
comes, it is like the Sword of Jonathan and Saul, 2 Samuel 1.22.
that returns not empty. And without this, other gifts and virtues are
useless. Fear disables us for what we might do, robs us of the means we
have, and is a traitor to all great designs. Therefore God commands courage in
Joshua, Josh. 1.6. Be strong and of a good courage: charged upon him again in
ver. 9. and by the people, ver. 18. as if the weight of all Israel lay upon
this one grace, Courage. I will leave the Counsel with you that Joab gave his
brother Abishai, They had a just cause, and so true courage and valor will be
employed, Pet. Mar.
Non ut inferantur, sed ut propul sentur injuriae, not to inflict but remove
oppression. Be of good courage, let us play the men, for our people, and the
Cities of our God, 2 Samuel 10.12. The argument is strong, it is for your people,
and for the Cities of our God, for your people, as the Commonwealth, and Gods
Cities as the Church, be valiant for both.

Fifthly, If you would give God no rest you must pray against denials, work
against discouragements, persevere in both. What ever difficulties you meet
with, Give him no rest. Be constant in the duty what ever God says, put by his
denyals, take no refusals; the more denyals he gives, the more strength you
must get, Mat. 7.7. Ask and ye shall have: if that be too weak and do not
obtain, then Seek, with more earnestness, and you shall find: if that fail,
then Knock, with more boldness, and it shall be opened to you. This was the
practice of that poor woman, Mat. 15.22. etc. Have mercy on me thou son of
David, my Daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. He answered not aword.
She cries after him: at last he said, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel: she leaves out the Son of David, and now Lord only,
Lord help me. What a Lord, and can help none but Israel? a Lord, and thy
power confined? He seems angry, and answers, It is not meet to give the
childrens bread to dogs. She rises higher, and locks her self within his
denial; Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbes which fall from their
Masters table. She pleads his truth and justice: if mercy will not serve, let
thy words be true, I am a dog, yet there is something for dogs, let me but
have a dogs portion, crumbes, I crave no more.

So should we in praying and working: difficulties should raise our spirits:
Genesis 32.
Jacob wrastled in the night, that was one discouragement; he was alone, that
was another; God was leaving of him, Let me go; God staid to his loss, He
smote his thigh, yet he wrastled upon one leg. So must you continue wrestling
with difficulties; If in the night of some calamity, if alone in that night, if
God should seem to depart, yea, though he should strike and leave you maimed,
halting, yet continue in the service. Your valor and judgments have been
tried, now your constancy, and patience is aimed at. Christ says; we must pray
always, Luke 18.1.
(...), non defatigari, faint not, non evadere (...), begin well and end ill,
begin in the spirit and end in the flesh. To urge you to constancy, I might
urge your sufferings; it was Paul's argument to the Galatians, Gal. 3.4. Have
you suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain. If you should now
be weary and faint, before you be established, you would lose all your
sufferings, and the fruit of your long and great pains. As your own
sufferings, so let Gods mercy engage you to constancy. It is the same Apostles
argument, 2 Cor. 4.1. Having received mercy, faint not: God has preserved you,
covered you under his wings, do not therefore let your hearts sink under your
great burdens. Or may that argument move with you, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be ye
steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as
much as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. The good that
you have done is not small, although not answerable to your desires: Preserving
a Kingdom from ruin. We may say with the Prophet, Isa. 1.9.
Except the Lord had left us such a remnant, we had been as Sodom, and we
should have been like unto Gomorrah, swallowed up of sin and misery. Besides
the spreading of the light, larger dispensing of the Word, freedom from
innovations: All of these precious mercies, and many more, have been the
fruit of your watchful care and pains. If we had no gain here, yet God
would reward you hereafter: Therefore be steadfast and unmovable, your labor
is not in vain in the Lord.

Constancy will conquer God and man. The Israelites overcame God, Judge. 10.10,
11. etc. they cried to him when they were oppressed, he upbraided them with
former mercies, said flatly, I will deliver you no more. Nay, which was worse,
bids them Go to their Gods whom they had served, let them deliver them. God
that uses to give liberally and upbraid none, here he gives nothing but
upbraidings. They are not beaten off by this, but reform he more exactly,
renew their supplication, Do what thou will with us, what seems good unto
thee, Only deliver us this day. q d. What no more mercy? must we suffer? then
do what thou will: Let us suffer under thy hands, but deliver us from these
Ammonites: we never was under such cruel enemies as these, deliver us this
day. In ver. 16. his Soul was grieved, he was wearyed, broken by their
importunity. Go on to seek God, he cannot hold out long; prayers and
importunities will break his heart, extort, and force mercy from him: we have
wearyed him by sin, let us weary him by prayer: We have been impudent in
transgression, be impudent in seeking deliverance: We have been bent to
perpetual backe-sliding, let us be as constant in suing for deliverance, and
so we shall be as Jacob; As a Prince have thou power with God, and with men,
and have prevailed, Genesis 32.28. If it prevails with God, with men much more.

By this constancy of importunity, Dalilah overcame Sampson, Judge. 16. She
desired to know where his strength lay; he deceived her, and mocked her diverse
times, at last she urged him close, ver. 15. How can thou say, I love thee,
when thy heart is not with me? And she pressed him daily with her words, and
his Soul was vexed unto death. ver. 16. Luke 11.8. Though he will not rise and
give, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise,
Amicus ille quod petebatur fecit, quia alter in petendo non defecit, Aug.
and give as many as he needs. Where neither love, nor reason, nor desert
will gain, importunity will make restless. Hold out Worthies; Jacob had his
wages denied ten times, God paid him at last largely; so will he you, if you
continue, wait patiently, be steadfast: The Kingdom is in a tottering
condition, steadfastness must begin in your breasts. Let me conclude this
with Paul's words to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.8. England may use them to
You, We live if you stand fast in the Lord.

Sixthly, If you would give God no rest, you must take none. The best way to
make God restless, is to be restless in seeking, our activity works upon
God. Abraham had a hot service of it to quench the wrath of God kindled against
Sodom, and he was early at it, Genesis 19.27. David when he had praying work in
hand, Early will I seek thee, Psalm. 63.1. When he had works of justice in
hand, he would dispatch it, I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land,
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord, Psalm. 101.8.
When he had Church-worke in hand, I will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor
slumber to mine eyelids, until I find a place for the Lord, an habitation
for the mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132.4, 5. You must be restless till
Jerusalem rest, and be established. We are sorry we must require such pains of
you, but glad to see your cheerful and indefatigable travail. God that calls
you to it, makes you willing and able for it. Remember you are watchmen, and
they must not hold their peace, night nor day. Your waking is our sleep, your
toil, our ease, your trouble our peace.

You are like Gideons three hundred, Judge. 7.5. that lapped water with their
tongues, as a dog lappeth, Tanquam canis e Nilo; carptim, cursim; so do you,
enjoy your repasts as Jonathan pursuing his enemies, a little honey with the
end of a rod, 1 Samuel 14.43. Go on, Worthies, be yet more active, more
heavenly, less earthy. If you want comforts, look up to God and behold him,
saying, Well done good and faithful servants. Let action be your rest, let it
be your meat and drink to do the will of God: God cannot rest till you give
over working, he will work with you so long as you work for him.

Seventhly, If you would give him no rest, you must ask and desire largely of
him for his Church. God has large thoughts toward Jerusalem, Call unto me and
I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou know
not Jer. 33.3. God will do for his people abundantly above all that we can
ask or think of, Ephesians. 3.20 Beyond your prayers and thoughts, much more
beyond your indevours. God has given in more in some things then was aimed at,
and is resolved to out-goe any that are employed for his Church. Carve as
largely as you will to Zion, God will add as much more: he is resolved no
Creature shall equal him in love to his Church.

Take heed of being low spirited for God, of haltings and halvings in
Reformation: We have seen the mischiefs of such a way already; yea, many
times we lose all, because we would be contented with some.

The Prophet was angry with Joash, that when he was to smite the Syrians, he
smote but thrice, 2 King. 13.18, 19. God honors and prospers them that do all
his will: Jehu did much, was very zealous, but the Text says, He took not
heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart; For he
departed not from the sin of Jeroboam, 2 King. 10.31. And the evil effect it
had is noted in the next verse. 32. In those days the Lord began to cut Israel
short. The same measure that you mete to him, he will mete to you; as you sow
in spirituals, you shall reap in carnals; if you cut Reformation short, he
will cut your privileges and the Kingdoms peace short: It is safe and
successful to aim at great matters for God. We may thankefully embrace what
we can get, but seek no less than perfection: Magna audent quoniam magni
sunt, and qua audent obtinent. Bern. They that are truly noble and magnanimous
they will attempt great things for God, and what they do attempt they shall
obtain. Think of no less then making Jerusalem a praise in the earth:
despair not to see her in all her beauty and brightness. In outward things,
use your discretion, be as moderate as you see cause, but in the cause of God,
Moses his resolution is worth imitation, he would not leave a hoof behind
him. In this case Jehoshophat gives good Counsel to his Judges, the Lord write
it in your hearts, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take heed what you do, for you judge not for
man, but for the Lord.

Thirdly, Wherein should this labor be employed* I shall be your remembrance^
only for two things; Do them, and God will do the rest, To make Jerusalem a
praise in the Earth.

First, You must set up light. This is (as you have heard, a chief pait of the
Churches beauty; advance the light of powerful Preaching, and that will
advance the Truth, Religion, Peace, Christ, and all. The Hieroglyphicke of life
amongst the Egyptians was light, a burning lamp: and though ignorance be the
Mother of Romish devotion, such lamps are the life of Religion, powerful
Preaching.

It was the work of some to do all they could to put out the light, the most
horrid, hellish, and unnatural wickedness that can be, to deny men the joy
and comfort of our souls: the more malicious they were in suppressing of it,
the more pains must be taken in freeing of it. You have done much this way,
and intend more; our prayers shall join with your indevours, That the Word may
run and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. That it may be said of England as it was
of Antioch, Act. 13.49. The Word of the Lord was published throughout all the
Region. Nothing so excellent, but (...) are displeased with it: The light is
offensure to sore eyes.

Some complained of Prometheus for reaching the use of fire, as the Poets say,
and many amongst us Preach against Preaching; But they that quarrel with the
light, Act. 13.48.
quarrel with Christ himself, who is the Light of the Gentiles. Men complain
against the Seers; as Isay 30.10, 11. See not, prophecy not right things; But
their anger is against him that sent them; let them speak out, and they say,
Cause the holy One of Israel to cease from before us. The light it self stands
in the light of their wicked ways, as the Angel in Bal^^ms way to his sin,
and that is the reason They hate the light, because their works are evil.

Men father divisions upon the light, when as the present distractions and
mistakes are, because it is but half day, the mist is not quite dispelled;
Darkness causes divisions, and those most dangerous, as quarrels in the
night: The more ^^stours and Teachers, and the Work of the Ministry, the
nearer we come to the unity of the Faith. Let light scatter, and it will pull
down the Kingdom of darkness. You, and the Truth, and Christ have no such
enemy as ignorance.

Secondly, Advance holiness. This is another winning and prevailing blessing.
Oh that Righteousness might be as waves of the Sea! And then our Peace will be
as a River, Isay 48.18. Labor for holy Laws, holy worship, holy Sabbaths, holy
families. For a holy Court, and then holiness will be in fashion. For holy
Universities, and then they will be filled, not with sons of Beliall, but
with sons of the Prophets. But above all for a holy Ministry, From the Prophets
of Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth into all the Land, Jer. 23.15. and
from them must the people learn holiness. And a holy Magistracy, if God would
restore our Judges as at first; Let us enjoy faithful Moseses, Joshua's, etc.
Then should we be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City, Isay
1.26. Nothing but sin can hurt us, and sin will not only make all your
good purposes of Reformation abortive, but Gods too, Jer. 18.9, 10. At what
instant I say concerning a Nation and Kingdom, to build and plant it, if it
do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then will I repent of the
good wherewith I said I would benefit it.

Seek first the Kingdom of God in light, and helinesse, and then all other
things shall be administered unto you. What ever difficulties hinder the
execution, let these be first in your intentions.

These directions God has given you by me a weak creature, I hope you need
not much to quicken you. Judge. 5.9.
We desire with Deborah to bless the Lord that made the governors of Israel
to offer themselves willingly. Remember the place God has called you to: the
Kingdom is in a broken and shatterd condition, you are our watchmen, we say to
you as Moses to Hobab, Number. 10.31. in the Wilderness, thou art to us instead
of eyes: you are our eyes to see our dangers, and our hands to defend us from
them. We cannot better express that trust that lies upon you then God himself
has done concerning Moses, Exodus 4.16. thou shall be to him instead of a God.

Governors are styled Gods in Scripture, but those best deserve it that are
delivering rulers such was Moses, such to us instead of a God are you; and then
think you what Wisdom, justice, firmness, and stability is required in you.

The trust is heavy, our expectations great, and the account will be dreadful.
If you were alone in this work you would sink under it, but God has promised
his presence, and God is in you of a truth. It is the sword of the Lord and the
sword of Gideon: Gods people see it with comfort, his enemies shall feel it
with shame. What the people observed of Jonathan, we may observe in you, 1 Samuel
14.45. he has wrought with God this day; so you have, and so you will, we
hope: and then Gamaliels words will hold, Act. 5.39. if it be of God you cannot
overthrow it.

You labor with God, and for God, because you labor for Zion; you travail for
her that travailed with you; For the Church that must stand and prosper, Christ
has promised, the gates of hell shall not prevayle against her; not the gate^
in which was their strength; in the gates the elders sat, and so their polity
as well as their strength was in the gates; yet both shall not prevayle against
the Church.

God is gone before you travailing in the greatness of his strength,
challenging countries, Isa. 63.1.
and people, he says, I will divide Shechem, mete out the valley of Succoth;
Gilead is mine, over Edom will I cast out my shoe, etc. Psalm. 60.6.7.8. And
the prayers of Gods people are gone like the Arc before the camp of Israel,
three days journey to seek out a resting place, Number. 10.33. they are before
you, preparing your way, hewing down difficulties: It is safe following such a
conduct: And God has made the people willing in the day of his power. Psalm.
1^0.3.
That of the Psalmist is considerable, Psalm. 47.9. The Princes of the people
are gathered together: the marginall lection is, the voluntary of the people,
the generous of the people: God has the hearts of all men in his hand; And the
shields of the earth belong unto the Lord: The Militia of the world is his: And
all these shall second them that seek his glory and Zions Peace* Therefore
proceed chearefully to make use of this sweet opportunity, to honor God, and
heal our breaches. Heaven we hope is big with blessings; The Tabernacle of
God, is coming down to dwell with men; what ever dark clouds appear, let us
continue praying, waiting, laboring, believing, God will at last establish,
and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 29. Junii. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, that Sir
Thomas Barrington do return thanks to Mr. Sedgwicke, for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he Preached this day at St. Margarets Church in Westminster,
at the entreaty of the Commons House of Parliament, this being the day of the
public Fast, And that he be desired to Print his Sermon, And that no man
presume to Print it, but such as he shall appoint, till the House shall take
further Order.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint John Bellamy and Ralph Smith, to Print my Sermon. WILLIAM SEDGVVICKE.


