England's PRESERVATION OR, A SERMON discovering the only way to prevent
destroying JUDGMENTS: Preached to the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS at their
last solemn Fast, being on May, 25. 1642.

BY OBADIAH SEDGWICKE Batchelour in Divinity and Minister of COGGESHALL in
Essex.

Published by Order of that House.

JEREMIAH 13. 27. O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean? When shall it once
be?

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1642.

To the Honorable House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THis Sermon which I preached by your command, and you harkned unto with much
acceptance, and is now printed by our Order, I most humbly present unto your
Gracious Patronage, and Religious practice; It has this only in it; that it is
seasonable; what one once writ to Aegidius the Abbot of Norinberg concerning
David's words in Psalm 118. They are verba vivenda, non legenda: That may be
affirmed of the Text I preached on, the pith and matter of it should be lived,
and not heard only: Repentance is a living word: Alexander (as Plutarch Orat.
1. de Alex. (...)
reports) demanded of Porus (whom he had surprised) what his thoughts were of
him, he answered, I think of Alexander, Regaliter, and that's enough said he,
for in that word all other things are contained: the same I may say, if any man
demands what our sinful and distracted Kingdom should do? I answer, Repent,
and in that word (if lived and done) all our safeties and hopes are contained.

There were 3. things (most Honorable Sirs!) which Luther did fear would
prove Melchior Adam: in vita Luther: p. 157. 158.
to be the Ruin of Religion. 1. Oblivion. 2 Security. 3. Carnal policy: The
good God overthrow these in our Land, least our land be overthrown by these:
Though Ministers discover all sorts of sins, and though a Parliament discovers
all sorts of plots and dangers, yet people are settled on their Lee's, they will
not see, nor fear, nor humble themselves, nor turn to the Lord at all; O
pray, (said a dying man in the beginning of the German reformation) that God
would preserve the Gospel (pontifex enim Romanus, and Concilium Trident. mira
moliuntur) For the Pope and Council of Trent are hatching of strange things:
Ministers say as much and more to people, pray, be humbled, reform; For you see
what the bloody Papists have done in Ireland, and you hear what they are
plotting against England, we do thus speak and weep, but man will not hearken
and obey; They who will not easily see their sins, will as hardly believe their
dangers: Fuge, fuge Brenti! cito, citius, citissime, so friendly did a Senator
of Hala advise Brentius, have, hasten, make all the have you can, your life is
lost else: He embraced the advice, and preserved his life by it; O that Gods
advises (so frequent, so earnest, so and more safe) to humbling and reforming
might once be regarded and followed: we shall never be safe, if we ever
remain impenitent.

As for your selves, Honorable Sirs! we have all cause to bless God for the
worthy Acts already done by you, and for your further intentions of most
excellent good to our Church and Kingdom; Ripen these intentions (we pray you)
into Actions* That our Church may be glorious, and our State safe; and both
flourishing and stable: good actions are excellent, though evil men oppose
them, nor shall they be therefore, the less successeful: remember that Christ
has conquered all the world, and a world conquered by Christ shall never be able
to conquer truth.

I have one request which I earnestly present to your selves and the House of
Lords, It is only this, Hasten (what you can) Englands Reformation, and
Irelands preservation: In these the good and Almighty God unite, strengthen,
protect, and prosper you All, To whose everlasting arms, you and all your
pious endeavors are commended by your daily Orator.

Obadiah Sedwicke.
Die Mercurij 25. May 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament that Master
Harris, and Mr. Obadiah Sedgwicke, who this day, being the day of the public
Fast, at the entreaty of the said Commons; preached at Saint Margaret
Westminster, shall have thanks returned them, for the great and worthy pains
they have taken, and that they be desired to print their Sermons, and that no
man presume to print them, but such as they shall appoint, till the House shall
take further Order.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Samuel Gellibrand to print my Sermon.

Obadiah Sedgwick.



A Sermon Preached at the late Fast, to the Commons House OF PARLIAMENT.
JEREM. 4. 3. Thus says the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, break up
your fallow ground, and sow not among Thorns.
THere is a learned writer who speaks of four days for a sinner. Bernard.


The first is Dies Faetoris, A day of loathsomenesse, 4. Days incident to man.
and this is the time when the sinner lies rotting in the grave of sin. 2. The
second Dies Timoris, a day of anguish, and this is the time when Conscience
begins to be awakened with the sight and sense of sin; 3. The third is Dies
Doloris, a day of mourning, and this is the time when the heart begins to melt
into Tears for sinning; The fourth is Dies Laboris, a day of Combat, and this
is the time when the penitent and converted soul sets it self against the
temptations of sin.

The first of these is the worst of our days, and yet too common (the dead in
this sense are more than the living.) The second of these is a bitter and
turbulent day, and yet it may prove happy and cheerful (there being more
hope of a sore Conscience then of a seared Conscience) The two last are (like
precious Jewels) very good, but very Rare: It is an easy thing to find
sinners, but it is not an easy thing to find mourning sinners, and penitent
sinners.

So blind is the mind of man, so perverse is the will of a sinner, so
prevalent is the love of sin, so desperate is the resolution of an hardened
heart, that neither the Golden Scepter, nor the Iron Rod, neither the sweetest
mercies, nor the sharpest miseries will easily prevail with sinning man, to
become a penitent man; But though God be leaving, though mercies be setting,
though wrath be approaching, though life be short, though hell be fearful,
yet it is a thousand to one, but the sinner remains (under all these)
constantly wicked, or only deceitfully good.

A clear instance whereof, you have in the Jews in this Chapter, who
notwithstanding they had almost sinned away their God, their Country, their
lives, their helps, their hopes; And notwithstanding all their warnings by
variety of Prophets, and all their sufferings by variety of punishments, and
all their threatenings in variety of Judgments, though there was but a step
twixt them and death, only one mercy twixt them and utter destruction by the
enemy, yet either they totally neglected the work, or would not be persuaded
thoroughly to act the duty of Repentance.

The Lord saw this dangerous obstinacy and pitties it, and strives with them to
save their souls, that they might (by this means) save their Country. The
way he spreads before them is expressed,

Partly in verse 1. [If thou will Return, O Israel! says the Lord, Return
unto me, and if thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then
thou shall not Remove:] q. d. leave thy sins and save all. Thou have made
many overtures and semblances thereof by Fastings, by confessings, by prayings.
Add now one thing more, Repent in good earnest. This will be life to your
solemnities and safety to your Nation.

Partly in ver. 3. [Break up your fallow ground and sow not among thorns.] q.
d. If you do not Repent, you are undone, if you do repent, but not thoroughly,
you will be undone too: hypocrisy in good duties, as well as profaneness in
bad ways may ruin a person and Nation; A man may as surely be drowned in a
ship that has a leake, as when he has no ship at all.

Therefore pretend Repentance no longer, but act it, and when you do act it,
act it not slightly but exactly; become good, and do good to purpose: If you
regard and follow this Counsel, Then (as in ver. 1.) you shall not remove; but
if you will not hearken unto it, then (as in ver. 4.) My fury shall come forth
like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your
doings.

The words of my Text contain in them the principal works of this day, which
are two,

1. A serious humiliation, unto which the Jews are exhorted in these words
[Break up your Fallow ground] 2. A dextrous Reformation, delivered unto them by
way of caution [And sow not among thorns:]
There must be not a little rasing, but a breaking, nor a mere breaking, but
a breaking up, and when that is done, there must be a sowing too, but every
sowing must not serve the turn, It must be such a sowing, as may come to
something, It must not be a sowing among thorns.

The field which I am at this time to work upon and go over (you see) is very
large, there is much more ground in it then I can conveniently break up and
sow, I shall though (by that Gods assistance who only is the Maker and breaker
of hearts) set upon the whole work, and He (in tender mercy) so accompany,
and water and prosper His truths this day, that all our Fallow grounds may be
broken up, and then so graciously sown in righteousness, that we and all the
land may shortly Reap in mercy!

I begin with the first part [Breake up your Fallow ground.]

That these words are to be understood, not literally but metaphorically, I
make no question, that any who hears me, does question: Interpreters (though)
do vary something in their conjectures. Tertullian by fallow ground understands
the old Law, which he Adversus Iudaeos. c. 3.
says is to be broken up by the new Law (he means the Gospel,) an exposition
much impertinent, and too wide.

Cassianus understands by it, the Heathens and Pagans, and other secular
persons, nor is this conjecture apt to the Text.

Cyprian draws nearer to the sense, who by fallow ground, understands (Mores
popusi) the conversations of the Jews; and Cyril of Alexandria who by it
understands, (Animum sylvescentem) an heart like the wilderness, wild and
destitute of all pious culture, and Chrysostom yet more exactly by fallow
ground understands (cordis profundum) the very Core and depths of a sinful
heart.

So then (to stop all quotations) the fallow ground The Fallow ground is the
sinful heart.
is nothing else but the sinful estate of a person or Nation; And it is very
aptly so described by reason of that consimilitude which the one has with the
other, For;

First, Fallow ground is a barren piece of earth: a Tohu and Bohu as at the
first, void of all excellency and beauty: There is not one grain of good seed
So resembled in three re
in it, nor any one delightful flower; such a desert is man's sinful heart: It
is a very (Inane and Nihilum) vanity and vanity, no divine excellency is to be
found there; Not any one effect, nor any one seed of spiritual inclination:
For this, It may answer as the depth did for wisdom, It is not in me. Job 28.
14.


Secondly, Fallow ground is (usually) an indigested Thicket, lumbred all over
with weeds, and Briars, and Thorns, and Thistles, (that original curse which
befell the Earth for man's transgression:) And such a piece also is man's sinful
heart Though it be but a barren Wilderness for any good, yet it is an ample
Ocean for all that is evil, and hurtful. The upper part of his field has in
it an abundance of thorns (unprofitable thoughts, hurtful cares, wounding
errors;) and the lower part of his field is as full of stinking weeds (vile
affections as the Apostle calls them:) the best fruits of him are but as a
briar to scratch himself, and to catch and entangle others with sin.

Lastly, Fallow ground is an hardened part of earth, extremely compacted by the
influences of the sun and winds, and by its own native inclination; so that
it is not an easy thing to sever it, and dispose it for a better use: just so
is a natural, or sinful heart; It is so trodden, and seared and obdurated,
partly by the frequent repetition of sinful acts, and partly by the intension
of sinful delights, that it is not only defective of good, but also very
active against it, unyeelding, resisting, and fighting against all heavenly
counsels and motions. The man is evil, and will be so, he is not good, nor
will he be so, unless God by an insuperable virtue of his own spirit makes him
to be so.

We have found what the fallow ground is, let us in the next place inquire,
what the breaking of it up The breaking up: what?
is? Then the Fallow ground is broken up, when the Husbandman comes with his
Plow, and enters that plow into it, deeply enters it, even into the Bowels of
the ground, and then rents and tears it, and turns it upside down: Not in one
Furrow, but in every Furrow, once, twice, perhaps thrice if need so requires.

Even so the sinful heart is broken up when the Almighty and gracious God
(whom Christ calls the Husbandman) comes with his Word and Spirit, and (Alta
voce as St. Austine speaks, or virtute magnifica John 15. 1.
as Ber. speaks) enters into the heart or soul of a sinner by irresistible
convincings, and by efficacious humblings (which are as rentings and tearings to
the ground) and by rooting up the dominion and love of all sins.

The Scriptures sometimes call this work, a touching, sometimes a pricking,
sometimes a troubling, Acts 2. 37. 1 Samuel 1. 5. Psalm. 34. 18. Prove. 18. 14.
Isa. 42. 3. Joel 2. 13. 2 King. 22. 19.
sometimes a wounding, sometimes a bruising, sometimes a breaking, sometimes a
renting, sometimes a killing, and sometimes an humbling and melting of the
heart.

And this is it which God calls for in the Text from the Jews as a means to
prevent their utter destruction by the sword of the Caldeans; whence the
proposition (which I shall in the first place insist on) is this,

That the breaking up of sinful hearts, Is a singular means to prevent the
breaking down of a sinful Nation.

THere are three things unto which I shall speak for the explication of this
assertion, Namely

1. What the right breaking of a sinful heart is, which is so availeable to
prevent the breaking down of a sinful Nation? 2. Some demonstrations that it
is a preventing means. 3. The Reasons why it is so?
For the first quaere, what the right breaking up of a Quest. 1.
a sinful heart is? Be pleased to know that there is a twofold Breaking of a
sinners heart. Sol.


1. One is specious only and formal (supersicie tenus The heart broken for sin
2 Ways 1. Formally.
as Saint Bernard speaks) as Artificial Juglars seem to wound themselves, but
do not; or as Players seem to thrust themselves through their bodies, but the
sword passes only through their clothes: There is something done about sins,
but nothing is done against sins; peccata raduntur sed non eradicantur, as the
same Auhor speaks, which he truly calls a Fiction and vanity; As when men
only lop the Trees, which thereupon in time grow the faster and thicker.
Against this breaking the Prophet of old much complained; They in Isaiah hung
down their heads and afflicted their souls for a day, but for all that they
Esa. 58. 5, and 3
still afflicted their poor brethren; And they in Hosea, did howl, but yet
they did still rebel against the Hosea 7. 14.
Lord; And they in Malachy did cry out, and cover Malach. 2. 13. and 11.
the Altar with Tears, and yet for all their pretended contrition, they did
profane the holiness of their God: And though the Pharisees did assume unto
themselves a most mortified garb of humbling (especially in their days of
Fasting disfiguring their faces as Christ reports of them) yet their hearts
were as loose, as full of pride, and covetousness, and envy, Matthew. 6. 16.
and opposition of Christ, as ever.

2. Another is serious and Real; which is acted most in the hidden man, and
pierces like the word, (Hebr. 4. 12.) even to the dividing of soul and
spirit, of which likewise there are two kinds, one is styled Attrition, and
the other is styled Contrition by the Schoolmen; the former (by our Casuists)
is called a legal breaking, and the latter an Evangelicall breaking. They
difference them thus, partly,


1. By their objects. Penal evil is the object on which Attrition does work,
and sinful evil is the object on which Contrition works; the one is
conversant about passive evil (that is) the evil which we suffer, but the
other is conversant about Active evil (that is) the evil which we have done;
For sin has in it two qualities, one, to make us unhappie, and this
Attrition looks at; another to make us unholy, and at this does contrition
look.

2. By their causes, legal Attrition is only the pinching of servile fear
and despair, for it sees nothing but Sea, all that will tear and distract
the Conscience; but Evangelicall contrition is the melting and lamenting of
filial Love, and Hope: The frowns of a Revenging Judge causes that; but the
smiles of a gracious Father raises this; In the one the heart is shivered by
the flashes of Hell, In the other the heart is melted by the beams of Heaven;
A stroke from guilt brake Judas's heart into despair, but a look from CHRIST
brake Peter's heart into tears.

3. By their effects, an Attrite heart may (for that space of time whiles the
Conscience burns and flames with wrath) become negatively penitent, Non
proponit peccare, It does not purpose to sin; the sensible anguish for former
sinnings may suspend delightful intentions for future sins; but the contrite
heart (out of a contrariety of nature) becomes positively holy, proponit non
peccare, It does Cordially purpose not to sin any more; All which (if I mistake
not) is the same that Cajetan aims at, when he says, that Attrition
produces (velleitatem) an imperfect motion of the will, but contrition
produces (voluntatem) a complete and direct will against sin:

But this discourse (I fear) is too speculative for this days work, give me
leave therefore to open the nature of this penitential heart breaking in a
more practical and profitable way: There are several workings which
ordinarily concur to the full constituting of this heartbreaking work,
whereof some are Antecedent, some are formally ingredient, and some are
inseparably consequent.

1. The Antecedent workings are such as previously lead the way to the
Evangelicall breaking as Antecedents to heart breaking three.
the Needle does to the thread, and the breaking by the hammer does to the
melting by the fire, by way of order only and not by causality: These are
(principally) three.

1. A Notionall Irradiation: The Lord never breaks a sinners heart before he
has opened a sinners 1. Irradiation
eyes: the day breaks before the heart breaks: light breaks to elevate the
soul, thus far to discern and distinguish of evil; till then, sin is no
burden to the Conscience, nor trouble to the affections: As no good wrapped up in
darkness excites desire, so no evil swathed up in Ignorance strikes any
trouble or sorrow: unknown things, have not motive faculty because they are as
(non entia) no things at all: And therefore God ever keeps this method, to
make sin appear to be sin, and afterward to humble and break our hearts for
it.

2. A practical conviction, which is nothing else but a personal application
of guilt and wrath, without 2. Conviction
which the notion of sin would be no trouble: let me open my mind thus unto
you: That drunkenness, or swearing, or whoredom, or murder, or Sabbath
breaking, etc. are sins; And that such persons who are guilty of them, (without
Repentance) shall not inherit the kingdom of God, All this the sinner knows
already* and yet is not troubled, for as long as light rests in a bare Notion,
it is only an addition to his understanding, It is no burden at all to his
heart: But when this light slips down, and charge this sin and this wrath
upon this very person, and shines so clearly in this charge, that the person
cannot for his life deny it, thou art a drunkard, thou art this swearer, etc.
And hereupon in the name of God arrests him with that wrath which God has
threatened unto that sin and sinner, now the sinner begins to consider, and
tremble, and break.

When Peter closed with the Jews, and convinced Acts 2. 36, 37.
them that they (in particular* crucified Jesus Christ, Now their h^^ts were
pricked: and when Nathan draws his parable out of the cloud, and unclothes his
Message to David, saying, Thou art the man, Now 2 Samuel 12. 7. Psalm 51.
Davids's heart begins to break and take on; O see! the subtle heart of man
will endure and bear all the Historical Notions of sin (as we can the names
and natures of diseases and medicines) without any aching and sickness; But
when the Lord brings down sin from being a notion, to be an obligation, and
enters an action against the soul within the soul, now (and not before) the
heart-workings, and heart-breakings do begin.

3. A Conscience affliction: which in respect of 3. Affliction.
degrees and quantity, is, in some more, and in others less: for Gods Spirit
is an Arbitrary agent in the Graduall effects of bondage as well as in those
gracious effects of Adoption; Nevertheless though the degrees of working be
different, yet the work it self is certain; The heart will never be rightly
broken for sin, till Conscience (which Saint Bernard calls Accuser, Witness,
Judge, and Tormentor) begins to be awakened and quickened: And believe it if The
terrible workings of conscience.
Conscience which has been so much stirred begins to stir, if Conscience
which has been so often wounded begins to wound, the spirit of man will
eftsoone fail and break within him; O says Conscience! What have thou done,
thus and thus to provoke the Holy and Righteous and Great God. I know the
several acts of thy sinnings, and times, and places, and persons, and
circumstances; and I have sad news to tell thee, that great God (against whom
thou have so much and so often sinned) has commanded and deputed me not only
to speak no peace, but also to speak His wrath and displeasure unto thee, and
in His Name I charge upon thee all thy sins and all his just wrath revealed
against them.

And now the proud and stout heart of a sinner begins to throb and fear and
tremble: He thinks that every threatening which he reads, is a Cloud of
Tempests against him, he thinks that every judgment he hears of another, is
a Sword drawn to cut him off also; He thinks that all the hell and torments
thereof mentioned in the Scriptures, will ere long be his portion; whereupon
his distracted soul cries out, o that I had never been! o that I had never
sinned! o that I might never be! If I should now dye, good Lord! what will
become of me? If I should yet live, will the Lord ever be merciful to me?
The sins which I see are many, the wrath which I feel is great, and that which
I fear is infinite: If I live, I see I am an accursed creature, and if I dye
(o let me not yet dye!) I fear I shall be for ever (o my soul breaks at
that endless word of misery, for ever!) a damned sinner: But yet cries out
this sinner, Lord! Lord! Is there no mercy, nor hope of any mercy for me, a
most vile sinner?

With these mind racking-breaking thoughts away hastens this burdened, broken
sinner unto his Closet, and shuts the door, and down he falls on his knees,
and with much confusion of thoughts and fears he spreads all his sinnings
before God, confessing one, and then another, and then with fervent agonies
begges of the Lord (more than for his life) Mercy Lord! mercy, mercy for a
lost, for an heinous, for an undone sinner! Can thou pardon me? Will thou
pardon me? O Lord pardon me! O Lord be reconciled unto me! O that I might
have any hopes, the least hopes, that thou would be merciful unto me!

And now up rises this sinner with these or the like thoughts, well! I will
read the Bible, I will hear such a Minister, I will open my condition unto
him, and confer, and inquire whither there be no balm in Gilead: whither
there be a mercy Seat, a City of refuge to entertain such a sinner as I am;
and after a while upon careful search, he finds that yet there is hope, that
there is an immeasurable sufficiency in the blood of Christ, and an Ocean of
full and free grace in God, and that God (notwithstanding all his former
sinnings against him) is most willing and ready to accept of him into mercy, if
so be, he be willing to forsake his sins and embrace a Mediator.

2. The formal Ingredients.
HEreupon follows the second principal working Ingredients of heart breaking
two Ier. 31, 19.
which formally makes up Evangelicall Contrition, and it is (1. Pudor. 2.
Dolor,) shame and grief: Such kindness from the mercy-seate makes him now as
Ephraim, confounded and ashamed, and his heart to break into most melting
floods of tears, that ever he should be so monstrously vile to offend such
tender and gracious bowels of mercy, which he now apprehends yerning toward
him in and through Christ. As before, the apprehensions of divine wrath did
distract and shiver him, so now the apprehensions of divine love do totally
dissolve and melt him; though there were not Heaven hereafter to Crown him,
yet he must grieve, and though there were not Hell hereafter to burn him, yet
he must exceedingly mourn for sinning against such a God.

This is that right Evangelicall Contrition which I press for at this time!
called in Scripture, a softness of heart, and a contrite Heart, and a
mourning, and a bitter mourning, and a great mourning, like that of Hadadrimmon
in the Valley of Megiddon: which Zac. 12. 10, 11.
Saint Ambrose calls (Cor liquescens) an heart melting, and dissolving, and
Saint Hierome (magnum planctum) an exceeding lamenting; and St. Austin (grave
lamentum) a very heavy grief.

The Casuists and Schoolmen affirm it to be the Sorrow for sin the greatest
sorrow in 4. respects. Adrianus. Scotus. Soto.
greatest of all sorrows. 1. In conatu, the whole soul seems to send springs
into it out of every faculty. 2. In extensione, It is a spring which in this
life (more or less) is continually dropping. 3. In appreciatione, the changed
soul does ever judge that a good God offended, should be the prime cause of
greatest sorrow, and Lastly, In intensione, For Intension of displicence in the
will, there being no other things, with which, or for which the will is more
displeased with it self then for sinning against God. And therefore some of
the Schoolmen propounding this question Sot in 4. Sent. d. 17. q. 2. art. 4.
whether there should be more grief for sin, then for the p^ssion of Christ?
Resolve it Affirmatively, that there is more cause of grief for sinning, then
for the death of Christ: and their reason is this, because in the death of
Christ there was (Aliquid placens) Something that did please God, so far as
it was a Redemption, but sin is (simpliciter displicens) there is nothing in it
which is not altogether displeasing unto God, consider it formally as sin.

3. The consequent working.
WHich rather shows and declares, then makes a broken heart, and it is hatred
of sin; the Hatred of sin the consequent of heart breaking for sin. A double
hatred of sin.
heart which is rightly broken, is not only broken for sin, but also from sin
by an hatred. 1. Of abomination, loathing it as the greatest evil: Get thee
hence say they in, Esa. 30. 22. And 2. Of enmi^y and irreconciliation, what
have I to do any more with Idols, says Ephraim in Hosea 14. 8.

Thus have you heard what the breaking up of the fallow ground, or sinful
heart is, now I proceed (in few words) to demonstrate, That it is the means to
prevent the breaking down of a sinful Nation; this Quest. 2.
may evidently appear.

1. By the fingers of God in Scripture pointing a Sol. 4. Demonstrations of the
proposition in its truth.
people to this work, that so they might not sink into ruin, but be
preserved: Read Ezekiel 18. 30, 31. Joel 2. 13, 14.

2. By the pledges which God makes in several promises, that if a sinful
Nation will take this course, he will then spare them, and continue them: Read,
Ier. 18. 7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

3. By the Records or Instances of Gods sparing a people, and a revoking of his
wrath and judgments when they have set upon this Heartbreaking course, Read
Jonah 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 2 Chronicles 34. 27.

4. By the executions of destruction because they would not hearken to this
course, See 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16, 17.

But why should the breaking up of sinful hearts be a means to prevent the
breaking down of a sinful Quest. 3.
Nation? The Reasons are these, because

First, where hearts are rightly broken for sins, there sins are pardoned:
and where sins are pardoned, Sol. 4. Confirmations of the proposition. 2
Chro. 7. 14. Esaias. 1. 16.
all breaking down is unquestionably prevented. In Esaiah, you read of washing
and cleansing (they are the same with this heartbreaking and mourning) and
presently you read of pardon, Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow, 18.
etc. and presently after that, you read, of eating the 19.
good of the Land: a comfortable fruition of themselves, and of their Country,
and of all means and blessings.

Beloved! when sins are pardoned then, 2. Effects of sins pardoned.


1. All their guilty clamor is silenced: pardoned sins are disabled sins, they
can bring no action against us, debts forgiven shall never prejudice nor hurt
us: Sins unpardoned can raise posse comitatus, all the Armies Remissa culpa
remittitur paena.
of God in Heaven and Earth against sinners, but once pardoned, they are of no
force or strength at all.

And secondly, when sins are pardoned, all good has a free passage; God is
reconciled, and mercies have their Commission to attend us: Now says the Lord,
I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall
hear the Corn, and the Wine Hos. 2. 21, 22
and the Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel.

2. Again, If sinful hearts be broken, God has his end, and then all
quarrels cease twixt him and a 2.
Nation: the Lord does not threaten destruction to a people for destructions
sake, but for Humiliations sake: Not that they may be destroyed, but that they
should repent, and not be destroyed.

3. Thirdly, Broken hearts are a wonderful delight unto the Lord: There are
somethings in which 3.
God has no delight, He has no delight in sinnings, Psalm. 5. 4. Ezekiel. 18. 32.
nor in punishments: and there are two hearts in which God takes much delight,
namely, in an upright heart and in a Contrite heart, The broken heart he will
not despise, nay he will look upon that heart to revive it: If broken hearts
be Gods delight, and the objects of Psalm. 51. 17. Esa. 57. 15.
his reviving, then without question they are a means to prevent destruction.

4. Lastly, when hearts are broken for sins, then Gods heart (if I may so
phrase it) is broken with compassions unto sinners: Though sinners remain
obstinate yet divine compassions work strongly toward them, (How shall I give
thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? etc. Hosea 11. 8.) what
bowels then (think you) are working in God when sinners are broken and humbled
and turning? If God can so hardly find the way to punish impenitent Ephraim,
will he not find the way to spare an humbling Ephraim, See Ier. 31. 18. I have
surely heard Ephraim lamenting himself, etc. 20. My bowels are troubled for
him, I will surely have mercy upon him says the Lord.

I have done with the explication of the point, I now address my self to the
Application of it.

1. To all of us. 2. To you of public employment.

Is the breaking up of sinful hearts, the means to prevent the breaking down
of a sinning Nation? Use.
Then let every one of us here, (o that the whole Land also would) search and
try the temper and frame of our hearts, whither they be broken or unbroken?
Beloved! I beseech you sadly to consider of a few things.

1. That brokennesse of heart is the work of this 6. Things considerable,
about brokennesse of heart.
day: This is a day of Humiliation; but what is an humbling day without an
humbled heart? to present your selves before the great God, at such a time,
with all your sins, and yet without hearts broken for those sins, is not only
an irreligious incongruity, but also an high provocation of our God; like
Zimries act when all the Congregation were weeping before the door of the
Tabernacle, Numb. 25. 6.

Come we not this day with all sorts of guilt upon our souls, and with ropes
about our necks, expecting (if the Lord should render unto us our deserts) the
sentence of death, and confess as much, and yet dare we to play the
Hypocrites, having hearts under all this utterly unbroken?

Secondly, brokennesse of heart, is the hope of this day: I profess seriously
unto you, that were you as much in fasting as John's Disciples, and in praying
as Christ's Disciples, could you by Fasting make your knees to faint, and your
flesh to fail, and resolve your bodies into a very Sceleton, if yet your
hearts were not broken for your sins, Neither your selves, nor your endaevours,
nor our own Nation, nor the distressed Church of Ireland, nor any other would
be the better for it: As one of the Fathers said of Learning, All learning is
suspected, nay disrespected by me, wherein is not the mention of Christ, that I
affirm of all solemn fastings whatsoever, the Lord regards them not, if the
broken heart be not found in them.

What Joseph said to his brethren, unless you bring your brother Benjamin with
you, you shall not see my face, or as Isaac said to his Father, Behold the Fire
and the Wood, but where is the Lamb for a burnt offering? That the Lord says
unto us, Fast as often as you please, and pray too, unless your hearts be
broken for your sins, nothing that you do shall find favor with me; all
the rest is but as wood and fire, the Lamb, the Sacrifice of a Contrite heart
(which is that I look at, and for,) is wanting.

Get thee behind me said Jehu to the several messengers, what have you to do
with peace? Confessions, and prayers are the messengers of our souls to God,
but unless the sinful heart be broken, they will never be messengers of peace.

If any of you would angle in a River, would you throw in a naked line only?
would this be to any purpose? Sirs! I know well, that if a Fast be rightly
performed, it has as many promises of blessings and mercies (See Esaias 58.) As
any religious duty whatsoever: Nay, and I think that you never read in all the
Bible, nor yet in experience, of its right performance without some sudden and
remarkable Testimony of Gods gracious acceptance and answer: But then breaking
of hearts ever accompanied those prevailing and victorious Fasts, as you may
Read in Judges, and Samuel, and the Kings, and Ezra, and Nehemiah, etc. And
for my part, I should not scruple the assecution of any convenient mercy, nor
the diversion of any impendent evil, if once with all our Fastings, there were
also a breaking up of our Fallow grounds: If GOD could in this command our
hearts, we might then (in some sense) command our God:

3. Thirdly, Have we not all of us sufficient cause to break our sinful
hearts? Should sins, should calamities abroad, should dangers at home break
hearts? all these may then work upon us: our sins have broken the heart of
CHRIST, and are such as have broken off God from a people, and have broken many
Churches down: Can you be ignorant of the professed Idolatry in this Land? of
the horrid blasphemies? of the overflowing drunkenness? of the Sabbaths
profanation? etc. And if we look at calamities abroad, why, as Jacob said,
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, so may we say, Bohemia is broken up, and the
Palatinate is broken up, and IRELAND is breaking up, and yet the hearts of
sinful England will not be broken up: Nay if we look at the dangers
hovering like a Cloud over this Land, and dropping already in manifold and
sundry divisions, in manifold plots, in manifold and several contradictions,
and even ready to break forth (O LORD let it not break forth) in a bitter
intestine War amongst our selves, where every man's sword shall be against
his brother, and the Child may kill the Parent, or the Parent kill his Child
(bowels sheathed in bowels,) No man scarce secure in his own Family, our sins
are bringing this upon us, and yet our hearts will not break for these sins!
The God of all Wisdom and mercies break our hearts, that so this judgment
may not do that which all our foreign enemies hitherto could not do, Break
down our Church and Nation.

4. And if judgments should break in upon sinners, before hearts are broken
for sins, good Lord! what, where are they? Dudilius relates a sad story of
Bochna a woman who had but two sons, and whiles she was walking with the one
toward the River, she heard the other crying out, and hastening back, she
found a knife sticking in him, which killed him quickly, then she returns to her
other child thinking to solace her self in an only child, but he in her
absence was fallen into the river and drowned, both lost at once: Ah Sirs! we
have but two children, a Soul and a body! what an heavy loss will it be to
lose both these at once? To be cut off by an angry enemy and to be cast off
by a mighty God! To lose a life, and at the same time to lofe an eternal life!
To lose safety and salvation at once? It Is true that if a sinners heart be
broken by grace, there is no question of mercy, but when an impenitent sinners
life is broken by judgment, his hopes are gone, and his breaking of it for ever.

5. Fifthly, We shall assuredly be broken off, if we be not broken up;
Beloved! There are two vile malignities in an unbroken heart.

First, It is one of the greatest of spiritual judgments, o said a Reverend
man once, if I must be put to my option, I had rather be in Hell with a
sensible heart, then live on earth with a reprobate mind; so I say, an hardened
and unbroken heart (is in some respect) a judgment worse than Hell, for as
much as one of the greatest sins, is far greater in evil, then any of the
greatest punishments.

Secondly, It is the immediate and unavoydable forerunner of the greatest of
temporal judgments, He that hardens his heart shall be destroyed suddenly and
that without remedy, Prove. 29. 1. Observe that place: There is no less then
destruction, which is not a particular and imperfect damage, but it is a
complete ruin, and this destruction is certain (shall, not may perhaps, be
destroyed) but when? Suddenly! I! but the sinner will shift it off, and
withstand it! No, but he shall be destroyed without remedy: His destruction
shall not be prevented; you may read all this in the old World, and in
Pharaoh, and in the Jews before the Babylonian Captivity, and afterward in
the Roman divastation which has lasted these 1600 years.

6. But now where are our broken hearts? I know not what to say, my heartakes
within me, o that it could be broken because hearts are generally unbroken:
Sinners are secure, Consciences are seared, wickedness is bold, sins are a
delight and pastime, God is not seen nor feared in his judgments, in His
warnings, in His dealings; Reformation is abhorred, Humiliation (most know not
what it means, and if they do) it is distasted: Serious thoughts of our
sinful ways who takes them up? sufficient time for selfe-examination who
makes it for himself? every man runs on in his course, loves as he did,
lives as he did; And never knew a trouble in his soul, nor a tear in his eye
either for his own, or for the sins of others, all his days: And what will
the end of all this be?

O that God would pity us this day, and break our hearts for us! though it
be so irksome and contrary to our flesh and blood: It is better (said a
Father) to dye one death, then to live and fear all deaths: better it is to
suffer the heart to be broken, then to expose our selves to all sorts of
Judicial and eternal breakings: o Lord said dying Fulgen. (Dapaenitentiam and
postea indulgentiam) make me a penitent sinner, and then let me find thee an
indulgent Father: Never look for great mercies, for long mercies, for any
mercies with unbroken hearts; we are not good, we can do no good, we can
expect no good, till our sinful hearts be broken: O Christians be persuaded
this day to get broken hearts! God can do it for you, and will do it for you,
if you will but use the means and seek unto him: spare time, and take it to
study the Law, to study Conscience, to study the Gospel, to study mercies, to
study judgments, to study Christ, to study all, that after all, our hearts may
be broken for our sins, that so God may not break away from us, but
continue to be our God, and that judgments (which look so black upon us may
be broken off, and plots (contrived against us) may break asunder, and all
spiritual and earthly mercies may break down in mercy upon us.

And thus much be spoken with a respect unto every one that hears me this
day, I have besides all this a particular errand from God to you, who are
public persons, and have summond me this day unto Use 2.
this public work, me thinks that the Lord speaks to you in some respect
what once he spoke to the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 1. Verse 10. See, I have this
day set you over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms to root out, and to pull
down, and to destroy, and to throw down.

And blessed be the Lord, and blessed be your souls, and blessed be your
endeavors, that notwithstanding the infinite difficulty of the work, and the
Malignant contrariety you meet with, yet your hearts are undaunted and resolved
to finish the work, as Honorable, as ever Parliament undertook, and as
profitable to Church and State, as ever Christians enterprised, your arms
shall be made strong by the blessing of the everlasting God of Jacob, let
popish and malevolent and ignorant persons say or do what they can: Give me
leave. 1. To represent unto you The work of the Parliament.
some public plots of fallow-ground, which you (blessed be God) have begun to
break, nevertheless they need yet a more full breaking up.

Secondly, to present in all humble fidelity unto you some few intimations and
directions. 1. The public plots of Fallow ground which need a further breaking
up, are (especially) four. 4. Grounds to be broken up.



1. The first lies directly in the valley of Hinnom: and it is Idolatry; a
piece of ground which lies too much in every Shire of this Land, what County is
there where much Popery is not? Sirs! you must break this ground up, or it
will break our Land up: There is not such a God-povoking sin, a God-removing
sin, a Church-dissolving sin, a kingdomebreaking sin as Idolatry, the soul
of God abhorres it: down with it, down with it even to the ground.

2. The second lies near to Beth-Aven, and it is superstition: which is but a
bawd to gross Idolatry: As rife in practice (even now) notwithstanding all
that you have said and done, as if a Parliament had never opened a mouth
against it: If a due and careful inquiry be made, I question not but you
shall find in too many Churches and public places, as many Altars, and as many
Crucifixes hanging over them, and as many Tapers on the Altars, and as much
bowing toward the East, and Altar, almost as many, and as much, as when you
began this Parliament.

3. The third lies just upon the coasts of Egypt, that Land of darkness; And
it is ignorance, a very large circuit of ground this is; many, many places of
this land there are which lie Fallow to this day, never any husbandman, nor
Plow have entered in to break up those grounds: A most lamentable thing, that
since Jesus Christ came into the world and since the Gospel is come into this
Land, after several scores of years, yet how many Parishes in Wales, and in
the North, and in other Counties which scarsely have enjoyed this much mercy as
to hear one solid soul working Sermon concerning Christ and salvation by him;
O Sirs! let your hearts bleed in pity to these poor souls; liberties (I
confess) are precious and so are our estates, and so are bodies and lives, o
then what are souls? what are precious souls which did cost the most precious
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ?

The fourth ill plot of ground lies on Mizpah, or if you please on Mount Taber,
for there the Priests 4.
were a Net, and a Snare, Hosea 5. 1. And this is an idle and an evil
ministry: Sirs! mistake me not, I speak not of our Ministers indefinitely, I
know that we have as godly, as learned, as painful, as profitable Ministers
as any in all the Christian world, but I speak only of such whose special
gifts consist in one of these two things, either quietly to read out of a book
and discreetly to gather up their Tithes; or malevolently to discountenance all
godliness, and rail against the Parliament.

Ah worthy Sirs! It would amaze any ingenuous man to travail such a Country as
England and passing through many Parishes, this (after all) is his Diurnall,
the Patron is Popish, the Minister is an Idle Dunce, or else a drunkard, or
else a swearer, or else a scoffer, preaching all holiness out of his pulpit
out of his Church, out of his family, out of his Parish, and his people are
like unto him, and love to have it so: And thus what between the Idle Minister
and the evil Minister, the poor people never come to knowledge, or (without
which knowledge never comes to any thing) they never come to the love and
practice of any saving good: These are the principal fallow grounds in this
Land, which need your care and pains.

2. Now follow the Intimations and directions which I humbly present unto you.
1. B Break them up: If ever you will quit your own souls, and the trust
reposed in you, and 4. Directions about the breaking up of ill grounds
the whole land of Judgments spiritual and corporal, If ever you desire to
gain ground in your public intentions for good, for the Lords sake break up
these Fallow grounds.

2. But then in the next place, go very deep with your Plow, or else you will
never break up these grounds: the deeper the better; As all good is most
strengthened, so all evil is most crushed in its causes: Take heed of
shadow-worke, and surface-plowing: Gods eyes are upon you, and so are the eyes
of judicious men, which can distinguish twixt scraping and breaking, our misery
will be but finely laid asleep a while if your plow goes not deep.

Does a little cringing move you? o then, let gross Idolatry heat and burn
your souls! Does boldness in a questioned Minister displease you? o then let
his gross wickedness stir you utterly to disburden poor peoples souls of
him: o let sad complaints have quick and full redresses!

3. And go over the Fallow grounds which you have broken, go them over
again; Yea, and again: Fallow grounds must be often broken up with the Plow.
Even the actions of the most judicious receave more ripeness by review: by
often doing we grow into a better acquaintance with what is to be done: our
first doings are rather trialls and enterprises, the second doings ever prove
the best work: besides that, our affections also are oftimes too quick for
our eyes, the desires of doing some good may outrunne the due search of much
evil: Add yet further, That ingrained diseases are not easily stirred, much
less destroyed by one potion; evils long in gathering, and much baked into
and settled in a State or Church, are not so suddenly cured as vulgar people in
their haste imagine: shall I speak one thing more; There is as much Art almost
as sin, as much guilt, as Guiltiness: The Laws are ingenuous, but offenders
are fraudulent and subtle: Sirs! you deal with bold offenders, and with
cunning offenders too, which (if you look not the better to it) will quite
delude and frustrate all your Religious and pious intentions.

Shall I tell you what I know, and what the Country sighs and sheds Tears
at, that notwithstanding your Religious pity to their souls, yet their
souls are as much abused as ever: They have complained of some ill Ministers,
you hearken unto them; but in the mean time, the Minister exchangeth his
living with another (perhaps) a far of, unknown to the people, against whom
there can be (for the present) No legal exception, and thus they perish still
for want of bread:

Therefore Worthy Sirs! Out with your plow again, you are by all these
after-workes much more directed how to manage and carry on your work.

4. Lastly, Be as earnest and active as possibly you can to send Laborers
into the Field, I mean, 4.
to plant all the Land with an heartbreaking ministry: All will come to
nothing unless this be done: Pluralities are Voted down, but what good will
that be, when all comes but to this, before that Order, one bad man had two
good livings, and now two bad men have each of them one too good for them both:
I will say no more unto you; but be serious and courageous in this work in
settling of a good Ministry, with which join also an answerable Magistracy:
This to do, is your duty, this is your honor, this will be our safety and
happiness, This will be Your great reward in Heaven.

Go on thus in this breaking-worke, and prosper: There is no man ever did any
thing for God and lost by it, or to his Church, but gained by it: If you will
go on with an humble and unwearied zeal, it shall shortly be said of this
Parliament, These were Scotlands Vmpire, Irelands guard and revenge, Englands
preservation, The Churches safety, and religions glory:

And so I pass from the Plow to the seed, from the plowing up of
Fallow-grounds, to the sowing of them being broken up, expressed with its
caution in the Text.

And sow not among thorns, etc.
Second Part. And sow not among Thorns:
THat a breaking up of the ground must go before a sowing, and then that a
sowing must follow the breaking up, is no question with any judicious man; For
as it were a vain thing to sow when the ground is not broken up (the seed
would but be a prey) so it were as foolish when the ground is broken up, not to
sow (the labor would never prove an harvest) breaking up of the ground being
in it self only (opus imperfectum and respectivum) a work for another Sowing
must follow breaking up.
work; And indeed as the Historian spoke of the Emperor that he rather wanted
vice then was virtuous, so it may be said of a person and Nation if their
Fallow grounds be broken up, and yet be not sown, they are rather not wicked,
then good, For Negatives (alone) make no estate to be gracious; It must be some
positive quality which gives perfection and denomination; They say well in
Philosophy, that whiles the motion is passing from the Terminus a quo It is but
in Fieri, and till the terminus ad quem be attained, it is not in facto esse,
the work is but on the way, it is not at the end, nor done: The same is a
truth in Divinity, for cessation from evil is not sufficient Esaias 1. 16, 17.
without an operation of good; to pull down wickedness is not enough unless
we also set up godliness; Josiah did pull down Idols, but then he did
likewise restore and set up the true worship of God: And our Savior did not
only correct the false glosses wherewith the Pharisees had corrupted the law,
Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 28, 32, etc.
but also erected and established the true sense and genuine Interpretation of
it: Iehu to this day lies under the tongue and censure of Hypocrisy,
notwithstanding all his zeal against Baal and the Priests, because after all
this, He took no care or heed to walk in the Law 2 Kings 10. 27, 28, 31.
of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart, It is (I think) a true maxim,
that all true quarrel with evil, arises from the love of good: and therefore
the defacings and displacings of the former ought to end in the advancings and
setlings of the latter; and verily it were a weak design to undo the one,
and yet not to do the other: because,

1. Moral evils will not be cured, but by contrary qualities: A state (like
water though for a time heated, yet will slip back to coldness) will warp
about (after a while) to its corruptions, if care be not taken for its
perfecting and preservation too:

2. Again, though a Nation be somewhat less miserable, because evil is
removed, yet it will not be happy till good be planted; you shall find,
besides this, that the soul of the public state will answer that of the
person: To whom as the presence of (Nocivum) what oppresses him is a burden,
so the absence of (Honestum as they speak) what is convenient will certainly
prove a complaint: Both Religion and nature instruct us in this, Religion puts
men on for holiness, as well as pulls men off from sinfulness; and nature
has ingrafted in it not only (Abyssus) depths of distasts against apprehended
evils, but also (Hiatus) vast desires, for all thoroughly apprehended good:
Neither will it receive satisfaction in the one without the other: Yea ordinary
policy can discern (in a Commonwealth) as great an aptness to tumult where
conveniencie is with held as there is to impatience, where misery is felt:
shall I add one thing more? That in all public changes and alterations, these
ever go in the thoughts of the vulgar (yea of all) Confident expectations that
some other thing must succeed in the place of any thing that is removed,
(especially in matter of Religion where corruption is discerned on all sides)
the ordination and plantation of which, if public authority does not take in
hand, you shall find that ordinary heads will presume to do, the which what
confusion it will make amongst people, and future difficulties to your selves,
I leave to your Religious wisdoms to consider of.

So then it is evident (de jure) that a sowing ought to follow the breaking up;
But yet any kind of sowing is not a sufficient consequent, the direction is
given in the Text with a Caution, sow, but sow not among thorns.

Interpreters abound in their opinions concerning For the sense of the words.
these thorns: By them Chrysostom understands Idols (as entangling and
piercing as the sharpest of Briars and thorns) Origin and Hierom, by the
thorns understand covetousness and the cares of the world (which likewise are
scratching and wounding) others understand all our sinful corruptions', there
are spinae in cord, says Bernard, thorns in our hearts, as well as in our
Fields: and some understand by the thorns, mixtures of worship crept into the
worship of God amongst the Jews (as Sanctius and others.) But with the favor
of all these (and yet with submission) I conjecture that these words (Sow not
among Thorns) are a proverbiall speech, and suggest only this unto us, That
as the Jews were to break down what was evil in themselves and the Church
and State, so they were to set upon the doing of all good in private and
public, In such a manner and order, as that their pains and endeavors might
not come to nothing, but might prove effectual and successful, be to some
good purpose indeed, etc. As an Husbandman who sowes, will so sow that he may
reap, and not loose his seed and labor, and therefore will not sow among
Thorns; For this were an improper work, and would prove (in the event)
utterly unprofitable: It is a thousand to one if ever his seed comes up (for
Thorns have a stealing, withdrawing, and frustrating quality) or if it does
come up, yet it will be lost, it cannot be gathered, there is no coming at it
with sith or sickle; Thorns have an hindering malignity, as well as a
stifling power: From this exposition, I observe only this proposition, Namely.

That all penitential and reforming work must be so managed and acted that
it may not prove a vain and fruitless work, but may come to be a
successful and profitable work: It must not be a sowing among Thorns, but
such a sowing which may in the issue produce an harvest: for as good never a
whit, as never the better.

You read (in Scripture) of many Sowers.

1. The evil man did sow Tares; we have had (of Four sorts of sowers.
late) many such Sowers, not only professed Priests and Jesuits, but some
also amongst ourselves who have sown Popish, Arminian, Socinian, and
superstitious Tares.

2. The cunning man, and he sowes divisions and dissentions; There have been
(and still are) too many who sow division twixt the King and the Parliament,
twixt Ministers and Ministers, twixt Ministers and people, twixt people and
people.

3. The foolish man, and he sowes he cares not what (in respect of the seed)
nor where (in respect of the soil) nor when (in respect of the time,) and so
all is lost and comes to nothing.

4. The wise man, who in his sowing looks to the seed that it be good and
clean; and to the soil that it be prepared and right; and to the season that
it be fit, upon which (through Gods blessing) the seed sown takes root,
prospers, and proves an harvest.

Of this I now speak in the proposition, which whither you limit it to a
Repentance, that is personal, or extend it to a Reformation that is National
holds true in both, and the Text will bear both: The one and the other must
be so dispersed, that it may not prove vain and lost, but effectual and
successful.

Sirs! Though penitential works rightly done are never without success and
blessing, yet pretendingly penitential agents may so carry on these works
(materially good) that they may never prove formally and eventually good or
beneficial: and therefore you read in Scripture, that many prayings, and
fastings, and solemn meetings, and tears, and other doings have found no
acceptance with God, nor wrought any subjective alterations in persons, nor
change from misery to mercy in a Nation; read the Prophets concerning the
Jews, and that will be testimony sufficient.

In six cases they prove (in the event) to be nothing, but only a sowing
amongst thorns.

1. When they are but external, not acted by any inward principles, the
effects rather of art and parts then of the heart and grace: Shells, not
kernells, tears of the eyes, but not tears of the heart, prayers of the lips,
but not of the soul: Shadows and pageants of Repentance, seeming to be so to
the eye of man, but not heart-workings which only are interpreted to be true
and solid to the eye of God:

The Swanne in the Law was white in feathers yet reputed unclean and unmeet for
sacrifice because the skin (under them) was black: Religious workings (you
know) stand in Gods account according to the quality of the worke-man; the
heart of whom is all in all for acceptance or rejection; God reputes nothing
done, which the heart does not: Art may take man more than nature; but with
God, the more art, the less acceptance: A painted Repentance (which is only
external) will do our selves and the Nation as much good as a painted sword,
as a painted staff, and as painted Fire; That will not cut, this will not
help, the other will not heat, no more will a merely external Repentance
prevent any judgments or obtain any mercies.

2. When they are but partial: A putting down of some sins, and a keeping up
of other sins, will be as vain, as to cure the Palsy and yet to neglect
the plague, or as to mend the pumpe and yet to neglect the leake; Iehu's Golden
Calves made an end of him, though he made an end of Baals Images and Priests;
And so in the doing of good, it will come to nothing, though some good be done
and yet the best good is neglected; The Pharisees did many acts of
Righteousness, but lost them, and themselves, because they opposed and
rejected Christ who was the chiefest and only Righteousness.

There is (beloved) such a natural concatenation twixt all vices (and so there
is amongst virtues) That they (in a formal working) ever include an universal
hatred, or an universal love: No man can be interpreted good, who is at
defiance with any known particular good, nor does he cease to be wicked, who
does not hate and oppose every known evil: particular and exclusive actings
in the one and in the other serve only to the disacceptance of the works, and
to the greater condemnation of the persons.

Though Imbecility shall never be any prejudice to our works, yet subtlety
and partiality shall.

3. When they are but circumstantiall: though a multitude of lesser evils be
crushed, if yet the greater are spared to survive, This Reformation will prove
like Saul's discretion with the Amalekites, Read, Ier. 48. 10.
who spared the fattest and destroyed the poorest, but he lost the kingdom by
it.

Circumstantiall reformations (I grant) are more easy and quick, but those
which are most deep, are ever most safe: a Cloth will stop up the wound as
soon (and perhaps sooner) then the plaster, but the plaster (which searches
to the quick) heales much better: If the Tree be stark naught (and good for
no service,) It is bettter to cut it down to the Root, then to hire men many
days to out off the limbs.

There are three great mischiefs in all circumstantiall and slight acts. One
is, The greatest causes of wrath are not met with.



And the third is, That when these evils once feel their strength and regaine
their opportunity, they will become more evil and mischievous then ever:
Histories and experiences witness enough of this Popery was hot in former
Kings times, but when it got out the bit by the death of Edward the sixth, it
burst out with more burnings and flaming cruelty in Queen Mary's days.

4. When they are only Coactive: I mean such actings unto which there is
little or no concurrence of a judicious and active will, but are rather the
sparkles which are forced out by the collision of flints, elicited rather by
the impressions of appearing and urging evils: like Pharahos Obedience which
was forced out of judgments, and nothing else.

Mariners in a storm are very pious, but then in a Calm turn as wicked as
before: the Jews in their straites were as pliable as could be desired, they
would part with any thing, and do any thing for God, but when the Sun arose,
this vain Cloud and dew were gone and scatterd; If a Cloud of wrath be it
which puts us on to be and to do good, a few beams Hosea 6. 4.
of temporal safety will find us flat, and strangers again; The Acts of men
do spring sometimes from fear, and sometimes from love, those of fear may
be more strong and stirring for the present, (like a flood which runs more
violently then a River) but those of love are most acceptable and constant:
voluntary acts though sometimes more slow, yet are at all times more
successful: John (in the Gospel) ran faster then Peter, yet being at the
Sepulcher, Peter went farther then John, John looks down, but Peter goes
down, an Arrow flies swifter, and a man walks slower, yet a man may sooner
walk to the mark then the Arrow can hit it; Sirs! No private or public work
of Reformation will come to good, which is derived only from a fear of evil,
and not from a love of good, when the circumstances of evil are of, the evil
heart will show it self evil again.

5. When they are hypocritical and vainglorious; done by our selves, and for
our selves; It is a strange thing to observe how the spirits of men are
balanced and mounted and keep parallel with the ends which they propound unto
themselves! The Art and strength and length of our workings are ever molded in
our own aims and respects: One man acts for God, another acts for himself;
the works of the one are blessed and prosper, the attempts of the other quickly
languish and are blasted; As vicious acts are under GODS curse, so
vainglorious acts are out of his blessing: Sincerity, humble sincerity is
that which gives life, finds acceptance, and is crowned with success.

If a man in his religious performances of praying and fasting, and humbling of
himself, should seek not God but himself, as the Pharisees did, his vain
glory would purchase only the applause of men and rejection with God; all his
works will be lost and come to nothing: Verily you have your reward said
Christ: a poor reward to have breath for breath! And so in public attempts if
you should not entirely seek God, His Glory, His Truth, His Worship, but your
selves, your work will never prosper, It will rest only on your own parts to
act it, and on your own strength to consummate and perfect it, and what blessed
issue can be expected where weak man is left alone to be the Author and
finisher of great actions?

6. Lastly, when they are fickle and inconstant; begun (perhaps) with some
fervency, but then laid aside by as much tepidity: An aguish zeal, hot in
attempting, but cold in effecting; One day to act like penitents, and the next
day to live like sinners, one while humbling and praying, and after a while
cursing and swearing: Sometimes offering all our service and strength for
CHRIST and Religion, and See Hosea 6. 1, 4.
suddenly intent only to our own delights and ways, forgetting (like them who
are much in complements) all our zeal and professions: What a vanity will this
prove? What harvest will ensue when the Husbandman will one hour sow an
handful of seed, and a week after go home and do nothing?

It is observed in Nature, that many remiss acts (which have no proportion to
effects) and some strong acts soon remitted, will equally come to nothing: If
there be to weak a strength in the root, or if all the strength shootes out at
once, little or no fruit will follow: yet this deceit cleaves much to man's
heart that it will either be constantly bad, or else inconstantly good: It has
some degrees of heat to begin, but wants that prudence of patient endeavor
and coming to finish and perfect: like him in the Gospel who began to build,
but did not make an end: Whereupon results a vanity and successelesnesse to our
works; the ripeness of which is betrayed many times more by our own
remissness, then by others oppositions: they stick and dye in the birth,
because we continue not in our strength, to help and bring them forth.

I see that the time and your wearied patience call upon me to hasten and
finish: Give me leave to make some useful application of all this, and then I
have done; the application shall be in this as in the former part a word.

First, To all of us, and then,

Secondly, To you of great employment and public service.

1. To every one of us.


But if all this sowing should be but a sowing amongst thorns; if all this
should be so managed by us, that our prayers, that our confessions, that our
hearings, that our resolvings should come to nothing, and prove nothing: If
after once, twice, thrice, many humblings, we yet should not be humbled; if
after all the changes which befall our times, our hearts yet should not be
changed, but sins remain as strong, and judgments remain as near. If after
all this, God should not be reconciled unto us, our transgressions should not
be pardoned, judgments should not be withdrawn, mercies should not be sent
down; what a bitter and sad thing would this be for a man to perish, though
he prays, and to be destroyed though he fasts, and a Nation to be made a
curse and an hissing, and a desolation, after it has seemed to meet the Lord
by solemn confessions and humiliations? To perish in the shows of repentance
is a bitter perishing.

It was a sad greeting which they found from Christ; Lord, say they, we have
heard thee preaching in our Synagogues, we have eat and drunk in thy presence;
yet says Christ unto them, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, verily I
know you not: So when we come to die, and then come to judgment, and say,
Lord, we have heard thy Word, we have fasted, we have prayed, we have afflicted
our bodies and souls; and yet Christ shall say, depart, I know you not, ye
heard my Word indeed, but ye did not obey my Word; ye confessed your sins, but
ye never forsook your sins, ye gave on toward a little good, but ye never
became good, you professed obedience, but you never did care to walk in my
ways, and therefore all that you have done shall never do you any good; would
not this be a sad and heavy answer to our selfe-deluded souls?

Nay, put the case, that now after all our fastings, the same judgment (or a
worse) should befall us which befalls our poor Brethren in Ireland, that the
sword should break forth among us, and all the unmercifull and sudden
calamities of war should beleaguer us, that in a moment the Gospel should be
banished, our liberties should be imbondaged, our estates should be exhausted,
our lands should be dispossessed, our houses should be burnt, our coffers
should be ransacked, our bodies should be tortured, and our lives should be
threatened; Good Lord! would we say, is all our fasting and humbling come to
this? we looked for good, and not for evil, we looked for peace, and not for
destruction; why? and the Lord might answer us, when did you fast to me, and
when did you pray to me? Indeed you prayed against judgments, but you would
never leave your sins, which (I told you often) would pull down judgments:
you would have had mercies, but I could never persuade you to repent in good
earnest; you would trust to vain thoughts of your own, you would never be
humbled to purpose, you would sow among thorns, and see now what ye get by it.

O Christian think seriously of these things! God has called to England,
once, again, often, a longer time, repent indeed, turn from your evil ways
indeed, be upright and holy indeed, walk with me once at length in truth;
judgments have called, warnings have called, consciences still call, dangers
still call, fears still call, the Ministers of God (as the Prophets of old)
still call, and cry, and beseech, and weep; turn yet unto the Lord, turn not
feignedly, but with all your hearts, sow not among thorns; yet Lord! who
believes our reports and calls? the Prophet is reputed a fool, and the
Spiritual man mad, men will be sinful still, they will (perhaps one of ten
thousand) be seemingly penitent; and the issue (I fear) will be this, the
destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be together, Isai. 1.
28. And while they be folden together as thorns, they shall be devoured as
stubble fully dry, Nahum 1. 10

But Sirs let us yet be persuaded to repent, and to reform our selves to
purpose; if ever we purpose to repent, or would repent to purpose, this is the
time; all within us, all without us, all abroad, all at home beg it at our
hearts: O that God would work all his works in us, that our selfe-reforming
work may begin, go on, hold out, and abound, that God may be reconciled to our
selves, and this sinful land.

2. To you of public employment.
MAny excellent works are fallen into your hands, some of them you have gone
through with already, and more (we are persuaded) had received their seal, had
not the excellency of your attempts raised against you, the enmity of manifold
oppositions and contradictions; my humble and earnest entreaty of you, is only
this, let not those remaining excellent works (if it be possible, so much as
in you lies) for ever stick in the birth; let them not die in mere intentions
or propositions, but strive to bring them unto their due and much desired
perfection; you have begun some things,

1. About erroneous Doctrines. 2. Against superstitious practices. 3. Against
Idolatry, and seducing Priests and Jesuits. 4. With notorious delinquents and
offenders. 5. Against scandalous Ministers and Innovations. 6. For the settling
of a faithful and laborious Ministry. 7. For an honorable maintenance and
encouragement of it; (O never let us stand to the courtesy of the vulgar!) 8.
For the easing of tender consciences. 9. For the vindicating of the Lords day.
10. For the settling of all distractions, and hopes of a Church-Reformation
according to the Word of God, against which malice it self cannot justly open
its mouth. 11. For the succouring and relieving of poor and distressed
Ireland: Hasten all that you can, lest it prove too late.
Now God forbid, that such works as these should ever fall to the ground, after
so many years misery, after so many thousand prayers, after so many gracious
overtures which you have made: let it not be said of you in these works, as he
said of his own, Faciebam, non feci: he was doing of them, but they were never
done. Take up your first thoughts, and engage your hearts and resolutions, and
all your endeavors speedily and successefully to carry on (at least) this one
work of all works, a solid Reformation: Believe me, it is the work which will
bring a blessing upon all your other works: peruse that place well in Haggai 2.
18. Consider now (says the Lord) from this day, even from the day that the
foundation of the Lords Temple was laid, consider it. (verse. 19.) from this day
will I bless you. Now whereas Zerubbabel might reply, we would set to this
work, but that we are afraid of warlike opposition; To this the Lord answers,
in Verse 22. and 23. I will overthrow the Throne of Kingdoms, and I will
destroy the strength of the Kingdoms of the Heathen; and I will overthrow the
Charrets, and the Horses, and the Riders: And I will take thee Zerubbabel my
servant, and I will make thee as a Signet, q. d. Look you to that work, and I
will assuredly look to your persons and safeties.

Now that you may effectually carry on all these great works (and especially
that of Church-Reformation) so that all may be prosperous, and in the event
come to something; make use of two Two Directions.
directions, which I humbly propound unto you.

First strip your selves of all the things which will weaken your hearts, and
make your endeavors still slow and fruitless; therefore

First put off your sins, or else they will put off your work: evil men are
seldom apt for, or prove successful in good attempts: There is nothing which
intricates our actions more than our sins, which do likewise ensnarle our
souls; Enterprises set upon, either without God, or against God, are like
arrows shot up aloft, which never do good, but many times do much hurt. It
is affirmed only of the godly man, That whatsoever he does, shall prosper,
Psalm. 1. 3.

Secondly, you must put off irregular fears: Ecquid hoc infort^^i age, corpus
quidem occidere po^unt, animam non possunt they were Z^inglius his last words.
you will never be exactly serviceable to God nor Religion, if you have any
thing to lose: should such a man as I flee? said Nehemiah, Chap. 6. 11. guilty
persons who are contriving against the foundations of a Church and State, they
may well fear; their consciences may read terrors, and dangers, and losses to
them. But persons royally Tibi adest nimia humilitas, said Luther to Stanpitius.
summoned, and piously employed for the right settling of a Church and Kingdom,
as their attempts are above all contumely, so their hearts 1 Pet 3. 13.
should be above all fancies and fears: If ye Poene securus spectator sum and
(...) minaces and scroces Papistas non hujus facio: si nos ruemus, ruet
Christus una scilicet ille regnator mundi, said Luth. in lib. edit. 1549.
be followers of that which is good, who is he that will harm you. There can
never be any true danger nor loss by being good, or by doing good in our
callings. The King of Poland, when his servant Zelislaus lost his hand in his
wars, sent him instead thereof a golden hand: you shall never expend your
strength for God in vain, his service is good, and reward sure.

Thirdly, you must put off favors: a public man as he should have nothing to
lose, so he should have nothing to get: he should be above Olim didici quid
sint munera, said a worthy man.
all price or sale: Truth and public good should only sway and command him; he
has too impotent a spirit, whose services (like the dial) must be set only by
the Sun, who says to advancement and respect, as Tiberius once answered
Justinius (though upon a better ground and end) Si tu volueris, Ego sum; Si tu
non vis, ego non sum; I am only thy clay and wax. It was a brave commendation
of Luther (though not intended by that Cardinal who spoke it) That German
Beast cares not for gold. And Henry, afterward Duke Anno. 1539.
of Saxony rather adventured the hopes of the Dukedom, than that he would be
bound not to change and reform a corrupt Religion.

Fourthly, you must put off prejudices: If the great work of Church-Reformation
seems to any of you either fordid and contemptible, or hopeless and
impossible, or needless and idle, or unseasonable and inconvenient; you will
either be formal in attempts, or subtle to entangle, or professedly opposite
to crush the work, and bring it to nothing; But yet Worthies of our Israel,
know, that Reformation is

An Honorable work: It is a work fit for a Honorable to you, and honorable
to the Church, which the more pure it is, the more excellent it is.
God, fit for the greatest Monarchs on earth; and the greatest Reformers in
Religion have attained thereby to the greatest splendour and glory, as Hezekiah,
Iehosophat, Josiah, King Edward, etc.

A possible work: Though there be many knots, and blocks, and rubs, and
alarums; yet do you unanimously and strenuously act, act and the work is done;
possunt (said he) quia posse videntur: the Historians ascribe most of King
Alexanders success to his courage, there was nothing he attempted, but he
conceived it might be done. All works for God are both honorable and fecible:
As Tertullian, in comparing the Resurrection with the Creation, said it was
more easy reficere quam facere, to make up the body again, than simply to
make it to be; that same holds true in this case, it is more easy to reform
than to form a Church; as the work is easier to cure a diseased body, than to
enliven a dead body.

A needful work: A Reformation is needful when a Church is like to be
poisoned with errors, or to be rent with contrariety of opinions, or is sick
with manifold corruptions. This is our condition, and besides all this, we see
great judgments hanging over us, which have befallen other Churches: were it
not better to reform before judgments, than under them? who can tell but it
may be an effectual means to prevent them?

Lastly, it is a seasonable work: If you judge it a fit season for our Church
to be humbled, assuredly then it is a fit season for it to be reformed: that
which puts us upon the one, directs us also to the other; but I pass on.

Secondly, If you would carry on this work for good, then you must get into
your hearts, and cherish in your thoughts all those things which will quicken
you to the perfecting of such a work.

First, you must labor to possess your hearts with those active, industrious,
and unwearied graces of self-denial, of ardent love of God, of enflamed zeal
for his glory, and of sublime faith, which will raise your spirits above all
difficulties and oppositions, above all clouds and seas: were men thus
qualified, they would then count nothing too dear, or too much for God, but
would most cheerfully spend and be spent for him, they would lend all their
honors, places, gifts, abilities, all to the service of Christ.

And secondly, you must cherish quickening thoughts: I will make bold to
propound some unto you, only to add, at least, to what you have, and do know
already.

First, mind much the dignity of the work, and mind little the malignity of
the opposers: when the Temple was to be rebuilt, you know what opposition
Sanballat, and Tobiah, and others made, what accusations, what letters, what
attempts, and devices against Zerubbabel and the rest; but they minded the work
of the Temple the more, their eyes were upon God and his service: So when
Luther began the Reformation in Germany, you read that the Pope and his
Cardinals, and their currs presently opened their foul mouths, crying out,
that he was (mendax, perfidus, apostata, tuba Vide Mel. Adam ia vita Lutheri
page 144 145.
rebellionis, quod omnia quae de moliminibus Papae scripsisset, ficta erant and
ementita etc.) a liar, perfidious, an Apostate, a trumpet of rebellion and
sedition; and that all which he charged on the Pope, were but his own vain
surmises and devices: yet Luther went on with the work, and maugre all
contradiction, prevailed and prospered: The like we read in our own
Chronicles, when King Edward set upon Reformation, what scorns, derisions,
oppositions, sides, tumults encountered it by the Friars, and the Popish party;
yet he kept on the work, and greatly prospered in it: the excellency of the
work, and a consciousnesse of his duty, and confidence in God, made his Arc to
swim upon all those raging waters.

Secondly, mind your encouragements more, and all discouragements less: Toll
Coelum, and Christ did once die for sinners, but he ever reigns sor truth: so
Luth. in an Epistle to Melanchion.
nullus ero, said Empedocles once: Take away heaven, and I am no body; all
serenity comes from above us, the damps rise from that which should be under
our feet. Worthy Sirs, as the Prophets charriots with him were more than the
charriots of the adversaries against him, so I may say, there are more with you
(being in Gods work) than can be against you: In a good work you have a God
commanding (as once to Joshua, chap. 1. 9. See Judges 6. 12, 14.
Have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage;) and a God
protecting you (as in the same place, the Lord thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou go,) and a God promising to bless Read Esaias 41. 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, etc.
and reward you: me thinks all this should lift up your hearts, and strengthen
them much. I have read a story of one Julius Pflugius, who had been employed by
the Emperor, but was much wronged and injured by the Duke of Saxony, of which
complaining, Caesar returned him this answer, have a little patience, Tua causa
erit mea causa, thy cause and condition shall be mine own, and Causa ut sit
magna, magnus est actor and author ejus, neque enim nostra est: Luth. Melan.
this was heartning enough; God says the same to you, make you the same in
livening use of it; weakness (said he in Sophocles) is strong enough if God
will fight.

Thirdly, mind the strength which you have by prayers, more than the words
that are against you and evil minded men; the language of wicked men is but an
empty breath, it may declare malice, but does not assure us of power, but the
language of prayer is a mighty and doing breath, it can shake Heaven and Earth;
the prayer of one good man has wrought wonders, it has conquered God, and
Men, and Devils: wicked adversaries may set men to work, but prayer sets a God
to work. And you (Right Honorable) you have millions of prayers almost every
day sent up to Heaven for you: It cannot be, said Saint Ambrose to Monica, that
a child of so many tears and prayers should perish; so say I, it cannot be,
that such Worthies, who are every day compassed about with so many prayers,
should miscarry; you have the prayers of three Kingdoms for you, and I am
persuaded also, the prayers of all the people of God throughout the whole world.

Fourthly, mind the excellency of the issue, and not the difficulty of the
progress: We say in Philosophy that Finis dat amabilitatem and virtutem; the
end makes the work amiable, and gives strength to the workman. This I observe,
that great and choice services are more difficult when they are in agitation,
than when they are in action, more when we are contriving of them, than when we
are doing them; but though they be difficult to be wrought, yet when they are
finished they are glorious and excellent: The Temple was long in building, but
when it was finished, there was not the like in all the world, for it was
filled with the glory of the Lord from the Mercy-Seat. O what a glory unto our
good God, what a beauty to our Church, what an honor to our Nation, what a
satisfaction to all pious hearts, what a safety to this Land, what an influence
to all the Churches of Christ will this Reformation prove if it could be once
effectually wrought by Gods blessing and your successful endeavors.

FINIS.

