THE RICHES of GRACE DISPLAYED In the offer and tender of Salvation to poor
SINNERS.

Wherein is set out, The gracious behavior of Christ, standing at the door and
knocking for entrance.

The Dutiful behavior of sinners in hearing Christ's voice and opening to him.

And the comfortable event upon them both.

By Obadiah Sedgwick B. D. and late Minister of the Gospel in Covent Garden.

LONDON. Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Adoniram Byfield at the Bible in Popes
head Alley near Lumbard-street 1657. 1656

To The Reader
Christian Reader,
IT has pleased the most wise disposer of all things, by bodily infirmity, to
render me unable to be serviceable to his glory and the good of his Church, in
my public Ministry: And though I did account it one of the greatest
happinesses under heaven, that God was pleased to use me in so honorable a
service, yet through mercy, I have learned to be willing to submit to the good
pleasure of God herein, and to say with David, If I shall find favor in the^
eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, but if he thus say, I have no
delight in thee, here I am, let him do to me as seems good unto him. God has
no need of any for his service, neither may we prescribe unto him in what way
he will be honored by us. If therefore God shall be pleased to make me further
useful to the Church of Christ, in publishing of any thing that I have
preached: In this I shall rejoice, only let me desire thee to take heed of
imperfect notes and false copies that may be injuriously published under my
name to the public prejudice; I find that Paul was necessitated to subscribe
the salutation in the close of all his Estiles, with his own hand to be the
sign in every Epistle, to characterize his own writings from counterfeits, or
such as by forgery should be fathered upon him. A wicked practice which was
successively continued by men of corrupt minds, in diverse Ages after the
Apostles times; neither am I altogether secure from such attempts, having
lately had experience of the daring boldness of one to enter that as his copy
under my name, the very title whereof carries in it a manifest building again
of that which we have destroyed; yea, if others should not go so far, yet the
publishing of broken and imperfect notes, may bring no small prejudice, not
only to the Author, but also to the Church of God; which is the more to be
feared, because it is grown so common a practice for mercinary men, who look
no higher then their own private gain, to claim so great an interest in the
publishing of their imperfect copies, as that the Author himself, or those
entrusted by him, shall not be consulted withal for the review or correcting
of them; The preventing of such abuses I shall carefully endeavor, both by my
self whilst I remain in this Tabernacle, and what I may after my dissolution,
by intrusting some godly friends and brethren with the perusal of my notes,
that such only may be published as shall be found most useful for public
benefit and edification. I have now prepared for thee this little Manual, in
which there is discovered so much of the flowings and rich emanations of that
fullness of grace that is in Christ, as that whatsoever the workmanship of it
may be, yet the matter of it is such, as cannot but find acceptance,
especially with those who have had so much experience of the riches of that
grace, as that they cannot but earnestly desire to feel more of it; if in this
or any other of my notes I may be instrumental for the Churches good, let God
have the glory, and my self thy earnest prayers, who am

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ Obadiah Sedgwick.

THE CONTENTS.
Sermon. 1.
THe parts of the text. page 1 The Explication of the words. 3 Where is
unfolded, 1. What door is in this place meant, Ibid 2. What is meant by Christ
standing at this door and knocking. 4 3. What Christ's knocking at the door
implies. 5 How many ways Christ knocks. 6 4. What is meant by hearing his
voice and opening the door. 8 Two scruples resolved. 1. Whether these words do
not set up the liberty and power of a natural will. p. 9 2. Whether there be a
universal and sufficient grace afforded to all. 11 Doct. That Jesus Christ is
exceeding ready and willing to come in to sinners, and to save them. 13 Proved,
1. By five things in the text and context. ib. 1. By the quality of the persons
at whose doors he knocks. ib. 2. By the motions of Christ toward sinners. 15
3. By the easiness of the terms upon which he would be theirs. 16 4. By the
indefinitenesse of his desire. 17 5. By the sweetness of his persuading and
alluring arguments. ib. 2. By diverse things in Christ which testify his
willingness to save sinners. 18 As 1. His actions and passions for sinners. ib.
2. His professions. 3. His invitations. 4. His expostulations. 5. His
acceptations. 19 6. His compassions toward sinners. 20 7. His frequent
knockings. 21 8. His patient expectations. 22 9. His rhetorical and
soul-drawing Arguments. 22, 23 10. His gracious Articles. 23 11. His singular
joy and thankfulness upon a sinners opening to him. 25 The Reasons of the
Doctrine. 26 Use. Reproof of those who shut the door against Jesus Christ. 28
Use 2. Exhortation to sensible sinners to believe that Jesus Christ is willing
to enter into their hearts. 30 Helps to believe this; by considering, 1. The
door of a broken heart is the great door at which Christ knocks. 31 2. Jesus
Christ has broken through many of your doors already. 32 3. The more able you
are to believe that Christ is willing, the more willing your hearts will be to
open to him. 33 4. Christ's greatest displeasure is against unbeleevers. 34 How
we may get strength to open the doo^ to Christ. 34, 35
Sermon. 2.
Doct. Jesus Christ waits long upon sinners, and earnestly labors with them
for entrance or admission. 37 Demonstrated in several particulars. 1. Christ
gives not sinners over, though they have given him no answer at all. 39 2.
Christ continues knocking, though sinners have made light of his invitations.
39, 40 3. Christ has continued at the door of sinners, when they have made
dilatory Answers. 40 4. Christ has not gone away from the door, though they
have given him harsh and churlish answers. 40, 41 5. He has not given over
sinners, though they have opened their mouths, and lift up their hands against
him; 41 6. Yea, though they have imbrued their hands in the blood of his
messengers and of himself. 42 7. The multiplicity of his calls without, and
motions within. 43 8. Christ strongly follows his suit. 45 9 He never gives
over knocking till he have forced a soul to yield and open to him. 47 Reasons
why Christ waits and knocks thus long. 1. On Christ's part. 1. Christ is God. 49
2. Christ knows the price of a soul: 50 3. He knows the sad consequence of not
opening to him. p. 50 Expressed in three particulars. 51 4. He knows our
necessity, and the excellency of his own salvation. 51, 52 5. He knows whereof
man is made. 52 2. On the sinners part. 1. The deep sleep into which he is
fallen. 2. The thick ignorance and blindness in him. 3 The strange resistance
in a sinful heart. 53 Use 1. Information of, 1. The pride and stoubournesse,
and rebellion of the will of sinful man. 54 2. The just cause of a sinners
damnation. 55 Use 2. For humiliation of those who have not opened to Christ
knocking. 56 1. The evidence that may be given in against us for this. 57 1. By
the Gospel. 2. By the Ministers of the Gospel. 3. By our own conscience. p. 57,
58 2. The causes of our not opening to Christ. 1. Ignorance and
self-confidence. 59 2. The judgment of the sinner likes not the conditions. 60
3. The proud and irrational perverseness of the will. 62 3. The humbling
aggravations hereof, from 1. The incomparable absurdity and indignity of it. 64
2. The desperate hazard such do run. 65 3. Holding out Christ thus long will
cost us dear, though at length we open to him. 66 Use 3. Think it not strange
if we wait long, and knock often at heaven door before God opens to us. 67 Use
4. Exhortation to let in Christ. 69 Three considerations to enforce it. 69, 70
Use 5. Encouragement to distressed souls to open to Jesus Christ. 71
Sermon. 3.
Doct. The door of a sinners heart ought to open to Christ calling and
knocking. 78 2. Distinctions premised. ib. 3. Questions discussed. 1. What
door of a sinner that is which must be opened to Christ knocking. 79 In the
general it is the whole soul of man ib. Principally, the judgment and will of
a sinner. 80 2. What the opening of the door is, and how far it extends. 81 1.
In respect of the judgment, where three things are wro^ght. 1. An evang^lical
apprehension both of the necessity and excellency (...) Jesus Christ; in which
the key is put into the door. 81 2. A singular appreciation of Jesus Christ, in
which the door is unl^cked to Christ. 82 3. A comfortable subjection to the
authority of Christ, in which the hand is upon the door, ready to set it open.
83 2. In respect of the will, and so the will opens to Christ. 1. When it comes
off to Christ determinately or completely. 85 2. When it comes off freely and
^lectively. 87 3. When it comes off with indefinite closure, both in respect of
it self, and in respect of Christ. 89 4. When it comes off with the concomitant
attendance of the whole soul. 90 3. Why this door must be opened to Christ,
when Christ by his omnipotency is able to enter in. 92 In answer to it three
things premised. 1. It is not safe to insist on the absolute power, but rather
to respect his ordinate power. 93. 2. Though the door must be opened, yet by an
omnipotent act from Christ. ib. 3. Christ will not so act his omnipotency, but
he will make the heart willing to open to him. p. 94 Reasons of it. 1. Christ
intends in this work a conjugal union, to which a mutual consent of will is
required. 94 2. Christ in this converting work aims at the glorifying of his
grace and rich love. 95 3. Christ will have the sinner to esteem him a most
valuable object. 96 4. The work is done, if this door be opened. 96, 97 Use 1.
To reflect upon our selves whether our hearts be set open to Christ, or no. 98
1. You have had many callings and knookings from Christ. ib. 2. Christ is
worthy of admission. 99 3. Many hearts are as yet shut against Christ. 100 4.
It is a difficult thing to make a sinner willing to open his heart to Christ.
101 5. Many think their wills are opened to receive Christ, yet they are shut
or not truly opened. 102 Quest. How we may know that our hearts are rightly
opened to let in Jesus Christ. 103 Answ. 1. By the causes. The right opening of
the heart is from the word. 104 This the word does three ways. 105 2. The right
opening of the heart arises from faith. 106 2. By the concomitants, as 1. The
whole will is opened to Christ. 107 Five acts of the will according to to the
Schoolmen ib. According to these, the will makes choice of Christ and consents
to him. 108 And extends the soul to all the means of attaining Christ, and
commands all the man to give up to Christ, and the fruition of him is most
sweet and pleasant. 109 2. A whole Christ is opened to. 110 3. The heart is
opened unto Christ only. 111 3. By the consequents, as in the following Sermon.
112
Sermon. 4.
Doct. Whatsoever the former condition of any sinner has been, and whatsoever
his present condition is, yet if he will open to Christ, he will be his 114.
Proved, 1. Though the person has been very sinful, yet if he will open his
heart to Christ, he will be his. 118 Sin considered two ways. 118, 119 There
is a double refusal of the offer of Christ. 121 2. Though the sinner be not
able of himself to make the least satisfaction to divine justice, yet if he
will open to Christ, he will be his. 122 3. Though his humblings be very small,
yet if he will open to Christ, he will be his. 123 Humblings considered two
ways. 124 4. Though his worthiness be none at all, yet if his heart will open
to Christ, he will be his. 126 A twofold worthiness. 127 5. Though holiness
be altogether wanting, yet if the sinner will come to Christ, he will be his.
128 Reasons of it. 1. Christ is made ours only by believing. 129 2. Christ does
come to the soul in a gracious way, upon free, not upon mercenary terms. 131
3. Christ comes to the soul as an alsufficiency, and so looks not to find any
thing in us, and needs nothing from us. 132 4. Christ will keep a proportion
betwixt the Application of redemption, and the work of our redemption. 134 5.
Christ indefinitely tenders himself, insisting on nothing but letletting of him
in. p. 135 Use 1. For encouragement to every broken hearted trembling soul. 136
Many pleadings of men against themselves answered. 136, 137, 138, 139, 140 Use
2. Exhortations to stand out no longer. 142 Consider, 1. The amplitude of
Christ's goodness toward us. ib. 2. The necessity we have of Jesus Christ. 143
3. Thy inexcusablenesse if thou harden thy heart and do not open. 144 Use 3.
For Direction. 1. The mind must be opened if you would get the will to be
opened. 146 Knowledge in the mind must be twofold. 147 2. The judgment must
be opened if you would have the will to be opened. 148 A double work of the
judgment necessary to affect the will to Christ. 148, 149 3. Faith must be
obtained. 151 4. The Gospel must be heard. 152 5. Importunate prayer must be
made 152, 153
Sermon. 5.
Doct. Jesus Christ comes into the soul that opens to him, or takes possession
of an opening soul. 157 A threefold coming of Christ. ibid. A twofold
Application of Christ. ib. 1. The Doctrine unfolded in three particulars. 1.
What it is for Christ to take possession of the soul. 159 Certain premises in
nine particulars. 159, 160. 161 Christ has a double possession of the soul. 1.
A possession of right in three particular. p. 163 2. A possession of grace,
which comprehends, 1. A Sovereign seazure. 163 2. A distinguishing furniture.
165 3. A sweet gubernation. 169 4. A watchful provision. 170 5. A sure
protection 172 2. The properties and adjuncts of this possession. 1. The
possessing is Real. 175 2. Yet it is spiritual. 175, 176 3. It is powerful. 176
4. It is eternal. 177 3. Why Christ takes possession of the soul that opens to
him? answered in five particulars. 178, 179 Use 1. For Trial, who it is that
has possession of us. 180 Christ's possession of the soul is evidenced. 1. By
his affecting excellency. 183 2. By his vertual efficacy. p. 184 3. By his
exceeding Authority. 186 4. By our importunate insatiability. 187 Use 2. They
who find Christ's possessing presence, must bless God and rejoice in their
portion. 188 The blessed condition of such a one. 189 Use. 3. Instructions. 1.
Great, rich, learned persons should prize and esteem godly believing Persons.
192 2. Christians should remember whose they are, and to whom they owe all. ib.
3. Do not part with Christ when he has gotten possession. 193
Sermon. 6.
Doct. There is a sweet and excellent communion betwixt Christ and the soul
possessed by Christ. 196 What communion is in general, and how it is
distinguished. 196, 197 Spiritual communion respect either the Angels and
glorified souls in heaven, or those that walk by faith on earth. 197 That there
is a communion betwixt Christ and believers, appears in four particulars. 198,
199 1. Wherein this communion does consist. It consists in a reciprocal
expression betwixt Christ and believers. 199 Which includes. 1. An exceeding
mutual love. 200 2. A singularly mutual complacency or delight. 202 Christ
delights in believers, their Persons, Graces, Services. 202, 203 Believers
delight in Christ, the glories of his person, the wonder of his Redemption, and
the methods of his presence. p. 204 3. A mutual benevolence. 205 4. A mutual
beneficence. 206 The good Christ communicates to believers. 207 1. Congruous
good respecting this life. 1. Fundamental, in Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, Preservation. 208, 209, 210 2. Accidental. 210 2. Glorious
good, respecting another life. 210, 211 2. The extent of this communion: It is,
1. Universal with all believers. 211. 212 2. Radically and substantially, equal
for quantity. 212 3. In respect of duration it is eternal. 214 3. Why Christ
has such a communion with Believers. 214 1. Communication is the principal end
of his union, offices and works. 215, 216 2. Jesus Christ is ordained to invest
believers with as good, nay with a better estate then men had in Adam. 216 3.
All the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ. 217 4. Jesus Christ is
filled with goodness in himself, and with love also to his members. 218 5.
What else should Christ do with himself, and with all his benefits. 219 6.
Believers have much work lying upon them for Christ. 220 7. All the good we do
is done by the strength of communion. 221 8. Christ glorifies himself in it. ib
Use 1. For Consolation to all believers. 222 This communion surpasses all
communions. 1. For dignity. p. 223 2. For commodity. 224 3. For privilege. 225
4. For pleasure. 226 5. For sufficiency. 228 6. For duration. 230
Sermon. 7.
Use 2. For Instruction to such as have communion with Christ, and Christ with
them, in several duties. 234 1. Walk with cheerful thankfulness. ibid. Some
Objections answered. 235, 236 Three considerations to provoke those that
complain they have but a little from Christ in communion, to be thankful and
cheerful. 237, 238 2. Live like those who have communion with Christ. 239 3.
Improve your communion with Christ. 243 Considerations to persuade us to make
use of Christ, and to improve him. 1. Though our relation be excellent, yet our
condition is indigent. 244 2. There is a fullness in Christ with respect to our
wants. ib. Christ's fullness has in it three qualities. 244, 245 Christ's
willingness to impart himself according to his fullness expressed in four
particulars. 245, 246 3. You your selves have all the kinds of improving Christ
attending you, as improving interests, improving principles, and improving
Ordinances. 246, 247 Use 3. Search whether you have a share in this communion.
248 Quest. How this may be discerned? 1. By preparations. 249 Four things
precede the state of communion. 1. Contrition of heart. 230 2. Poverty of
Spirit. 251 3. Discommunion with sin. 252 4. Insition or implantation into
Christ. 255 2. By the formal concomitants. 256 Four properties of a Christ and
soul communion. 1. It is spiritual and holy. 256 257 2. It is a close and
immediate communion. 258 3. It is a full and satisfying communion. 259 4. It is
an inflaming communion 261 3. By the effects resulting upon this communion.
263, 264 Use 4. Exhortation to all out of communion with Christ, not to rest in
such a state. 264 Two things to move to this. 1. The unspeakable misery of a
person out of communion with Christ. p. 264. Three things make such a condition
sad. 266 1. His best portion is but poor and cursed. ib. 2. All the Good in
Christ is sealed from him. 267 3. He stands alone in all his soul accounts. 268
2. There is yet a possibility of attaining of this communion. 269
THE Sermon. 1.
RICHES Of GRACE DISPLAYED.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him and will sup with him and he with me.
THese words contain in them three parts.

1. The gracious behavior of Christ toward poor sinners; where you have,

1. The matter of it: twofold,

1. He stands at the door.

2. He knocks at the door.

2. The wonder of it (Behold, I stand, etc.)

2. The dutiful behavior of sinners, delivered by way of supposition or
condition.

1. If any man hear my voice.

2. And if any man open the door, both these may be amplified by,

1. The conjunction of the duties, Hear and open; Not hear only.

2. The indefinitenesse of the subject, If any man, no sinner is excluded by
Christ, but he who excludes himself.

3. The comfortable event upon this hearing and opening. Expressed in three
particulars,

1. Christ will come in to him.

2. He will sup with him.

3. And such a person shall sup, or feast with Christ.

Before I insist on any Proposition, two things must be touched, viz.

1. The Explication of the words, which are all along metaphorical.

2. The resolution of a scruple or two.

For the Explication: These questions must be unfolded.

Quest. What door is in this place meant.

Sol. A door (properly) is an entering into, and a passage out of an house, such
was the door at which Peter knocked, Acts 12. 13.

But Metaphorically. It is applied, sometimes

1. To Christ, Joh. 10. 1. I am Ostium Vitae.
the door. Heaven is our Palace, Christ Jesus is the door, his merits are the
key to open it.

2. To the Gospel, Acts 14. 27. God Ostium Gratiae.
has opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles: By the Gospel there is a
mutual passage made for Christ to enter into us, and for us to enter into
Christ.

3. To the heart of man: As in Ostium Animae.
this place: Now this door is in different respects, an open door, and a shut
door.

In respect of sin and Satan, This door still stands open; sinful lusts
freely come out, and sinful suggestions freely come in at it.

But in respect of Christ and Grace, It is a shut door locked up by ignorance,
and barred up by hardness, and infidelity: so that consider any man in his
mere natural condition, Christ is not within him, but without him: He is not a
guest, but a stranger, the door is shut against Christ.

Quest. 2. What is meant by Christ's standing at this door, and knocking?

Sol. I answer, Three things are meant by them.

1. Christ's willingness to do a sinner good; to have entrance, to be admitted.
Christ is a thousand times more willing to come to thee, then thou art to come
to Christ: He is at the door before e're you think of him.

2. Christ's earnest desire, his active pains with a sinful soul. He does not
only come to the door, but knocks at the door, so that oft-times he breaks open
the door; coming and calling will not be heard, and therefore he knocks.

3. Christ's patient expectation of a sinners opening. He does not come and go
away presently; Nor ask, and go away presently; nor call, and go away
presently; no, nor knock, and go away presently; But he stands and knocks: His
standing at the door notes his continuing patience, and his continuing study of
our salvation; his knocking, notes his earnest importunity.

Quest. 3. What the knocking at the door implies.

Sol. In the general, it is some preventing, previous, evengelical, and potent
work of Christ toward and upon a sinner, making way for his gracious entrance,
and admission into to the soul.

It is a work wherein Christ stands alone; a beginning work, and a work toward
and upon a sinner. God (says one) works many things in us, without us, in
which we are only patients, and with us, in which we are made agents.

The will is made good, and joins with God, being first joined to him, but
this knocking whatsoever it be, it is none of ours, it is Christ's work, his
(...) upon us and within us.

In particular Christ knocks, either,

1. Revelando, by preaching and publishing the accomplishment of our salvation
by himself, and the capacity and possibility of any sinners interest in it, and
also the methods and ways for the sinner partake thereof.

2. Vocando, by offering this acquired or purchased salvation upon the most
gracious terms, even such as nothing can hinder the sinner from it, but his
own stoubbornesse and carelessnesse.

3. Irradiando, by letting fall so much light as to see, both the divine beauty
of it, and the sinners necessity to accept of it. You know who and whence I am,
said Christ unto the Pharisees.

4. Inspirando; by conveighing some things which work upon the will of a
sinner, to desire and embrace this Christ and his salvation.

5. Increpando, by threatening the sinning soul if it will withstand, if it
will not be gathered, if it will not open: you shall die in your sins, the
wrath of God will abide on you. Your house shall be left desolate.

6 Immutando, which Austin calls, vocationem Altissimam, and Driedo calls
suasionem exaltissimam; In this there is not only the Immission of a good
thought, but also the Immutation of a bad and rebellious will; the Divine mercy
in and by this, has so touched and affected the will of a sinner, that he now
comes to himself with compunction and displeasure, and flies unto that grace of
God in Christ, which a little before he minded not, or contemned.

Quest. 4. What is meant by hearing his voice, and opening of the door?

Sol. I conceive three things also in this.

1. A listening to what Christ speaks, and offers to treat with us about.

2. A belief of him in what he speaks, with an approbation of himself and offer.

3. A consent of the will, yiedling to let Christ come into the heart, and to
give him a real welcome.

Now to the scruples.

Case 1. Whether these words do not set up the liberty and power of a natural
will, that it is able of it self to open the door to Christ.

Sol. I answer: No, the words are Metaphorical, and their scope keeps only this
Analogy, That as when a door is shut, if a man will have entry, there must be
knocking by the one party, and opening by the other party; so if we will be
saved by Christ, as there must be a knocking on Christ's part, so there must be
opening of the heart on our part.

2. But to give a further answer, know that this and the like Exhortations,

1. Are instances of our duty, not testimonies of our self-ability, they show
what we should do, not what we can do.

2. Are conveiances of strength, not cognizances of our own power. Christ by
commanding us to do, helps us to do. Evangelical Exhortations are a power, as
well as a letter. And they are verba operativa, as well as praeceptiva.

3. Are Items for our prayers, Jubet Deus quae non possumus ut Noverimus, quid
ab ipso pete^e d^bemus. ^e Great. and (...). A^bit. c. 16.
not ^ints of our sufficiency, God commands such things as we cannot do, that
we might know what to ask of him. Austin said well: Gods Commands exceed our
strength, because we should pray to him whose strength exceeds his commands

And therefore the same Father sums up all exactly, Oh man, in the Command
know what thou ought to do; in the Reproof know that it is through thy Homo
i^ praeceptione, cognosse quid debeas habere incorruptione cognosse, tuo te
vitio no^ habere, in oratione cognosse unde accipias quid vis habere, de^
orrupt. and Great. ^. 3
own fault thou can not do it; in Prayer know whether thou receivest strength
to perform.

4. Are platformes of our conjunction, not evidences of our inclination: (that
is) They do not show what the will of man can do of it self, but rather what is
done when the soul and Christ come to be united (namely) that he is willing to
enter, and we are willing to admit, to receive, to entertain him.

Case 2. Whether there be an universal and sufficient grace afforded to all,
because, here it is said, If any, etc.

Sol. I will not canvase this difficulty in this Auditory, only in a word thus.

1. There is an Universality,

Of proposition: this in some sense granted. Of collation: this is denied.
2. There is a sufficiency so as to leave men inexcusable, and there is a
sufficiency to conversion, this latter only to a few, the former is more
general.

3. If you speak of all men absolutely, that have been, are, or shall be in the
world, the Proposition is denied.

If you speak of all in the evangelical world (that is) to whom the Gospel is
preached, It is granted that the tender is indefinitely universal, and enough
is offered if men did accept of it.

There are five propositions principally observeable out of the text.

1. That Christ is exceeding willing to come in to sinners and to save them.

2. That Jesus Christ waits long upon sinners and earnestly labors with them
for entrance.

3. That the door of the heart must be opened to Christ, and then he will enter
in.

4. That whatsoev^r any sinners condition has been and is, yet if he open to
Christ, Christ will be his.

5. If the soul will give entrance to Christ, there shall ensue a sweet
communion 'twixt it and Christ.

Observe. 1. That Jesus Christ is exceeding ready and willing to come in to
sinners and to save them, Behold, I stand at the door and knock.

There are five things in the Text, and from the precedent part of this Epistle
to the Church of Laodicea, which plainly demonstrate the truth of the
proposition.

1. If you observe first the quality of the persons, at whose doors Christ did
stand and knock.

1. They were a mere formal people, there was little or no power of godliness
at all in them (ver. 15. Thou art neither hot nor cold) A company of mere
hypocrites, or at least of formal professors.

2. They were a proudly conceited people (verse. 17. Thou say I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing.)

3. They were (in respect of all spirituals) a most destitute people: not a
doit of goodness, nor any one ragge of grace; nor good in any one part, (ver.
19. Thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. They
could bring nothing at all to Christ, there was not any one thing considerable
in them; nay, every thing which might raise distaste and disregard.) And all
this miserable condition, was the more miserable, because they were thus
miserable and knew it not.

4. They were so provokingly sinful, that Christ's stomach had much ado to bear
with them. He could hardly forbear to spew them out of his mouth, (verse 16.)

Yet at their doors does Christ stand and knock, He begs at the door of
beggars, mercy begs to misery, happiness begs to wretchedness, riches begs to
poverty, light begs to blindness, and alsufficiency begs to nakedness, and
beseeches those poor and miserable sinners to take gold from him, those naked
sinners to take raiment from him, and those blind sinners to take ointment
from him, (v. 18.)

2. If you consider the motions of Christ toward them.

1. In the order of motion: one would think that the poor should have come to
the rich man's door, and the sick man have come or sent for the Physician; but
behold! here the rich man comes to the poor man's door, and the Physician comes
to the sick man's house. They came not first to Christ, but Christ came first to
them. Christ came not only to save, but also to seek that which was l^st:
Christ prevents sinners with his kindness, and with their salvation.

2. In the degrees of motion, he comes to the door, and then he calls at the
door: (verse 18. I council thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire) and then
he stands; (He does not take every silence, nor every neglect of offer for an
answer) and then he knocks at the door by some louder and stronger operation
of his spirit, and all this is, that they would once hearken and open the door
unto him, that he might enter.

3. If you consider the easiness of the terms upon which he would be theirs,
as low as possibly Terms not of Authority but of necessity.
could be; do but open the door and I will enter, and I will be yours. You know
that in an ordinary way there can be no entering in till the doors be opened:
Christ stands upon nothing with a sinners but this -- open thy heart to let me
in, and to receive me, or he stands on no more then needs must.

4. If you consider the ind^finitenesse of his desire, (If any man will hear
and open the door, I will come in unto him:) as if he had said, I will not
stand upon former miscarriages, not upon former hypocrisy, pride, blindness,
baseness, wretchedness, I will not decline you because of such and such sins,
I know that some of you have been more vile then others, but I will pass by
all in every one of you. Even the greatest sinner amongst you, shall enjoy the
sweetest Savior; If he will but open the door, let him but give me entrance,
and I will give him salvation.

5. If you consider the sweetness of his persuading and alluring Arguments:
(let me but come in, and I will sup with him, and he shall sup with me.)
Zacheus did let in Christ, and salvation came thereby unto him: Christ will be
a feast wheresoever he comes: If we let him in by faith, he will bring all
spiritual life and peace and comfort with him: Christ shall come one day to
Judge, but now he comes to save sinners. Besides this evidence from the Text,
there are diverse other things which testify that Christ is exceeding willing
to come in and save sinners. As,

1. His Actions, and passions for sinners.

1. He took his life to bring us life, led his life, to lead us unto life, laid
down his life to save our souls.

2. He came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

3. And laid down his life for his sheep, John 10. 15. Offered himself to do
and suffer for us, Lo I come, Heb. 10. 6, 7.

4. Nay was straightened till it was done, Luke 12. 50. How am I straightened till it
be accomplished: As if he had said, O sinners, I am come into the world for
your sakes! I have endured the reproaches of men, the scourgings of men, the
Anger of God, for your sakes I hung on the Cross for you, I bled out my soul
for you, I laid in the grave for you, I rose again for you.

2. His professions, I came to seek that which was lost. The whole Mat. 23. 37
need not a Physician, but they that are sick: How often would I have gathered
your children as a he^ gathers her chicken, etc?

3. His invitations, Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, let him come, Come
to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 28. Whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17.

4. His expostulations: why will you not come to me? why will you die? yea, and
his forcings of sinners, compel them to come to the wedding.

5. His acceptations: never did any sinner open to him but he entered into him;
Never did any sinner come to him, but he accepted of him, John 6. 37. Him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise reject.

There is a rejection, 1. Negative, in passing by. 2. Positive, in hating:
neither of these for them that come to Christ: There are two Negatives in the
Greek, I will not, not reject him, to take off all fears and disputes.

6. His compassions toward sinners, and that both to those,

1. That have still shut the door: He wept over Jerusalem, because she would
not know the day of her visitation.

2. And to those that have opened the door unto him: How he ran to meet the
lost child, and fell on his neck and kissed him; gives him Luke 15.
not one harsh word: He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking f^ax.

7. His frequent knockings at the door, and all of them to get us to open the
door unto him: He knocks at every door of man.

1. At the ear of man that first wicket; by the preaching of the Word.

2. At the fore-door, the mind of man; by enlightening it to see its vile and
lost condition without him.

3. At the Chamber Door, the conscience of man by strong troubles and despair
of self-deliverance.

4. At the closet-door, the will Open to me. 1. Per legem 2. Per crucem. 3. Per
lucem. 4. Per concilium. 5. Per afflatum and auxilium. in l^^.
and affections of man, by notable excitations to stand out no longer, but to
yield and to receive him: Hearken unto me, and your souls shall live.

Or as Viega, or Pareus, etc. on this place; He knocks at the door by the Law,
by the Cross, by light shining in the Gospel, by Councels, by the breathing,
and aid of the Spirit.

8. His patient expectation; if answer be not presently given, yet he does
repeat his strokes, nay, though denial be many times given, yet he assayes
sinners again and again, waits after three years, one year more, on the
fig tree; stretches out his hand to a gainsaying people, (that is) to them that
have said him nay, and that all the day long, Romans 10. 21. and of Jerusalem, he
says, How often would I have gathered thee, Mat. 23. 37.

How many Sermons by one Minister to woo us to open our hearts to Christ? and
when he is dead or gone, how many more by another? He has stood at our doors
more then one day or night, more then one week or two, more then one year or
two, more then one twenty years or two. Would he do thus if he were not willing
to come in and save us?

9. His retorical and soul-drawing Arguments: Partly,

1. Privative, ye shall not perish if ye will open to him.

2. Positive, ye shall have ever lasting life if you will open to him, John 3.
15, 16. the words are doubled, whosoever believes in him, he shall not perish
he shall not perish, but he shall have everlasting life. Your sins (you
fear) will damn you, but open to me and I will be your surety, I will
undertake to satisfy God for them, and will assuredly deliver you from his
wrath, and from damnation.

Your sins (you fear) will shut heaven against you: O fear it not: open the
heart to receive me, and my blood shall open heaven to receive you.

10. His gracious Articles, he requires no more but open the door unto me.

1. He does not say, If I find Not on merit.
desert in you, then I will enter: O no, he has entered into the most
undeserving hearts: That woman in John 4. 7, etc. was a very undeserving
creature, In respect of worship, she was an ignorant and superstitious person,
ver. 22. In respect of morals she was a common where, verse 18. In respect of
present disposition she was an hard hearted wretch, she would not give Christ
so much as a cup of cold water, verse 9. nay a mocking sinner; almost at every
word that Christ spoke, and yet Christ stood not upon any of these.

And so for Paul, he was a blasphemour, he was injurious, he was a persecutor,
etc.

2. Nor does he say, if I find Not on holiness.
any holiness or comeliness in you, then I will enter, Ezekiel 6. 8. When I
passed by thee, and looked upon thee, Behold thy time was the time of love, and
I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness, yea, I swear unto
thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou
becamest mine. Verse 6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine
own blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live, yea, I said
unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: O note, Live, live, live, and
this was when thou wast in thy blood, in thy blood, in thy blood. All the
condition that Christ stands on, is this, do but come, do but open to me, do
but receive me.

And he is willing to work in you this condition too, for he has appointed the
Ministry of the Gospel upon hearing to be a word of faith, Romans 10. 17. yea,
he did open the door in Lydia upon the hearing of Paul, Acts 16. 14.

11. The opening of the door unto him, makes Christ,

1. Exceeding joyful: when the lost child came back; what rejoicing was there?
It was meet (said his father, Luke 15. 32.) that we should make merry and be
glad, For this thy brother was dead, and is alive again, and was lost, and is
found.

2. Exceeding thankful, See Mat. 11. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, because thou have revealed these things unto babes: as if he had
said, O my Father, this is such a mercy as my heart cannot contain it self, I
must needs acknowledge this, etc.

Quest. But why should Christ be thus willing to enter into the hearts of
sinners, and to save them?

Sol. The Reasons briefly are these. Because,

1. Not only that Philanthropy in him above all other creatures, His bowels of
mercy and compassion.

2. Not only his perfection of obedience to his Fathers Will, whose Will he
came down from heaven to do, John 6 38. And this is the will of him that sent
me, that every one who has the son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life, ver. 40*

3. But also it is the very end of his Mediatorship: The conjunction of the
divine and humane nature in his person, was to conjoyne us and God, to declare
the name of his Father and his love. Joh. 17. 25
The qualifications of him with the grace of union, and with the grace of
unction, was to perfect our Redemption and Salvation. John 17. 4. I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.

4. It is the glory of Christ to do this, John 17. 10. All mine are thine, and
thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. He glorifies all his attributes by
it, of mercy, and kindness, and truth, and power.

He glorifier all his Offices by it: His Priestly Office, in that he is able to
save to the utmost, Heb. 7. 2, 25, 26.

His Prophetical office, that he can reveal the way of salvation, not only to
the ears, but hearts of sinners. And his Regal office, that he can open the
doors and come in as a King of glory, Psalm. 24.

2 Cor. 8. 23. If any enquire of Titus or our brethren, they are the Messengers
of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. Believing and converted and saved
sinners, they are the glory of Christ as so many lame diseased men cured, are
the glory of a Physician.

Use 1. The first use shall be of reproof unto all such who do shut the doors
against Jesus Christ, against a willing Christ, a saving Christ, a Christ that
stands and knocks, who stand out and will not hearken to his calls, nor open to
his knocks; they are guilty of the greatest sin in the world; they despise the
greatest, the kindest, yea, the only salvation of their souls. This is as if a
sick man should bolt the doors against his Physician; or as if a traitor should
bar the door against his Princes pardon. O think of this you who have had
Christ knocking at your doors so many years and would not open, the time is
coming that you (like those foolish Virgins) shall knock at his door too and
he will not open to you.

Hearken to this, you who can open your doors to every sinful temptation, to
every sinful lust, to every call of the the world, but have never opened your
doors to let in Jesus Christ.

You shall have your will a while, and God will have his Will on you after a
while: He will break open the doors of your consciences, and he will set open
the doors of Hell for those sinners who will set open the doors for sin, but
will shut their doors against Christ; the sick man does deservedly perish who
refuses both the Physician and medicine too: why yellest thou in hell O damned
soul? was there not a Christ offered to thee on earth to save thee?

Use 2. For sensible and broken hearted sinners, and lost in their own eyes, my
exhortation is to you, Strive to believe that Jesus Christ is willing to enter
into your hearts, and shut the doors no longer against him: but get thy heart
opened that Christ may enter in to wipe off those tears, to answer those
doubts, to cl^anse that house; to purify and pacify that troubled conscience
of yours.

O remember! It is Jesus Christ, 2. Things.


1. Who did set mercy at liberty: without a Christ thou can not expect the
least mercy; by Jesus Christ thou may hope for the greatest mercy: Justice
is satisfied, and now the mercyseat stands open: This is a faithful saying and
worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief, said Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

2. Who must set conscience at liberty: The house will be full of trouble, till
Christ comes in: As in Jairus house there was nothing but weeping till Christ
came in and raised his daughter: Those in Act. 2. 39. and he in Acts 16. 39.
There was nothing but prickings and tremblings, till faith opened the door for
Christ to come in, and then presently there was rejoycings by them all, the
golden key of the Gospel must open that which was shut up by the iron key of
the Law.

O strive to believe that Christ is willing to save a broken sinner: and to
help you in this consider four things,

1. The door of a broken heart is the great door at which Christ knocks. He
calls to such a sinner by name, come unto me: Behold he calls thee: open thy
door for a broken Savior, O thou broken hearted sinner! let me but come in,
and I have oil to supple those sores of yours, and I have balm to cure those
wounds of yours, and I have blood, and merits, and mercies to answer for those
sins of yours; and I have a spirit to cleanse and beautify that soul of yours,
you cannot need the thing which I have not, nor desire the good which I will
not freely give unto you.

2. Jesus Christ has broken through many of your doors already, to find you
out and to get within you: He has broken through the door of your ignorance,
and through the door of your self-conceitednesse, and through the door of your
consciences, there is but one door left, the door of your will; If you be but
willing to take him, he stands upon no more.

3. The more able you are to believe that Christ is willing to enter your
hearts, the more willing your hearts will be to open unto Christ.

The truth is, all that the troubled soul urges (if it be strictly observed)
is the questioning of Christ's willingness to save it; All those objections of
greatness of sinnings, of want of deeper humblings, and want of holiness, of
long resistances, of the variety of sinnings, of utter unworthiness, etc.
Arise from this suspicion, Christ is not willing to save sinners: these are
reasons (we think) that Christ will not save us.

Now why do thou stick at this? For,

If he be willing to save any, it is to save sinners, and he never saved any
but a sinner, who, because a sinner, was therefore unworthy: Must not Christ
save because we deserve not to be saved? must not he be merciful because we be
sinful? Ah Lord, who then should be saved?

Has he not saved the greatest of sinners! the crucified thief, the
blaspheming Paul, the unclean M^gd^l^^, the bloody Manasses* the Sodomitical
Corinthians, the Christ-killing Jews.

4. Lastly, know that all his anger is not against swearers and liers, and
adulterers, assuredly his greatest displeasure is against unbeleevers: This sin
dishonours and greives him more then all other sinnings.

Quest. But who can help it! can we open the door?

Sol. No, nor must you yet shut the door! There are four doors if thou did
stand at more often, strength would come to open the door of thy heart, viz.

1. The door of the blood of Christ; look upon it more, it speaks good and
great things for a broken sinner.

2. The door of Gods free, and ful^, and everlasting Covenant, study it better.

3. The door of the preaching of the Gospel, attend it oftener.

4. The door of heaven, by continual praying and waiting O never, never cease
begging, O Lord, O Lord, Thou that call, make me to hear, Thou that
knockest make me to open, nay do thou by thine own spirit open my doors that
the King of glory may come in.

Rev. 3. 20. Sermon. 2.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
THe readiness and willingness of Christ to come in to a sinners heart, and
save him (of which you heard much in a former Sermon) is particularly declared
by two things in the Text, viz.

His patient expectation, (I stand at the door.)

His vehement solicitation, (and knock.)

I shall wrap them both up in one proposition, which is this,

Doct. That Jesus Christ waits long upon sinners, and earnestly labors with
them for entrance or admission (he stands at the door and knocks.)

Thirty years did Christ in person wait upon the Jews, and preached, and
wrought miracles. Forty years did he by his Spirit wait upon them in the
Wilderness, and testified unto them by signs and wonders. One hundred and
Genesis 6.
twenty years did he by the preaching of N^ah and others wait upon the world
and did strive with them. These one thousand six hundred years has he waited
upon the Gentiles, that the fullness of them may come in. These eighty years
(well near) has he waited upon England. Twenty years (sometimes) he waits upon
one sinner. Forty years upon another sinner. These sixty years has he waited
upon us. How often has he said to us, as to the Church in Cant. 5. 2. Vp^n to
me, Dilectus stat ad osti um vocife rans and pulsans quasi morae impatiens,
B^rnard. in loc.
my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and
my locks with the drops of the night.

Mat. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered thy children, etc. Romans 10 21.
All the day long he stretched forth his hand to a rebellious and gainsaying
people. Mat. 22. 2. A marriage feast is prepared. Ver. 2. Servants are sent
forth to bid men to the wedding: And then servants are sent forth to call them
that were bidden. Ver. 4. Then he sends forth other servants to acquaint them
that all was ready.

What do these passages hold forth, but the great love of Christ, the long
expectation of Christ, the earnest importunity of Christ with sinners to come
and be happily conjoined with him.

But I shall more fully demonstrate the truth of the assertion by some
particulars.

1. Christ gives ^^t sinners over though they have giv^n him no Awake thou that
sleep, Ephesians. 5. How long will thou sleep O sluggard? ^ rov 6. 9.
answer at all: when they have been drowsy and sleepy, lying careless in the
bed of ignorance, and security, (not at all minding the dignity of his person,
nor heavenlinesse of his voice, nor excellency of his salvation, nor tender of
his grace,) yet still has he stood at their doors and knocked: He has called
the louder, and knocked the harder, perhaps by some affliction or cross to
awaken them, and make them to hear and open. Romans 13. 11. It is high time to
awake out of sleep. Ver. 12. The day is far spent, the night is at hand, etc.

2. Christ has continued knocking, and calling, although sinners Luke 14.
have made light of his invitations; As they in the Parable, who did prefer
their Oxen and Farms before the Feast: yea, although sinners have expressed an
extreme backwardness, yet has Christ followed them, and put them forward, as
in the other Parable, he sent other servants, Matthew. 22. 4. He has renewed his
motion.

3. Christ has continued at the door of sinners when they have made dilatory
answers, would have put him off with excuses and delays, as if he would take no
denial.

Austin delayed in his youth, yet Christ followed and overcame him. Cant. 5. 2.
Open to Augustine. in confess Modo, modo cras, cras, sine Paululum. Austin. ut
supra.
me, etc. Ver. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on: I have washed
my feet, how shall I defile them. Ver. 4. Yet for all this Christ did put in
his hand by the hole of the door. How often has Christ overcome a sinner in
his Age, who would not hearken unto him in his youth.

4. He has not gone away from the door of sinners although they have given
him* harsh and somewhat churlish answers. Cant. 5. 9. What is thy beloved more
then another beloved? chapter 6. 13. What will ye Who is the son of ^^sse? Who is
the Lord, said Pharaoh, yet Moses is sent again.
see in the Shulamite? John 1. 46. Can any good come out of Nazareth? so
Nathaniel replies to Philip; and after this comes Christ and bespeaks
Nathaniel, ver. 48, 49.

John 4. 9. Then says the woman of Samaria, How is it, that thou being a Jew,
ask drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? yet Christ goes on with his
discourse, and offers to her the water of life who churlishly denied him a
little ordinary water to drink.

5. Nay, he has not given over sinners, although they have been so far from
opening to him, that they have opened their mouths against him, by reviling
him, and lift up their hands against him to persecute and kill him. When the
Pharisees went about to kill him, yet even then he stood and cried, If any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink, John 7. 25, 27.

6. Yea, though sinners have actually imbrued their hands in the murdering of
his Messengers, nay, of himself, yet has he stood at their doors knocking.

1. Of his Messengers, though they kill the servants, yet he sent his Son to
the husbandmen.

Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent to thee! How often would I have gathered thy
children, etc.

2 Of himself.

Acts 2. 36. Let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made that
same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ: yet to these does
Christ (in his Apostle Peter) preach and begs of them to repent and to save
themselves, and assures them by promise of pardon if they would come in, see
verses 38, 39, 40.

7. Observe the multiplicity of his calls without and motions within. How often
has he been thrusting in at the Port or Haven of a sinners heart, and then you
must confess that he waits and labors much to get into a sinners soul. As to
the Jews of old he preached to them, wrought miracles, prayed for them on the
cross, afterward sent Apostles to them. As Moses to the Israelites, Exodus 4.
8. If they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the voice of the first sign,
they will believe the voice of the latt^^ sign.

If you could know all the prayers, which a faithful Minister (whom Christ sets
over you) puts up every day to heaven for you, and all his tears, beside his
cares and studies. If you could number all the Sermons which have been preached
unto you, (such a day of the week, every Lords day) and the thousands of
Exhortations, not to stand out against Christ, not to refuse his salvation, to
be persuaded to give way to Jesus Christ.

If (beside all these) it were possible for you to fetch back and present to
your own eyes, the millions of internal motions, in the space of many years,
the number of those secret parlies, and and touches of Jesus Christ at your
hearts: You would then say, Christ indeed has stood at your doors and knocked;
And perhaps be ashamed that you have held out Christ so long. If a beggar
should stand at your doors but one day, for one penny, men would cry shame on
you! and yet thou have held out Christ these twenty years standing at thy door.
Christ has stood at thy doors, with commands in one hand, and with entreaties
in an other hand, he has stood at thy doors with promises in his mouth, and
with tears in his eyes; he has stood at thy door with heaven in his fingers,
and sorrow in his soul; with arms of mercy to clasp thee, if thou openest;
with floods of compassion to bewail thee, if thou refusest.

8. Consider how strongly he follows his suite? If easier knockings will not
prevail, he knocks so that all the house rings of him. He steps from other
doors to that of the conscience, and (volens nolens) in despite of the sinner
breaks it open, and sets that to calling and knocking too. As the servants of
Pharaoh, know thou not that all Egypt is destroyed, Let the people go? Moses
cries out, and all his servants cry to him; so Christ cries out, and conscience
cries out; does conscience speak, and hack, and smite, and wound, and distress
the sinner, and print hell on him: And will thou hold out? will thou not yet
part with thy sins? will thou not yet open to Christ? As in Acts 2. Peter
preached, ver. 36. and conscience preached. ver. 37.

And when conscience knocks And all the soul cries out.
at the door, believe me, all the soul will be awakened, and be in an uprore;
the memory will fetch up all former sinnings, the judgment will see the wrath
by them, and the heart will feel the burden of them, and amongst all other
sins, these, of keeping Christ at the door, will lie most at the door.

O brethren, if Christ might open our door with the Golden Key of his Mercy, it
were best for us, but rather then he will loose a sinner, he will break open
the door with the ^ron bar of the Law: if men will not open, he will compel
them (ere he has done with them) to set open all their gates unto him.

9. Lastly, observe one thing more, that many times he never gives over
knocking, till he has not only knocked down the sinner, but knocked him also
quite off He will force him to yield and open.
from all other hopes, and helps within himself, and without himself, that he
must either certainly perish, or else be constreined to open unto Christ. When
Christ knocks thus at a sinners door for entrance, the sinner thinks of several
courses, ere ever he will open to him.

Sometimes he thinks to outthink these knocks of Christ, by engaging his mind
with much worldly employment: But this puts not off the knockings of Christ.

Sometimes he thinks to forget the sins represented to him, but then perhaps
more sins come up knocking afresh.

Sometimes he thinks that a few prayers shall be the answer given to still all
these knockings of conscience, but they shall not do it: The poor wretch must
know that there is something else in this knocking, besides the confession of
his sins and prayer for pardon.

Sometimes he thinks that hearing of Godly Ministers shall quiet all these
knockings, nor will Christ be put off so, for as he would have his Ministers to
be heard, so (ultimately) he must have the door opened, for himself to be
received.

Sometimes he thinks to help all, by surveighing the rich mercy of God, and his
gracious promises; but neither shall these stick on the soul, unless it will
stoop and come down and open the door and submit to receive Jesus Christ
himself, in whom all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen: so that neither
word, nor prayer, nor duty, nor promise, nor mercy, nor free grace, shall help
until we receive Christ.

Quest. But now you may demand the reasons, why Christ should thus wait and
thus knock at a sinners door for entrance.

Sol. The causes are these of a double sort, some

1. On Christ's part. 2. On the sinners part. A merciful high Priest Heb. 2. 17.

1. On Christ's part.

1. Christ is God, and because he is God, he is therefore merciful, willing to
show mercy to sinners in misery, and unwilling to destroy them: How shall I
give thee up O Ephraim. He is long-suffering: Hosea 4
God is a long-suffering God, and so is Christ; He is a much-suffering Christ,
and a long-suffering Christ. 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.

It is the greatness of mercy to be willing to pity or pardon sinners, and it
is the greatness of goodness, to offer help unto them; And it is the
greatness of patience to wait long upon them.

2. Christ knows the price of a The price of a soul is a great price.
soul; though the sinner knows it not; He knows, that a soul cost the shedding
of his blood, and could never have been ransomed without it: And therefore
Christ will wait and work to get a soul: If he were at cost to offer up his
soul to redeem our souls, he stands not upon some pains to apply that
redemption unto our souls. Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear
and your soul shall live.

3. He knows the sad consequences which will befall the soul that will not open
to him. For instance, the soul will be lost, and the consequence of this is
very sad in regard of,

(1) The fullness of misery; the punishment of loss; such a soul shall never
see God and the punishment of sense, the wrath of God shall abide on that soul.
See John 3 36. The loss of the soul is a great loss, no loss like this loss.

(2) The hideousness of misery, John 3. 19. This is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather them light:
Infidelity is a sin that binds on all our sins, such a sinner is condemned
by the mercy-seat, as well as by the judgment seat.

(3.) The inevitability of all this: There being no name under heaven given
amongst men whereby they must be saved, Acts 4. 12. The only plaster, the
only Physician, the only Mediator, the only Savior is Christ.

(4.) He knows our necessities and the excellency of his o^^ salvation. Though
we think to be and do well enough without Christ, as the Laodiceans thought
themselves rich and Rev. 3. 17
increased, and to stand in need of nothing, yet he knows that we are blind,
and poor, and miserable, and naked: that we perish without him, are lost
without him, are demned without him.

Again, he knows that himself is the proper good, the chiefest good, the
fittest good, the happiest good to a sinners soul, that Luke 19. 42 Joh. 17 3
the knowing of him,

Is the knowing of the things which concern our peace. Is eternal life.
5. He knows whereof we are made, he knows our conditions, and dispositions to
be such, as a short and light work, will not do the work with us. Exodus 32. 9.
I have seen this people; and behold it is a stiff necked people. Acts 7. 51. Ye
stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the
holy Ghost. Ezekiel. 2. 3. And he said unto him, Son of man, I send thee to the
children of Israel, to a rebellious Nation. Verse. 4. They are impudent children
and stiff-hearted.

2 On the sinners part.

There are three things which Christ fore-knows in a sinner, and therefore he
stands and knocks.

1. The deep sleep into which he is fallen: there is a spirit of slumber, a
drowsiness of conscience seized on him, and much must be done ere this drousie
sinner will open his eyes or ears.

2. The thick ignorance and blindness in him: Who is the Lord says Pharaoh? I
know not the Lord: Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory: Father forgive them for they know not what they do.

3. The strange resistance in a sinful heart, it will hold out against Christ
to the last, and will never yield till it be overpowered with the Almighty
operations of his spirit: As he in the story held the ship with his hands and
teeth.

Use 1. Does Christ so importunately knock, and so patiently wait? then be
informed,

1. Of the pride and stubbornness, and rebellion which lie in the will of
sinful man: The Poelagians of old, and the Arminians of late, talk much of the
sovereignty, and virginity, and liberty of man's will; What shipwreck it alone,
has escaped in the fall of man, and of the sufficiency of a moral swa^ion, to
man's conversion, as if God needed to do no more to save us, then devil does to
damn us. Yea, and you shall find the hearts of ignorant people generally
leavened with this proud error, though we know not so much as others, and fall
short of them in ability, yet we have as good a will as the best. O poor
sinner, if thy will be so good, why have thou held out Christ all this while?
why do thou not open the door to Christ? No, no! of Corruption optimi est
pessima.
all the faculties in thy soul, Thy will is the worst; Here lies thy greatest
misery and hell, thou will not come to Christ, thou will not be gathered, thou will not (with Babylon) be healed, thou will not part with thy sins for a
saving Christ.

2. Of the just cause of a sinners damnation: It is of and from himself: never
lay it on Gods decrees, or want of means and helps. What could I have done more
for my vineyard, etc? Isa. 5. So what could Christ do more? he calls, and cries,
and knocks, and entreats, and waits, and weeps, and yet you will not accept of
him, nor of salvation by him.

Thou must thank thy self for all thy miseries; Thou will confess one day I
might have had mercy; I was offered Christ and grace, I felt him knocking by
his spirit, but I slighted him, grieved him, rejected him, and now it is just
with God to shut the door of mercy against me, as it happened to that King who
stayed to drink a cup of water, but lost his Kingdom by it.

Use 2. The second Use which I will make of this point shall be for Humiliation
of us this day. That Jesus Christ has stood at our doors so long, and knocked,
and yet we have not opened unto him.

For this let me speak three things,

1. The evidence which may be given in against us. 2. The causes why we deal
thus with Christ of which we may be ashamed. 3. The peculiar aggravations of
this.
1. The evidence to prove this indictment against us.

1. The Gospel, which you have 3. Inditements.
heard so long a time, challenges you this day; where is the Christ which I
have so clearly revealed, so freely offered, so strictly commanded you to
receive, so seriously beseeched you to let in: whose doors have been set open,
since this door has been set open, etc?

2. The Ministers of the Gospel come in against you: Lord Jesus say they, we
have been Ambassadors sent from thee, and we have preached thee to our people;
We have told them that thou art the Son of God, the Prince of peace, the Lord
of glory, the Physician of souls, the Savior of sinners; that thou came to
seek that which is lost, that thou would have all the ends of the earth to
look after thee; That it is the duty of sinners to open their hearts, and to
give up all their house unto thee; that they shall perish, if they keep thee
out; that they shall live for ever, if they will let thee in. We have told them
how able thou art, and willing to answer for their sins, to make their peace,
to cloth them with righteousness; But Lord, who has believed our report? we
are (after all) slighted, despised, grieved, vexed, reproached, opposed. O
cries out one Minister with tears, I have lived amongst a people and preached
to them these twenty years, and I hardly see one man in all my Parish looking
toward Christ; O cries out another, my heart is almost broken to see the
desperate spirits of my people, they cast dung into the face of Christ, and
trample him (in his Ordinances) under their feet.

3. The consciences of men, testify against them that they will not let in any
power of Jesus Christ; any saving virtue of Christ. O says conscience, thou
set open thy door and let in such company as Christ will never endure;
And when Christ speaks, thou turnest away thine ears; and when his Spirit
treats, thou quenchest his motions, grievest him, resistest him, and usually
offerest despite unto him.

2. The Causes of this, are Ignorance self-confidence. They are whole.
either,

1 The ignorant confidence in the minds of men. All this while they see not
any need of opening unto Jesus Christ, they hear that the souls of men are
lost, but what that means they know not; For their parts, they thank God they
are as well as ever they were in their lives, and What is thy beloved? Cant. 5.
So John 4. 10 If thou knew the gift of God.
hope to be saved as well as the best.

From hence is it that they prize not the wells of salvation, discern not the
height, and depth, and breadth of the love of God toward us in Christ; make
nothing of the pearl, and slight the bread of life, etc.

2. If any light breaks in upon the mind, yet the judgment of the sinner
likes not Christ's conditions: what, says he, and must I

Hazard all my estate now, be willing on a sudden to let all (that I and mine
have taken pains for) go?

Nay, must I hazard mine own life too, (the dearest of all outward comforts,)
yea, and in the mean time submit to such truths as will crush down all my
profits, and to such ways as will cashire all my sins; must I become a fool
to be wise, deny my self and trust in another?

Nay verily, if Christ thinks that I want Reason, and know not what is good for
one; or sees not when I am well, if he will not come in and take part with the
world, and with an infirmity too, and with a little liberty, I must be pardoned
if I keep house alone.

O Christians, there are three chains which hold the sinner that he will not
open the door to Christ.

1. The chain of sinful pleasures, this held the young man, Eccles. 11. 9.

2. The chain of sinful profits, this held the young man in the Gospel.

3. The chain of self ease. These will hold thee till thou art bound up in
chains of everlasting darkness, unless God be the more merciful to thee.

These are the things which make men either totally to stand out, or only
Hypocritically (in a fit) to pretend that they will open unto Christ; the love
of a sin makes them shut the door again, and so does the love of the world,
and the love of their ease, and liberty and respects, etc.

3. The proud and irrational perverseness of the will, this is many times a
special cause why Christ is made to stand long and knock.

Either men will not (after all) be persuaded: Though their judgments be
disarmed of all carnal cavils and objections, though they be convinced of that
infinite happiness in Jesus Christ, yet they cannot abide the holiness of
Christ, they will not hearken: As they answered in the Parable we will not
come, Mat. 22.
ye will not come to me, ye would not, etc.

Or they will capitulate with Christ, to enter in their way and manner, unto
which Christ will never yield: For instance, they will open and receive Christ,

If they may find some holy change in their hearts first, or

If they might find some worthiness in themselves, or

If they they might have some Assurance that their sins were pardoned, and
they stood in favor with God, and were in Covenant, or

If they might have him come in just at that time as they please, in the
desires of mercy, or

If they might have such measures of his grace and love.

O Christian, what do thou mean to make and impose articles on thy Christ,
who alone is to propose articles unto thee; why do thou require that of, and
in thy self, which Christ (when he comes at first to enter the soul) never
required of it. These are after works, and not previous conditions, thy work is
only to open the door, and it is then Christ's work to furnish the house; let
him but in, and let him alone to bring with him mercy to thee, grace to
sanctify, assurance to comfort and ease thee.

3. The humbling aggravations from all this,

1. The incomparable absurdity and indignity; why do thou make Christ thus
to stand and wait at thy door? would thou deal so

With thy friend? what man amongst Luke 11. 5, 6, 7, 8.
you, if his friend came to the door and was importunate, would he not arise
and open the door? as Christ spoke.

Or with a beggar, who knocks and is importunate: would ye not rise and open
and give him an alms? will you open the doors to a beggar, and not to a
Savior? to one who may receive an alms of bounty from you, and not to a
Christ from whom your selves may receive the alms of everlasting mercy?

Or with thy dog, that stands without and cries to come in: Ah Lord, will you
open your doors to a dog, and not to Christ!

Or with the devil, who no sooner calls, but you hear, he is opened unto
before he knocks: will you open the door to let in hell, and will you not open
the door to let in heaven? will you open the door to sin and death, and not
to Christ and life? Can you show a more base disesteeme of Jesus Christ. Why,
what is Christ? and what is the Son of God? and what would you have that you
deal thus unworthily with him, and shut him out of your doors?

Whether you hold out Christ by, 1. Ignorance. 2. Or by incompliance. 3. Or by
diffidence, 4. Or by impenitence, yet you and Christ are still asunder, you are
Christlesse, and evangelical offers, though excellent, yet are transient. Rara
hora Brevis mora.


2. The desparate hazard you run; in the midst of all evangelical knockings;
what if death should knock at your doors before you have opened to Christ?
where are you then? your doors have been shut against Christ, and heaven doors
will be shut against your souls.

Or what if Christ will go away from thy door, and never stand there, or knock
there any longer? It was one of the greatest mercies that ever God showed to
thee, that Jesus Christ would condescend to come, and stand, and knock at thy
doors, and it will prove the heaviest judgment that ever befell sinners; if he
utterly departs from thee because thou will not open thy doors unto him.

3. Your holding out Christ thus long will cost you dear, though at length you
do open to him, as it will cost you hell if you never open to him. You that
keep Christ (thus long) out of his own purchase, and out of his own possession
(for thy soul by right is Christ's) perhaps thou shall have Christ, but thou
shall set at a great fine for it, it will cost thee dear; for thy sins and this
sin of all the rest will set hard and close on thy conscience, that thou have
stood out so long with thy Christ.

Use 3. Does Christ wait long and knock often at our doors before we give him
entrance? then let not us think it strange if we wait long, and knock often at
the doors of heaven, (either for our selves or for the land) before God opens
to us.

Beloved! the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and wise too in the
proportionate retributions of sinners: we may see our sins in the very
judgments and dealings of God. The time was that we would not hear the voice
of Christ, and now he will not hear the voice of our prayers. We have shut out
his Son, and he shuts out our suits; we have made Christ to wait long, and we
now are made to expect long. We did not arise to the knockings of Christ, and
he will not now arise to the knockings and calls of our distresses. We think it
much that God comes not down all this while to deliver us from the blood of
war; and God has thought it much that we would not come down to open the
doors, and to accept of the blood of his Son. We have made our God and Christ
to wait upon us with spiritual deliverances; Is it not righteous that we
should wait upon him for temporal deliverances? O that we could stop our
mouths, and silence and check our impatient and murmuring hearts this day!
Remember, says God, how ye have dealt with my Christ, with my Spirit, with my
Gospel, with my Offers of grace and salvation.

Confess it, and be ashamed and humbled this day, that you have dealt thus
with your God, and with your Savior; It is not that the Lords ear is heavy,
nor is it that his hand is shortened! Isa. 59. 1.
that he hears not and delivers not all this while! But it is to recompense
unto us our own ways, Because when he called, we would not hear, therefore
Prove. 1. 24, 25.
when calamities be upon us, we shall call upon him and not be answered.

Use 4. The next Use shall be of Exhortation, to persuade you to let in Christ,
and not to close the door against him any longer; but as the Apostle spoke, To
day whiles it is called to day, hearken to his voice, Heb. 3. 7. and to know in
the day of your visitation the things which concern your peace: O what a mercy
is it for Christ to come and wait upon us.

Consider,

1. Your withstandings of Christ are unspeakably dangerous; you lost your
souls once by Adams wilfulness, will you lose them the second time by your
own? Every refusal of Christ is (if mercy relieve us not) a new destruction of
the soul. A contempt of Christ, a crucifying of Christ afresh, a cruel
murdering of our own souls.

2. All shall be pardoned, if yet you will hearken and open to him, mercy can
pardon sins against mercy, and Christ can pardon sins against Christ: former
refusals are no prejudice to future invitations, and offers of grace; If we be
humbled and they be accepted.

Acts 3. 17. And now brethren, I wot that through ignoranc^ you did it, as did
also your Rulers.

Verse 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out.

3. What would a damned soul give for one opportunity more? what would a dying
man give for one day more? what cuts his soul more then his delaying and
slighting of Christ? Soul-opportunities, and Christ-opportunities are precious,
more worth then all the world: mercy is in them, grace, glory, eternity is in
them: The whole earth hangs on a point, and so does heaven on an inch of
opportunity.

Quest. But what must be done?

Sol. Get, 1. Knowledge of your sinful condition, and exigences, and
necessities.

2. Knowledge of the worth and singularity of Christ to a sinners condition,
John 4. 10. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto
thee, give me drink. Thou would have asked of him, and he would have given
thee living water.

Use 5. The last Use shall be of Exhortation and encouragement to distressed
and laden Consciences: Behold yet Christ stands at thy door and knocks, why
do thou not open unto him? why art thou afraid of a gracious Savior? why
yet hold thou him at the the door with thy unbeleeving disputes and doubts?

O that God would set thee at liberty; O that God would this day overpower thy
heart; O that Jesus Christ who has made all ready to feast and welcome thy
drooping heart, wo^ld by his Spirit command off thy fetters, command on his
strength, that thou would open thy doors, and give one welcome to thy
Savior!

He is worthy to come in, though thou be not worthy to receive him. Once say, O
blessed Christ! the door is open, and such as I am, is thine; if thou will have
all my heart, all is thine, welcome O Christ, and welcome O blessed Spirit of
Christ, and welcome thou Covenant of Grace, and welcome thou free mercy of God,
and welcome all the excellencies of Christ, and welcome all the Laws of
Christ, and welcome all you conditions of Christ.

Blessed Christ; Take the best Room I have! set up thy self and abide in my
Judgment, as the most excellent Treasure; In my will, as the most excellent
happiness; In my affections, as the only love, desire, joy, hope, and
confidence of my poor soul.

Thou hold me at the door, thou did not stand on my worthiness, nor
except against me for my sinfulness! O dear Christ; Take me a poor miserable
sinner, and make me another, an holy, and well-pleasing creature! I can bring
nothing to thee, but I will expect all from thee! I will trust on thy blood for
pardon, on thy merits for acceptance, on thy Spirit for holiness, on thy
compassions for comforts, on thy self, thy self alone for salvation, on thy
faithfulness and fullness for all. And is it so says Christ? and do thou
so, says Christ? well, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven, I will, be
thou clean: Grace, Mercy and Peace enter into this poor soul for ever.

Rev. 3. 20. Sermon. 3.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
YOu have heard already out of these words, the gra^i^us behavior of Christ
toward sinners, viz. his singular readiness, his earnest importunity, and his
patient expectations to enter into their hearts and save them (Behold (...)
stand at the door and knock.)

I am now to discover the dutiful behavior of sinners toward Christ (If any
man hear my words and open the doors, I will come into him, etc.)

The words (you see) are expressed in an hypothetical, or conditional form, If
any man, etc. to note unto us,

That something must be done on our part, as well as something on Christ's part;
though Christ be willing to save a sinner, yet he will not save him against his
will. It Is true, this willingness to open unto Christ is not a natural, but a
supernatural effect, it is voluntas mota, nay mutata, (as Austin rightly
speaks) yet it it must be, or else there can be no conversion, no salvation of
us.

Again, they are expressed in an indefinite way as well as conditional: Not if
this or that man; but if any man, etc. To note

That there is a latitude, a full latitude in the offer of Christ and grace: No
sinner (under the Gospel) is excluded by Christ, but by himself. Although the
Application of Christ be definite and particular, yet the proclamation is
indefinite and general: Favors (say the Lawyers)* sunt ampliandi.

Now the condition of Christ's entrance, is only this, If any man hear my voice
and open the door: The hearing answers to his counselling, in verse 18. and
the opening answers to his knocking in v. 20. Both of them united make up (if I
mistake not) that which we call believing, which comes by hearing, and is in it
self the ear of the soul to hearken, and the key of the soul to open unto
Christ: But of this more anon; In the mean time there are two very remarkable
propositions from the Text.

1. That the door of a sinners heart ought to open unto Christ's calling and
knocking.

2. That whatsoever the former condition of any sinner has been, and
whatsoever his present condition is, yet if he opens to Christ, Christ will be
his.

Doct. 1. That the door of a sinners heart ought to open unto Christ calling
and knocking.

Before I explicate this proposition, let me premise a distinction or two.

1. You must distiguish 'twixt officium and principium: I do not say that the
sinner can open his door to Christ but that he ought to open it: the ability is
one thing, the duty is another.

2. Although it be true, that in conversion, the sinner does actually open the
door to Christ, yet you must distinguish 'twixt what he does virtute innata,
and what he does virtute illata: by a power of his own, and by a power given
unto him: the former we deny, the latter we grant.

These things being premised I shall now discuss three particulars.

1. What door of a sinner that is which must be opened.

2. What the opening of that door is, and how far it extends.

3. Why that door must be opened, since Christ is able by his omnipotency to
come into the soul of a sinner without his opening.

Quest. 1. What door of a sinner that is which must be opened unto Christ
calling and knocking?

Sol. The door in the general is the whole soul of man: The soul of man is the
house in which Christ desires to dwell: And it is It is the door at which and
for which Christ knocks.
the door too through which Christ intends to enter, although some other Lord
has got possession, yet the soul belongs only to Christ, as by right of
creation, (for he made it) so also by right of Redemption, (for he has bought
and purchased it.)

But principally there are two noble faculties of the soul, which (I humbly
conceive) make up this door.

1. The judgment of a sinner: at this part of the door stands the Gospel, in
the truth of it, (this is a true saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world
to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.)

2. The will of a sinner: at this part of the door stands the Gospel, in the
goodness of it. This is a true saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world
to save sinners (this is for the understanding) and is worthy of all
acceptance, (here is goodness,) and properly respects the will of a sinner.
So that whatsoever the Gospel holds forth concerning Christ, It presents all of
it to these doors, and these two faculties may and can reach (either by way of
perceiving in the understanding, or by way of receiving in the will) the whole
sum of Evangelical salvation.

And in truth, all the commerce or trading (if I may so speak) which Christ has
with a sinner, or that a sinner has with Christ, is originally and primarily
at these doors.

Quest. 2. But the next question is more difficult, What the opening of the
door is, and how far it extends?

Sol. I answer by parts.

1. In respect of the understanding and judgment of a sinner, the door is
opening when three things are wrought.

1. An evangelical apprehension, not only of our necessity of Jesus Christ, but
also of his excellency, designation, qualification, sufficiency, and
willingness to save sinners.

When so much spiritual light is let in, as that a sinner discerns Christ to be
a Savior, that God has set him forth, and sent him to be so, and that he has
accomplished the full work of our Redemption, and that a sinner is capable of
him and it; yea and the soul gives credence hereto: Now the key (if I may so
express my self) is put into the door. Key in the ^oore.


2. A singular appreciation of this Jesus Christ, so that now he stands as it
were in his glory and beauty before the eyes of a poor sinner, like the Sun
dazzling and drowning all the Stars. Not self-confidence, nor creature-comfort,
nor help, nor hope do move him: Yea the soul counts all but dross and dung in
comparison of Christ, Phil. 3.

And Christ alone is esteemed by the poor humbled sinner, as the superlative
excellency, the chiefest of ten thousands, the royal signet of divine love, the
only desirable of my soul, the peculiar remedy of my misery, the absolute
center of my everlasting blessedness, and the most attractive Adamant or
Lodestone of all my affections.

Now when this is stamped and formed in the soul, then not only the key is put
into the door, but also the door is (as it were) unl^ckt to Christ. Door
unlock^.


3. A comfortable subjection unto the authority and sovereignty of Christ, in
respect of his Person, and Laws, and ways, and conditions.

The soul lets fall all proud cavils, reasonings, disputes, exceptions, and
quarrels, and now professes it self to be fully satisfied, resolved and
cleared, about Christ and all concerning Christ; It assents, and says, This is
that glorious, gracious, blessed Christ, whom I judge, and acknowledge to be
worthy of all credence, of all reverence, of all acceptance of all affiance, of
all obedience: And all his Laws, and Rules to be a most holy, spiritual,
righteous, and good will, infinitely pure, justly sovereigne, only saving.

Yea, and that there is no condition which he propounds, whether active or
passive, but it is most equal to submit unto it: Happy is the man who may enjoy
him, upon any, upon all his gracious and soul-saving terms: Christ with any
loss, is gain, enough, yea upon the cross he is a Savior good enough.

And when this is done, then Hand up on the door.
the door is not only unlockt, but the hand also is upon the door, even ready
to set it open to Christ.

2. In respect of the will, and here (in a word) the door is opened, when by
faith the will is changed and inclined to a right election, and acceptance of
Christ.

When it is not only invited, but also changed, not only touched, but drawn,
not only mollified, but also persuaded, or as Saint Austine spoke, When of
unwilling it is made willing, and being freed by grace, it becomes Voluntas
libera est quand^ liberata est.
now free to open to Christ.

For the better understanding of this, know, that when the will 4. Things.
of a sinner opens to Christ.

1. It comes off to Christ determinately or completely: the Schoolmen Two
inclinations in the will.
do rightly observe that there are two sorts of inclinations in the will.

Some are imperfect and incomplete, as (vota and velleitates) wishings and
wouldings, to which the will is partly willing, and partly unwilling: It is
divided, it hangs upon an indifferent balance, Arguments of either side do
poise it with an equal strength: The soul fees reason to respect and open to
Christ, and yet it is tottered with reasons, not yet, or not so fully, to give
way unto him.

Some are perfect and complete as (volitiones) the peremptory bents of the
will, wherein the person (as one sufficiently cleared and resolved, and
biassed) comes off fully, without any ifs or ands; The scale has sufficient in
it to weigh it down, the sinner ^ees so much of the excellency of Jesus Christ,
and of his sutablenesse, that he cries out, O Lord! give me Christ, I must have
Christ, I will have Christ; I will stand upon nothing so that I may have
Christ; farewell sin, farewell my self; Take the world who will; let me have
Christ, my mind is satisfied, my heart is resolved and fixed, I know my need
of Christ; I know the worth of Christ, I have heard his call, I like his
articles, I prize his person, he is the end and desire of my soul; Christ is
willing to save me, and I (O Lord) I am most willing to receive and serve him.

2. It comes off to Christ freely and electively: There is (to our conceit and
apprehension) a twofold opening of the will to A twofold opening.
Christ.

One arising from the mere urgency of an anguished conscience, which may make a
man willing to subscribe to any course (for the present.) As in a storm, the
Mariner is willing to cast out all his lading to preserve himself, so a sinner
may be willing to give up all, and to give way to Christ in the tempest of a
vexing and tormenting conscience, to procure a little ease and calmness; All
which springs only from self-love, and looks upon Christ, not so directly as
one to make peace with God; but reflexively as one to make peace and ease in
the conscience. And this exigence being once removed, the heart of a sinner
(having served its turn of Christ) expels Christ, and closes up it self
against him: Like the Athenians and others, who made use of brave Commanders,
when an enemy brake in and endangered their Cities, but being once secured,
they grew weary, picked a quarrel and benished them.

Another arising from the efficacy of saving faith, which when it opens the
will to Christ, it inclines and raises it to him from Arguments to be found in
Christ alone; It sees reason enough in Christ to make us willing to open unto
Christ; Namely such a perfection of goodness, and excellency, and
sutablenesse, that if there were no conscience to trouble me, Nay if there were
no heaven to crown me, yet the beauty of Christ alone has won my heart, he
alone is object and motive too.

As there is sweetness enough in the honey it self, to invite a man to eat it;
so in Christ alone, to open to him and to have union with him.

3. It comes off with ind^finite closure, both in respect of it self, and in
respect of Christ.

1. In respect of it self: O Lord Christ, I lay down all that I am at thy feet,
I am no longer mine own, but thine, I expect nothing, I reserve nothing, my
whole soul, body, state, honor, liberty, ability, life are thine. I do not
insist on any lust to be spared; I do not desire any worldly thing to be
exempted; I do not crave any further time to be granted, Take the house, take
the key, take my heart, take present possession of all.

2. In respect of Christ: I close with thee, and with all concerning thee, with
thy person (O that I had union with it!) with thy graces, (O that I had
communion with them!) with thy righteousness (it is my only confidence,) with
thy will (it is my only guide,) with thy services (they are my liberty,) with
thy promises (they are my ability,) with thy sufferings (they are my glory,)
with thy rewards (they are my eternal felicity.) Thou art a goodness better
then all prosperity; thou art a comfortablenesse sufficient in all adversity;
Heaven is not heaven without thee, and misery is heaven enough with thee.

4. When the door of the will rightly opens to Christ, It comes off with the
concomitant attendance of the whole soul: the whole soul stands open to look on
ChrisT, to admire Christ, to welcome Christ. The memory stands open and
remembers the excellent things which it has heard of Christ. The mind stands
open, and contemplates (even with astonishment) the royal glories in Christ,
the surpassing love of Christ, the merciful compassion of Christ, the great
redemption and full salvation by Christ. Yea all the affections open themselves
and come forth (as it were) to let in and welcome Christ. Love comes forth and
says, welcome Christ, thou art the bridgroom of my soul. Desire comes forth,
and says welcome Christ, thou art the satisfaction of my soul. Delight comes
forth, and says welcome Christ, thou art the paradise of my soul. Hope comes
forth, and says welcome Christ, thou have been the long looked for of my
soul. Joy comes forth, and says, welcome Christ, thou art the center and rest
of my soul. Grief comes forth, and says welcome Christ, I am offended and
exceedingly troubled, because I have dealt so unkindly with a gracious Christ.
Anger comes forth, and says, welcome Christ, I am vexed at the very heart,
that for poor and base things I should all this while keep out my blessed
Christ. Hatred comes forth, and says, welcome Christ, I protest I will never
have any peace, nor yield service, but will do my best to destroy all these
sinful Lusts, the enemies of Christ And fear comes forth and says, welcome
Christ; I owe thee all reverence, and will watch the soul that it shall never
willingly grieve Christ more. And zeal comes forth and says, welcome Christ, I
will do the more for thee, because I have done so much against thee: I am
resolved to do any thing for thee, who have done every thing for me: thou did
not spare thy blood to save my soul, and I will not spare my life to serve
thine honor: And now (sirs) when the soul is thus formed and framed by faith,
(when the judgment thus comes off to Christ, and the will thus comes off to
Christ) then is the door (at which Christ has knocked) truly and fully opened.

Quest. 3. Why that door must be opened to Christ, when Christ is able by his
omnipotency (without our opening) to enter into the heart of any sinner?

Sol. That you may have a more clear and distinct resolution of this enquiry,
premise a few things with me.

1. In matters of this nature, it is not safe to insist on the absolute power
of Christ, but we must rather respect his ordinate power, if I may so express
my self; Christ is (in respect of his absolute power) as able to damn us as to
save us; to throw us into hell, as well as draw us up to heaven.

2. Although the door must be opened, yet this is done by virtue of an
omnipotent act from Christ too

There are three things wherein Christ declares his Almighty power.

First, the creation of the world.

Secondly, the conversion of sinners.

Thirdly, the resurrection of the dead. To quicken a dead sinner, to make him a
believer, declares as great power as to give a new Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
being.

3. Yet thirdly, Christ will not so act his omnipotency in a sinners
conversion, as to exclude the heart of a sinner from opening to him, but will
make the heart of a sinner willing to open to him; Because,

1. Christ intends in this work a conjugal union 'twixt himself and the soul of
a sinner, unto which a mutual consent of will is requisite.

To some other kinds of union, this is not necessary, but unto a match or
marriage it is: Christ's Will, and our will reciprocally meeting make it up.

I do confess that all the offers of Christ are precious, and declare
unspeakable readiness or willingness on his part, but there must be also
consent, and an acceptance on our part, or else no saving will come to us. For
it is not salvation only purchased, or only offered, which actually saves a
sinner, it must be salvation also embraced and accepted, etc.

2. Christ in this converting work, principally aims at the glorifying of his
grace and rich love, and mercy, and therefore he carries it on by such ways,
and steps wherein the soul may take notice of them. When he did create man,
this he did without any more ado, by a sole word of power, which then he
intended to magnify. But when he converts a sinner, now he orders every act
and passage, so that the sinner shall subscribe all the glory to his free grace
and great love. Now he must see his lost condition without Christ, now he must
see the travels and sufferings of Christ, to redeem and save him; now he must
see the tender care of Christ, and vehement desire to bestow himself, and
purchase on him; Now he must see the glories and riches of Christ, to persuade
and draw him; Now he must see the free bounty of Christ, in insisting on no
condition but this, open unto me, and be but willing to let me in. Now he must
see, that nothing in himself can be salvation unto him; the heart must open to
Christ, or else it must perish.

3. Christ will have the sinner to esteem him a most valuable object, and to
let him in as one that is worthy: Mere power (whether we will or no) may set up
it self, whether we think the person worthy or not; But Christ will come in
rather upon choice; His worth shall make as much way for him as his power, the
sinner shall say, it is better to let in Christ, then to keep out Christ.

4. The work is done if this door be opened; Christ stands upon no more.

Nothing is done by us, if the will comes no off to Christ: All the knowledge
which a man has, and all the troubles which a man feels, and all the duties
which a man performs, and all the good words which a man speaks, they are all
as nothing, they alter not the condition; The condition is still Christlesse
till the will opens to let in Christ: But all comes off, the work is done if
the will comes off and opens to Christ; Christ has got what he would have, he
has got the strong castle, he has now won all; for all the soul stands or
falls with the will, holds out or comes in with the will. The whole man is at
the obedience of his will and if that be now at the obedience of Christ, Christ
has got all.

Use 1. Should the door of a sinners heart open to the voice and knocking of
Christ? Let us reflect then on our selves, and seriously search whether our
heart^ be set open unto him; Are you yet made willing to entertain Christ.

Beloved, be pleased to consider a few things.

1. You have had many callings, many offers, many knockings at the door from
Christ: partly,

By the ^spiration of the world; O how many commands? how many entreaties? how
many invitations? how many promises?

By the inspiration of the Spirit; O how much illumination? how many
convictions? How many motions and excitations?

Now what are become of those golden drops? of those celestial breaths, of
those almost persuasions, of those unanswerable demonstrations of eternal life
by Christ, of eternal life without Christ? Thou have been awakened by them, why
did thou not rise? Thou did rise out of thy bed, why did not thou step
down to the door? Thou did step down to the door, why did not thou open?
Why did thou step back from thy convictions, from thy resolutions?

2. Christ is worthy, is most worthy of admission: Sirs, is Jesus Christ a
considerable object in your eyes or not? Is there any worth at all or value in
him? Is there more worth in a saving Christ, then in a damning lust? can any
thing stand in competition with him, either for intrinsecal perfection, or for
respective perfection to your souls? is the creature (that specious, short,
transient, empty nothing) fit to be let in, and set up in the heart? Is sin
(that vile, in glorious, Goddishonouring, and soul-damning hell) fit to be let
in and set up in the heart? shall that which is the least of good, (the world)
and that which is the greatest of evil (sin) lie in the chamber and Christ
(the center of happiness) still be thrust out to lie in the manger?

3. Many hearts are as yet shut against Christ: they are not opened to him;
what think you of such, whose ears are not open to Christ? you read of some in
Scripture, Acts 7.
who refused to hear, yea, and stopped their ears least they should hear; and
too many there are amongst us who decline the hearing of the Word, etc. Is it
likely the heart is open, when the ear is not open? What think you of such who
profess a dislike of Christ? we will not have this man to reign over us,
spoke they in the Gospel; and the Apostle relates of some, that they could not
abide wholesome doctrine, and of others, by Luke, that spoke against the way
too of Christ, He came amongst his own, and his own received him not, said
John. Yea Christ himself delivered it of the Jews, ye will not come unto me
that ye might have life, John 5. 40. What think you of such who prefer other
things before Christ? the honor of men, as they in John, the profits of the
world, and pleasures, as they in the Parable: Esau preferred a mess of pottage
before his birthright: the Jews preferred Barrabas a thief before Christ, etc.

4. It is a difficult thing to make a sinner willing to open his heart to
Christ. There is so much ignorance to removed out of the mind. There is so
much resistance against the truth, and way of salvation to be removed out of
the judgment; there is so much confidence in our own abilities and
righteousness; there is so much pride and stomach, to lie at the door of
another, and there to beg, and there to depend for an alms of free mercy;
there is so much unbelief, whether Christ can save, or whether Christ will
save; so many reasonings, so many fears, besides the natural oppositions of the
will of a sinner to the commands of Christ, and the holiness of Christ, and the
conditions of Christ, that it is of al things under heaven, the most difficult
to be willing to open to Christ.

O how many Sermons! how many strokes in afflictions? how many lashes in
conscience? how many condescensions of mercy? how many operations of the spirit
of God ere the sinner will step and stoop to open unto Christ? The Prodigal was
wel-nigh famished, ere he would return to his Fathers house; and the sinner is
made to lie a while in hell, before he can be made willing to accept of heaven.

5. Many think that their wills are opened to receive Christ, and yet they are
stut, or else not truly opened. They like to hear a Minister preaching of
Christ, especially such a Minister; O Sirs, it is not the excellency of Christ
which draws you, it is only the elegancy of the servants which affect you. It
was not Christ, but the loaves, which made the multitude to flock so much: The
child loves the painted book, but cares not for the printed lesson: You like
the phrases, we speak (your ears are open) but you regard not the precepts
which we deliver from Christ to you, (your hearts are not open.) Their hearts
are open to a glorified Christ but not to a crucified Christ; when Hosanna was
sung, then all the multitude follow Christ, but when crucifying was cried, then
they all forsook him. They are willing to open to Christ, so that they may be
open to sin too; this is like an Inne-keepers door, which is open to every
passenger: Or if willing only and altogether for Christ, this is only in case
of extremity upon a racking conscience, or upon a dying bed.

Quest. How then may we know that our hearts have been, or are rightly opened
to let in Jesus Christ.

Sol. This may be known (as I conceive) three ways, 1. By the causes. 2. By
the concomitants. 3. By the consequents of opening.

1 By the causes.

1. The right opening of the heart arises from the word, this is the key of
the Spirit of Christ, by which he opens a sinners heart.

The word in the legal part is a key which shuts up a sinner, Gal. 3. 23. and
in the evangelical part, it is a key which opens the heart of a sinner; there
it is said in Isa. 61. 1. to open the prison to them that are bound. When it
has convinced a person of his sinful and lost estate, and killed and broken
him, in respect of wrath and self confidence, then it proceeds to revive him,
and raise him by the possibilities, and hopes of mercy and salvation in Christ.

And this it does three ways.

1. Proponendo; both by revealing (objecta credibilia) the matter and manner of
a sinners salvation, (God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, John 3. 16.) and by inviting the sinner to come and accept of him and his
salvation; If any man thirst, let him come unto me, John 7. 37.

2. Imponendo; by commanding sinners to come unto Christ, 1 John 3. 23. This is
his commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his S^nne Jesus Christ.
This is called a bidding of people to a marriage, Mat. 22. 3.

3. Apponendo, by promising that Christ will not reject such a coming soul,
John 6. 37. nor deal harshly with it, matthew. 12. 20. not break the bruised
reed; But will lovingly embrace it, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me and I will give
you rest, yea, and secure it from hell, and assure it of heaven, John 3. 16.

2. The right opening of the heart arises from faith: this (in Scripture) is
called, the coming grace, and the receiving grace, and the opening grace, when
the Lord gives faith to the heart this is an eye to see all the revelations of
the Gospel, this is an ear to hear all the commands of the Gospel, this is an
hand to clasp all the promises of the Gospel, and to set the door wide open to
Jesus Christ. O sinner, says faith, here is mercy to be had, and here is
salvation to be had, and Christ to be had, and all for thee? Thou gave up thy
condition as desperate, but be of good cheer, I see a Savior, I see a
satisfaction, I see a deliverance, God is willing to be reconciled to thee;
Christ has born thy sins, made thy peace, offers himself to thee, entreats
thee, commands thee, assures thee of salvation if thou come to him. O cries
out an heart awaked by faith, O Christ I bless thee, O Christ I come unto
thee; Thou art worthy of all acceptance; my heart is ready, the door is open O
Christ, and welcome O Christ too, etc.

2. By the Concomitants.

1. The whole body (if I may speak improperly) of the will is opened to Christ,
when the heart is rightly opened.

The Schoolmen report unto us diverse motions and abilities in the will, which
give me leave to make use of to my purpose, they tell us in the will of man
there 5. Acts of the wi^^.
is,

1. Election, which is a preacceptation of a good before an evil, or of one
good before another. 2. Consent, which is a complying of the will with the
judgment in a good propropanded, and apprehended, and approved. 3. Intention,
which is a tendancy, or an extending of the will in the use of means for the
assecution of a good represented and desired. 4. Imperium, or command, which is
a secret authority it has to do dispose all the faculties of the soul to move
according to its bent. 5. Fruition, which is a delightful acquiescence in a
good possessed. All this appears in the heart which is rightly opened unto
Christ. The Will,
1. Makes choice of Christ, above all, and before all: Sin is vile, and the
world is empty; there is none in heaven that the soul prefers to Christ, or on
earth that it desires in compariof Christ: Christ is best, best of all.

2. Consents to Christ, subscribes to Christ: Christ has not one will, and the
soul another: What Christ commands is good, what he likes is best.

3. Extends the soul to all the means of attaining Christ; It will pray for
Christ, enquire for Christ, hear for Christ, wait for Christ, weep for Christ.

4. Commands all the man to give up to Christ: every room in the house, every
faculty in the soul; it will set up Christ in our contemplation, in our
judgments, in our affections, in our speeches, in our studies, in our lives.

5. The fruition of Christ is most sweet and pleasunt: I have enough, said
Jacob, Joseph is yet alive: The Merchant who sold all for the pearl, and bought
it, rejoiced in his pearl: Christ alone is Portion, and Lands, and Houses, and
Father, and Mother, and Sister, and Brother, and Profit, and Pleasure, and
Comfort, and Happiness enough to the soul that opens unto Christ.

2. A whole Christ is opened unto: O brrthren, as Christ, so every thing in and
about Christ, is precious: His salvation is precious, his doctrine is precious,
his way is precious, his redemption is precious, his righteousness is
precious, his holiness is precious, his blood is precious, his will is
precious. His Priestly office is preeious, and so is his Prophetical office,
and so is his Kingly office: Reigning with Christ is precious, and so is
suffering for Christ; Gaining by Christ is precious, and so is losing for
Christ; Receiving from Christ is precious, and so is doing for Christ; The
comforting virtue of Christ is precious, and so is his mortifying virtue, and
so is his healing virtue, and so is his guiding or leading virtue. An half
Christ was never ordained to be a Savior, the whole Lamb was a sacrifice; and
a whole Christ is a sinners salvation.

3. The heart is opened unto Christ only: If you have a foredoor for Christ,
and a backdoor to open unto sin, you will deceive and lose your souls. An
heart, and an heart is ever a false heart: the young man in the Gospel was
willing to have Christ, but then he must have his possessions too: Some of the
Jews would have had Christ, but then they must have the praise of men too. O
no, one heaven cannot hold too Sons; one heart can hold but one christ only,
or no Christ at all; Christ and grace it may hold (many pearls may be upon one
string) but Christ and sin it cannot hold, (light and darkness have no
communion.) The heart of man is just fit for Christ: There is so much in Christ
as will take up a whole heart. There is not a room or corner to be spared for
any lust. And in truth, a whole love is little enough for Christ, a whole
desire, a whole delight, a whole hope, a whole joy, a whole confidence, all
little enough for Christ; Christ can fill them all: the box of ointment was
little enough for the feet of Christ, etc.

3. By the Consequents.

But these will more aptly fall in, in the subsequent part of the text, unto
which I will refer them.

Use 2. I should now proceed to an use of Exhortation, to stand it out no
longer, but presently to open unto Christ, and then to an use of Direction,
what course we should take so that our hearts may be opened.

But I will first handle the other Proposition which I mentioned at the
beginning, and refer these two Uses to the closure of it.

Rev. 3. 20. Sermon. 4.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
YOu have heard already (out of these words) the gracious behavior of Christ
toward sinners, and something of the dutiful behavior of sinners toward
Christ, viz. (that they ought to hear and open to him.)

I now proceed to handle the indefinitenesse of personal admittance with a
little relation also to Christ's further insureance (If any m^n open, etc. I
will come in to him.)

O Sirs, read over the words again; are they not like the year of Jubilee, in
which any servant might (if he would) have his freedom? when Christ was
betrayed upon his speech, one Disciple an answers, Is it I? and another, Is it
I? But when Christ offers himself himself and salvation to us, there is no
cause for such a reply, does he mean me, or thee, or another? O no, herein is a
haven open to any ship; a Savior ready to entertain any sinner: (If any man
hear my voice, I will come in to him.)

Whence observe.

Doct. 2. That whatsoever the former condition of any sinner has been, and
whatsoever his present condition is; yet if he will open unto Christ, Christ
will be his.

These Laodiceans (of whom the text expressly speaks) they were poor, and
blind, and naked, and wretched, and miserable, yet for none of these does
Christ except against them; Though they had no riches of worthiness, no eyes
of knowledge, no garment of righteousness; yea, though they were so wretched,
and miserable, that they had no ability to buy these, but stood before his eyes
as mere, impotent, undiscerning objects, yet he calls to them, and offers
himself to them, to all of them, to every one, he excepts not a man; but if any
man will, etc.

In Luke 14. 21. The Master of the house said to servant, go out quickly into
the streets and lanes of the City, and bring in hither the poor, and the
maimed, and the halt, and the blind; Here Is not a man of quality, of any
dignity, of any self-sufficiency, but a company of indigent, impotent,
deformed, wounded sinners; yet th^se are by Christ envited and welcome, Isa.
55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy milk and honey without money, and
without price.

There is in Christ, water to cleanse, milk to nourish, bread to strengthen,
Honey to comfort, a full good for a sinner, all good for a sinner: And the
sinner is called upon to come, yea, the second time to come; yea, the third
time to come. And the sinner is every sinner; Ho, every one that thirsts,
every sinner who feels his want, and sees his need, and desire Christ.

Object. But what if he has no desire, nothing to lay down?

Sol. Why let him come (and he that has no money, come.)

Object. But something else at least must be brought.

Sol. No (buy milk, and honey without many, and without price*) as if he should
say, I sell for nothing, I was sold for a price, but I sell my self without
price. Thirst, and come, be but willing to open, to take, and all is yours.
Parallel to this are those two other places in John 7. 37. Jesus stood and
cried, if any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Rev. 22. 17. Let him
that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

For the further confirmation of this point, I will demonstrate two things,

1. The (...): That it is a divine truth. 2. The (...): Why it is so.
1. The quod sit, that it is a truth.

Which I think will appear if five things can be proved.

1. Though the person has been very sinful. 2. Though the sinner be not able
to make satisfaction 3. Though his humblings be very small. 4. Though his
worthiness be none at all. 5. Though holiness be altogether wanting, yet if
he will open to Christ, Christ will be his.
1. Though the person has been very sinful, yet if he will open his heart to
Christ, Christ will be his. Sin may be considered two ways either,

Absolutely, in respect of its filth and guilt.

Relatively, in respect of affection and service: I confess that former
sinfulness resolutely affected, and bound up with the chief desire, and
complacence of the will, is utterly offensive and incompatible with Christ;
neither will or can he heart of a person, (thus considered) open to Christ, nor
will Christ (with such a corrival) step into the heart.

Nevertheless sin absolutely considered (as defiling and transgressing)
makes not the person, neither incapable of Christ, or un suitable to christ.

A sick person is a proper subject for a Physician, (the whole need not the
Physician, but the sick;) a sinner is as proper a subject for a Savior; For
this is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Take sin how you please, either
as it is a Trangression against the Law, when the Law has shut and bound up
and condemned a transgressour; the Sun can scatter all the clouds, that Ocean
swallow up mountains; the Gospel can release and set him free: God has set
forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, Romans 3 25. (the
Gospel is a sufficient remedy against Law.)

Or as it is a transgression against the Gospel: if yet the heart open to
Christ, Christ will not reject it. Mat. 12. 31. All manner of sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men. Ver. 32. And whosoever speaks a word against the
Son of men, it shall be forgiven him: Not only sins against God in his
holiness, but also against Christ, (here called the Son of man) upon
repentance and believing, shall be forgiven. Manasses sinned against the Law,
and upon repentance was accepted. Paul sinned against the Gospel, and yet upon
his believing was received unto mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 16. It is possible for a
sinner, who has refused and opposed Christ, yet to be humbled for these, and
to accept of Christ. There is a double refusal of the offer of Christ.

One is total and final, which is fixed in a peculiar malice, and a permanent
obstinacy against Christ; this is hopeless: It Is not sins absolutely against
the Gospel which excludes, but impenitencies.

Another is total but temporary, this arises either from ignorance or
inadvertency which Christ does pity, and it does not infallibly hinder a second
and further offer: Nor yet an opening and closure with Christ.

Acts 3. 17. And now brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it as did
also your Rulers. Ver. 19. Rep^nt ye therefore and be converted that your
sins may be blotted out. Acts 4. 4. Many of them which heard the Word
believed, and the number of the men were about five thousand.

2. Though the sinner be not able of himself to make the least satisfaction to
divine justice for his sins committed, yet if he will open unto Christ, Christ
will be his. It is most true, that God must be satisfied, or else he will not
be reconciled: Though he be ready to show mercy, yet he is very tender of the
glory of his Justice; we owe unto him obedience as such creatures, and
satisfaction as sinners. But now mark if your hearts be willing to open to
Christ, you shall not be rejected, although you can make no satisfaction at
all. Upon me be thy curse my Son (said Rebecca to Jacob) only obey my voice,
Genesis 27. 13. So says Christ to a sinner, upon me be thy curse (I was made a
curse for thee, Gal. 3. 13.) only obey my voice, only open thy heart unto me.
If he has wronged thee or owes thee ought, put that on mine account, said
Paul to Philemon concerning Onesimus, Philem. v. 18. So says Christ to the
sinner, whatsoever thou owe to my Father (for perfect obedience) and wherein
soever thou have wronged my Father, (in thy perfect disobedience,) put all on
mine account; I will be thy surety, at my hands let God require them: I was
made sin for thee, that thou might be made righteous, only open to me, and
all my satisfaction shall be thine.

3. Though his humblings be very small, yet if he will open to Christ, Christ
will be his. It is true, that humblings (for ought I know) are a necessary
antecedent before the opening of the heart to Christ. The stinging Serpent was
felt before the healing Serpent was looked on: The ground is plowed before it is
sown; The breaking hammer of the Law strikes the conscience, before the golden
key of the Gospel opens the will. But as Christ enters not after the greatest
humblings in conscience, if the will opens not to him, so he will enter into
the least humblings in the soul, if the will therefore opens to receive him.

Humblings may be considered two ways.

1. Intensively, for high degrees

2. Congruously, in order to a succeeding work, as they occasion a sinner to
cast out his provoking lusts, and to be willing to let in a saving Christ. And
when this is attained (whether by more or by lesser strokes,) Christ's feet are
stepping into the soul presently.

May I speak a strange truth; If it were possible for a soul to be willing to
be open unto Christ, without any one lash or touch of antecedent trouble, or
brusing, Jesus Christ would forthwith close with it.

If the iron would bow and be pliable without fire or stroke, the impression
might, and would be made upon it immediately.

If the wood did cleave without a stroke, it were well enough, or if it does
with one stroke, that without the addition of any more suffices.

If there accompanies such an efficacy, the least sense of sin, and the
lowest smiting for sin, that the will is truly turned off from it, and turned
up to Christ, it is enough; though thou troublest thy self with more, yet
Christ expects no more, the door is open and he will enter. Lydia's heart was
touched, and presently opened: The Jews were wounded, and cried out, What shall
we do? upon hearing the first part of Peter's Sermon, and were opened to receive
Christ, and they enjoyed him, upon the hearing of the next part of the Sermon
at the same time. In one night the Jailer shuts up the Apostles in prison, and
lets them out of prison again; shuts his heart against Christ, and has his
heart opened to Christ, the same hour trembling, believing, rejoicing.

4. Though his worthiness be none at all, yet if his heart will open to
Christ, Christ will be his. I am not worthy, said the Centurion to Christ, that
thou should Mat. 8. 8.
come under the roof of my house. He acknowledged Christ to be worthy, and he
confesses himself not worthy; Though Christ did not enter into the door of
his house, yet he entered into the door of his heart; A worthy Christ entered
into the soul of an unworthy Centurion, because his heart did prize Christ,
because his heart was wiling to receive Christ. The Prodigal child was willing
to come to his Fathers house again? did he plead his good behavior, did he
plead his worthiness? O no, I am not worthy (says he) to be called thy Son;
and yet because that door of his heart was opened, the door of his fathers
affection was also opened; He fell on his neck and embraced him, and received
him joyfully, Luke 15. 21.

There is a twofold worthiness.

One is Legal or Personal: O if you look for this, if you stand upon this, you
will never open the door to Christ: The full soul despises the honey comb, the
self-justifying Pharisee went home unjustified: you must be lost in your own
eyes, you must be nothing in your own eyes, you must be poor in Spirit, you
must see your lives, and hopes, and helps to lie in the hands of mere mercy, or
else you will never open to Christ, and Christ will never enter into you.

Another is Evangelical or objective. As the Father once spoke: Domine! Merita
measunt misericordia tua: so must the sinner say, O blessed Christ, my
worthiness is only in thy worthiness. Although I am not worthy that thou
should enter into my heart, yet thou art worthy that my heart should be
opened unto thee. This is the worthiness, and none other but this that Christ
insists upon.

5. Though holiness be altogether wanting, yet if the sinner will open unto
Christ, Christ will be his. I do confess that if Christ stood with a sinner
upon these terms, holy you must be, and holy you must make your self to be
ere I will close with you; I must see every room furnished with grace before I
will come in to you, then I am confident that no flesh living shall be saved:
For it is as impossible for a sinner to sanctify and renew himself, as it is
for a dead man to quicken himself. But Christ stands not on that, he knows that
the sinner is an empty cask, that no good dwells in him, that he lies in his
blood, that all his beautifying ornaments are from above, all to be found and
taken out of his wardrobe; That it is his work to refine, and sanctify, as
well as to pardon and justify, all that the humble soul must bring, is to
open; as the beggar needs bring nothing but a hand to receive; and for
holiness, which thou complainest is wanting, the opening soul must expect that
from Christ; who brings this to the sinner, not the sinner to Christ.

By all which it evidently appears that nothing shall hinder the sinner, any
sinner, if he be once willing to open to Christ.

2. The Cur sit*

Quest. Why is it that Christ deals thus? that any sinner (whatsoever his
condition and course has been) may yet have him, if he will but open unto him.

Sol The Reasons are these.

1. Christ is made ours only by believing: This is that which immediately, and
fully draws up Joh. 3. 16.
the match 'twixt a soul and Christ, and faith excludes no sinner: If any
sinner can believe he shall have Christ. Indeed if Christ did offer himself to
be ours upon the legal condition of inherent perfection; (habitual and actual)
then every precedent transgression, and every present defect or want of
rectitude, would have rendered us incapable of his person and union. The Law
receives no sinner to mercy. But because he tenders himself only upon
believing, now no sinner is pre-judged, the way is open and free to any one.
Christ does not deal with us at all (in this opening work) but as absolute
sinners; nor does faith (herein) deal with Christ, but as with an absolute
Savior: He knows that we are cast by the Law, and therefore addresses himself
to us in the way of the New Covenant, which requires nothing in the world from
us, but only believe, only come, only open to me. The least sinner cannot
have Christ any other way, and the greatest sinner may enjoy him upon these
terms.

2. Christ does come to the so^l in a gracious way upon free, not upon
mercinary terms: I will love them freely, so the Prophet, H^sea 14. 4. Being
justified freely, so the Apostle, Romans 3. 24. He is ours for his own sake, not
ours for our own sake. Now where a benefit is collated in a gracious way,
according to the latitude of that graciousnesse, there is an indefinite access
opened to persons. Suppose a Prince proclaims that if any offender will but
come to him, he shall have pardon and promotion: Or a rich man, if any poor man
will come to my house, he shall have an alms, why! no offender needs to
dispute, does the King mean me? nor needs any poor man to except, surely he
means not me? If thou be a poor man, the alms is as free, and as ready, and as
sure for thee as any one that comes: So when Christ is to be bestowed, he is a
rich alms amongst a company of poor sinners; He says to one, come and I will
be thine, and to another come, and to every one come, if thou be a poor needy
sinner, come, drink of the waters of life freely; sinfulness is no exception,
for I bestow my self on none but sinners: It is an exception to meriting, but
not to receiving: Though the poor man must not challenge, yet he must open his
hand.

3. Jesus Christ comes to the soul as an al-sufficiency, and and therefore he
looks not to find any thing in us, and needs nothing from us, but will bring
all with himself to us: He comes to a sinner, as an agent to give, not as a
patient to receive, as the Sun to the world, to enlighten, not to be
enlightened; As a founder to lay a building, not as a buyer to survey and find
out a building; as a fountain to supply us with good, not as a cistern to take
any good from us: When he comes to the soul, he comes to create a new work in
it: (therefore are we said to be created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. and in
him to be new creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17.) now in Creation, the thing created was
nothing before it was created: The first creature was the mere effect of Gods
power, and the new creature is the mere effect of Gods mercy. When he comes to
any sinner, he comes as a Physician to a sick man: In the sick man there are
nothing but corrupt humors, but aches, and faintings, and groanings, and
impotencies, It is the Physician who brings all the healing salves, and
medicines, and recoveries. In a word, when man to except, surely he means not
me? If thou be a poor man, the alms is as free, and as ready, and as sure for
thee as any one that comes: So when Christ is to be bestowed, he is a rich
alms amongst a company of poor sinners; He says to one, come and I will be
thine, and to another come, and to every one come, if thou be a poor needy
sinner, come, drink of the waters of life freely; sinfulness is no exception,
for I bestow my self on none but sinners: It is an exception to meriting, but
not to receiving: Though the poor man must not challenge, yet he must open his
hand.

3. Jesus Christ comes to the soul as an al-sufficiency, and therefore he looks
not to find any thing in us, and needs nothing from us, but will bring all
with himself to us: He comes to a sinner, as an agent to give, not as a patient
to receive, as the Sun to the world, to enlighten, not to be enlightened; As a
founder to lay a building, not as a buyer to survey and find out a building;
as a fountain to supply us with good, not as a cistern to take any good from
us: When he comes to the soul, he comes to create a new work in it: (therefore
are we said to be created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. and in him to be new
creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17.) now in Creation, the thing created was nothing before
it was created: The first creature was the mere effect of Gods power, and the
new creature is the mere effect of Gods mercy. When he comes to any sinner, he
comes as a Physician to a sick man: In the sick man there are nothing but
corrupt humors, but aches, and faintings, and groanings, and impotencies, It
is the Physician who brings all the healing salves, and medicines, and
recoveries. In a word, when Christ comes to us, he comes as life to a dead man,
as pardon to a condemned man, as finding to a lost man; as riches to a poor
man, as pity to a miserable man, as help to a diseased man. To give, to give
all, to give himself, to give his blood, to give his Spirit, to give his
righteousness, to give his peace. To give us heaven, to give us all which must
fit us for heaven; now any sinner (being in these conditions) may come.

4. Christ will keep a proportion 'twixt the Application of Redemption, and the
Work of our Redemption. When Christ was to perform the work of man's Redemption,
he stood alone in his own excellencies, and in his own perfections, and in his
own worthiness. He did not stand before God, (then) with any man's great birth,
or with any man's great parts, nor with any man's graces: Indeed he took upon him
our sins, but there was no holiness of ours, which he could or did bear: All
our sins were charged on, and he alone went through the work of satisfaction
for them, and without any concurrent dignity of ours, did he accomplish our
redemption and reconciliation. And thus does he carry himself toward us, in
the Application of that Redemption: he will stand alone in this also; He
beholds nothing but sins, but wants, but miseries, he sees nothing in one
sinner more then in another, and therefore stands upon nothing with any of
them, but let any one open the door and I will come in unto him.

5. Lastly, He thus indefinitely tenders himself insisting on nothing, but
letting of him in, that no sinner might despair, nor yet glory in any thing
but in Christ.

If his offers were restreigned to some kind of sinners, then the rest must
perish without hope. Have thou but one blessing O my Father?
And if any thing besides the opening of the door did conduce as invitation of
him, then the poor sinner would soon be a proud sinner: He would bless his
own worthiness as much, if not more, then Christ's goodness.

Use 1. The first Use shall be of encouragement to every brokenhearted and
trembling soul, who fears he is the person against whom Christ only takes
exception. Many are apt to plead thus against themselves.

Obj. Others may be received to mercy, but not I; others may be clasped by
Christ, but he will have none of me; he will enter in at the door of any one
else, into my soul (O I fear) he will never enter.

Sol. To these I would address a few words, much like those of God to his
people in Isa. 40. 27. Why say thou oh Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way
is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God. So say I to
you, why have you such hard thoughts of a good Christ; what is he? what has he
said? what has he done unto you? what occasion have you to be so jealous in
questioning of his intentions and respects unto you? why will you dispute his
willingness to save you; when you must confess his readiness to suffer and
die for you? Why do you cavil at his intention to enter, when your hearts have
felt so many of his knockings to open; did he die for thy soul in earnest, and
think thou that now he knocks in jest? Are not his commands serious, and all
his promises faithful? why will you distinguish your selves from Christ, when
Christ has not distinguished you from himself? if Christ does not except
against you, why will you except against him or your selves?

Saint Austine in his troubles of spirit, thought he heard a voice saying.
Toll and Lege, Toll and Lege; Take up and read, take up and read; He
thereupon took up his Bible and read, and the place he lighted on was Romans 13.
11, 12, 13, 14. verses, on which he seriously mused and was converted. I would
say the like to you, Take up the Bible and read; read this one passage of the
Text, read it again, and consider seriously of it, (If any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in unto him.) There is enough in them (if God
will breath his blessing) to answer all thy fears, to remove all thy doubts, to
take off all thy exceptions, to incline thy heart to open, to assure thy heart
of Christ's present intention to come in to thee.

Obj. Will you say, that Christ will not at all have to do with a sinner?

Sol. Read the Text, He stands and knocks at their doors, and for this end, to
come in.

Obj. Will you say, he intends that for other sinners, but not for you?

Sol. Read the Text again, If any man open, I will come in to him: If you be
not out of the number of sinners, you are not out of the reach of the duty, nor
out of the compass of his promise.

Obj. Will you say, if we had opened when he knocked, then indeed he would have
entered?

Sol. Read the text again, Beh^ld I stand at the door and knock, if any man
will open, etc The hope of entering is not over while the door is opening, and
the time of opening is not past whilst the season of knocking does continue.

Obj. Will you say (what will you say) If I had any goodness in my self, any
worthiness in my self?

Sol. What then? then you would open, nay, then you would not open to Christ;
Had you any thing of your own to live upon, you would never live upon Christ?
nay then you could not open to Christ, for he will come in only to the empty
soul: But peruse the text, If any man will open, I will come in: He looks for
no more, but open the door and I am thine; if you will believe Christ at his
word, opening is all that he expects.

O that God would set thee at liberty? O that one word of his omnipotency would
command thy heart to believe and open.

O that, as the Spirit said come, and the Bride said come; so Christ (this day)
would say unto thee, come; and thy heart could say, O Christ I come: As Christ
says, open, so thy heart would answer, O Christ, I open to thee: Since thou
do not except against my sinfulness, since thou will pass by all my
unworthiness since thou assurest me of thy preciousnesse and of thy fullness, I
am overcome, I yield, I come, I open to thee, have pity on me the miserablest
sinner one earth; Thou will find me a wicked creature, O make me a new and
holy creature; I can bring guilt, O Christ bring pardon with thee; I shall
bring misery, but O Christ, bring thou mercy, I shall bring wants, but do thou
bring fullness; I take thy person, O be thou my Redeemer; I take thy merits, O
let them be my satisfaction; I take thy righteousness, O let it be my
clothing; I take thy Spirit, O let it be my cleansing; I take thee at thy
promise, O let it be faithfulness unto me.

Is it so says Christ? do thou open thy heart indeed unto me? well, be of
good cheer, thou never heardest a quarter of that goodness, which I will do
for thee; I am thine O poor soul; thy sins (which are many) are forgiven; thy
heart which was so polluted shall be cleansed; Grace, mercy, peace, strength,
every good, enter ye, and dwell in this believing soul for ever.

Use 2. The next Use shall be for exhortation to every one of us to stand out
no longer, but to set open our hearts that Christ may come in unto us.

Consider,

1. The amplitude of Christ's goodness toward us: There is not a sinner this
day in this place, but Jesus Christ says unto him, if thou will hear and
open, I will come in unto thee, and be thine, I know well enough what thou have
been, and what thou have done, I know thou have been a blasphemer, or a
whore-monger, or a drunkard, or a thief, or a Sabbath-breaker, or a scorner, or
a hard-hearted ignorant wretch; yet at thy door I stand this day, and knock, I
will receive thee unto mercy, I will forgive thee all these sins, I will
accept, I will heal, I will save thy soul, if thou will open thy heart this day
unto me and let me in. O Brethren, for Christ his sake refuse not Christ, do
not reject, nor neglect so great salvation, so ample a salvation, so every soul
enviting a salvation.

2. The necessity you have of Jesus Christ; Give me children, or else I die,
said Rachel: Give me Christ or else I perish for ever: Can you be saved without
Christ? and if you cannot be saved without Christ, and you may have a Christ
but for opening of the door, then while it is called to day hear and open to
him; If the door of grace should be shut because the door of thy heart will not
be opened, thou art shut up for ever.

3. The inexcusablenesse of thy soul, if yet thou will harden thy heart and not
open. Why, what will thou? what can thou plead for thy self at the day of
judgment? Will thou say, the Gospel never offered me Christ? Why, thou have
heard this day that it says, If any man will hear and open, etc.

Will thou say? I would have opened my heart had it not been for the love of
one sin, or the love of a little earth, and ease, and liberty, and safety,
and honors, or to please some friends and company: O how will men and Angels
hiss at thee? This is a person who for a lusts sake forsook his mercies, who
for a little vanity rejected his own salvation. O how will thou curse thy self,
that for nothing, for that which is worse then nothing; thou have put off
Christ and his salvation. And therefore Men, Fathers and Brethren hearken unto
me, as Moses once to the Israelites, so do I propound this day unto you,
blessing and cursing, life and death; salvation if you will open to Christ, and
damnation if you will refuse Christ. O choose not cursing but blessing, choose
not death but life, choose not hell but heaven, choose not sin but Christ,
although you have formerly slighted, if yet you will regard; though you have
formerly contemned, if yet you will prize; though you have formerly resisted,
if yet you will yield, if yet you will consent, if yet you will become willing
to open unto Christ, Christ will be yours, Mercy will be yours, and Salvation
will be yours.

Use 3. The last Use shall be for direction: for me thinks some soul is touched
and wrought upon this day, and secretly cries out, O what shall we do? what
course may we take, that our hearts may be made willing to open unto Christ,
and to let him in.

The helpful directions which I would prescribe, are these:

1. The mind must be opened if ever you would get your wills to be opened: I
may here aptly make use of that scholastical distinction of necessitas
consequentiae, and of necessitas consequentis: Although there be not a
necessity of consequence, that if the mind be enlightened, then the will is
opened, yet there is a necessity of consequent, for the will cannot be opened,
unless the mind be first enlightened. For there is neither any particular
object, for the will to tend to, nor any motive to affect and draw the will,
till light discovers and apprehends them: Now this light or knowledge in the
mind, which is representative and affective, must be twofold.

Reflexive, that you are sinful and lost, and stand in need of mercy and
salvation, more then the most pining beggar does of a bit of bread to save his
life.

Direct, That Jesus Christ is by God the Father set forth to be a Savior, and
that this is a goodness suitable to your condition, and possible for your
fruition. A sense of misery, and then an apprehension of a good every way
helpful, and of which one may be capable, is necessarily apt to draw and
incline the will: If there were a good, but then it is of another kind, and
answered not my necessity; or if it did answer my necessity, but then there
were an impossibility for me to obtain it. It would not stir the will at all;
Therefore strive for such a knowledge as discovers your souls to be lost, and
only reparable by Jesus Christ, John 4 10. If thou knew the gift of God,
and who it is that says unto thee, give me drink, thou would have asked of
him, etc.

2. The judgment must be opened, if you would have your wills opened: A light
merely apprehensive, is nothing so working on the will, as that which is
discursive: A sudden carrying of a candle through the room enables us not to
so full a survey as if you stood a while with it and seriously beheld the
objects: A double work of judgment is necessary to affect the will to Christ.

One is considerative, which is a s^rious and full weighing of the souls
condition as wanting Christ, or as enjoying of him; I am but a dead man if I
refuse Christ; If I embrace him, I am blessed, in the one scale is eternal
misery, in the other scale is eternal felicity, upon the turning of either, is
the turning of my soul, my precious soul. If I will not open to Christ upon his
own conditions, my soul is lost, (O my soul, what loss is the loss of a
soul?) If my heart be willing to open, my soul is saved; (O the mercy, the
grace, the peace, the life, the heaven in that one word!)

Suppose I keep my sins and hold fast the world, and let go the offer of
Christ, where is the gain, what is the safety, whence is the comfort by this,
what will be the issue? Suppose I open to Christ, and let go my sins, and
part with the world, what is my loss? where is my diminution? can happiness
impoverish me? can alsufficiency be loss to me? can salvation distress me? If
I be not a sinner, why do I talk of a Savior? if I be, why do I not receive an
offered Savior? If I be a sinner, do not I need a Savior? If it be a tender
mercy to offer, is it more then a wise duty to embrace him? if my body were
drowning, I would catch hold of a rock; If my soul be sinking, why should I
not lay hold of a Christ? I may perish if I will, (O but who would perish
wilfully? who would perish at all?) etc.

Another is Argumentative, which consists in a divine reasoning, either
disproving the objections of the soul against a closing with Christ, or
enforcing and edging those arguments drawn from free grace, from Christ, from
the New Covenant, which tends to incline the will unto him: There ^e many
fears, and doubts, and jealousies, rolling (especially) in a convinced and
humbled spirit, questioning sometimes Christ's sufficiency, or else his
intention and willingness; sometimes our own capacity, by reason of greatness
of sinning, or pecularity of former refusals, all which you should do well to
get resolved and cleared, that so you may see the way standing open, and free
for such a sinner (as you judge your self to be) to come in, and be embraced by
Christ.

3. Faith must be obtained if ever you would get your hearts opened; for when
all Arguments are answered, yet the will will not come off without a
supernatural quality to enable and draw it: There must be a new quality in the
will, as well as a new light in the mind; for the will cannot execute a
supernatural act, without a supernatural qualification. When you put another
bias on the Bowl, this will draw it another way; what is the reason one needle
starts up to the pole star, and another does not? One is touched with the
Lodestone, and the other is not, Surgunt indocti (says Saint Austine) and
capiunt coelum, etc. the unlearned rise up and take heaven, and many that are
learned do not: poor people (in respect of parts as well as in respect of
estate) receive the Gospel, and the wise men of the world slight it. Surely the
reason is this, because God gives knowledge only to the one, but he gives
faith to the other; nothing can see the worth of Christ, nor bow the will unto
him but faith.

4. The Gospel must be heard, for this can work that faith which opens the
will, Fidas ex auditu, Romans 10. 17. Lydia heard Paul preaching, and the Lord
opened her heart, Acts 16. 14. so did the Jailer in the same chapter, and his
heart was opened.

5. Lastly, importunate prayer must be used: the Gospel (we say) is the key of
the Spirit, and prayer (we say) is the key of heaven; and truly if it can open
the ears of a God, it may quickly serve to open the heart of a sinner. The
heart of a man is the best present to offer to God, and it is the fittest
object for him to work upon. O pray to the heart-maker to be the heart-opener:
He works in us (says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 13.) to will and to do; O pray to
him who has the key of David, and opens, and no man shuts, that your hearts
may be opened to Christ, and never shut against him more.

Rev. 3. 20. Sermon. 5.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
THere are three things in this text observable about Christ

1. His gracious assaying of a sinners heart (Behold) I stand at the door and
knock.

2. His gracious conveying of himself in to the opening soul (if any man open
the door, I will come in to him.)

3. His gracious displaying of his goodness (upon that entrance) to the
opening person (and will sup with him, and he with me.)

I have finished the first of these, and am now to proceed to the disquition of
the two latter, whereof the one seems to set forth a possestion and union, and
the other seems to set forth an expression or communion which an opening soul
has with Christ.

The words have little or no difficulty in them, yet if you please take a short
par^phrase upon them.

I] That is Jesus Christ, not as man only, nor as God only, but as Mediator.

Will come in to him] a p^remp^ory expression. He does not say I will shun him,
or I will expostulate with him for his neglects, nor yet will I only come to
him, (whiles he treats with a sinner, ^e comes unto him) but I will come in to
him. The door can no sooner be open, but Christ comes in immediately, and
indeed mercy is quicker in entering, then misery is in opening.

And will sup with him and he with me] Christ is pleased often to set forth his
communion with the soul under the notion of a feast, and of a Supper: The
confirmation of exceeding mercies has been with a Supper: That of the Passover
in the old Testament, and that of our Sacrament in the New Testament; but
certainly the meaning is that Christ has some choice, sweet, admirable mercies
and delights to impart or communicate to the soul which opens and receives him.

From all this I shall insist only on two propositions.

1. That Jesus Christ comes in and takes possession of the soul which opens to
him (I will come in to him.) 2. That there is an admirable and sweet communion
'twixt Christ and the soul possessed of Christ, (I will sup with him and he
with me.
Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ comes into the soul which opens unto him, or takes
possession of an opening soul.

There is a fourfold coming of Christ.

1. Personal: this was for redemption: A coming for sinners.

2. Judicial, this shall be for retribution: a coming against sinners.

3. Evangelical; this is for vocation: a coming unto sinners.

4. Spiritual, this is for Application: a coming into sinners.

There is a twofold Application of Christ.

1. One is Active, and in this the soul comes to Christ.

2. Another is passive, and in this Christ comes to the soul: which exactly to
express, does exceed my capacity.

The Scripture calls it sometimes,

His apprehending of us, Phil. 3. 12. If that I may apprehend that for which
also I am apprehended ^f Christ Jesus.

His forming of himself in us, G^l. 4. 19. Till Christ be formed in you.

His being or abiding in us, Jo^. 15. 4. Abide in me, and I in you.

His dwelling in us, Ephesians. 3. 17. Christ dwells in your hearts by faith.

But because the coming in of Christ is restrained to the Metaphor of a King;
or Master, coming in to possess and dwell in an house or Mansion opened or
yielded up unto him.

I shall therefore keep close to that, and for the un^olding of it insist a
little on three particulars.

1. What it is for Christ to possess himself of the soul.

2. What the properties and adjuncts of this possession are.

3. The reasons why he takes possession of that soul that opens to him.

1. What it is for Christ to take possession of the soul.

In answer to this, consider certain premises before the opening of Christ's
taking possession.

1. God (at first) made man a goodly creature, and righteous, and as he severed
Paradise for his habitation, so he reserved man (above all other creatures) for
his own possession.

2. Man quickly dispossessed himself of that condition by sin, and stood now
(qua talis) as an outlawry and rejected person.

3. Christ Jesus was immediately promised as the author of life and salvation,
and passed under Covenant, and Types, and at length in the fullness of time was
incarnated, and as a Mediator and Redeemer, perfectly wrought out
Reconciliation and Redemption.

4. The Gospel makes publication if this, and indefinitely tenders Jesus Christ
to sinners, and by vocation calls them to Christ, and the participation of
salvation by him.

5. This vocation to some is ineffectual, to others it is ^fficacious: To them
(who from faith given) and thereby answer, or obey, or accept, or open to the
call of Christ, it is effectual.

6. When this faith is wrought, then immediately and ^emultaneously ensues an
union 'twixt Christ and the believer.

7. Which union is a spiritual relation 'twixt Christ and a believing soul, and
a most intimate, close, mystical, and inseparable conjunction 'twixt them:
Expressed in Scripture by that of Head and Member, of Husband and Wife, of a
Foundation and Living-stone built thereupon: of the Vine and Branches, etc.

8. In this union believers are by the Spirit of Christ immediately knit to
him, and by him to God, so that (in a mystical respect) they become one with
him and with the Father, and partakes of all the good in and by Jesus Christ,
which flows from him as the head from the members.

Christ in respect of himself is one that possesses all good, and upon this
union a communication thereof does ensue.

9. The form of this union is a mystical compaction or co-augmentation by
those admirable joints of the Spirit and Faith, Ephesians. 4. 16. And is severally
phrased in Scripture.

As Christ stands under the relation of a Head, and we of members, It is called
incorporation.

As Christ has the relation of a foundation, and we of a building, it is
called an inedification.

As Christ stands in the relation of an husband, and we of a wife, it is called
a disponsation and marriage.

As Christ stands in relation of a vine, and we of branches, It is called an
insition or implantation.

As Christ stands in relation of a Lord or Master, and we of an house and
family; It is called (especially on his part) An entrance, possession and
inhabitation.

These things being premised, for answer to the question we must know, that
there is a double possession that Christ has of souls.

1. Possessio juris a possession of Right or Title, by which he may lay claim
unto them, which he may justly do.

1. Jure autoritatis: for all of them are the fruit of his power, the
workmanship of his hand in Creation. 2. Jure pretii, for he has laid down a
price, and has ransomed, or purchased them by his death. 3. Jure donationis,
for all of them are given unto him for subjection and rule.
2. Possessio Gratiae: A possession of grace, or a gracious possession, in
which he does not only claim but take possession, or enters a as possessor: of
this I am now to speak, and it comprehends five things in it.

1. A Sovereigne seazure, when he comes in as a possessour; he does in a way of
propriety set up his Title in the soul: As if he should say, now this soul is
mine: It is no longer sins, no longer the worlds, no longer the devils, no
longer its own, but mine, and only mine, I am the Lord and husband of it. As in
all contracts there results an exclusive propriety. Ezekiel. 16. 8. When I passed
by thee, and looked upon thee, Behold, thy time was the time of love, and I
spread my skirt over thee, yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant
with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. Or as Psalm. 132. 13. The
Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation. Ver. 14. This is
my rest for ever, here will I dwell.

Hence those relative and impropriating expressions, as my love, my dove, my
undefiled, Cant. 5. 2. As an husband can say, this woman is mine, etc.

The wife cannot be more the husbands, nor a house more the owners, nor a
member more the heads, nor a branch more the vines then the opening soul is
Christ's.

Which is therefore said to be knit unto him, Ephesians. 4. and to be joined, or
glued unto him, 1 Cor. 6. 17. and to be married unto him for an eternity, Hos.
2.

And he is said to own us as a Master owns a servant, Romans 6. as an husband
owns a wi^e, as a Lord owns an house, as the head owns the members, as the Lord
once owned the Temple. So then Christ comes into the soul by way of
possession, when he does interest himself in such a peculiar way of union, and
propriety, that he says, this soul is mine, and the soul may reciprocally
answer, this Christ is mine, as the Church in Canticles 6. 3.

2. A distinguishing furniture, when Christ takes possession of a soul, there
is not only a relation of propriety, but there is also a communication of
quality: The Spirit of Christ actuates. the whole soul with grace. As to make
Christ (in himself a Mediator) there was not only the grace of union, by which
he was God and man; but also the grace of unction, by which he was adorned and
qualified to the work of Mediator. So is it when Christ takes possession of a
poor soul, he does apply himself to it, not only in a way of affection,
(wishing well to it) not only in a way of consent (I do yield my self unto it)
not only in a way of consent (I do yield my self unto it) not only in a way of
union (I take this soul as mine, and will own it as my own self) not only in a
way of promise, (I will bestow some good upon it) but also in a way of unction
(that is) he does set up himself in this his possession; He does qualify, he
does sanctify, he does beautify every room of the soul with the graces of
his blessed Spirit: As when the Lord entered into the Temple which Solomon
built, he then filled the same with his glory, 1 King. 8. 11. So when Jesus
Christ enters into a soul, he fills that soul with the glory of his grace, with
his influence as well as with his presence. When the first Adam enters into us,
he enters as a contagion, and as death; so when the second Adam enters into us,
he enters into us as a renovation and life. Therefore is Christ said to be
formed in us, Gal. 4. 19. The Papist talk of the figure of Christ's body
sticking in the garments, etc. that is a vanity, but this is a truth: that
Christ does form himself in the soul of a believer, he forms himself in us,
by conforming us unto himself, implanting in us all holy graces, which 1.
Alter. 2. Enable. 3. Dispose and incline; as if he should say, this heart shall
love sin no more, it shall be enflamed with love to me; this heart shall
trust vanity no more, it shall trust on me; this tongue shall blaspheme no
more, it shall praise me; this person shall be a slaye no more, he shall be a
servant unto me. Behold (O soul) thou art become mine, and I must now adorn
thee to be a delightful Mansion for my self, therefore we are said to be new
creatures, and his workmanship, and to put on Christ.

Blindness, vanity, folly, pride be gone: come in knowledge, wisdom,
soundness of judgment, truth, regard of me and it; come in and possess the
upper room of this soul, the mind. Unwillingness, stoutness, rebellion,
hardness, hypocrisy be gone; come in plyablenesse, softness, tenderness,
sincerity, readiness, compliance with my will, dependence on my* self, come in
and possess the royal chamber of the soul the will: Irregularity, vileness,
inordinatenesse be gone: Come in purity, order, quickness, come in and possess
the lower room of the soul, the affections. All ye graces of my Spirit, be ye
set up in the inward rooms, and spread, and act in the outward rooms of the
life, in all spiritualnesse of behavior toward God and man, etc.

3. A sweet gubernation: for Christ possesses the soul as a Lord possesses
his Mansion, to do what he pleases, and to rule after his own will in it: and
therefore he is called the Lord of his Temple: And the householder, who employs
and sets every servant his work, having first given unto them several talents.
He must have and has the command and disposal of the soul. As the Centurion
said, to one servant go, and he went, do this, and he did it, come and he came,
Matthew. 8. So says Christ to the soul which he takes possession of; I will
have you sometimes to abound, and then you must be thankful, and sometimes to
want, and then you must be contented: now I will have you to do for me with
your graces, or with your estates, and you must then be ready to do: and
another time, now I will have you to suffer for me in your Name, in your
comforts, in your possessions, in your liberties, perhaps in your lives, and
you must then be willing to forsake all for me. Sometimes your lusts will be
commanding, but do not hearken to them; sometimes Satan will be tempting, but
do not yield to him; sometimes your carnal friends will be trying of you, but
do not regard them; you are none of theirs, nor none of your own; you are my
possession, and therefore must be only at my disposal.

4. A watchful provision, when a man takes possession of house, or household, or
lands, he is thereupon engaged to take care and charge over all: He must Till
the ground, and manure it, and mend it, and keep it in heart; and he must keep
and repair the house, if it be sinking, and he must maintain the servants
with all necessaries of food and raiment; he must look to them when they be
well, and when they be sick; just so does Christ, when he takes possession of a
soul, he takes upon him the full care of that soul, he will be a sufficiency
unto it,

By preserving the graces given unto it.

By adding suitable degrees, and helps of grace for greater and further services.

By repairing and recovering a fallen or sinking soul. There is a rich
storehouse in Christ, for the soul which he possesses: He will give renewing
grace, and justifying grace, and then he will keep that grace given; And he
will yet add more grace and help.

And if the soul be drawn aside, and falls, he will not lose it, he will seek
after it, he will find it again, and recover it again.

5. A sure protection: when one has possession, it behooves him to keep
possession, he is to defray all the rents or dues wherewith that possession is
charged; and he is to answer and take off all claims and titles made against
his right of possession. Go to my Master, says the servant; to my husband,
says the wife; So does Jesus Christ, when he enters and takes possession of
the soul. This soul (says Christ) is mine, I own it, I will provide for it;
plead for it or against it who will or can, I will answer him, I will answer
for it, I will stand 'twixt it and all pleas, 'twixt it and all claims 'twixt
it and all hazards, I will, take all upon me, and as long as I am Christ, and
as far as my blood will go, or my intercession will go, or my merits can go, or
my Spirit can go, I will maintain and defend mine own.

John 17. 12. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost.

John 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice, etc. Ver. 28. And I give unto them
eternal life, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

Romans 8. 38. Neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, (...)
powers, nor things present, nor things to come. Ver. 39. Nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, etc. As if he
should say, come who will, and do your utmost, yet I will be possessour and
Savior still. Satan stands out, and says, this soul belongs to me, I have had
possession of it a long time; too long, says Christ, a deceiver and usurper as
thou art, but I have crushed and bruised thy power; Come thou out and never
enter into this soul more.

Sin stands out, and says, this soul has been my habitation from the first,
but Christ casts out the bondwoman with her child, and says, thy possession
is but an incroachment: This soul was mine by Creation first of all, and now is
mine again by purchase, and therefore sin get you gone, Never shall thou have
royal possession in any soul that belongs to me. And when the soul sometimes
reports sad tidings, that divine justice calls upon it for arrearages, well,
says Christ, let me alone; I was thy surety, all is discharged, I have
satisfied all: I am thy propitiation, fear thou not, all is well 'twixt thee
and my Father, I am his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased.

So that (summarily) then Christ does come in and take possession of the soul,
when he does unite himself to the soul, or seazeth on it as his own, and then
purifies and enables it for his service and use, and then erects his power and
rule in it and over it, and undertakes for it, for full provisions and
protection.

Quest. 2. What the properties and adjuncts of this possession are?

Sol. 1. The possessing is real: it is not a fixious notion formed only by a
wild imagination, for the door of the heart is a real thing, and the knocking
at the door is a real motion and offer, and the opening of the door is a real
dilatation of the soul to embrace Christ; so likewise is his coming in, it is a
real entrance and taking possession of the soul, a real owning and interessing,
etc.

2 Yet it is spiritual, you must not be so weak to imagine that the person of
Christ comes now into our hearts, as once into sinners houses, O no, a corporal
possession cannot be, and it alone were fruitless. But Christ takes possession
of the soul, (being a spirit) by his Spirit; and therefore as in one place
Christ is said to dwell in us, Ephesians. 3. 17. so in another place the Spirit is
said to dwell in us, John 14. 17. and as he is said to be in us, so his Spirit
is said to be in us: He dwells with you, and shall be in you, ibid. It is his
Spirit which applies him to us, and it is his Spirit which works in us (by
way of efficiency) the graces we enjoy, and it is the Spirit of Christ who
rules in us, etc.

3. It is powerful; all that Christ does about the soul, either for entrance or
maintenance, is carried with exceeding power when he is taking possession, he
does dispossess the strong man in the house, and with a greater strength of
power rescues and delivers; as the Israelites were brought out of the house of
bondage by an Almighty arm: When he possesses the soul, (possessed by
himself) with his grace, he communicates these by an exceeding power; no power
less then Almightinesse, less then that which raised Christ from the dead, is
requisite to quicken a dead sinner.

And the preservation of grace received is likewise a work of power: The same
Sun which begets the light must preserve the light: We are kept by the power
of God unto salvation.

4. It is eternal: till you can quench the love of Christ, till you can reverse
the seals of Christ, till you can crush the power of Christ, (which never can
be done) Christ who has taken possession will keep it. If you had possession
of Christ, and Christ had no possession of you, then some danger, but ye hold
Christ, and Christ holds you, etc.

Quest. 3. Why Christ enters and takes possession, and will dwell in any soul
that opens to him?

Sol. I answer:

1. You have his promise for it in the text, and Christ was never yet worse
then his word.

2. He will not be behind hand in his goodness to any: If he offers himself
when the door is shut, he will not stand off when the door is opened. If he
pursues us flying, he will not shun us yiedling; if he allures us whiles
unwilling, he will surely embrace us being willing.

3. It is himself who makes the heart willing to open, and for this end, that
himself might enter: There is no more required on our parts; I am willing says
Christ to enter, are you willing to let me in? If your will concurs with him,
the work is done: nothing but the sinners unwillingness has kept him out all
this while.

4. When the heart comes to open, it is now sufficiently conditioned and fitted
for all that Christ intends to work in it: For,

1. It is now willing to part with all for Christ.

2. It is now willing to resign up all to Christ.

3. It is now willing to take all from Christ.

4. It is now willing to be disposed in all by Christ.

5. When the soul comes to opening terms, it stands in the extremest need of
Christ: Never did a wounded, gored body stand in more need of plasters, nor a
diseased body stand in more need of medicines, nor a tortured body stand in
more need of ease, nor a starved hungry body stand in more need of bread, nor a
pursued body stand in more need of help, nor an accused body stand in more need
of defense, nor a fainting body stand in more need of cordials, then the
humbled and opening soul does stand in need of Christ: Now Christ will come and
help in a needful time: He will not be wanting to a soul in such a condition.

Use 1. Does Christ come in and take possession of the soul which opens to him?
I beseech you earnestly to survey your estate; wisely and seriously consider to
whom you do belong; who or what it is that owns you and has possession of you
There was a great contention once amongst some Nations about H^mer (an
excellent Poet) they severally pleaded their interest in him. And truly so it
is about the soul of man, many lay claim unto it, sin does, the world does,
Satan does, Christ does.

The soul of man is not a waste piece of ground, nor is it a desolate
habitation, some one or other has possession of it: if Christ has not, besure
that an enemy of Christ, and of the soul, has the possession: Has Christ
possession, or has he not? O Sirs, Meditate a while of this description,
vanity possesses my mind, iniquity possesses my heart, vexation possessed my
life, but Christ never yet possessed my soul

Life is come into my body, and sin is come into my soul, and the Law is come
into my conscience, and the Gospel is come unto my ear: and strivings are come
into my Spirit, and honors are come upon my Name, and riches are come upon my
Trade, and friends are come in to my society, but Christ, but Jesus Christ is
not yet come into my house.

Nay, yet again, a sword is come to waste us, famine is like to come to pine
us, death will surely come to remove us, and judgment, the judgment of God
will come to condemn us, and if Christ be not come in to save us, what will
become of our Christlesse souls? Therefore try and examine your selves, prove
your selves whether Christ be in you, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

He has called upon you by his Word, but is he come in? He has offered
himself to you by his. Ministers, but is he come in? He has knocked at your
doors by the strivings of his Spirit, but is he come in? ye have been almost
persuaded to open, but is he come in? you think that you have opened unto him,
but is he come in? you think that he is come in and has taken possession, but
is he so indeed?

O friends, the soul may be lost by fancy, as well as by obstinacy, by self
delusion as soon as by self rebellion: what a bitter thing will this prove? I
thought my self to be Christ's possession, but was deceived, and now am hells
portion.

Quest. But you will say, how may one know that Christ is come, and has taken
possession of the soul indeed.

Sol. It may be evidenced.

1. By his affecting excellency.

2. By his virtual efficacy.

3. By his exciting authority.

4. By our importuning insatiability.

First, by his affecting excellency: O sirs, before Christ comes in, much of
the excellency of Christ appeared to the soul by way of invitation, but when he
is come to the soul, more of his excellency now appears by way of fruition:
Apprehension may much affect us, but fruition and experience does much more
affect us: Now the soul sees indeed a wonderful Redeemer, a wonderful love, a
wonderful satisfaction, a wonderful happiness. As the Queen of Sheba, when she
saw Solomon in his glory, her spirit failed; or as Simeon, when he got Christ
in his arms, Now let me depart, mine eyes have seen thy salvation; or as Jacob
when he saw Joseph, now let me die; or as David, return to thy rest O my soul,
for, etc. Psalm. 116.

The soul which is possessed of Christ, adores, admires, cries out, I am
satisfied, I have enough; the pearl is found, the chiefest of ten thousand is
mine: As the Sun darkens all the Stars; all is as nothing to Christ: Now I have
love, joy, friends, lands and al in Christ.

This is the Christ that I looked for, that I longed for; I see, and find in
him the great love of God; the exact beauty of holiness; a ^ull redemption;
God reconciled; a spring of life; worth to satisfy judgment; worthiness to
fatisfie my will; sweetness to satisfy my affections; happiness to satisfy
my whole soul; now I am abundantly paid for all my prayers, pains, etc.

Secondly, by his virtual efficacy: Christ is not an empty notion, but a quick
agent: and when he comes into a soul, virtue from him comes into the soul too:
Christ and his Spirit come together, and dwell together, If any man have not
the Spirit of Christ he is none of his. In Mal. 3. 1. you Romans 8. 9.
read a promise of his coming into a prepared soul. Ver. 3. And then of the
work which he does when he is come (He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of
silver.)

A refiner or purifier uses the fire to melt the metal, and to separate the
dross and rust from it, and so makes it pure, and beautiful, and useful.

The soul of a man is a corrupt vessel, and when Christ comes in to it, he does
by his Spirit, (which is compared to fire) cleanse and purify it, make it
holy, delightful, and serviceable, stamps his own image upon it: Now you shall
be able to love your God, to hate your sin, to overcome the world, to pray,
to mourn, to trust, to wait, to be meek, lowly, contemned, etc.

3. By his exceeding authority: when Christ takes possession, he does
immediately set up his Throne, and rule in the heart: He rules all, and rules
alone, and the soul is willingly obediential. He pulls down all authority
contrary to himself: as that last Monarchy in Daniel crushed all the rest.

He has possession who has an acknowledged and consented dominion over your
souls; His servants ye are whom ye obey, Romans 6. O how does this discover
multitudes to be none of Christ's possession? Some they will not have him to
rule at all: Others like the Mother about the child, let it be neither mine
nor thine, but divide it; a sinful lust must rule, and a worldly lust shall
rule, and Christ (if he please) shall then rule too; but would you be half
saved? surely where Christ indeed takes possession, Christ alone is set up, and
the whole soul comes freely under subjection. None but Christ, none but
Christ, said the Martyr: I will know none but Christ, love none but Christ,
serve none but Christ; the will of a believer comes up to the will of its
Savior.

4. By our importunate insatiability; If Christ has taken possession of the
soul, that soul would have more possession of Christ: O I have not yet
attained, I have not yet enough of Christ. O says Paul, that I may apprehend
as I am apprehended, Phil. 3. Such a soul would have all to fall into the hands
of Christ, and to be more and more possessed by Christ: Lord, here is yet much
ignorance, O possess my mind more with thy light. Lord, here are many doubts
and f^ars, O possess my judgment more with thy evidencing and comforting
grace: Lord, here is much backwardness and dullness, O possess my will more
with thy quickening grace: Lord, here is much weakness and failings, O possess
my heart more with thy strengthening grace.

Use 2. If upon search any of you do discern Christ's possessing presence, rise
up and bless God, go home and rejoice in your portion: It was a great matter
for Christ to come into a man's house: It is more for him to come into a man's
heart.

When Zacheus opened his doors to Christ, This day (said Christ) is salvation
come into thy house: O Christian, if Christ be come into thy soul, the King of
glory, the Prince of peace, the Lord of life is come into thy soul; it is more
then for a King to come to a poor man's house.

I know not where to begin, or where to end, or in what phrase to set forth thy
blessed condition.

1. All that makes for heaven is thine; the person of a Savior, that is thine;
the price of Redemption, that is thine; the peace of Reconciliation, that is
thine; the release in Justification, that is thine; the privilege of Adoption,
that is thine; the spring of Sanctification, that is thine; the promise of
Consolation, that is thine; the hope of Salvation, that also is th^ne.

1 Cor. 3. 21. All things are yours. Ver. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or
C^phas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours. Ver. 23. And ye are Christ's.

2. All that may make thee up in all conditions, Christ will be that unto thee;
do losses befall thee for Christ? Christ will make them up: He alone will be
better to thee then all the world; what thou losest in the world, thou shall
find in him. Arnulphus cried out on his deathbed, O Christ, How true art thou
in thy promises? how true art thou in thy promises? how true art thou in thy
promises? They about him asked what he meant thereby; O says he, Christ
promised, that if any forsook wife and children, and house, and friends for his
sake, he should receive an hundred fold in this world. This says he has my
Savior verified to me, for I will not part with the love of Christ, and the
joy I find in my Christ for a thousand worlds.

Does exile, imprisonment, any hardship befall thee for Christ? Christ will make
up all; Thou may be forced from thy possessions, but Christ will not be
severed from his possession: When Paul was bound at Jerusalem, Christ was with
him; when he was thrown into the Castle, Christ Act. 23. 11
was with him; when he was at sea, Christ was with him; when he was cheined at
Rome, Christ also was with him.

Let men and devils do their utmost, Christ will own, Christ will stick to,
Christ will comfort, Christ will help, Christ will save his possession What
shall I say more? does any thing trouble thy soul? what is it? Is it the
remaining power of sin? It shall not have dominion over thee, says Christ: Is
it violent temptation? I will bruise Satan under thy feet, says Christ: Is it
want of more grace? I will sanctify you thorowout, says Christ: Is it want of
comfort? I will send the Comforter, says Christ: Is it want of strength? My
grace shall be sufficient for thee, says Christ: Art thou troubled for thy
sinnings? I will answer for them, says Christ: Do thou fear perseverance?
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Use 3. Does Christ take possession of an opening soul? the instructions
thence are these,

1. Then you great rich learned persons, prize and esteem a little better of
godly and believing persons: The Emperor kissed the hollow of Paphnutius his
eye, which he l^st for Christ: Much more are we to honor Christ himself in
whomsoever we find him. A real Christian is no less then the Temple of God,
and possession of Christ: Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. And let men take heed of injuring Christ's possession
you; I injure him, etc.

2. Then (Christians) remember whose you are, and to whom you owe all: you are
Christ's, all that belongs to you is Christ's: your graces, your parts, your
faculties, your estates, your honors, your lives, your bodies, your souls, all
Christ's: let none meddle with Christ's possession: But let Christ command his
own, and do what he will with his own; He has more right to you and yours,
then you your selves: If he call for his own, let him have it. If he says, I
will now use your greatness* use your wealth, use your strength, use your
souls, use your bodies; Lord say, we are thine, thine we are, thy servants we
are, thy purchase, thy possession, altogether at thy disposal.

3. Do not part with Christ when once he has gotten possession. The King of
Persia casts some beams of Honor upon Hermisda, and clothed him suitable to
his noble condition, but all was to Theod. l. 5 c. 39.
take him off from Christ, but discerning it, he rents them from his back; what
shall I forsake and deny my Christ for these, etc? Nazianz^ne relates of some
Christian soldiers commanded by Julian to throw some Franckincense into the
fire, as if it were to his honor, and they had their reward. But when they saw
the deceit: They run to him, throw him his money again, crying out, we are
Christians, we are Christians.

O Sirs, keep possession of Christ, and let Christ take possession of you. If
thou thrust Christ out of your doors, resolve upon it, that he will thrust your
souls out of heaven.

Rev. 3. 20. Sermon. 6.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
IAm come to the evening and close of the the Text; It goes off with as
satisfying and delightful a farewell, as Christ can make, or as heart can
desire, (I will sup with him, and he with me.)

When your hearts and sin do close, guilt ensues and terrifies the
conscience; It kisseth us at the entrance of our service, but stabs us at the
parting, for a recompense. But when our hearts and Christ do close, though the
preparation be difficult, yet the fruition is sweet and happy.

The Text sets it forth by the Metaphor of a Supper, wherein there is, 1.
Liberality of provision. 2. Courtesy of entertainment. 3. Sweetness of
society, and 4. Familiarity of intercourse, an exchange of kindnesses and
delights 'twixt the Master and the Guests.

The result of all amounts to this one proposition.

Doct. 1. That there is a sweet and excellent communion 'twixt Christ and the
soul possessed by Christ: (I will sup with him and he with me.)

For the opening of this, consider that communion (in general) is the immediate
consequent (if not effect) of union. And it is distinguished according to the
nature and condition of objects united, with a respect also to their use and
end.

Hence that division of communion into,

1 Natural, as is that of the head and members.

2. Political, as is that of King and subjects.

3. Spiritual, as is this of Christ and his Church.

This spiritual communion respects either,

1. Regnatores, the Angels and glorified souls in heaven, both which are united
to Christ as their head, whether by way of conformity only, or by way of
influence too, I will not now discuss because the proposition intends it not.

2. Viatores, those that walk by faith hear on earth, 'twixt Christ and them
there is a singular communion, as may appear.

1. By express phrases in Scripture, besides the book of the Canticles, 1 John
1. 3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
1. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called to the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ. Isaiah 25. 6. A feast of fat things, a feast of wines, of fat
things, full of marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined.

2. By the Parable of the wedding feast, Mat. 22. 2. and of the entertainment
of the Prodigal son, Luke 15.

3. By such relations as carry communion in their bosoms, as of an head and
body, of an husband and wife, of a foundation and building, of root and branch,
the head has communion with the body by influence, the husband with the wife
by love and consent, the foundation with the building by support and strength,
the root with the branches by leaf and sap: Thus it is 'twixt Christ and
Believers.

4. By such actions as import communion, viz.

1. Cohabitation, He dwells in us, and with us by his Spirit.

2. Consociation, he eats and drinks with us in the Sacrament.

3. Conversation, he speaks and conferres with us in his Word.

For the cleerer opening of the assertion, I will discuss these particulars.

1. Wherein this communion does consist. 2. What the extent of it is. 3. Why
Christ has communion, etc. 4. Then the useful Application.
Quest. 1. Wherein this communion does consist.

Sol. It does consist in a reciprocal expression 'twixt Christ and believers.
Like Jacobs ladder, the Angels ascending and descending. There are mutual
passages between them both.

Something Christ imparts to them, and something they impart to Christ: It is
an hand mutually opening and clasping.

It includes, 1. An exceeding mutual love: Two hearts respectively inflamed one
to another, and infolded one within another.

Christ lets out his love unto believers, he loves them as if they were his
servants, (but that is too little.) He loves them as if they were his friends
(ye are my friends, John 15.) He loves them as if they were his children (I and
the children God has given me, Heb. 2. 13.) Nay he loves them as if they were
his Spouse, Hosea 2. Nay yet more, he loves them as if they were bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh; he loves them as himself, Ephesians. 5. 30. nay yet
more, he loves them more then his own life (which he parted with for their
sakes) and in some respect more then his own glory (which he veiled a while for
their salvation.)

And believers let out their love to Christ, Simon, love thou me more then
these? Lord, says he, thou know that I love thee. O blessed Christ (says
Bernard) I love thee, plusquam mea (more then all lands) plusquam meos (more
then all friends) plusquam me (more then all my Amor m^us crucifixus, said
Ignatius.
self.)

So that here is the first branch of communion 'twixt Christ and believers,
viz. mutual love; ye are my beloved, and my friends, says Christ, and this is
my beloved, and this is my friend, says the Church, Cant. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Whom having not seen, ye love him whom my soul loves, Cant. 3. 1.

2. It includes a singularly mutual complacence or delight.

1. Christ delights in believers: he delights,

1. In their persons: Thou shall be called Hephzibah and Beulah for the Lord
delights in thee, Isa. 62. 4, 5. He delights in them as a bridegroom in his
newly married bride. And Zeph. 3. 17. He will rest in his love, he will joy
over thee with singing. When God created the world, he delighted in his own
workmanship; and so does Christ delight in a believer his new Creation, as the
birth of his own power and mercy, and as his glory on earth.

2. In their graces: which are as it were the face and image of Christ in the
soul: A believing soul is the reflex of Christ, and their graces are compared
in Cant. 4. to the smell of ointment, v. 10. to the chief spices, ver. 14. to
pleasant fruit, ver. 13. to a fountain of gardens, ver. 15.

3. In their services, which are therefore styled mountains of myrrh, and
hills of Frankincense, Cant. 4. 6. A little Myrrh and Frankincense is sweet and
pleasing, what is an hill or mountain of them? Ver. 10. The smell of thine
ointments is better then all spices. Ver. 11. Thy lips, O my Spouse drop as the
honeycomb; honey and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments
is like the smell of Leban^n. When Noah prayed and offered a burnt offering,
the Lord smelled a sweet savor, Genesis 8. 20, 21. When the Philippians exercised
acts of mercy, they were Phil. 4. 18.
as odours of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God*

When David offered up his broken heart, this was a delightful sacrifice: A
broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not desti^e, Psalm. 51. 17. Christ
delights in their tears, in their sighs, in their prayings (though we^k,) in
their hearings, in their trustings, in their praisings.

2. And believers delight in Christ, Cant. 2. 3. I sat down under his shadow
with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. They delight*

1. In the glories of his person: As the chiefest of ten thousand; none like to
him, or to be compared with him, John 1. 14. We beheld his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

2. In the wonder and mirror of his Redemption, admiring at the height, and
depth, and breadth of his love to die for them.

3. In all the methods of his pr^sence: the v^ice of him in his Word, O how
sweet? (One day in thy Courts is better then a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. the
disclosure of himself in the Sacrament; O how precious? (now the believing and
loving soul rejoices with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8.) The answer from him
of our seeking, O what a satisfaction? (Return to thy rest O my soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm 116. 7.)

3. It includes a mutual benevolence: In a rational and friendly communion,
each party studies and wishes good to each other.

So does Christ unto believers: He wishes much good to his enemies; to them
who reject communion with him; (How often would I have gathered you? and,
Father forgive them;) what good then does he wish and will to his friends?
There is not only a fullness of goodness in Christ, but also fullness of
willingness in Christ to do good to his members when he was on earth, He
instructed and prayed for them; and longed with a great desire to die for them,
and was earnest when they die, they might be with him, and Behold his glory,
John 17. 24.

And now he is in heaven, he is an Advocate for them, appears in their suit and
cause; he is an Intercessor, He ever lives to make intercession for us, Romans 8.
34.

And so do believers unto Christ, though they cannot wish any good to Christ as
to one that is indigent by way of addition, yet they do wish good unto him, as
to one who is glorious by way of publication: They wish, will and desire the
enlargement of his dominion in their own hearts and others: The honoring of
his Gospel, that it may be believed and received; prosperity to the cause and
servants of Christ, (pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love thee) and to all his Ordinances.

4. Lastly, it includes a mutual beneficence, or a mutual communication of
good, Christ communicates good unto believers, and they (in their way)
communicate good unto Christ, speak, and do, and live to him, and pay their all
to his glory.

Christ communicates good unto believers; In Zachary 4. 2. you read of a
Candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and seven Lamps, and
seven pipes. And then v. 3. of two Olive trees by it, one upon the right side
of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof. The golden Candlestick
is the Church, the seven Lamps are the several graces of it; the Olive trees
are the abundant supplies of his grace; and the seven Pipes the manifold ways
by which Christ deriveth good.

Now the good which Christ communicates to believers, is twofold.

1. Congru^us, which respects the militant condition. Bonum, Honestum.

2. Glorious, which respects the triumphant condition, Bonum Jucundum.

1. The congru^us good which respects this life, is first, fundamental, in,

1. Justification, wherein he bestows his blood upon believers for the
remission of all their sins, and so to exempt them from condemnation. (Rev.
1. 5. That loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood.) And his
righteousness upon them (we are made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5. 21.) and so to present them capable and fit for salvation.

2. Adoption, when he makes them the Sons of God, (Gal. 4. 4. God sent forth
his Son, verse 5. To redeem us that we might r^receive the Adoption of
Sons;) so that Believers by Jesus Christ attain to the dignity of being the
Sons of God, John 11. 12. And thereupon heirs of God, and coheirs with
Christ, Romans 8. 17. Their Savior becomes their brother, Heb. 2. 10, to 13. And
their God becomes their Father.

3. Sanctification, wherein he gives fellowship to them in the graces of his
Spirit, renewing and changing them by the infusion of divine qualities, 1 Cor.
6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 4. He makes us
partakers of the divine nature: As God took of the Spirit in Moses, and
imparted some of it on the Elders of Israel, or as Jonathan (who loved David as
his own soul, 1 Samuel 18. 3.) stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to David, and his garments even to his sword, and to his bow, and to
his girdle, verse 4. So does Jesus Christ, he does power out of his Spirit upon
believers; imparts not only the garment of righteousness to justify them, but
also his very Spirit of grace to be a sword and a girdle unto them; a sword to
slay their sins, and a girdle to bind and strengthen them for his service.
Therefore are believers said to have communion in his death, Phil. 3. 10. and
to be planted in the likeness of his death and resurrection, Romans 6. 5.

4. Preservation, These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them: As
the Sun gives light, and keeps it; one hand to give another to hold, as
Christ himself went on with his own work of redemption, never ceasing till he
had finished it and ascended to glory: so does he in his work of Believers; He
is the Author and finisher of faith, a spring of eternal life. The Author of
it to them that obey him.

2. Accidental, he kisseth them with a lip of peace, salutes them with joy
unspeakable; seals them with the signet of his own Spirit; puts sugar into
their wine

2. The glorious good which respects another life is beyond all expression and
conception: It is called a Kingdom, a crown of life, a crown of righteousness
that shall be given, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Paradise, an exceedingly exceeding weight of
glory. This also will Christ impart to believers, He will give them (besides
all they meet with here of grace, of peace, of joy, of help, etc.) hereafter
eternal life, and they shall be where he is, not only to behold his glory, but
to be glorified with him, they shall enter into their Masters joy.

Quest. 2. What the extent of this communion is 'twixt Christ and believers?

Sol. The question may be understood, either of the extent, 1. Of number; Or 2.
of quantity; Or 3. of duration; and accordingly I shall unfold the question in
three particulars.

1. The extent of Christ's communion with believers* is for number universal:
Believers are some of them strong: Abraham was strong in faith, he was the
Father of the faithful; and some of them are weak, I believe, Lord help my
unbelief, said the father of the child: some are ripe and well grown; others
are new born babes and very tender, all are included; union is as large as
opening, and communion is as large as union.

Christ has communion with them all, ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.
28. and all of them have communion with Christ: The Head has a conjunction
with, and an influence into the little Toe as well as into the strong Arm: and
the root (in the virtue of it) extends to the weakest branch as well as to the
strongest Limb of the tree.

2. The extent of Christ's communion with believers is radically and
substantially equal for quantity; I confess in respect of degrees (for some
part of this communion) and in respect of some acts, and in respect of some
feeling or sense, the communion is unequal and different; for some have a
greater measure of holiness, of strength, of joy, of evidence then others
have; but yet the radical and substantial part of this communion is equal and
alike: A full Reconciliation, Redemption, Sanctification, Remission: Christ is
alike Redeemer to all believers, and their Justification and Adoption are
alike; and the seed of Sanctification is alike, and the fr^ition of God in
glory (essentially considered) is alike: Though one star exceeds another in
magnitude, yet both are alike seated in the heavenly Orb, and though one member
be larger in the body then another, yet every one has an equal conjunction
with the head. Christ does not clasp believers with a different spirit, nor do
they clasp Christ with a different faith; his relation to them is one for the
nature of it, and their love to him is all one for the truth of it.

3. The extent of Christ's communion with believers in respect of duration is
eternal, or is continued to eternity It admits of no intercision in this life,
nor of any cessation in that other life; for Christ has an infinite goodness
to communicate to them, which they cannot take in but by an infiniteness of
time: His treasures can never be spent upon them; He has glory for them to an
eternity, and they have a love to bestow upon him, which will spend it self,
and yet last for ever and ever.

Quest. 3. Why has Christ such a communion with Believers.

Sol. The Reasons may be these:

1. Communication is the principal end of all about Christ; it is the end of
his union, the end of his offices, and the end of his works.

1. It is the end of all his unions. There is a twofold union.

One is personal, the union of natures in his person, and that was for this
end, viz. to make him a ^it and able Mediator and Redeemer for us: Unto us a
child is born, unto us a Son is given, Isaiah 9.

Another is mystical, the union of himself with believers, as an head with his
members; and this is for the Application of all his benefits and virtues also
unto us: He becomes one with us, for this very end, that partaking of himself,
we might partake of all good by him.

2. And the end of all his offices, viz.

His Office,

1. Regal, to rule us.

2. Prophetical, to teach and guide us.

3. Priestly, to expiate our, sin.

3. And the end of his great works.

1. He died to pay our debts.

2. Rose to give us the acquittance and discharge.

3. Ascended, to give us gifts.

4. Sits at Gods right hand to appear for us.

5. Intercedes, to complete and apply all for us.

2. Jesus Christ is ordained to invest believers with as good, nay with a
better estate then men had in Adam. He is to repair their lost condition; he
is to atone them with God, and to fit them for a glorious fruition of him; but
this cannot be without a manifold communication of good unto them: Of necessity
he must impart unto them the virtue of his blood for this, and the power of his
Spirit for this, and the arm of his alsufficiency and strength for this.

Ephesians. 5. 25. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it. Verse 26. That
he might sanctify and cleanse it. Ver. 27. And that he might present it to
himself glorious.

Our union with Christ is called a Marriage, will Christ bring no portion with
himself?

Divines do think that there was a necessity to impart some of his virtues for
confirmation unto the Elect Angels: And then surely much more must be imparted
to sinful men for their Reconcil^ation and Reparation.

3. All the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ (that is) they are to be
fulfilled and made good to believers: I say all the promises which are rich
veins, and full veins, the storehouses of all mercy, and grace, and good;
These are to be made good unto us by Christ: Not only in a way of stability,
but likewise in a way of efficacy which could never be without a communication
of the good things promised unto believers; Christ has the key of all these in
his hands.

These therefore are in his dispose, he is the Master to dispense them to his
family, the household of faith.

4. Jesus Christ is filled with goodness in himself, and with love also to his
members who are believers.

Now although all goodness (ex natura rei) be deffusive of it self, yet is it
most communicating when either it is seated in a relation, or engraven in an
affection. A good father will impart more good then a good man; a loving
husband will do more good then a mere husband: The goodness in Christ is a
goodness both ways: It is a goodness in relation, (that is) in one who
stands to believers as an head does to its members; and a goodness in
affection, (that is) in one who loves believers above all the people in the
world; and certainly love is bountiful: it is an easy key to open, and a
liberal hand to bestow.

Fifthly, What should Christ do with himself, and with all his benefits? God at
the first contented not himself (if I may so speak) with himself, and therefore
created man to communicate some of his goodness to him. And when Christ
redeemed man, he contents not himself with the perfecting of the work of
redemption, but he must communicate the virtue and fruit of it unto men;
unless we will say he lived in vain, or died in vain, or rose in vain; he
died not for himself, nor rose for himself.

But who shall partake of this purchased good? shall enemies, or friends? shall
they enjoy it who will not enjoy him? shall they enjoy sweetness of his
communion who shut their doors and hearts against him, and abhor the union of
his person? O no, we cannot sup together if we will not come together. But as
he wrote upon his book, mihi and meis this book is for me and for my friends,
or as we write in our Leases, for us and our heirs; so says Christ of all his
goodness, this is for me and my members; this is for me and believers; I may
look on others, but I will live with them; I may speak to others, but I will
sup with them; others may have a call from me, but these only shall have
communion with me.

6. Believers have much work lying upon them for Christ, active and passive,
ordinary and extraordinary, none of which can be done without communication
from Christ. Christ's works and Christ's help are parallel: The hand can do
nothing for the head, but by an influence imparted to it from the head; Without
me ye can do nothing, John 15. 5.

7. All the good we do is done by the strength of communion.

The nerves or liguments of union import this; For,

On Christ's part it is the Spirit, which is compared to fire and water (that
are diffusive and spreading) and to ointment (the unction of the Spirit) which
spreds its savor, and to light which is diffusive.

On our part it is faith: and faith is a,

1. Depending eye. 2. Drawing mouth. 3. Receiving hand.
8. He glorifies himself in it: His glory as Mediator is enlarged by giving
grace to his members, by filling them with more grace, he fills himself with
more glory: Though the glory of his person be full, yet the glory of his office
of Mediatourship, and of headship to his Church, this has another additional
fullness of glory from the good and happiness of his members.

All the useful Application which I intend at this time to make, shall be
reduced unto,

1. Consolation.

2. Exhortation, partly to persons,

1. In this communion,

1. Hold it fast. 2. Improve it.
2. As yet out of this communion, by all means get into it.

Use 1. The first Use shall be for comfort to all believing persons, to all
whose hearts have been opened to let in Christ, twixt whom and them there is
this high and glorious communion.

You have enough, and unless you were in heaven it self, you cannot have more:
As David spoke of the sword of Goliath, none like that, the same I affirm of
communion with Christ, none like this: It surpasses all communions in the
world in six respects.

1. For dignity, there is a communion 'twixt a sinner and lust, 6. Respects
(this is of all the basest) There is a communion 'twixt man and the creatures,
(this is of all the poorest:) A fellowship with sin makes up perfect misery;
a fellowship with the world makes up perfect vanity.

But the communion 'twixt Christ and a Believer is truly solid, and unspeakably
eminent: The Son of God with the sons of God; the chiefest in heaven with
the chiefest in earth; the most excellent agents in heaven and earth, by the
most excellent means the Spirit and Faith.

This fellowship is more then Angelical: It is a divine fellowship with the
whole Trinity, Our fellowship is with the Father and the Son, says ^aint John.
The communion of the Holy Ghest be with you, says Saint Paul.

2. For comodity, the things imparted in this communion, any one of them, nay
the least of them, is of more value and benefit then all the world.

There was more in the kiss which a Prince gave to one, then in a cup of gold
which he gave to another: The Philosophers hold that the lowest degree of life,
exceeds the highest degree of inanimate perfection: A living dog is better then
a dead lion; a living fly does (in this) overmatch all the stars.

The blood of Christ, the righteousness of Christ, the love of Christ, the
graces communicated from Christ, the lowest spark of any of them, does elevate
the soul, and adds more perfection of good then all the good which can be
drawn out of all the creatures in the world. The least good, in genere moris,
out-weighs all the good in genere fortunae: and the least good, in genere
spiritualis (or Gratiae) is of more value and consequence then all other good
whatsoever; one pearl is better then a million of stones, or a mountain of
dirt.

3. For privilege, were you clothed with all the moral abilities whereof
nature is capable; were you endowed with all the confluences of the earth to
the utmost receptions or extensions of sensual imaginations and desires, yet by
none of these are you brought in a neernesse of relation to God, or any jot
advantaged for any spiritual interests, or infranchized thereby with any
soul-helping liberties; still you are forreiners and strangers, and stand at
distance with God, you cannot call God Father yet, till communion with Christ
be enjoyed; and when this is enjoyed, your privileges (immediately) become
wonderful.

Now you may look on God and say, Thou art my portion. Now you may go to God
and say, Thou art my Father: Now you may behold the love of God, and say, this
is my treasure; and the Covenant of God, and say, this is my storehouse; and
the providence of God, and say, this is my Shield: Now you may look on Christ,
and say, This is my Redeemer, he is mine, and I am his: He lives in me, and I
live in him; He dwells with me, and I dwell with him; He sups with me, and I
feed on him; His blood is my refuge, and my heart is his Mansion; He does
graciously traffic in my heart by his Spirit, and I can as freely traffic
with heaven by his intercession.

4. For pleasure: One day in Gods house was more to David then a thousand
elsewhere, Psalm 84. 10.

One days communion with Christ (did I say one days? nay one hours, nay one
minutes communion with Christ) is of more true satisfaction, and
soul-delighting pleasures, then all the bathes and rivers of Joy in the world.

Saint Austine delivers a high Dic animae meae salus tua ego sum: Curram post
istam vocom: N^li absconderc faci^m tuam moriar ut came videam.
request to God; O Lord, say unto my soul, I am thy salvation, That one word, O
I will run to hear it: Hide not thy face from me, Let me die so I may see
thy favor. Moses was a while with God upon the mount, (and what a heaven was
it for him to see God; and converse with him?) Peter was a while with Christ
upon the Mount, (O what a ^aciety was it to him to be with his Christ in that
glimpse of excellent glory? and to hear that heavenly voice, This is my
beloved Son, 2 Pet. 1. 19. well might Peter say, it is good to be here.

Why Sirs, who can describe unto you the sweetness of this communion? I never
Meditate, but I meet with Christ? what a blessed contemplation is this? I never
hear, but I meet with Christ, what a blessed hour is this? I never receive of
the Sacrament, but I meet with Christ (O what a blessed feast is this?)

I never bow my soul in prayer, but I meet with Christ; when I go and hear, I
hear his voice; when I go and pray, he hears my voice, (O what a heaven is
this?).

I commend that speech of Nunquam abs te, absque te recedo, Bern. Ep. 116.
Bernard, if the soul can speak its of Christ, I never come to thee, but by
thee; I never come from thee without thee.

5. For sufficiency: show us the Father (said Philip) and it suffices; Have
thou communion with Christ? it is sufficient, let thy condition for other
things be what it may be.

You know the answer of the King of France to the Herald of him of Spain, who
varnished his Master with many empty titles of being King of Naples, King of
the Indies, etc. He only proclaimed himself King of France; as if that alone
weighed down all the rest.

O ye believers, there is so much in this one communion with Christ, as answers
to all other communions; nay, as infinitely overtops them: One man has
communion with profits, but he has no pleasure; another sucks at the flower of
pleasure, but he has no profit; one outward good or other is still wanting:
and if all were enjoyed, there were not enough to satisfy the vast soul of
man. But communion with Christ brings sufficiency with it: There is (if I may
so phrase it) an aggregation of all good in Christ, for the parts of satisfying
good, and likewise an intension of all good for the degrees of it.

There is mercy enough in Christ to pardon, holiness enough in Christ to heal,
peace enough in Christ to quiet, joy enough in Christ to refresh, dignity
enough in Christ to honor, wisdom enough in Christ to direct, readiness
enough in Christ to help, strength enough in Christ to uphold, goodness enough
in Christ to bless thy soul, happiness enough in Christ to save and crown thy
soul.

Let our condition be never so great, it is but a hell without Christ, let it
be never so flat, it is heaven sufficient if we enjoy Christ.

Who can say he wants nothing, who wants Christ? who can say he wants any
thing, who wants not a Christ.

6. For duration: all other communions are in hazard, and receive their period.
The communion 'twixt man and wife, has this inscription upon it, yours for
life; The communion 'twixt a man and his friend has this subscription to it,
yours till death; the communion that a man has with the creatures, has this
motto on it, yours till trouble; the communion that a man has with the
pleasures of sin, has this character on it, yours till conscience awakes, or
at least, till hell follows; the communion that Adam had with God in Paradise,
had this Epitaph on it, yours till temptation. Either that moth of death, or
that wave of trouble, or that flash in conscience, or that decreed period to
all creatures crack asunder all these communions, and in a moment make their
graves: so that we do many times scarce taste the sweetness of them in
fruition, before we are swallowed up with bitterness for the loss of them.
But the communion 'twixt Christ and the believer is begun in mercy, is
maintained by infiniteness, and prolonged to eternity; our life will end, and
the world will end, and time will end, but this communion shall never end.

Nay, (and contrary to all other communions which like wine is quickest at the
first drawing) the longer that this communion holds, the sweeter and the
fuller, and the purer it becomes: In this life you (by reason thereof) partake
of glorious and unspeakable good from Christ, but all is little to what he
reserves for another world. All in this life is but as the first fruits, the
harvest is to come but as the earnest penny, the full reward is to come; but as
the contract, the marriage is to come.

After a few days you shall come to an immediate and perfect communion, not at
second hand, by means, not by tokens, not by droppings, not by mixtures, but by
a glorious and absolute fullness by complete fruition and vision.

Christ will let out his strength of holiness and glory upon you, and you
shall let out the strength of love to Christ, you shall enjoy him to the utmost
capacity of fruition, and you shall love him with the utmost possibility of
affection for ever and ever. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord;
this is that admirable and blessed communion which is and shall be 'twixt
Christ and all believers.

Rev. 3. 20. Sermon. 7.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
THe next Use shall be of Instruction to such persons, who upon good grounds
find themselves to have communion with Christ and Christ with them: Their
dignity (I confess) is great, so the duty (thereupon) is manifold.

1. Walk with cheerful thanfulnesse: Two sights are very incongruous, one is, a
wicked man inflamed with joys, another is, a good man almost drowned in
tears. 1 Samuel 1. 8. Hanna (said Elkanah) why weepest thou? and why is thy
heart grieved? am I not better to thee then ten sons?

So say I to thee, a believer, why do thou walk with so many habitual cares
in thy head, and with so many continual fears in thy breast, have thou not
communion with Christ?

Obj. Perhaps thou have but little of the world, yet even at the lowest thou
have communion with Christ.

Sol. And should not the shining of the Sun satisfy thee, though all the
candles were put out? If thou had nothing but a naked Christ, thou had as
much as happiness comes to. How many have quitted all to enjoy Christ alone,
and have rejoiced too? why then should thou be troubled, who at once have as
much of earth as is necessary, and as much of Christ too as will make thee
blessed? Remember him who sold all for the pearl, and forso^k all for Christ.
A little with contentment is great gain, what then should a little, nay any
thing be with Christ.

When a fit of sadness (once) surprised Caesar, he struck himself on the
breast, saying, Cogita te Caesarem esse? why man art thou not Caesar? So when
melancholy thoughts about external possessions surprise thy mind, rouse up thy
self, Cogita te Christianum esse? remember, and say, am I not a Christian? have
I not communion with Christ? and cannot communion with him eke out that little
portion of other things: It was wont to make the prison a Palace, the flames of
martyrdom a bed of roses? why should it not be able to make thy bit of bread a
feast, and thy cup of water sweeter then wine it self?

Obj. Or perhaps it is but little which Christ as yet has imparted to thee of
himself, (little grace, little assurance, little joy.)

Sol. O friend, let that little be never so little, if it be aliquid Christi,
it is great in worth, though small in bulk. A little issuing from communion
with him is the fruit of highest love, and the pledge of fullest glory. The
ring of gold is little, but it with a pearl is very much: A little grace with
a full Christ is a condition very high: If the Christian were truly humble and
wise who had the prizing of it; nothing is little which drops from Christ; the
least ray of gold is precious.

For my part I judge that wife abundantly estated whose husband is so: O
Christian be contented, be thankful, be cheerful; Consider,

1. The least which comes from Christ is enough to save thee, and should not
then the much which comes from him be enough to comfort thee.

2. Where Christ communicates a little, there he will communicate more, it is a
gift, not a portion: There are showers which gush out of a cloud, but they
quickly cease, they grow less and less: There are drops which distill out of a
fountain, and they still increase: Thou have no sooner received one degree of
grace, but Christ is ready to add another. Methinks the child should suck
quietly, when, although it takes not in the whole breast at once, yet the milk
is spinning out to renew a further drought after the former is gone down.

3. Christ imparts not alike to all, nor all at once to any: He so gives, as
that still he reserves more to give: I fear our condition would not be sure,
were there not some good still in Christ's hand to bestow, communion would cease
if communication did cease.

It is an unspeakable comfort to me, that Christ is mine, no man ever enjoyed
him, but he shall enjoy more from him: I bless his goodness for the former, I
will wait on his wisdom for the latter.

2. Live like those who have communion with Christ: Nebuchadnezzar saw in a
dream an image whose head was of gold, but the feet were part of iron, and
part of clay, Dan. 2. 32. 33. Truly that Christian is but in a dream who
fancies a golden communion, and yet wallows in a wicked conversation: If we say
that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, 1 John 1. 6.
The forty four thousand with the Lamb had his Fathers name written in their
foreheads.

In communion there is always similitude and conformity, and this is twofold
in a Christian to that in Christ.

1. Of holiness: when the grace of Christ appears but doctrinally, it teaches
us to live holily, Titus 2. 12. much more when it appears effectually in
communication from Christ. Surely they are much mistaken who can exalt the
Gospel, and despise the Law; who can magnify the merit of Christ, and withal
contemn the Spirit of Christ: As if a good Christ and a good life were
inconsistent, or as if the blood of Christ purchased this unhappy favor for us
to live licentiously: will you shame your head and deny that Christ that bought
you? Is this a Christ communication? Is this to show the virtues of him who
has called you? Brethren, be not deceived, God is not mocked: An evil
conversation is incomplyable with the learning of Christ in truth, Ephesians. 4. 21,
22. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, or what
communion has light with darkness, and what concord has Christ with Belial?
and what agreement has the Temple of God with idols? 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. Some
would reconcile our Religion and Popery; and you would reconcile heaven and
hell.

2. Of communicativenesse: all the good which Christ imparts to us, is for to
make us good, and for to enable us to do good: If you kindle a fire, it is to
give warmth; If you give your steward money, it is to lay it out: All the
stars (they say) have light from the Sun, but then their light imparts it
self again by influence to bodies sub-celestial, you must do more then others.
Thou have received knowledge from Christ, this candle should give light to
others, as well as to thy self. Thou have received grace from Christ: this
ointment should heat the souls of others as well as his own soul: thou have
received mercy and comfort from Christ, this cordial should be let out to bind
up and sustain the drooping hearts of others, as well as thine own.

Christ has showed pity to thee, surely it is, that thou should show pity
to others: He forgives thee, should not thou forgive thy brother? when you
were wandering, he sought after you; when you were ignorant, he instructed you;
when you were untoward, he yet bare with you; when you humbled your souls, he
cheered you; when you yielded to him, he presently embraced you; O how often
has he bound up your wounded souls? How often has he raised up your fallen
feet, you have lived upon his blood, upon his Spirit, upon his love, upon his
bounty all your days.

Let the same mind be in you which is in your Christ. O when shall the soul
of a child, of a wife, of a servant, of a friend, of a neighbor, cry out, and
say, I bless God for such a Father, for such a Husband, etc.

3. Improve your communion with Christ, Heb. 4. 14. seeing that we have a great
High Priest, verse 16. Let us come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

Sirs, there is a double condition of the soul, one is of distance, I never
found a Christ; O then be wise to strive to get him.

The other is of presence, I enjoy a Christ, O then be wise to make use of him;
When I want bread, then I must look out for it, when I possess bread, then I
must feed on it.

Consider three things to set on this,

1. Though your relation be excellent, yet your condition is indigent. No
Christian has so little of Christ, but he has matter for praise: And no
Christian has so much from Christ, but he has matter still left for prayer.
Every day we find it a great work to do a little work, much patience to bear
a little cross, much strength to conquer a little temptation, much faith to
answer one doubt, much love to eat out one lust, much zeal to act one piece of
service. As our receipts are more then our deserts, so our wants are much larger
then our receipts.

2. There is a fullness in Christ, and that with respect to your wants; compare
any part of good in him with any part of want in your selves, it has in it
three qualities.

1. Sutableness: Mercy to answer misery, Holiness to answer sin, Peace to
answer trouble, strength to answer weakness, etc.

2. Fullness: remission of sins lies in his blood as in a perfect merit and
discharge: Holiness lies in his natures as an original and infinite spring.

3. Willingness to impart this to you; I know the great scruple still lies
about this, but in truth the imparting will of Christ is unutterable; can love,
invitation, union, donations assure you of this, he bids us come and eat
abundantly.

I will not expatiate in this, only if you consider,

1. That gracious design in God to draw up some to a glorious and eternal
communion with himself.

2. The voluntary contract 'twixt him and Christ to effect this.

3. All that for which Christ engages himself to believers as well as unto God
his and their Father.

4. All his cost already upon them which would be lost without further
communicating; you must confess his wonderful willingness, unless you would
imagine that either God should miss of his design, or Christ is willing to
lose all his pains.

3. You your selves have all the kinds of improving of Christ attending you:
For you have,

1. Improving interests, (...) and communion, he is yours, and therefore will
do you good: He has done you good, and therefore will do you more good.

2. Improving principles: Faith and love: He is the fountain, and faith is the
vessel, given purposely unto you still to draw out of his fullness.

3. Improving Ordinances, the word and Sacrament: They are bread set out on
purpose to feed you: They are the arms of Christ spread on purpose to
strengthen you; they are the pipes of Christ, laid out on purpose to convey
more of Christ unto you.

Therefore O thou feeble and complaining soul, who have communion with Christ;
consider thy self and thy condition often; and say, what need I yet from
Christ? wherein do I fall short? what is it that I want? what may Christ yet do
for me?

And then stir up faith to act in Christ, to go to Christ, to beg of Christ,
to draw from Christ more faith, more love, more humility, more patience, more
fruitfulness, more faithfulness, more strength, more assurance, more joy, etc.

Say thus, a friend will do for a friend; an husband will do for his wife; an
head will do for a member: A Christ, surely a Christ will do for a believer. If
he gives himself, he will give all other things; if he has given his blood for
me already: if he will give me glory hereafter, surely he will give me a dram
of grace more, and a drop of comfort more.

Use 3. Is there such an excellent and sweet communion between Christ and the
soul possessed by Christ? O then sadly and seriously search whether you have a
share in this communion, yea, ^^ne.

There are three sorts of people in the world.

Some of them have no communion at all with Christ: they are strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel.

Some of them have a communion of prosession, a moral, a visible communion:
Have we not heard thee preaching in our Synag^gue? have we not eat and drank in
thy presence? but this is not sufficient.

Some of them have a communion of possession and profession both. Have any of
you this communion with Christ?

Quest. How may that be discerned?

Sol. I conjecture it may be evidenced three ways;

1. By preparations. 2. By formal concomitants. 3. By resulting effects.
1. By preparations.

Are you fitted for such a communion as this the person who wanted a wedding
garment, was pulled out as unmeet for a wedding feast: Christ will not have
communion with every person. Sirs, whatso^ver we may dispute of a fitness for
union, yet assuredly there must be a fitness for communion with Christ for
communion implies a state of fitness.

Four things ever precede the state of communion.

1. Contrition of heart: A broken heart and a broken Christ will live together,
but an hardened heart, and a gracious Christ cannot. An heart merely humbled is
a legal heart (that is) fit for the Law to deal with.

A broken heart is a Gospel heart fit for Christ to have communion with.

Isaiah 66. 2. I will look to him who is of a contrite Spirit.

Isa. 57. 15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite spirit to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

Isaiah 62. 1. The Lord has anointed me, and sent me to bind up the broken
hearted. Matthew. 12. 20. A bruised reed he shall not break.

This is the heart which Christ invites to come to him and promises to give it
ease and rest, Mat. 11. 28.

This is the heart that Christ, 1. Pitieth. 2. Inviteth. 3. Cherishes. 4.
Delights in. 5. Binds up.

2. Poverty of spirit: A poor Christian and a rich Christ, they have
fellowship; but a full Christian; a proud Christian and a full and a lowly
Christ have none: an empty vessel is fit to be brought to the fountain to be
filled. Luke 1. 53. He fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he sends
empty away.

This heart, 1. Needs. 2. Prizeth. 3. Seeks. 4. Relieth. 5. Waits. 6.
Finds Christ.

When the great feast was made, the communion was not 'twixt the great ones,
the rich ones and Christ, but 'twixt the blind, and maimed, and poor, and
Christ. They would not come, but these would. This is the heart that Christ
seeks. 2. Esteems* 3. Converseth with. 4. Imparteth himself unto.

He who holds communion with his own worth, will hold no communion with Christ's
worthiness: If you can live without Christ, you will dwell without Christ. The
rivers run not upon the mountains (the lofty mountains) they run in the
low and humble valleys: Christ holds communion with none but such as see their
need of him, and are content to be altogether beholding unto him for all their
supplies.

3. Discommunion with sin: Naturally every man is engaged to his ^usts; And
therefore the Scripture calls sin an husband, and a Lord, and a lover: and
the sinner is said to make a covenant and an agreement with it. I will give
unto you so much pro^^t, and so much delight, says sin, and I will give unto
thee all my heart, and love, and strength, and service says the sinner.

But this communion must be broken up, or else be confident, you have no
communion with Christ.

Psalm. 45. 10. Forget thine own people, and thy Fathers house. Ver. 11. So
shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, etc. There is such a contrariety
'twixt these two objects (Sin and Christ) and there is such an impossibily of
inclination in the heart, to embrace and converse with these two at once, that
of necessity you must (as Christ spoke of the world and of God) either hate the
one, and love the other, or else hold to the one, and d^spise the ^ther, Mat.
6. 24. Christ did lie in a Manger, but never lived in a dunghill.

Communion, the center of it, is love (and therefore it is shadowed by Solomon's
chari^t, the midst whereof was paved with love, Cant. 3. 10.) your communion is
where your love is, but you cannot hold Christ and sin in the same affection.

Mezentius the tyrant, tied a dead body and a living man together. This was a
distructive torment, it was not a communicating favor: They might die together
but not live, etc. An heart dead in the love of sin, and a Christ the author
of life, there can be no comfortable, nay nor real Communion 'twixt them.

I have read of a diseased person, who was in danger to lose his fight, and his
Physician prescribed Theotinus
him to take heed of some lewd courses: What said he? cannot I enjoy my sight
and my delight too? why then, vale lumen Amicum: I fear it is thus with too
many: Communion with Christ is sweet, but may I not enjoy this and the world
too? now the young man goes away, then vale lumen amicum: And may I not
continue my delight in sin, and a delightful communion with Christ? why then,
farewell Christ.

4. Insitien, or Insplantation into Christ: for communion ever supposes a
relation: As difference, so distance too is opposite to communion* If you cut
off a limb from the tree, the root has no further communion with it, because
union cease, which is the foundation of communion* If you put a stick upon
the tree, it receives no influence at all from the root, because it is only a
naked opposition, without any union at all. But if you graft a science on a
stock, this will grow, this receives sap and life, because here is an union:
And so it is 'twixt Christ and us; there must be a relation 'twixt him and you,
an union 'twixt him and you, or else a communion is impossible. Paul therefore
desires first to be found in him, and then he strives to find something from
him: It is in Phil. 3. 8. That I may win Christ. Verse 9. And be found in
him: And then follows verse 10. That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferring.

2. By the formal conc^mitan^s.

There are four properties of a Christ and a soul-communion.

1. It is spiritual: In Exodus 26. 6. you read of one Tabernacle, and of several
curtains, which were coupled together with taches, and those taches were all
of gold. The communion with Christ, and his with us, as it is m^st high so it
is most precious; and the most precious communion is that which is most holy
and spiritual. It is a precious bl^^d which Christ imparts in communion, it is
a precious love, etc. They are precious fruits of his spirit, etc. They are
spiritual blessings in heavenly places, etc. And e contra, they are precious
and spiritual things which Christ looks for from you: Not a carnal, but a
spiritual love to him; Not common, or dead, but living and spiritual sacrifices
and services, spiritual praying, spiritual reading, etc.

This communion is holy,

1. Causally, because wrought by the holy Spirit. 2. Objectively, It is between
an holy Christ, and an holy people. 3. Vertually: the effects and fruits of
either side are holy. 4. Actually, Christ holds communion with us through holy
Ordinances, and we with him by holy duties.
2. It is a close and immediate communion; my meaning is, that nothing lies
between the heart and Christ. They say of the love of friendship, it is the
knitting of soul with soul, so that the soul loving lives in the soul loved.
If a stone lies twixt the sience and the stock, there is no communion. And
truly so it is in this communion, Christ and the soul are drawn so near
together, that they seem to be but one soul; Christ lives in the soul, and
the soul lives in Christ: As they report of the heart of Ignatius, the Name of
Jesus was engraven upon it: sure I am, the nature and power of Christ are
engraven upon the hearts of them who have communion with him.

What does Paul desire to know? none but Christ: In whom does the desire to be
found? in none but Christ; whom does he strive to magnify? none but Christ:
Open his heart, and see whether you find not Christ written in every affection
of him: His love, on whom was it? it is on Christ: The love of Christ
constrained him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. His hope; on whom was it? it is on Christ, Phil.
3. 20. We look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. His long desire: after
what was it? That I may be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. His joy and rejoicing, in
what? in whom was it? It was in Christ, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should
glory (in any thing) save in the cross of Christ.

3. It is a full and satisfying communion: It was a choice expression of
Paulinus, when one told him that the Goths had sacked Nola, and plundered all
from him: Domine (says he) ubi. sunt omnia mea tu scis; where my all is, thou
who art all in all, do know.

A deluded Christian is never satisfied with Christ alone: The Pharisee, he
must have his own righteousness too: The hypocrite, he must have his own
delight: The young man he must have all his wealth too: Let him pretend what he
pleases, apply himself to an open communion with Christ as often as he pleases,
yet there is something else besides Christ, which he must have.

Zonoras relates of a Prince of the Barbarians who being brought captive to
Rome, and released by Claudius viewed the stately structure of that City, and
then brake out thus, Why? This is wonderful, that you who enjoy such stately
palaces should so molest your selves to obtain our poor cottages.

But it is otherwise with him, who has a true communion with Christ, Christ
does bound his soul, and is a fullness to his soul: A fullness as well as a
fitness.

Psalm 17. 15. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. And
truly, besides this, that Christ is happiness, (and therefore fullness) there
is another thing considerable, that every relation includes satisfaction and
contentment: The child has enough in one father; the wife has enough in one
husband; the members have enough in one head; and the Christian finds enough
in one Christ: Righteousness enough to justify his person, blood enough to
expiate his sins; grace enough to cleanse his heart; peace enough to appease
his conscience; joy enough to satisfy his soul.

4. It is an inflaming communion, that is, it is such an alluring communion,
that the more you find of it, the more you thirst for it; as the tasting of
honey draws you to the eating of honey; So a little experimental communion with
Christ winds in the soul with greater desire of more communion with him. Phil.
3. 10. Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect, but I
follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which I also am apprehended of
Christ. V. 13. I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I
do: forgetting those things which are behind, I reach forth unto those things
which are before, etc.

There is a vast difference 'twixt a design which a person has upon Christ,
and a communion which one has with Christ. A design on Christ is a mercenary
complying with Christ for some particular good, and this being obtained, that
person has enough of Christ: If I meet with a commodity in the market, I have
that which I looked for, and so wholly quit the Market; If I have an arm
broken, I send for the Surgeon, and he sets the bone, and it being closed, I
have no further communion with him. And so many a person, he would have a
protection from hell by Christ, and then he is satisfied; he would have his
tormenting conscience alayd by Christ, and then he has done with Christ: But
in communion with Christ that soul is fixed on Christ; for Christ as my
universal good, and therefore rises still more and more after Christ: Lord,
evermore give us this bread: every receipt from Christ begets an higher degree
of love and desire unto Christ: as every drop of oil adds more light and life
(as it were) to the Lamp. 3. By the effects resulting upon this communion,
which I will only mention at this time.



1. Your affections will answer Christ's affections: Amicorum (we say) est idem
velle and idem nolle: you will delight in what, and in whom Christ does
delight, and you will hate what Christ does hate; friends will and nill the
same things.

2. You will prize the meeting places of Christ: If Christ be dear to you, his
Ordinances will be precious to you; you meet him by praying, and he meets you
by speaking: if the person be pleasing, his presence is so too.

3. Your obedience will be ready and cheerful: Let a man speak to his seat, it
stirs not: but let the Head speak to the hand it moves, for here is communion.

The last use shall be of Exhortation to all who are out of communion with
Christ: do not rest thus, but use all the means of heaven, that you may come
into this communion.

Two things (if rightly considered) will I trust, move you to hearken unto this
counsel.

1. The unspeakable misery of a person out of it; And here I know not how to
begin: If a non-communion with the Church of God be so direful a curse, that
Caine cries out, (thou have driven me out this day from the face of the Earth,
and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in
the Earth, and every one that finds me will s^ay me, Genesis 4. 14.) O then
what is a non-communion with Jesus Christ! Luther does profess, That he would
not be in heaven, if God were not there; and he could be content to be in Hell,
if God were there But where should he be willing to be, who is no where with
Christ? If he lives, he lives without Christ; if he dies, he dies not unto
Christ: I may say of him as Christ of Judas, It had been better for that man
that he had never been born.

Three things makes up this man's sad condition.

1. His best portion is but poor and cursed: All the Earth was cursed upon man's
fall: This (perhaps) thou have, and no more but this: When thou have summoned
up all thy pleasures, and when thou have cast up all thy riches, the result is
only this, the portion of my cup is a little cursed vanity; I have but earth,
and no longer then whilst on the earth. The Beauty, which is put on with the
garment, and put of with the garment is only in the garment, not in him that
wears the garment: And so the happiness which is put on with our life, and
put off with our life is not at a happiness for us, because it is only in the
enjoyment of the creature. Unhappy is that man, who has no world but this
world; whose bread is only that of carfulness, and whose water is only that
of bitterness.

2. All the good in Christ is sealed from him: It is to him as if Christ had
never lived, and never died for sinners: His condition is much like that of the
damned devils, who are eternal sinners, and eternal strangers: Thus it is with
him, his communion is ever with sin, but never, never shall it be with Christ.

The blood of Christ shall never make his peace: The merit of Christ shall
never procure his pardon: The grace of Christ shall never purge his
filthiness: whatsoever good another may attain, it is nothing to him: He has
no portion in Christ, and therefore shall have no benefit by Christ: none at
all.

3. He stands alone in all his soul-accounts, as she spoke in another case, and
I, whether shall I cause my shame to go? 2 Samuel 13. 13.

So is it with this indicted and arreigned sinner, whether shall I cause my gilt
to go? who shall answer for all these sins, which God and conscience charge
upon me?

Thou call upon mercy, mercy; O mercy pity me, and pardon me; why? says
mercy, If I find thee in Christ, I will do it; for I cross no sinners debts
but with the blood of Christ. Thou say, O Christ help me, O answer for these
sins; but says Christ, if thou would have closed with my person, I would
have answered for thy sins: But when I knocked at thy door thou did shut me
out, thou would none of me; how can thou expect the benefit of the office
of a Surety and Advocate, who did refuse the k^ndnesse of a Savior? And now
divine Justice seaseth on this soul; This is my prisoner, mercy will not bail
him, and Christ will not plead for him: Go thou accursed soul into everlasting
fire* Thou rejectest communion with the Son of God, and therefore take thou
communion with damned souls and devils in Hell.

2. Consider, there is yet a possibility of attaining to this communion; though
many are entered already into communion with Christ, yet more may be admitted:
this supper of communion does last as long as thy life and the Gospel last; as
long as the invitation does last.

I beseech you consider why has Christ laid open the nature and excellency of
this communion but to persuade and draw your souls into it?

A prize is put into your hands: you have an opportunity, you have all the
means which can show you the way how to fall into this communion, and by which
God does work on the souls of sinners for it, etc.

And now brethren, have I finished my work on this Text, a Theme of as sweet
mercy as ever sinner heard.

The Savior of sinners knocking at the door of sinners; A Savior begging of
that sinner to be saved: Have you opened your doors, or have you not? Will you
open them to Christ, or will you not? will you let in Christ and close with
him, or will you not? will you accept of communion with him, or will you not?

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Adoniram Byfield, at the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbard-street.
A Comentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by that Reverend Divine
Master John White, late of Dorchester, in fol.

An Exposition upon the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth
and thirteenth Chapters of the Prophet Ezekiel, by Master William Greenhill,
being the second vol. in 4.

An Exposition upon the fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, 17th. eighteenth, and
nineteenth Chapters of Ezekiel, by Master William Greenhil, being the third
vol. 4.

The Reasons of the Assembly of Divines concerning Presbyterial Government. 4.

The Assemblies larger and lesser Catechism.

The tenth Muse, several Poems by Mistress Anne Bradstreet in 8.

Short Writing shortened, by Mr. John Farthing, in 8.

Hidden Manna, or the Mystery of saving grace by Master William Fenner, in 12.

Safe conduct, or the Saints guidance to glory, at the Funeral of Mistress
Thomasin Barnardiston, by Master Ralph Robinson.

The Saints longings after their heavenly Country, a Sermon by Master Ralph
Robinson.

A Sermon at a Fast by Mr. N thanael Ward.

The Humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved, or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the only way of salvation for sensible sinners, by Master
Obadiah Sedgwick, in 4.

A short Catechism by Master Obadiah Sedgwick.

FINIS.

