THEANTHPOPOS: OR, God made Man. A TRACT PROVING THE NATIVITY OF OUR SAVIOR to
be on the 25. of December.

By JOHN SELDOM, that eminently-learned Antiquary, late of the Inner Temple.

LONDON, Printed by J.G. for Nathaniel Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill. 1661.

TO THE LEARNED GENTRY OF THE INNER TEMPLE.
WEre is not to comply with the mode of the Times, an Epistle had been
altogether useless; for to expatiate upon his desert, were but actum agere,
since the British world has been sufficiently sensible thereof. Opus authoris
nomine insignitur; The Authors name in the Frontispiece commends the work above
my ability, and will save me a labor. Now that this was the legitimate issue
of famous Seldens brain is indisputable, since he that is never so meanly
acquainted with the style, will soon acknowledge it. 'Twere pity that so
elaborate a Treatise should sleep in the grave of oblivion; especially, when
there are so many persons in this age, (whose misguided zeal christens all that
thwarts the grain of their phanatique opinions with the nickname of
superstition) that do so much oppugn the subject and verity of this discourse;
but, beyond all controversy, they that peruse it must be convinced or manifest
themselves obstinately stubborn. It Is a mystery to me that I could never
fathom, to imagine that any Levite should rely so much upon Christ for
salvation; and yet deny, nay, be offended at the celebrations of his Nativity:
But, if either Divine or Humane authority the practice of the Primitive times,
or the Institution of our Holy Mother the Church of England, carry strength or
prevalency along with them, I am confident of their recantation. This
abolishing of decency and solemnisations, has quite consumed the substance of
Religion; and the sad effects thereof, have been of late years too too apparent
among us; Instead of endeavoring to order, they did ordure the House of God;
Temples were turned into Stercoraries, into a confusion. But now, since it has
pleased the Supreme Architect of Heaven and Earth, that transoplves Crowns, and
tumbles down Diadems at his pleasure, to make us meet together like so many
lines in the center (that have been so long eccomrique both in the
Ecclesiastique and Politic capacity,) there is a certainty of a resettlement
of Ecclesiastique affairs according to the old and true form of the Church of
England. To which this Tractate if it conduce not, I presume 'twill no ways
impede it; since it is not only solid but full fraught with variety of
learning; insomuch that it will require three lives in the Law at least to
purchase, and peruse those printed pieces, and manuscripts, out of which he
has collected his quotations: But I must not be so uncivil as to detain you
too long in the Porch by a prolixe Epistle; nor so injurious to withhold you
from prying into the more sublime and refined sense of the Author: Now if your
porusall be with as much candor, gra^^ty and moderation, as the learned Seldom
penned it, (though now deceased) 'will certainly force you to acquiesce with
him, and affirm, That the day of the Nativity of our Savior is not only to be
celebrated, but also absolutely, and undeniably on the 25. of December.

The Contents of this Tract.
Of the Birthday of our SAVIOR.
BRiefly, of the Anniversary Celebration of Birth-days: The state of the
Question, and this Discourse digested into parts. page 1 SECT. I. The Authority
of keeping it on this day both in the Eastern and Western Churches about 400.
years after our Saviors; and that then it was ancient in the Western Church,
and known also under the name of the Winter-Solstice-day; which is especially
here observable. page 7 SECT. II. For preparation of more particular proof of
the Tradition of this Feast Day, the supposition which the most Primitive Ages
had touching the time of the Solstices and Aequinoxes. page 13 SECT. III. That
the keeping it on this day was so received from tradition, even of the eldest
times since our Savior; and this justified from the Fathers, supposing it to
have been on the very day of the ancient Winter-Solstice. page 21 SECT. IV.
Express testimonies to the same purpose out of ancient History, and a
Confirmation from the general use in the several Churches of Christendom.
page 32 SECT. V. The common Reasons used out of the holy Text to justify this
day, and how they are mistaken, and therefore not used here; together with what
some would prove from the Scheme of his Nativity. page 45 SECT. VI. The chief
Objections that are made against this day being the true time of the birth,
with plain answers to them. page 56 SECT. VII. Some other opinions among the
ancients touching it, and how some of them may agree with what we have
received, and the rest are of no weight against it; and there more especially
of the ancient confusion of this Feast with that of the Epiphany. page 77
JOANNIS SELDENI EPITAPHIUM.
Joannes Seldenus
Heic juxta situs;
Natus est XVI Decembris MDLXXXIV
Salvintoniae;
Qui viculus est Terring Occidentalis
in Sussexiae Maritimis;
Parentibus honestis,
Joanne Seldeno Thomae filio,
e Quinis secundo.
Anno MDXLI nate,
Et
Margareta filia and Haerede unica Thomae
Bakeri de Rushington ex Equestri Bakerorum in Cantio familia, filius e cunis
superstitum unicus, Aetatis fere
LXX annorum.
Denatus est ultime die Novembris,
Anno salutis reparatae
MDCLIV.
Per quam expectat heic Resurrectionem felicem.
Of the Birthday of our SAVIOR. Briefly, of the Anniversary Celebration of
Birth-dayes: The state of the Question, and this Discourse digested into parts.
IN the review of the 4 Chap. having occasion to speak of the authority of the
Clementines, the eighth book of Constitutions, attributed to the Apostles, in
which an express constitution is, that the Birthday of our Savior should be
celebrated on the 25 of December (or of the ninth month, as it is there called,
being accounted from April as the first) I noted that Constitution for one
character of that volum's being supposititious; in regard that in the Eastern
Church (where those Constitutions being in Greek must by all probability have
been in most use) the Celebration of that day was not received on the 25 of
December, till the ancient tradition of it was learned from the Western, about
400 years after Christ; and some touch also I have there of the opinion of them
that think that day not to be the true time of his birth. This passage has
been so conceived as if I had purposely called in question the celebration of
that sacred day (which is (...), as Tom. 7. edit. Saviliana, page 375. (...).
St. Chrysostom styles it, (...), that is, as the main fort of all happiness,
and the fountain and root of all good that we enjoy; and to call it in
question, as if I supposed it were observed at that time without sufficient
ground, and as if I were too inclining to the part of the hot-brained and
disturbing Puritans, which impiously deny the keeping of a day as an
anniversary feast consecrated to the birth of our blessed Savior; from which
my conscience was ever, and is most clearly free. For I knew, first, both from
sacred and profane Story, that the anniversary days, 200 Theodos. and Justin.
de feriis. Sed de hac re plene Martinus de Roa lib. de die Natali.
not only of Princes, but of some private men also, were with frequency ever
observed, and the beginning of Cities under that name yearly celebrated: and
even among the Heathen, those that professed such Philosophy as was nearest to
true Divinity, that is, the Platonists, were most religious in keeping their
Plato's birthday, which they received by tradition to be the Plutarch (...).
cap. 1. Laertius in vita Plat. etc.
same with Apollo's, that is, the 7. day of the Attique month Thargelion
(which answers to our April:) and this was still observed until the time of
Plotinus and Marsil. Ficinus comment. ad Plat. Sympos. cap. 1.
Porphyry, who lived about 270 years after our Saviors birth; and after the
discontinuance of it for many ages, it was revived in the days of our
Grandfathers with much solemnity in the Duchy of Florence by Lorenzo Medices.
But he misplaced it in the year, while he and his guests being better
Platonists than Chronologers, took the 7 of Thargelion to be the 7 of November:
As also the old trifling Astrologers committed a like fault, while in the
scheme Firmicus Mathes. lib. 6. cap. 30.
of his Nativity they place the Sun in Pisces, which must denote our February,
or the Attique Anthesterion. But however, an anniversary day was observed for
his Birth: so was there anciently for the birth of some false Gods; for they
had their certain days for the births of Calend. vet. Romans a G. Herwarto, naper
editum, etc.
Mars, Apollo, Diana, Minerva, the Muses, Hercules, and others, and carefully
observed them; and for Princes, and private persons, even to this day a
celebration is in use at the yearly returning of their Birth-days. To deny
therefore, with that way-ward Sect, such an anniversary honor to the Savior
of the World, were but to think him less worthy of it than false Gods were
esteemed by the Gentiles, than Princes by their Subjects, than private friends
by their greater friends, whose birth-dayes they yearly celebrated. But of this
I trust no man that truly deserves a name among Christians will make scruple.
Some indeed (and those not a few among the learned) have doubted of the just
time of the birth of our Savior; which while they doubt, they offer the more
occasion to others to question and impugn the celebration of it, as it is now
settled in the Church; For if that were not the true day (as they argue) it
follows that there were no more reason (save only what comes from the latter,
and arbitrary constitutions of the Church) to keep that day than any other
throughout the whole year, unless also some other day were found to be the
exact time of it. But for my self here, as I was far from questioning the duty
of it, so was I also from doubting of the right of Celebration of it on the
very day of December whereon it is now kept. And to make clear my mind here, I
shall now more largely, according to what His Majesty's most learned
instructions have taught me, declare the certainty of that feast, as it is at
this day observed, even from the eldest of the Christian times, and Apostolical
tradition, received even from the practice of his Disciples; for it is one
thing to deny (as I have done) that it was so ordained by the Apostles in those
Clementines, (which I think all learned and ingenuous men will deny) and
another and far-different thing to affirm, that the tradition of that day, as
it is now kept, is both Apostolical, and as ancient as the birth it self; as I
shall presently deliver in the deduction of the continuance of it, according as
it is now observed through all Christendom. For although in the feast, and in
all others unmovable, there be the known difference of ten days (which were
taken out of October. in the year MDLXXXII Constit. sum. Pontif. p. 775. and
Clavius in Kal. Greg. sive tom. 5.
by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, when he reformed the Julian Calendar) 'twixt
us, with some few other States, and those which have received the Gregorian
Calendar; yet both they and we agree in this, that upon the 25. of that Month
(that is with us of our Julian December) this feast is ever to be observed. So
that we meddle not here at all with any part of the differences 'twixt the
Julian and Gregorian year, but only endeavor to make it certain, that on this
day of that Month December that Feast has ever been settled in the Western
Church; from whence the Eastern also anciently received it. For it is clear,
that upon what day soever of any Month an unmovable feast is to be kept in
our Julian year, on the same day of the Month it is to be kept in the
Gregorian; so that the proof here is equal for the use of both Accounts. Thus
appears the state of the Question; and to this purpose, for orders sake, shall
be showed,

1. The Authorities of keeping it on this day both in the Eastern and Western
Churches, about 400. years after our Savior, and that then it was ancient in
the Western Church, and known also under the name of the Winter-Solstice-day;
which is especially here observable.

2. For preparation of more particular proof of the tradition of this
Feast Day, the supposition which the most primitive Ages had touching the time
of the Solstices and Aequinoxes.

3. That the keeping of it on this day was so received from tradition, even of
the eldest times since our Savior; and this justified from the Fathers,
supposing it to have been upon the very day of the ancient Winter-Solstice.

4. Express Testimonies to the same purpose out of ancient History, and a
confirmation from the general use in the several Churches in Christendom.

6. The chief Objections that are made against this days being the true time
of the birth, with plain Answers to them.

7. Some other Opinions among the Ancients touching it, and how some of them
may agree with what we have received, and the rest are of no weight against it:
And then more especially of the ancient confusion of this Feast with that of
the Epiphany.

SECT. I. The Authorities of keeping it on this day both in the Eastern and
Western Churches about 400. years after our Savior; and that then it was
ancient in the Western Church, and known also under the name of the
Winter-Solstice-day; which is especially here observable.
FOr the first, that is, the Authorities of the received use of keeping this
Feast on the 25 of December 400 years after Christ's Birth, they are frequent in
S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and others of the Fathers that lived
about the end of those 400 years: Those three especially have many Sermons
appropriated to the celebration of this day, and they frequently tell the
people confidently, that the Birth of our Savior was on the 25 of December, or
the 8 Kalends of January; as also that the birth of Saint John Baptist was on
the 8 Kalends of July, or the 24 day of June, according as to this day they are
observed. Ecce, says Sermon. de Temp. 8. and 10.
Saint Ambrose, in nativitate Christi dies crescit, and Johannis nativitate
decrescit; illo orient lux proficit, hoc nascente minuitur: That is, On our
Saviors Birthday the days begin to lengthen, and on St. John's to shorten; for
the Fathers herein supposed the 25 of December to be the Winterat what time
ever the days begin to lengthen; and the 24 of June to be the Summer-solstice,
in which they contrariwise begin to shorten: and this was according to the
ancienter Astronomy, out of which supposition in this Feast Day, the antiquity
of the tradition shall be also presently confirmed. And to this purpose of the
Summer-solstice at St John's Birth, and of the Winter at our Saviors, they
apply (I dispute not how well) that in St. John, D. Joan. c. 3. comm^n. 30.
(...), i. He must increase, but I must be diminished. So St. Augustine also,
Natus D. Aug. sermon. ded versis 40. and 59. l. 4. advers. Crescon. c. 37. and in
Psalm. 132.
est Johannes hodie, ab hodierno minuuntur dies; natus est Christus 8 Kalend.
Januarias, ab illo die crescunt dies. And enough to this purpose occurs in
others of that D. Hiero. in epist. de celebr. Pasch. tom. 4.
age, wherein these two Births were observed, and only these two, and that in
all, or the greatest part of Christendom; Solius Domini (says Sermon. de fanctis
2.
St. Augustine) and Beati Iohannis dies Nativitatis in universo mundo
celebratur and colitur. But it being clearly plain that about this time of 400
years past after our Savior, this 25 day was so observed, and taken generally
for his Birthday, it falls next to inquire the original whence it was so
taken: Had those Clementines been of sufficient credit, there had been no need
to have made any further inquiry; for then we might have thence resolved that
the Apostles had ordained it; and it had been fit for them that stand so much
for the Authority of those Constitutions, to have proved that the Apostles had
done so, that so they might have cleared that supposititious Volume of such a
Character of falsehood. For doubtless had such a Constitution been published in
that Volume, and by the Apostles, the Eastern Church had not so long been
ignorant of it, as it appears by St. Chrysostom they were: For until some 10
years before his Sermon D. Chrysostom. edit. Saviliana, tom. 5: {fo. p. 511.
made upon this day, especially for the truth of the time of the Feast, that
Church had not been generally instructed with this certainty of it; for then it
was newly learned from the Western Church, in which even from Thrace to Cadiz
(as he tells us from such as instructed him) it was so observed. But although
that Ordinance touching it in the Clementines, attributed to the Apostles, be
supposititious, yet there is great reason for us to think that the tradition of
this Feast to be so kept on that day was Apostolical, that is, taught and
deduced into the Church (though not in writing) both from the Apostles, and
first Disciples and Observers of our Savior. Quid autem (says Advers. Hares.
l. 3. c. 4.
Irenaeus) si neque Apostoli quidem scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne
oportebat ordinem sequi traditionis quam tradiderunt iis quibus committebant
Ecclesias? And we shall here use aptly enough the very words also of Tertul. De
corona militis c. 4.
speaking of diverse observations in both Sacraments, and other parts of
Christian Religion in his time, which was near the Apostles; Harum and aliarum
ejusmodi Disciplinarum si legem expostules scripturarum, nullam invenies: But,
traditio praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix, and fides observatrix.
But for the order of proof here (it being first cleared that this tradition was
about the time of those Fathers that testify it commonly received in
Christendom) before we come to the particular deductions of it out of the elder
ages that preceded them, we shall here not untimely first note, that as it was
commonly received as a thing then settled, so was it generally thought of as
what was then very ancient. So says St. Chrysostom expressly, Sermon. dict. item
in hom. 34. tom. 2. edit. Basil. and in sermon. 27. de not. Jo. Baptist. codem
tom.
being instructed from learned men of the Western Church, it was then (...),
that is, of ancient time, and delivered in the Church many years before, as his
words are; and yet, says he, it is new too, new in the Eastern Church, because
(as he writes) we have so lately learned it, that is, within ten years since;
but he calls it (...), etc. i. old and very ancient, in that it is even of
equal age with the ancienter feast-dayes which they had received: and again,
though it came but lately into the Eastern Church, yet it was, says he, (...),
i. well known from ancient time to those that were of the Western Church. And
St. Augustine also Enarrat. in Psalm. 132.
expressly says that the birth was upon this day, sic tradit Ecclesia; which
denotes great antiquity even in his time: and in Sermon. de sanct. 4.
another place speaking of the celebration of St. John Baptists birthday,
which was received with this, it seems, by a like tradition, Hoc majorum
traditione suscepimus, (says he) hoc ad posteros imitanda devotione
transmittimus. These passages alone are enough testimony that this Feast Day
thus placed was reputed in those times, that is, about 400. years after Christ,
very ancient: But to know how ancient it was more particularly, it behooves us
to look backward from those times by such degrees, as that by careful observing
one of them after another, up toward the times of our Savior, we may be
herein instructed according to the occurrence of such testimony as may make to
the end of the inquiry; and I doubt not but we shall so well enough at length
find it received in the Church, in the Western Church, even from Apostolical
tradition, derived from observation, while yet our Savior was on the earth.
But to begin this course of inquiry by looking back by degrees from the time of
St. Chrysostom, and the rest of the Fathers of about his age, we shall first
look on the time of near 100. years before them, that is, of Constantine the
Great, and the first general Council of Nice, held in the year 325. at which
time we shall with sufficient arguments first show, that this Feast was kept on
the 25. of December, as now it is, and that then also from ancienter time;
against those which suppose the beginning of it no elder than after or about
Constantine: And from thence we shall go upward to the Apostles. But because
that has first reference to the time of this Council, and makes much otherwise
also for confirmation of the antiquity of this, and the celebration of the day
(as shall be presently showed) consists especially in observation of the name
of the time under which those Fathers received, denoted and celebrated it, that
is, of the very day of the Winter-Solstice, with reference to the
Spring-Aequinox, as to the time of the conception of our Savior, and to the
Summer-Solstice, and Autumn-Aequinox, as to St. John's birth and conception; it
is first here requisite that we shortly open the ancient supposition which the
most primitive times had touching those four beginings of the Quarters of the
year, which (being much different from what was received, both at the time of
the Council of Nice, and before it, and somewhat is also yet retained in
Church-cycles) will make way for confirmation of the received opinion of that
sacred Birthday.

SECT. II. For preparation of more particular proof of the Tradition of this
Feast Day, the supposition which the most Primitive Ages had touching the time
of the Solstices and Aequinoxes.
THe ancient and civil supposition of the Solstices and Aequinoxes, (in which
an express character is found of the Antiquity of this Tradition, as shall be
presently showed) was both before and about our Saviors Birthday, (especially
in the Roman Empire) of another kind from that which either at this day is, or
at the time of the Birth was agreeable to the more accurate and natural
Astronomy; I mean, the supposition which was generally received in their
Characters and Parapegmata, which denoted both their Sacrifices, Feast-days,
and Country-observations for matter of Husbandry: For they supposed in those
Calendars, that the Suns entrance into the 1 degree of Aries was on the 15
Kalends of April in the Julian year, that is, on the 18 day of March; but that
the spring-aequinox was not until the 8 Kalends of April, that is, the 17 of
June, they placed the Suns first entrance into Cancer; but the Solstice on 8
Kalends, that is, on the 24 of June. So the 15 Kalends of October, or the 17 of
September, was their supposed time of the Suns first entrance into Libra; but
the Autumn-aequinox on the 8 Kalends, or the 24 of September; and according to
these the first entrance of the Sun into Capricorn they placed on the 15
Kalends of January, or the 18 of December: So that the Aequinoxes and Solstices
were not supposed in the first entrance, or in the 1 degree of those 4 signs
(as at this day they are, and many ages since have been) but at such time as
the Sun held the 8 degrees of them. For the Suns proper Diurnal motion being
about a degree, it so fell out in their Calculation, that 8 days being reckoned
from the first entrance into every of those signs (as is seen in the examples)
on the 8 day the Sun was in the 8 degrees of those signs, and then made the
supposed time of Solstices and Aequinoxes. The testimonies of this kind of
placing in those times are frequent. Ovid Fastorum l. 6.
expressly teaches us so for the Summersolstice. But in the Calendar that is
commonly joined with him, and received by others, it is therein mistaken. The
like for all four do Pliny, Hist. not. l. 2. c. 19. l. 18. c. 25. and 29.
Columel, De re Rustica c. 14. and l. 11. c. 2.
Vitruvius, Architect. l. 9. c. 5.
Martianus Capella Nupt. Philol. and Mercur.
, the Scholiast on Germanicus his Aratus, and the Author of the fragment joined
with Censorinus: And of the natural forces of the two Tropiques or Solstices,
to this purpose Manilius; Astron. l. 3. ad extrem.
Has quidam vires octava in part reponunt;
Sunt quibus esse placet decimas; nec defuit Author
Qui primae momenta daret, fraenosque dierum.


Meaning that the common opinion was, they were (with the Aequinoxes) in the
eight part of their signs, but that some thought them otherwise; some in the
tenth, some (as they ought) in the first. But this opinion of the eight parts,
and so by consequence of those times of the Aequinoxes and Solstices was a most
ancient tradition, and retained still in their Calendars, or Fasti, made for
civil, sacred and rustic use; notwithstanding that the more accurate
Astronomers had found it to be an error; not otherwise then at this day those
which keep the Julian and Dionysian account in the Church, (as we in Great
Britain) suppose the spring-aequinox on the 21 of March, though the known
Astronomy teach us that it anticipates about 11 days. And as it happens in like
cases, they still retained what had been from ancient time settled in the State,
neglecting the corrected Astronomy; and that especially because those old
Calendars were already fitted to their Feasts and Sacrifices, and were more
known to the people, who could not but have been much troubled with an
innovation of the time of all their public solemnities. Neither Sosigenes in
his diverse amendments of the year made upon Julius Caesar's commands, or the
rest after him so employed, alter any thing in this supposition: All which is
fully expressed in that of Columella, in his Precepts of Husbandry; where
having first spoken of the Solstices and Aequinoxes, falling upon the 8 degrees
of those signs, he presently thus admonishes: Agricult. 1. p. c. 14.
Nec me fallit (says he) Hipparchi ratio, quae docet Solstitia and Aequinoctia
non octavis, sed primis partibus signorum confici: Verum in hac ruris
disciplina sequor Eudoxi and Metonis, antiquorumque fastos Astrologorum, qui
sunt aptati publicis sacrificiis; quia and notior est ista velus Agricolis
concepta opinio. He gives here the true reason why that supposition was
retained; but, by the way, is deceived in this, that he takes Eudoxus and Meton
to be of those ancienter Astronomers from whom it was received. It is true
indeed that in the old Parap. quod gemino subnectitur.
Parapegmata, which show us that according to. Calippus and Euctemon, the
Solstices and Aequinoxes were at the first entrance of the Sun into the signs
proper for them: Eudoxus yet had otherwise placed them; as for the purpose, the
springaequinox on the 6 day after the Suns entrance into Aries, and the
Winter-solstice on the 4 day after the 1 entrance into Capricorn: But we find
not that he had taught this learning of the 8 days or parts; no more do we that
Meton was any teacher of it; although also for this particular, beside the
published Parapegmata, I made special search also for it in Ptolomies Cod. Ms.
est V. C. Henrici Savill Eq. Aurati; mihi vere communicavit pro sua humanitate
V. C. T. Bambridge Medicinae D and Mathematicus egregius.
(...), a Book never yet printed, but fraught with diverse pieces of the
Parapegmata both of Meton and Eudoxus; and wholly another thing from that which
goes under a like name for Ptolomies, published at the end of some Editions of
Ovids Fasti. Beside, it is certain that the Summer-Solstice observed by Meton
with Euctemon in the 316. year of Nabonassar, that is about CCCCXL. before
Christ, was upon the 21. of the Egyptian Month Phamenoth, as Mathemat. Syntax.
l. 3.
Ptolomy expressly testifies, which for that time agrees with the 27. of the
Julian June. Neither Eudoxus therefore, nor Meton, thus placed the Solstices on
the 8. Kalends of their Months. Others of late time have much troubled
themselves to find the ground or original whence this supposition came among
the Ancients; as especially Cardinal Contaren, Genesius de Sepulveda, and most
of all Joseph Scaliger; but their conjectures are most uncertain, and too weak
to rely on. Neither, I guess, will the original be found among any of the
Ancients that are classick in Authority, but in a Transcript of some parts of a
Latin Translation by Abraham de Balmis, of a Book titled Copiam mihi
perhumaniter fecit v. c. Jac. Usherus, sacrae Theol. D. undiquaque doctissimus.
Isagogicon Astrologiae Ptolomaei, (which indeed appears to be Geminus
Phenomenon) compared with the Greek; I find these words, as if they were but
translated from the first Author, Vterque Tropicus, and ambo Aequinoxia,
secundum Astrologorum Graecorum opinionem, fiunt in primis gradibus horum
Signorum; sed secundum Chaldaeorum opinionem, in octavis gradibus: but the
Greek copy had no such thing; though it be like enough that the copy whence he
translated it had, that is an Arabic copy of Geminus, who, as Euclide also,
Ptolomy, Aristotle, much of Galen, and other Greek Authors, was turned out of
Greek into Arabic, and thence into Latin, long before the Greek it self was
translated immediately into Latin, as we have it at this day: and it appears
that his translation was from an Arabic copy, in that alone, that the
parapegma which is at the end of this Latin Geminus, has the names of
Eudoxus, Calippus, Euctemon, Dolitheus and Meton, so varied as frequently other
names are, which are expressed out of Arabic letters into Latin in like
translations; as for Eudoxus, it has Orchalis; for Calippus, Philidis; for
Euctemon, Octiman; for the other two, Dussionius and Matheon; all which plainly
mistaken by the translator, when he found either the names written without
essential points in the Arabic character, or else mis-transcribed, as it might
easily be, by such a writer that was not worthy to be trusted to; for the
mishaping of a letter, or the doubling of a point, and the like, soon makes
such variance of names expressed out of that Language. But for the matter of
the 8 degrees, and the Solstices and Aequinoxes referred to them, here is
authority that it had original from 9 Kal. Jan. Brumale solstitium observant
Chaldaei, ait Columella, ^. l. 11. c. 2.
the Chaldees, which I yet think is as far from truth as that of Columel's;
neither is this a fit place to make larger inquiry after it. It here suffices
to show it manifest, that this placing of those parts of the year was observed
from anicnet time, and that especially in the State of Rome; as we see also in
those their old Country-Feasts, the Robegalia, the Floralia, the Vinalia; which
were the three main Feasts wherein from ancient time they made intercession to
their gods against all hurt that might happen to their green Corn, and the
ripening of the fruits, and their Vintage; and were kept and so noted by *
Varro, according to another account of the Suns place or motion then is before
delivered. And according to this account are the Aequinoxes and Solstices in
Venerable Bede's Ephemeris, noted with the addition of juxta quosdam to be
understood, although in the Print they somewhat vary it: but it is clear, that
in his December the Solstitium juxta quosdam, and in his March the Aequinoctium
juxta quosdam, are both placed a day before they should be, that is, they ought
to be on the 8. Calends, (not the 9.) the one of January, the other of April;
with which the Sol in Capricorn, and the Sol in Aries, there before noted, to
the 15. Calends, exactly suppose the Solstice in the 8. degree of Capricorn,
and the Aequinox in the 8. of Aries, that is, in the 25. days of their
Months; reference being still had to this ancient account, which he, being
most curious in the cycles of time, Apud Plin. l. 8. c. 19. and Scholiaest. ad
Aratea prognostica.
would not omit; although his Ephemeris were purposely made for the Dionysian
year, which also he has together expressed in the same colums: But, I suppose,
the chief reason why these two stand so displaced, is, because the noting of
the birth of St. Anastasia was thought more necessary to the 8. Call. of Ian.
than this old supposed Solstice to be added, it was cast upon a void place of a
line next preceding. The same may be said of the Spring-aequinox, which had no
room on the 8 Kalend of April in the Column, by reason of the conception and
passion of our Savior together noted to that day; and that he is so to be
understood, he himself elsewhere is De Temb. ratione, c. 28.
testimony enough, expressly relating this ancient course of accounting the
Solstices and Aequinoxes: So that his Ephemeris is a special example of it, if
rightly understood; as also is that Calendarium Romanum, lately cut in Brass,
and so published from the print, as supposed to be as ancient as Constantine
the Great; where the Summer-solstice is indeed by the cutters or transcribers
fault set to the 7 Kalend of July, which plainly should have been on the
eighth, and the Suns entrance into Cancer is on the 17 Kalend which should be
on the 15, as also the Suns entrance into Aries should have been placed on the
15 Kalend of April, which agrees just with the Feast of Hilaria being on the 8
Kalend. And according to this supposition of the ancients, did that learned
Gentleman, George Herwart van Hochenburg, (out of whose Library this Calendar
was lately published) judiciously declare the reason of those differences that
appear in it from the later Astronomy; and in his Letter written to Seignior
Haleander, a Gentleman of curious learning in Rome, the Copy whereof was thence
sent me through the hand of that learned and worthy Gentleman Monsieur Pierese,
an Advocate in the Parliament of Aix; and this some two years since, when
'twixt him and my self, and from him to Haleander diverse Letters passed
touching the particulars and authority of that Calendar.

SECT. III. That the keeping of it this day was so received from tradition,
even of the eldest times since our Savior; and this justified from the
Fathers, supposing it to have been on the very day of the ancient
Winter-solstice.
THat ancient supposition of the Solstices and Aequinoxes being thus hitherto
first opened, let us in looking back by degrees, first (as is before proposed)
begin with the time of the Council of Nice, held in the year of our Savior
325. It will so appear, that before that Council, this Feast was established in
the Western Church, and that by the general testimony of those Fathers, which
with one voice suppose it as formerly placed on the very day of the
Winter-solstice; for had it been begun after or about the time of that Council,
and withal supposed to have ought to have been kept on the Winter-solstice
day, then doubtless would they have placed it on that day which was received in
the Church to be the Winter-solstice-day, after or about the same Council, as
at this day in the Gregorian year, who doubts but that a Feast to be newly
instituted on an Aequinox or Solstice, or with reference to either of those
times, would be placed by them which have received that Reformation on the
Aequinoxes or Solstices, or with reference to them according as they are in the
corrected Calendar, and not as they fall in the Ju^ian or Dionysian year? For
example also, what greater testimony were there (if all other were lost) to
prove the antiquity of that very kind of keeping the Feast of Easter as we do
in our Church, to be of the Primitive time, than this, that the Paschales
termini are retained still according to the Spring-aequinox received in the
Primitive times? Now to make clear our purpose, here it is also certain that
about and after that Council of Nice, the Spring-oequinox according whereunto
the Paschal-cycles were made, was supposed in the Church upon the 21 of March,
as it is seen also in the Paschal-account used to this day in the Church of
England; so that it was become four days sooner than in those elder times,
when it fell in common opinion on the 25 day: but when the Spring-aequinox was
so changed, and according to the change also received, it could not but follow
that the beginning of the other three parts of the year must also be altered,
that is plainly seen in the known course of the Suns motion. And therefore the
Solstices and the other Aequinoxes must also vary in their months, and by a
like or very Vide sis Marcel. Francolin. de temp. hor. canonic. c. 75 and 76.
near like difference of days anticipate, as they are accordingly cited in
Bede's Ephemeris, who De temp. Not. c. 28.
elsewhere also admonishes us as much. Therefore it must follow too, that about
and after that general Council the time of the Winter-solstice was placed (and
so supposed in Ecclesiastical account) upon the 21 or 22 of December. But if it
had been so received when this Feast Day was first ordained, and specially
placed on the Solstice-day (as the Fathers generally by tradition from former
times place it) there had been necessary cause enough to have had it fallen
yearly three or four days sooner than it did, both in the Primitive times and
at this day, that is, on the 21 or 22 of the same month. By consequence it was
then ordained or received in the Church, at such time as the Winter-solstice
was not supposed on the 21 or 22 day of the same month, but on the 25, that
is, at least before that Council of Nice, or Constantine the Great, howsoever
too rashly some have delivered Jos. Scal. de emendat. Temp. l. 6. p. 510. and
Calvisius Isagog. chron. c. 46.
of it, that post seculum Constantim Romae haec observatio instituta est.
Neither can Objection have power here, which perhaps may obviously be brought
to impugn this kind of argument; that is, that it might notwithstanding be
ordained first in the later part of the primitive times, or after Constantine,
or that Council, in such sort that it might be placed on the day of the
Solstice that was received at the time of the birth, that is, the 25. day, and
not that which the received account had so innovated: for this Objection is
partly answered before in the passage of Feasts at this day to be ordained,
with reference to the Solstices in the Gregorian Calendar: and besides, if the
Church about this time after Constantine had regarded in a new Institution the
Solstice of the time of the birth, according as it was then to be found in the
Month, it must be that they either regarded the true and natural, or the
received and civil Solstice. For the first, if they had been so curious as to
have sought what the true place of the Winter solstice to this purpose had been
in the age of that birth, as they had indeed sought for the true Aequinox of
their own time for their direction of Easter, they had found that the true
Solstice anticipated the 25. day about two days; for, by the most accurate
calcularion to the noon of the Meridian of Bethlehem, on the 25. of December,
in the year commonly attributed to the birth of our Savior, the Sun was in the
second degree of Capricorn, and some minutes over, as Comment. ad Ptolem.
quadripartit. l. 2. com. 54. and Vide sis Clavium ad cap. 1. Joh. de Sacro
bosco. Alter quidem Colurus, p. 297. edit. 4. 1602.
Cardan also places it in the scheme of that nativity; whence it must clearly
follow, that about the 23. day was the very point of the Winter-solstice, the
diurnal true motion of that time of the year in the Perigaeum being somewhat
more than a degree. No place was then for this true Solstice in such their
consideration of the birth-time, if they had thus inquired after it, unless
they would have instituted the Feast (under that name of time) on the 23. day,
and not on the 25. For the second, what color have we to think that they
should in those times have retained the old supposition of the civil Solstice
for their Institution of this Feastday, and yet so carefully alter the
formerly-received aequinox for Easter? This of the birth being as the head and
rule of the chiefest immovable Feasts, as that of the Passion and Resurrection
is of the moveable. Would they have retained the same error upon Institution of
a new Feast, which with so much curiosity they corrected in establishing the
certainty of an old one? It rests firm therefore, that whenever it was first
instituted for anniversary celebration, it was in such an Age as had the
supposition of the Winter-solstice being on the 25. day of December yet
retained in the Church; otherwise what dependence were there 'twixt the name of
the Feast and the Solstice? But that dependence is by the consent of the
Fathers fully testified, as a tradition of former times; and the latest Age
which in the Church retained that supposition, must at least be before the
Council of Nice, as is already showed; therefore at least the Institution of it
must precede that Council.

This being hitherto deduced, it will in the next degree of searching backward
follow also, if we can prove the received supposition of the Church touching
the time of the Winter-solstice to have been long before this Council,
agreeable to that which here is showed to the time of it, that the first
observation or Institution of this Feast, under the name of the Solstice upon
the 25. day, was also long before that Council. Now as the Spring-aequinox
changed from the 25. to the 21. so did the Winter-solstice of necessity change
also, as is before showed: But the Spring-aequinox was also at least some 50.
years before that Council, upon the 21. or 22. of March, by the received
supposition of them from whose direction the Church-cycles were principally
guided, that is, of the Egyptians, and especially those of Alexandria; so is
the express Apud Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 7. c. 26.
testimony of Anatolius, born and bred in Alexandria, but Bishop of Laodicea in
the time of Aurelian, about 270 years after our Savior. He shows that then the
11 Kalends of April, that is, the 22 of March was the supposed Aequinox; which
agrees well enough with that of the 21, if regard be had to that variation
which the hours out of which the Leap-year is made must of necessity be a
cause of, as Bede In epist. ad Wichred de Paschatis celebration^, tom. 2.
withal in explanation of Anatolius has taught us: The same Bid well
admonishing, that it was Regula Niceno probato Concilio, not statuta, Wilfrid
apud Bedam, hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 25.
to have that time received for the Spring-aequinox. And indeed the very words
of the Epistles sent out of that Council touching it, and the Churchstories
plainly prove it to have been generally known and received in the Church, both
of the West, North, South, and part of the East long before. In Constantines
Epistle Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3. c. 18. Socrat. hist. l. 5. c. 21.
Nicephor. l. 12. c. 33.
to the Churches of Christendom sent presently upon the Council, it is
expressed that it was so generally received before; and Ruffinus speaking of
the Council, tells us, that, Hist. eccles. l. 10. c. 6.
De observatione Paschae, antiquum Canonem, per quem nulla de reliquo varietas
oriretur, tradiderunt. Nothing therefore can be clearer then that the aequinox
of the 21 or 22 of March, according to the difference before noted, was ancient
in the traditions of the Church, long before the Nicene Council: Otherwise they
had as well in express terms innovated the aequinox, as established uniformity
in observing their Easter by it. Therefore also was the Winter-solstice about
the 21 or 22 of December in the traditions of the Church long before that
Council then: what follows hence touching the institution of the Feast which we
inquire after, is according to the former inferences most apparent, for so much
time as those testimonies reach back unto.

To go farther up in a third degree, it will be also justified, that the
Aequinox, and by consequence another Winter-solstice then that of the 25 day of
December, was not only ancienter then the Nicene Council in the Church-cycles,
but also equal to the Apostles times. For although we find in the Church-story
great differences of the Primitive times touching the keeping of Easter, and
diverse cycles and Canons made for it, yet those differences are chiefly about
the day of the week whereon it should be kept, as between the
Tessareskaidecatoi and the Churches of the West, but never (in any testimony of
credit) about the diversity of supposition of the Aequinox that directs it,
otherwise than according to that in Anatolius, which stands with the received
time of the 21 of March, as is already noted; I say in any testimony of credit,
for under favor of the learned, I conceive not that attributed to Theophilus
Bishop of Caesaria, and published at the end of Bedes Epistle to Tom 2. p. 232
edit. Colon.
Wichred, where the 25 day is supposed for the Aequinox to be other then
supposititious, the whole shape of it has the Character of counterfeiting: But
the Aequinox is still (for ought appears) supposed the same in that
Controversy about Easter had under Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 5. c. 22. etc.
Pope Victor about the year CXC. as it was in the Council of Nice, and the same
also before Victor, even up to the time of the Apostles. What else is denoted
in that of Proterius, Patriarch of Alexandria to P. Leo the First, where he
tells Apud Bed. de temp. rat. c. 42. and Vide sis Ceolfrid apud eund. hist.
eccl. l. 5. c. 22.
him that St. Mark had taught the Egyptians (according as he had learned from
St. Peter) that Easter was to be observed after the XIV. moon of the first
month, the first month here was known by the spring-aequinox, of which if
they had not been agreed, as much trouble (or more) would have been in
establishing of that, as there was in clearing what day of the week the sacred
Feast of Easter was to be kept on. The like is affirmed of the Apostolical
tradition of that uniform celebration of Easter, by Ceolfrid in his Epistle to
Naitan King of the Picts: And to confirm more fully that the observation of it
established by the Nicene Council was such as had been even from the beginning
of Christianity, or the Apostles time, the very words of the Epistle sent by
that Council to the Churches of Egypt and Africa are, that now the
controversy was ended touching Easter, and that those of the Eastern Church
that had before followed the Jews in observing it on the XIV. Moon, did hold it
(...), Socrat. bist. eccles. l. 1. c. 6.
i. Agreeable to the Romans, to us, and to all you who from the beginning
observe Easter as we do; or, Consone cum Romany, and vobiscum, and cum omnibus
ab initio Pascha custodientibus, as Cassiodore anciently translated it; Hist.
Tripart. l. ^. c. 12.
which shows also that in Socrates he read (...), that is, from the beginning,
as some Copies are; and not (...), i.e. from ancient time, as in others the
reading is. It follows therefore, that even from the beginning, that is, from
the Apostles time, the same Spring-aequinox was received in the Church, that
is, the 21 or 22 of March as was afterward; and that it was thence established
on the 21 by the Council of Nice, and that by consequence, in those times of
the Apostles, the formerly-receiv'd aequinox was altered from the 25 to the 22
or 21; and so also (as of necessity it follows) the Winter-solstice from the
25 of December to near about the 21 or 22 of the same month. Whence also it is
to be concluded, that this Feast day was received as to be kept on the 25 day
even before the Apostles time, and that among the Disciples of our Savior,
while he was yet on earth, that is, while in common reputation the 25. day of
December was taken for the Winter-solstice: Otherwise what color were there
why the consent of the Fathers should denote it by that civil Winter-solstice
which was out of use in the Church, both in their time, and been so likewise
from the times of the Apostles, that is, from some time after the Passion of
our Savior, before which there was no need at all (for the establishing of our
Easter, which was to be ruled by the Spring-aequinox) to vary the placing of
those points of the Quarters of the year? But it being commonly received, out
of the account and Calendar of the Gentiles, that the 25. of December was the
Solstice, and that on the same day our Savior was born, it grew familiar, it
seems, and so was delivered down to those Fathers, that the birthday was on
the very Winter-solstice, which they so often inculcate: But the Apostles and
Evangelists not being able perhaps in the infancy of the Church to settle the
anniversary celebration of Easter, until about their later times, that is,
about 100. years after this birth, carefully observed, and especially St. Peter
and St. Mark, where the natural aequinox was, according to which the Solstices
ever vary, and so found it in that time about the 22. or 21. of March, as by
exact calculation it will happen, according to that before noted touching
Anatolius; and hence they delivered the knowledge of the change of those
Quarters of the year to posterity. But also, because even from the very birth
it self the 25. day of December had been kept, or known for it, notwithstanding
that it was in vulgar opinion conceived to have been on the day attributed to
the civil Solstice, In common reputation among the Gentiles; yet would they not
vary it from that day, because indeed it had no reference to the Solstice.
which anticipated it three days, as is before showed, but was proper to the
25. day of December only, as it was the 25. of that Month: Although those
Fathers, being none of the best Astronomers, thought still however the Solstice
was altered in their times, that at the time of the birth the natural Solstice
had fallen on the 25. day, and then only they so often note it, mistaking
vulgar supposition delivered in the Kalendars of the Gentiles for exact
calculation.

SECT. IV. Express testimonies to the same purpose out of ancient History, and
a Confirmation from the general use in the several Churches of Christendom.
NEither is this antiquity of certainty only thus proved from the common
joining the Feast with the Winter-solstice in the Fathers expressions of it,
but also from express testimonies denoting as much in relations of the
ancients. In which to observe first a like course, as before, in going upward
from the time of those Fathers toward the Apostles, we find, that many years
before the Council of Nice, that is, under Dioclesian, this Feast was thus
celebrated, and that in some part of the Eastern Church also; however that
Church was not generally instructed in it, till in St. Chrysostoms age; For in
the Church-story Nicephor. Calistus, l. 7. c. 6.
it appears, that under that Emperor, Anthimus Bishop of Nicomedia, together
with many thousand Christians, were assembled to keep that Feast Day; when as
the Emperor, or his fellow-Persecutor Maximinus, commanded fire to be put to
the Church wherein they were assembled, and that none of them should escape
that would not sacrifice presently to Jupiter Victor; whereupon they all
willingly received the Crown of Martyrdom: and in the ancient Martyrology of
Rome, the passion of those Martyrs is placed on the 25 of December in these
words, Nicomediae passio multorum millium Martyrum, qui cum in Christi natali
ad dominicum convenissent, etc. which also for the time is justified by the
Greek ad (...).
Menologie, where the words (...), etc. that is, Anthimus assembling in his
Church a multitude of Christians on the Feast Day of Christ's Birth, kept the
Feast with them, etc. But indeed the Greek Church casts this Feast of the
Martyrs on the 28 of December, as they do also upon other days the Menol. ad
dictos dies.
memories of St. Eugenia and St. Anastasia (both which the Western Churches
retain with this Birthday on the 25) the one on the 22, the other on the 24
day. But this was done by them only, because the more single honor might be
given both to our Saviors Birth, and to those other names, being so divided:
Vt horum solennitatem (speaking of those Martyrs says Old Martyrol. 8 Kalend
Jan.
Baronius) celebrius agerent, came transtulerunt. As also among the Jews a
Translation was often used of their feasts from one day to another, that two
Sabbaths or great Feasts might not concur, as their Talmud. massec. Rosh.
Hassana.
Doctors deliver. Hence then it is enough also manifest, first, that by ancient
testimony of the Monuments of the Church, this Feast was thus observed before
Constantine, or that Council of Nice which was held many years after the death
of Dioclesian.

But also to look farther upon the times preceding this Martyrdom, we shall
find good testimony that it was taught to posterity to be kept so, even by the
Apostles, who knew it as a clear certainty while our Savior was yet on earth:
For though they ordained it not in those Constitutions falsely attributed to
them, or in any other Writer, yet might they teach it as a tradition to be
received ever to the Church, as they did the changing of the Sabbath from the
seventh day to the first of the week; the solemn Renunciation of the Devil at
Baptism; the keeping of Easter on the Sun-day, or the like, quas sine ullius
Scripturae instrumento, as De corona militis, c. 3.
Tertullian says, solius traditionis titulo, exinde consuetudinis patrocinio,
vindicamus. To this purpose, among St. Chrysostoms Works in Latin, one Homily
is Edit. Bass^. tom. 2. hom. 39.
De Nativitate Domim, as the Latin title is, for the Greek of that Homily I
have not yet seen; wherein he confidently, as elsewhere, teaches, that this day
of December is the just day of that birth, and for his authority brings no less
than St. Peter's testimony; Petrus, are the words, qui hic fuit cum Joh. qui hic
fuit cum Jac. nos in occidente docuit; which has plain reference to that
before noted out of his long Oration for the same matter, where he tells Edit.
Savil: tom. 5. p. 512.
us also, that in the controversies of those times touching this Feast, such as
defended it as what ought to be kept on this day, justified that it was (...),
i. Very ancient and from old time known, and famous from Thract to Cadis, that
is in the whole Western Church. To these may be added that of Euodius, whom
Nicephoras calls the Successor of the Apostles, and it is delivered Suid in
verb. (...), and (...).
that it was ordained by St. Peter himself in Antioch; that we may so
distinguish him from that other Euodius Bishop of Vzalis Cujus nomini
ascribuntur opera aliquot ad sin tom. 10. D. Aug. subjunc^^ edit. Lova^^ensi.
in St. Augustines time; he in an Epistle touching the times of the Passion of
our Savior, of St. Stephens Martyrdom, of the death of the blessed Virgin,
and the like, says expressly of her, (as the Latin is in Eccles. bist. l. 2.
c. 3.
Nicephorus, translated by Langius, for neither have I the Greek of him)
Peperit autem mundi ipsius lucem, annum agens quindecimum 25. die mensis
Decembris. And likewise in an old Greek Author (the Book being written about
the time of Pope Honorius the First) in the Library of St. Mark's in Florence,
express testimony is, Apostolos memoriae prodidisse Christum ex Virgin natum
Bethlemae 25. Decembris, as Albertus Widemonstadius of his own sight witnesses
in his Notes on that impious Book called Mahomets Divinity, and brings also
Hesychius his authority to the same purpose. And to these may be added Cedren,
Orosius, and some ancient Manuscripts Fasti cited by Cuspinian upon Cassiodore;
and there is authority also, Catholicus Armeniorum in legatione ad Arvienios
male legitur 20 Dec. tam. in Biblioth. Patrum edit. Paris. tom. 3. p. 864. quam
in edit. Colon. tom. 12. part. 1. p. 891. Nam Graece erat ^e. (...). quod
videre est apud Jos. Scalig. in Isagog. chron. l. 3. p. 30.
that however Epiphamus in his Works have another designation of the day of
this birth, (as anon is showed) yet out of the Monuments of the Jews he
learned, and then taught, that this was the very day; which they say was
justified also by some Writers brought to Rome from Jerusalem by Titus; which
also is strengthened by that of St. Chrysostom, when he says Tom. 5. eait.
Savil. sol. 12.
expressly, that in public Records kept at Rome in his age, the exact time of
the description under Quirinus, spoken of by St. Luke, (which could not but be
a special character of the time of our Saviors birth) was expressed; and then
he goes on, But what is this to us, says he, that neither are at Rome, nor
have been there, that so we might be sure of it? yet hearken, says Ibid. p.
513.
he, and doubt not; for we have received the day (...), i. from those which
accurately know these things, and dwell at Rome; And that they (...), i. having
from ancient time and old tradition celebrated it, have now also sent us the
knowledge of it. This is likewise confirmed by an old barbarous Translation of
what was taken out of Africanus and Eusebius, and published in the noble
Scaliger's Thesaurus Temporum, where the words are, Aug. and Sylvano Coss
Dominus noster Jesus Christus natus est sub Augusto 8. calendas Ianuarias: and
then, In ipsa die in qua natus est pastores viderunt stellam, Chuac 28. which
should rather be 29. for so agrees the 25. of December to that of the Egyptian
Choiac, which the Author means. And Prudentius upon the day, supposing the In
hymn. ad calend. 8 Jan.
old tradition of the concurrence of the Solstice with it, Quid est quod arctum
circulum
Sol jam recurrens deserit?
Christusne terris nascitur,
Qui lucis auget tramitem?
Hic ille natalis dies,
Quo te Creator ard^us
Spiravit, and limo indidit,
Sermon carnem glutinant.
And of later times the Authorities are infinite.

These testimonies being compared with the consent of the Fathers, that about
400. years after Christ have written that it was ancient, as is already showed;
and being confirmed by the arguments made against the supposed later
institution of it, out of the place of the received Winter-solstice, enough
manifest the antiquity and certainty of this ancient Feast Day, according as we
now observe it; and that even from the age wherein it first brought forth the
redemption of Mankind. And to these we may add the consent of Christian
Churches ever since about those 400. years; for after that the Eastern or Greek
Church of Asia had learned the truth of it from the Western, (as is delivered)
this celebration of it yearly increased, and grew still more famous through
Christendom: so expressly St. Chrysostom, (...), says Pan^g. in di(...) dit.
Sav. l. to n. 5. p. 512.
he, i.e. Every year it increased and grew more famous. But indeed, because in
some places it was not as yet so received, but that old erroreous opinion
touching it (as it happens in like cases, and shall anon be more particularly
showed) still held there place among some that were too wayward to be brought
to prefer truth newly discovered to them before their own errors, therefore
about 100. years after St. Chrysostom, it was expressly ordained by the
Emperor Justin (if my Author deceive not) that in every place of the Christian
world it should be thus observed: My Author here is Nicephorus Hist. eccles. l.
17. c. 28.
Calistus, who (as the Translation of him is) tells us first of Justinian, that
he Primum Servatoris exceptionem (that is, the Hypatants, which in our Western
Church is the Purification of the blessed Virgin) tot^ orb terrarum festo die
honorare instituit: and then he adds, sicut Justinius de sancta Christi
nativitate fecit. And according hereto are the Kalendars and Book of Divine
service, not only of the Western, which are every where common, but of the
Eastern Churches also: In the Menology of the Greek Church in December, (...).
i. On the 25. of the same month, the Feast of the Incarnation of our Lord, and
God, and Savior, Jesus Christ: and (...). That is, The Virgin Mary brought
forth our Savior on the 25. day. Other Volumes of their Divine service, as
their Apostolo-Evangela, and the like, enough show this also. And for other
Churches which are not under the name of the Greek, as those of Antioch, or
Syriae, of Aethiopia, and of Elcopti or Egypt, although we have not their
Calendars published with such exactness of the placeing of their feasts, as we
have those of the Greek Church, yet have we testimonies enough of them also,
whence we may collect that they agree with us in this anniversary celebration:
As, first, for that of Antioch, they keep Wid monstad. in epist. subnexa Test.
Syriac. and vide sis computum Antioch. a pud Jos. Scalig. l. 7 de emendat. tomo
p. 670.
this birth upon the same day with us in their Month Canun the former; and in
Alfragan (as he is translated) we read in his enumeration of the Syriack
Months, Canun prior 31. dierum, cujus 25. nox vocatur nox Nativitatis: So in
the Ethiopian Church on the 29. of their Month Jos. Scalig. dicto l. p. 650.
Thachsasch they kept it, which agrees always with the 25. of our December,
though their Intercalation falling before ours (and in their Mascharum, or our
August) changes the day of the Week every Leap-year into the next after what we
keep: And for that of Elkopti we see in a short description of their account,
received from an Ethiopian Apud Scalig. diste l. p. 661.
Priest, that their Almolad, or the feast of the Nativity, is placed against
their Month Chiach, which answers to our December, and the succession of their
Feasts is just as in the Syriack account; and therefore reason enough is, that
thence we collect the very days in both to be the self-same. And to conclude
here, what greater testimony can there be that it was received into the Church,
even from the Disciples and Apostles of our Savior, than this, that it was so
anciently observed, and has been ever since so generally received through
Christendom? for so of the like things that great Father St. Augustine
pronounces, Epist. ad Januarium 118.
Illa quae non scripta, says he, sed tradita, custodimus; quae quidem toto
terrarum orb observantur, dantur intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel a
plenariis Conciliis, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, commendata
atque statuta retineri: Sicuti quod Domini Passio, and Resurrectio, and
Ascensio in coelum, and adventus de coelo Spiritus Sancti, anniversaria
solennitate celebrantur; and si quid aliud tale occurrerit quod servatur ab
universa quacunque se diffundit Ecclesia: All such things he supposes either
delivered by the Apostles, or ordained by general Councils; for Councils, here
we have no testimony that they ordained it; therefore it rests by this
argument, that we derive it from the eldest tradition that may be in
Christianity. But we end here this inquiry, and resolve with that old Hymn of
St. Ambrose, used in the service of this day in the Church of Rome: Sic
praesens testatur dies,
Currens per anni circulum,
Quod solus a sede Patris
Mundi salus adveneris:
Hunc coelum, terra, hunc mare,
Hunc omne quod in eis est,
Auctorem adventus tui
Laudans exultat cantico.


Neither find I any Christian Church that in the later ages has otherwise
celebrated it, save only that of the Armenians, who Cathalicus Armeniorum in
legate. ad Arm.
retained an ancient custom of confounding it with the Epiphany, and that to
the time of Manuel Comnenus, which is about 440. years since, and perhaps yet
do; of which confusion of those feasts more in the last Paragraph. But, because
in these proofs hitherto declared, the common and most received grounds and
reasons brought for it out of the holy Text, and some other, are omitted; as
also on the other side, some objections are made in later times against it, and
that by such as bear even the greatest names in the state of Learning; and some
ancient testimonies also impugn what we have hitherto concluded: It follows
next, (lest the inquiry should seem done with too much negligence) that we both
consider of those common grounds and reasons, and then show why they were not
here used; and furthermore, that we give such answer to those objections, and
ancient testimonies, as that they may not at all hinder the credit of those
arguments which before have so demonstratively justified it.

SECT. V. The common Reasons used out of the holy Text to justify this day,
and how they are mistaken, and therefore not used here; together with what some
would prove from the Scheme of his Nativity.
OF those which have generally received it, the Ancients about 400. years after
it have strived to fetch reasons for it out of the holy Writ, (being unhappily
not contented to rely wholly upon the tradition) and some of later time
justify it by Astrological observations; both being deceived, the first by
misunderstanding the Text, the other by too much mingling their errors in the
consideration of Nature with the thoughts of this most sacred birthday. For
those Ancients, they knew out of Lev. 16. and 23.
Moses, that the High Priest did only once every year enter into the Holiest
place, or the Sanctum Sanctorum; and this is ordained to be on the 10. day of
the 7. Month, that is, the Feast of Kippurim, or Expiations in Tisri: Then out
of St. Luke, they supposed that the Angel appeared to Zachary, being High
Priest, and sacrificing there on the same day which they would make agree with
the 24. of September, (although for the very day they have somewhat differed in
the Eastern Church, and some have also Stephanus Gobarus Trith. apud Photium,
cod. 232.
supposed the conception in October, some in November) and that on the night
following Zachary's Wife Elizabeth conceived St. John Baptist, as the Apostle
foretold him: From hence, according to the Evangelist, they accounted 6.
Months; at the end of which time the blessed Virgin Mary conceived, that time
falls into the 25. of March, from whence 9. Months being accounted, (the
common time of a birth) the 25. of December found the very birthday of our
Savior: This is the sum of the calculation used out of the holy Text by the
D. Chrysostom. in sape laudato Panegyrico. Anastasius Antiochenus, Cedrenus
chronici Alexandrini author, etc.
Ancients, although not without some confusion of Months; while by reason of
application of old Lunar Months to the Roman, which are Solar, they confound
herein sometimes April with March, and September with October.

That other sort which would prove it by Astrology, shows us the Scheme of this
Nativity, erected for the altitude and Meridian of Bethlehem, to the midnight
following the 25. of December, and then telling how wonderfully it is (by the
Rules of that Art) agreeable to so wonderful a birth; and anticipating some
part of the accusation they might justly look for, they declare themselves,
that they mean not that any thing touching his Divinity, his Miracles, his
Holiness of life, or sending forth the Gospel, depended at all on the Stars;
but they say, that as naturally he was of the best temperature, and exactest
beauty, and had continual health, and so singular gravity of aspect. Sic etiam
Deus optimus and gloriosus (as Cardan's Ad Ptolem. Tetrabib. l. 2. text. 54.
words are) optima constitutione astrorum atque admirabili Genesin illius
adornavit; which constitution of the Heavens if the Almighty, says he, had not
to this purpose ordained to have concurred and have been observed, one of these
two things had happened; either that the very day, and hour, and minute of the
hour of that birth, had not been so constantly and diligently ever kept in the
Church; or else that all the significations in the Scheme had not been adeo
singularia, as he writes, magnifica, gloriosa, and tanto concursu digna, tum
vero omnibus quae successerunt de vitae sanctitate, de morum gravitate, etc.
adeo congruentia, ut nil exactius possit excogitari; and after the particulars
largely declared, he too boldly concludes against such as justly enough impugn
the art of Astrology as groundless, with this, that they can now have nothing
else left to speak against it, as Ptolomy teaches it, than this only, that
they should perhaps object, that Ptolomy, to gain credit to the profession,
wrote his whole Quadripartite, according to the agreement 'twixt this Scheme,
which it is most likely he never saw, and the parts of our Saviors life
denoted by it; than which, says he, as he well might, nothing can be more
absurd. But out of this we may easily see, that such as stand upon those
learned errors cannot but think with him, that the very day and hour of this
birth is fully confirmed by that Scheme: Neither is there cause (so their
grounds were certain) but that they might hence conclude also that this were
the very time, although no other testimony were extant of it: For what want
they in this pretense of that knowledge of the ancient Tarutius, who was able
(as he made some learned men believe) not only to foretell out of the Scheme
of a Nativity, but also to find out of the circumstances of any life and
fortune, the very point of the birth, and so frame the Scheme it self? as
Plutarch says he did both in the search after Romulus his birthday, and the
first foundation of Rome; and the finding the exact Scheme is the same with
finding the exact time of the birth; which those Astrologers, it seems, think
they have done, as well out of the congruity (as they suppose) of the Scheme to
what they apply it, as out of any testimony or tradition of the Church.

But the truth is, that both this of some Astrologers; and that other of
calculation out of the holy Text, deserve nor place nor name of reason to this
purpose: For that of the Calculation of the months out of the holy Text, the
chief ground on which it insists, and which being taken away it all become;
merely vain, is that of Zacharias being a High Priest, and in his sacrificing
in the holiest place, or Sanctum Sanctorum, or in the Oracle, as the names of
it are varied. For a sacrifice in that place was only in that feast of
Expiation, that is, the 10 of Tisri, or 7 month, and this only by the
High Priest; But it is most clear that Zacharis was no High Priest, but only
one of those 24 courses or stations of Priests which weekly served at the
Temple. For David distinguished the 1 Paral. 24.
posterity of Eleazar and Ithamar by Lots for the continual and daily service
and sacrifice into 24 courses, and of those courses every one had a week for
attendance, so that after every 24 weeks the first came to attend again; as
also it was in the 24 courses of the Levites, their weeks in attendance always
ending on the morning of the Sabbath. Hereof is plentiful testimony, both in
holy 1 Paral. 9. comm. 25. Jos. (...). l. 7. c. 11 and in vita sua, and 2 adv.
Apionem.
writ and in the Jews Liturgies, besides Joseph, and the old Fathers, and it is
fully and shortly expressed by Eucherius, Erant sorts 24 (says he) and
sacerdotum, and Levitarum and Janutorum, qui per totidem septimanas sibi ex
ordine succederent, sabbato nova turma intrante ad officimn, and post sabbatum,
ea quae proxima septimativa ministraverat domum redeunte. In these 24 courses
the 8 is the family of Abia; of his 8 course was Zachary a Priest, and was as
Ad l. 4. Reg. c. 23.
this time in the week of his course building incense in the Temple, but not in
the Ho^^ lieft place; so is the Text of St. Luke; A^ certain Priest (...), i.
of the coursed of Abia; speaking of Zachary; and afterward, as soon as the
ministrations were accomplished, etc. what course or special days of
ministration to be accomplished could here belong to the Priests of the Jews?
But as Matthias, and Flavius Josephus were 1 Macab. c. 2 comm. 1 Jos. in (...).
l. 12. c. 8 and in vita sua.
Priests of the Sons, or course of Jeho^arid. (that is, of the 1 course) so was
Zachary of Abia, or of the 8. Neither was any High Priest of that age bearing
any such name: But he that was High Priest at the birth was Joazar, and his
predecessors were Joseph Niceph. Patriarch. in chronol. etc.
Matthias, Simon, etc. So that nothing is more certain then this, that Zachary
was not High Priest; although anciently very great names were deceived, while
they took him to be so, as St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, Anastasius Patriarch
MS. apud Jos. Scalig. l. 6. p. 509.
of Antioch, and others expressly: Zachary then being no High Priest, it plainly
follows that their whose calculation of Months here from the 10. of Tisri. (in
which only the High Priest entered into the Oracle) proves nothing at all, but
supposes merely false grounds; and so no proof of the certainty of this day can
be extracted out of that holy Story; and Zacharies Sacrifice, for ought appears
there, might indifferently be on any other day of the year. We omit here their
supposition of an exact number of days for the natural time of a Birth, which
plainly can never be known; and in so clear a point thus much is too much then
enough.

For that other reason or confirmation (as they would have it) out of
Astrology, doubtless it is most vain (that we may speak no worse of it) both in
regard of the Art it self, and also of this application of it. For the Art it
self though very many Authors are of it, yet there is none extant of any great
antiquity; and of those which are, very few agree to any purpose among
themselves. Ptolomy, who is the ancientest of them, whose Volumes of it are
publicly extant, and lived about CXL. years after our Savior, varyed
Tetrabib. l. 1. comm. 57, 58, etc.
from what the Chaldeans before him had observed. The Arabians, as Haly,
Albumazar, Messalath, the Author of Alcabitius, Zabel, and such more have
another Doctrine from his. The Latins, as Manilius and Julius Firmicus, neither
agree among themselves nor with others; to omit the numerous differences that
are in the many Volums of it written in the middle and latter ages. What
certainty thereof can there be in that Art whose Professors do make no other
pretense then long continuance of constant observation of signs, and things
signified to justify themselves; and yet in truth they have no testimony of
such continuance of observation? And I trust that no man will think that by
rational collection only (as in some other faculties) without a preceding and
constant observation of many ages at least, it is possible to discover the
nature of this or that Star, or of the various policious of the Heavens which
every minute produces. Besides, without supposition of a certainty, not only
of the degrees, but in some particulars of the minutes also in which this or
that Planet is, the Astrologer proceeds not; yet it is most known that the
Astronomers, from whose noble search these suppositions are patiently taken by
the Astrologers, are herein even almost as differing among themselves as the
Astrologers in denoting of effects; witness the difference of hours in
Calculation by the Alphonsine. Tables from the Prutenique, made according to
Copernicus, and of both of the restored motions of Tycho Brahe. And two of the
Planets, Mars and Mercury, which bear no small rule in the precepts of
Astrology, have hitherto scarce less concealed their motions and places in the
Heavens, then Proteus would have done his true shape. Yet still what the
Astronomer knows is uncertain, and ingeniously confesses to be so; the
Astrologer for the most part slothfully believing, and so fixing himself on
that belief, takes for his infallible ground, and so deceives, and is deceived
in his aspects (which he resolves partile, when they may perhaps be platique,
and platique when they may be partile) in his directions in the print of his
Horoscope, and the other three of his Figure in his Fines, in his Ferdariae, in
his Conjunctions, and in what else stands upon such exactness of calculation.
But this is no place to speak more in particular of that Art: Enough has been
said of the vanity of it by Mirandula, Alexander ab Angelis, and others that
have purposely written Volumes against it. But for the application of it to
this of our Saviors Birthday, it is both too groundless also in respect of
the hour to which the Figure is erected, and withal impious in the rest of the
suppositions. For the hour, it is erected to midnight following the 29. of
December, for so we must understand that which Cardan designs the time by;
Diebus 6. (says he) horis 12. ante radicem Astrologorum, qui auni initium
sumunt in Calendis Januariis: This falls upon 12. of the clock of the night
following the 25. of December. But whence, I wonder, was Cardan so sure that
this was the minute of the hour of the Birth? Some indeed that among the
Ancients erroneously placed it on the 6. of January, took the point of midnight
to be the very minute, as we see out of those collections out of Stephanus,
Gobarus, Tritheites in Photius. And in some part of the Asiatique Churches
(especially of Syria) the night of this day has the name of the night of the
Nativity, which Alfragan remembers. But that testimony of the Nativity cited
out of an old Greek Manuscript in St. Marks Library at Florence Ad Theolog.
Muchamed. not. 12.
by Widmonstadius, says, it was hora diet sexta: Hesychius there also
mentioned put in on hora diei septima; with which agrees that Chronicle of
Alexandria, or the Fasti Editione Radertana p. 532.
Siculi (...), i. e. the 7. hour of the day. And though none of those are of
credit enough to justify the very hour; yet, it seems, they all meant it a
Birth of the day, and not of the night, the hours of which they also note by
the name of the hours of the night; neither can it be cleared in the holy Text,
whether it were in the night or in the day. The Angel in the night says to the
Shepherds, For unto you is born this day, (that is, (...)) a Savior, out of
which words it were too much rashness to resolve whether the point of the
Birth were in the night or in the day. If then Cardan, or his followers had
been led by authority, they should have rather erected the figure (if at all
they erected it) to the 6. or 7. hour of the day, that is about 12. hours
before their supposed time; and so the whole Scheme had been changed, and Aries
had been the Horoscope instead of Libra, and Capricorn in mid-heaven for
Cancer. Besides also, had the midnight following the 25. day been the just
time, those which in Jewry propagated the tradition to Posterity, should (by
all probability) have delivered it to have been on the 26. day of the Julian
December, not on the 25. For by the use of the Jews, their natural days
Severus A^tiochenus apud Anastas. Sinast. quaest. 152. praeter litt. sacras.
were accounted from Evening to Evening: So that the night following the 25.
was part in their account of the 26. day, as also the Ecclesiastical account
of days by the Cannon-Law, Quod die did. 75. and extra de feriis c. 1
Francolin de horis canonic. c. 43. and synod. in Trullo canigo. 91.
and that from ancient time. Neither can it for this reason alone be salved,
unless advantage of a different account of days be taken from the old use in
the State of Rome, whereunto Jewry was then subject: For in that State the
natural day was from midnight F. tit. de feriis l. 8. and Plutarch in probl.
Romans 84.
to midnight; yet according to that too it stands but indifferent to which of
the two days the Birth should be referred, being thus placed in the very point
of midnight which parts them. Besides also, the Church of Rome have taken it to
have been in the nighttime preceding the 25. day, for they in the Vigil of the
Feast celebrate the Shepherds watching, and in the morning they have a special
Mass with reference Ordo Roman. sed and vide sis Hugo de S. Victore, erudit.
Theol. l. 3. c. 5.
to the Shepherds visitation of our Savior, at that time in the Manger: So
that according to their supposition, that Scheme is not for the birth, but for
a day after: In sum, the hour is every way uncertain, their proof therefore
being thus showed groundless in regard of the exact hour of the natural day
(which is unknown) I hope there needs not much be said to justify that the
suppositions of dependence twixt any working or significations of the Stars,
and that great and most sacred mystery of the Incarnation are most impious;
although it were so that otherwise the traditions of that art had their place:
As if either the common objects of sense, or uncertain collections of man's weak
understanding, had so much to do with what but at the best we are able to
apprehend by Faith only. But Cardan had herein example to follow in those who
long before him had impiously referred the beginning of Christian Albumazar de
conjunct. differ. 8. tract. 2 and apud Rog. Bacon in opere majori M.S. ad Clem.
P.P. 4.
Religion to a certain number of revolutions of Saturn. And therefore also he
makes that Comet which in 1133. appeared in Aries under the Northern part of
the Milky way, and was (as he supposed) of Martial, Jovial and Mercuriall
quality, to denote the Schisms and Changes of Religion which soon after fell in
this Kingdom under Henry 8. For to Aries (says Ptolomy) is this Island subject
as to a tutelar sign. And in this Nativity also, that Star which St. Matthew
speaks of, Cardan takes for a signifying Comet, and places it in the Ascendent,
because it seems he read in the Evangelist that the wise men saw it in the
East. But there is good authority among the Ancients, and that by collection
out of the holy Text, that their seeing of it in the East was a continual
seeing of it D. August. in sermon. 1. edit. Paris. edit. Lovaniens. tom. 10. p.
431. Nicephor. Calist. l. 1. c. 13.
for two years time before the birth in the Countries, that lay East from
Jewry: and doubtless also it could not be of any such heights as Comets are at
the lowest supposed to be, neither could it have designed a particular House in
Bethlem, if it had been so high as to have been carried either as Stars or
Comets are in the Diurnall motion of the Heavens. But enough hereof is already
said against him by that great Tycho Brahe, with whose Progymnasm. de nova
stella p. 316.
words also we conclude here, that Cardan and his followers, plus impie quam
justa ratione, quomodocunque tandem excusent, hoc asseverant ut reliqua; pudet
n. referra quae Astrologicis suis commentis hac de re inseruit, non adducam.

There was reason enough therefore why neither of these first kind of arguments
(whereof the one is taken from a groundless calculation of Months in the holy
Text, the other from the vanities of Astrology) were used among the proofs
brought for the certainty of this Birthday: For he that endeavors to
establish a truth by arguments, should no less religiously abstain from false
premises, than he ought carefully to meet with the sharpest objections; lest
while the conclusion is of it self true, and would clearly appear so if no
other but true grounds were used to induce it; the credit of it be therefore
still questioned, because in the foundations whereon it is so made to insist
there is such use of apparent falsehoods: At least, he rather seems too willing
than truly able to prove, who so mixes truth, doubts and falsehood in deducing
his conclusion, that either some of his premises first patiently received and
credited by himself, and then offered in his arguments, have indeed either much
more need of proof, but are less proved by him than his conclusion; or else are
every way false, and so utterly betray both the conclusion and his judgment.
But we leave these, and go next (as is before purposed) to the Objections of
late time made against what is hitherto concluded touching the just day of this
sacred birth.

SECT. VII. The chief Objections that are made against this days being the
true time of the birth, with plain Answers to them.
THe Objections against this received opinion or tradition of the day made in
later time are chiefly two; the one taken out of the enumeration of those
circular courses, of the Priests divided into their 24. families, as is before
expressed; and the other from the circumstances of the time of the year of this
birth mentioned in holy Writ. For the first, diverse Chronologers, after they
have according to their own fancies altered the years of account from our
Saviors birth, (some making it one, some two, some three, some more years
ancienter than the Dionysian Epoch received in the Church) then, that they may
settle also the very day of the birth, or at least the time of the year wherein
the day fell, they calculate by those weekly ministrations of the 24. courses
of the Priests, to find out the week wherein the course of Abia (of which
Zachary was) ministered in the Temple; for then would it follow, that the time
of John's conception, from which the conception, and birth of our Savior was
accounted would nearly, if not exactly be found also. For the Text is, That
after those days (of his ministration) his wife Elizabeth conceived, and hid
her self five months, etc. For example, some here supposing in their chronology
that the birth was two years before the vulgarly-received time, and in the
MMMMDCCXI. year of the Julian period, thus work in calculation to find out the
time of the year when our Savior was born; they observe first that Antiochus
polluted the Temple, and discontinued the daily Sacrifices, and so by
consequence the continuance of these courses; then they say that Judas
Macchabeus, upon the new Dedication of the Temple recontinued the daily
Sacrifices, and by a like consequence restored the courses, and in restoring of
them began with the first, that is, the course of Jehoiarid, and this in the
25. day of the Hebrew Month Caslea, in the MMMMDXLIX. year of the Julian
period, which agrees with the 24. of November of that year; this day fell on
Monday, so that the continuance of the course of Ieheiarid was (according to
the first constitution) till the morning of the Sabbath following, the next
Sabbath before this new Dedication of the Temples falling so on the 22. of
November: From this renewing of the courses they thus reckon; from the course
of Ichoiarid, being the first, to that of Abia, being the eighth, must
intercede 49. days; so that the course of Abia began on the 10. of January
MMMMDL. year of the Julian Period; having then before supposed that the year of
the birth was the MMMMDCCXI. year of the Julian Period, and that the conception
of St. John was in the year preceding, that is, in the year MMMMDCCX. they
account over the whole cycles of those 24. courses that intercede from the
course of Abia in January of the year MMMMDL. and thence observe at what time
the course of Abia falls again in that MMMMDCCX. year of the Julian Period;
thus they find that in those 160. years 349. of those courses being past, the
course of Abia being the last (in this computation, which begins at the next
from it) of the 349. falls exactly to begin upon the 21. of July (being the
Sabbath) of the year MMMMDCCX. and so ends upon the 28. of the same July, that
is, the morning of the Sabbath following: By which they conclude, that upon or
immediately after the 28. of the same July St. John was conceived; according to
the Text, that tells us, After the days of Zacharies ministration, etc. This
being granted, it would follow that the birth of our Savior (according to the
vulgar calculation from the time of St. John's conception) would be in October
or November of the following year, that is, of the MMMMDCCXI. of the Julian
Period. Others by another liberty in this kind of numbering, placing it in
September, others otherwise, while they fetch their arguments out of the
revolutions of their courses.

The other Objection, that is, from the circumstances of the time of the year
of this birth, is out of the holy Text; where it is D. Luc. c. 2. comm. 8.
written, that there were Shepherds in the same country abiding in the
fields, (...), i. and keeping watch over their flock by night, and this at the
time of the birth: This, say some, of all times fits not the midst of Winter,
or December; but rather the Spring, Summer or Autumn, when the temper or heat
of the night permit both sheep and shepherd to be in the fields.

But neither of these reasons have any weight against that received tradition
of the 25. of December, First, for the 24. courses, it were something indeed if
we exactly knew with which of the courses Judas Macchabeus began his
Instauration of the Sacrifices; for supposing then that from this beginning and
new dedication until Zacharies ministration no disturbance of the continuance
of those courses had happened, and also that had the just number of years fully
agreed upon from the same dedication to our Saviors Birth, it were such an
argument as could not in any way be exceeded, so that we also otherwise allow
the common calculation of time that was used by the Fathers out of St. Luke, in
regard only of the distance between the conception of St. John, and the
conception and Birth of our Savior. For St. John was, as they commonly agree
conceived presently upon the end of Zacharies Ministration, and this conception
once fixed were a constant Epoch (according to the vulgarly-receiv'd
interpretation of St. Luke) from whence the time of the year at least of our
Saviors Birth-night may be clearly collected. But on the other side, if we
fail in the certainty of the beginning of the courses, who sees not that
nothing can be concluded out of them to satisfy such a judgment as dares not
rely upon such conjecturall inferences without an open clearness in their
antecedents? Now for that matter, no old Stories have mention of the name of
that particular course with which Judas Macchabaeus began; but they Lib.
Hasmonaeorum c. 1.20 and 4.52. Epit. Jasonis c. 10.15. item Joseph Ben Gorion
l. 3: c. 13.
only show the new dedication, in which it may be granted that there was an
instauration of the courses; but whether by beginning again (as they suppose)
with that of Ieheiarid, which is first in David's distribution, or with that of
Jedaiah, being the second or with any other of the 24. nothing is left to
instruct us; and we know that through Amiochus his profanation of the Temple,
the courses were discontinued in the 143. year from Selucu^ Nicanor, and that
upon the 25. of Casleu, and that upon the same day five years after the
sacrifices, and by consequence the courses were restored. But it is neither
known what course was then in Ministration, when Antiochus profaned the Temple
(for we have no certain Epoch from which that can be deduced) or with what
course the first week after the dedication was served: How then is it possible
to reckon by the cycles of those courses, and so find the just time of this of
Abia, or the eight? No more then it might be possible for one who knew only we
had 12 months in the year, but withal were wholly ignorant when the first
began, could yet tell at what season the 8. fell? And for that their conjecture
of the beginning with the course of Jehoiarib, because that was the first in
David's distribution, it is both in it self a very weak one and perhaps expressly
against the strictness used among the Jews in observation of those courses. For
besides that, no testimony at all assures us but that any other of the courses
as well as that of Ichoiarib (according to the opportunity of time, and
fitness of persons) might be the first at that new dedication. We have it
confessed by the greatest of them which this way impugn the received
tradition, that the certainty of the cycles of those 24. courses was so
carefully kept so long as the sacrifices continued, that no one course might
supply the room of another, against the order of succession in their cycles:
For example, if that of Iehoiarib were for this week, then of necessity that of
Iedaiah, being the second in the cycle, must be for the week following, and
that of Harim for the third week, that of Seorim for the fourth, and so the
rest according to their succession in the cycle; and this insomuch, that if
(for the purpose) that of Harim should have missed at the Temple at the third
week, after the end of the course of Iedaiah, yet might not the service be
supplied either by the following course of Scorim, or by the continuance of
that of Iedaiah; neither might any other minister in the Temple that week, nor
might that of Scorim (being the next in the cycle) begin till the Sabbath
following. And to this purpose also, Vide sis inprimis Jos. Scalig. Isag.
canon. l. 3. p. 298.
they bring that old Canon of the Jews, (...) i. Every Priest and every Levite
that puts himself into the ministration of any of his fellows is punishable
with death. And by this also they understand that in Josephus, (...).
where he says that the daily sacrifice failed upon the 17. day of the
Macedonian month Panemus (which was the 17. day of their Tammuz, whereon the
Jews keep a solemn Fast to this day and that this was (...), i. for want of
those that should Minister, as if only (as they understand it) the reason
were, because the course of that week failed, and might not be by their Canons
supplied either by the preceding course, or that which was the next week to
succeed, nor by any other. This being thus confessed by them, they should
otherwise have fearched in their way of proof out of those courses accounted
from the new Dedication under Judas Macchabaeus: For upon this supposition,
they should first have been sure what had been the last course at the time of
Antiochus his profanation; then should they have reckoned over the cycles from
that course, and so have observed from which of the 24. the Ministration
beginning on the Sabbuth, being the 23. of Casleu in the 148. year (of
Seleucus, or Dilkarnon) would happen; and thence might they have reckoned
forward to search out that of Abia, in this question of Zacharies Ministration.
For if there were such a careful avoiding of supplying the course of one by
another, then follows it plainly, that it was certainly known at he time of
Antiochus his profanation, to which of the courses the Ministration five years
from that week would necessarily belong as it was then known what course was in
the present ministration: For example, admit five years were complete from the
end of the week of the profanation and discontinuance of the courses under
Antiochus to the end of the week of the Dedication; and suppose also that the
first course, that is of Iehoiarid, had served in the Temple in the week of
profanation, then must it necessarily first follow, that the course of Iedaiah
on the second, must have served in the week following, that is, the first week
of those five years: Now in those five years (taking in about a day to make the
numbers round in the example) we have CCLXI. weeks, and 261. weeks are ten
complete cycles of those 24. courses, and 21. weeks of advantage to go on with
to make an eleventh cycle: If then the strict observation of keeping every
course to his own week (which was as well foreseen always by the revolution of
those cycles as any immovable Feast, or the Dominical letter in our
Ecclesiastic accounts is fore-known) were in such use, then clearly what
course soever should have served in the sixth week of this eleventh cycle,
which in our example falls to that of Iedaiah: Reckon with him in this eleventh
cycle till the 21. course (as the weeks require) and then the course of Gamul
is proper to the very week of the new Dedication; and this way, if the course
which served at the profanation were known, it were easy to find which of
them should by that tradition of the Jews have served at the Dedication: But
when we neither know which of them served at the profanation, nor which at the
Dedication, what rashness is it to rely upon a bare conjecture; and that also
such an one as is adverse to that received tradition of the exact keeping of
the cycles; and is in substance confessed to be so by such as have used it?
These things thus considered, it follows, that they which insist upon this
argument, taken from the beginning of the 24. courses in that of Iehoiarib
under Indas Macchabeus, fail in their ground, and prove nothing at all against
our received tradition: The weakness of their Objection also is therein
increased, that their chronology in it is so uncertain, that they know not
clearly in what year to fix the birth; some of them making it one, some two,
some three or more years before the common Epoch, and this also upon
conjecture. But while they vary so much in the year, they have little reason to
be confident (out of their own grounds only, wherein they refuse this so
ancient tradition) that they can in their supposed years be sure of the very
day of which no other old testimony instructs them, then either what we have
before remembered, or that which shall presently be both delivered, and so
cleared also that it may not have weight against what is already justified. And
it might easily fall out, that the certain year of the birth might be
forgotten, or at least not so remembered, or the memory of it not so preserved,
as that later posterity could clearly have notice of it; and yet that the day
of the month on which the Birth sell, might by the continuance of tradition
(as it has been) be clearly known. The anniversary celebration gave the day
certain to posterity, which could not thence find any thing to rectify them in
the exactness of the year, as we see also in an example of the Roman States.
They clearly knew that the birth of Servius Tullius, who was the first that was
King there against the will of the common people, first fell upon the Nores of
some month, but they Macrobius, l. 1. Saturnal. c. 13.
knew not at all of what month, nor in what year, for ought appears: And
therefore they avoided public meetings in the City upon the Nones of every
month through the year, that so they might be sure to avoid them (as supposed
most unlucky to the State) anniversarily upon his birthday. This anniversary
avoiding public meetings, or Fairs, on the Nones, continued the certainty of
his being born on the Nones of some month, though the month were unknown; and
so did the anniversary celebration continue from the Disciples to the day of
the month, though perbaps the year be not clearly enough certain. And there
was other reason also why the certainty of the year might be unknown: For there
is nothing that preserves such a certainty, but either such express testimony
of Authors as cannot be questioned, or else a continuance of vulgar supputation
of time from, or very near from the time of the Birth it self. But we have
herein had neither of these. For the first, that is, the testimony of old
Authors, they vary in the years of Augustus and of the Consuls, which are the
Characters by which they design it; and besides, they are not of such antiquity
as that we can clearly rely upon them; and for that of the vulgar supputation
of time, the common account either in Instruments, Letters, Receipts, or the
like; was not all made by the years of our Lord, till between D. and DC. after
the Birth; that is, after the time that Dionysius made his cycle of DXXXII. by
multiplication of the cycle of the Sun into the Golden number, and from that
time brought Beda de Temp. rat. c. 45.
in (according to his own suppositions) the supputation of time by the years of
our Lord. For before that age the Christians use was, either to note times by
the Consuls of the year, as the ancient course of Rome was; and as we see in
old General Councils, and in Receipts of the Emperors, in the Codes of
Theodosius and Justinian; whence also Constantine ordained it for a C. Theodos.
tit. de constit. prim. l. 1. si qud.
Law; that if any Edicts or Constitutions of the Emperors should be found fine
die and Consule, they should be held of no authority; or else by that Era
(commonly called Era Hispanica) which began under Augustus 38. years before
the Dionysian Epoch of our Savior, and was chiefly used in Spain; as we see
both in the Titles of the old Councils of Sivil, Bracara and Toledo, and in the
Inscriptions of that Country; but also it was in use in Africa and France, as
we may collect by most of the Titles of the Councils of Carthage, of Arles, and
Valence; unless we suppose that Isidore (from whose Volumes of Councils we have
these) being a Spariard, used the supputation by that Era in the Titles,
without warrant of the original Copies. But we have in the very Acts of the
fourth Council of Arles use of this Era; which was also in the accounts of
time at Rome, as is seen in the Epistles of Pope Leo subscribed with the years
of it. Others denoted the years by an account from some regaining of their
freedom; as those of Antiochia did from Epoch 48. years before our Savior,
which is the (...), so frequently spoken of in Evagrius his Churchstory; or
from that of Seleucus or Dhilkarnun, beginning after Alexanders death. Others
from the year of the Creation as the Greek Church: others from a time that fell
283. years after our Savior (as those of Egypt, and the adjoining Churches)
that is, from Dioclesians persecution; which in Egypt and Aethiopia is to this
day Jos. Scalig. de emendat. Temp. p. 465, and 629.
retained; and by the Christians that use Arabique called (...) Tarick
Alshehuda, The Epoch of the Martyrs; and among the Aethiopians (...): amath
Michrath, i. The year of Grace. So was also that of Spain in common use there,
till somewhat above 300. years since it was by special constitution abrogated,
and the year of our Lord made the beginning of the account of time; and this
alteration is by the Spanish Lawyers referred to John the first King of
Castile. Duravit (Era) usque ad tempora Iohannis primi (says ad l. 52.
partit. 3. tit. 18. de las escrituras.
Lopez) qui jussit apponi annos Nativitatis Domini. So also writes Azevedo, ad
l. 3. Recopil. l. 2. tit. 1. de las leges.
so others of them; whence it appears, that anciently, till long after our
Savior, no account was vulgarly made by the years of his birth in which the
true year might be by a continual tradition retained: and also, that although
about the time of Justinian (that is, when Dionysius began his cycle) the
course of reckoning from the Birth was brought into use, yet it was received
but in few parts of Christendom, and that principally within Italy, in the
instruments, it seems, of the Court of Rome. And it is observable here also,
that with us in England however our ancientest Stories of the time since
Christianity, both in Saxon and Latin, are deduced by distinction made out of
the years of our Savior, and that according to the Court of Rome; our
Church-proceedings and instruments belonging to that jurisdiction they have
anciently had, and still retain an account by those years; yet the characters
of time, both in the pleadings and instruments of the secular jurisdiction,
has been ever and is chiefly by the years only of our Sovereigns, Kings or
Queens; so are our Records distinguished, of Pleas, Patents, Parlaments, and
the like; so are the instruments of conveyance, and what else is of that
nature: In which, doubtless, the ancient course of computation is so retained,
that it shows us that none other has been ever proper to the practice of our
secular jurisidiction. And although indeed at this day clearly it be not of
exception or erroneous, if the times in a pleading or instrument be
distinguished only by the year of our Lord, yet anciently it was much stood
upon under 23 Ed 3. fol. 21 b. 24 Ed. 3. fol. 51 a. and 53 b.
Edward the Third, when in a Writ of Annuity brought by the Prior of St.
Trinity of London against an Abbot, the Prior declared upon a composition
bearing date in such a year of the Lord, and the Defendants Counsel took
exceptions to it, supposing that none should declare at the Common Law of the
year of our Lord, but of the King; but upon deliberation it was resolved good,
for this reason only, because the composition had only the date of the Lord;
as if properly and necessarily otherwise it should have been of the year of the
King: And so, doubtless, did they think who in the times of King Henry the
Third, and King John, not only carefully used the years of the King only, as
at this day; but also in Recognisances entered Archia. de temp. reg. Joh. and
Hen. 3.
for payment of money a year or two after the entry, they denoted the time of
payment by the year of the King, that should happen only if he reigned so
long; as in the 41. of Henry the Third the Recognisance should bind the
Recognisor to pay money in 42. or 43. of his Reign. All which further consirms,
that the computation of time by the years of our Lord, even after such time as
it came at all to be in use, has not been near so vulgarly received as the
anniversary celebration of the day of the birth, under the name of the old
civil Solstice or the 25. of December; and therefore it may easily be, that the
very year may be uncertain for want of such a continuance of tradition, which
might have come to us from the time of the birth, if from thence a computation
received at first in the Church had continued it. But the yearly celebration or
memory continued even from the eldest of Christian time, has taught us the
exact day of the Month; therefore we have reason enough still to resolve on it.

But also for farther search into what may at all afford us any ^ertainty of
the ^o^^se that Ministered at the time of St. Jol^^ Co^ception; if we first
believe the perpetual continuance of them according to the succession in their
cycles, and then also the testimony of an old Jew touching the course that
served at the second destruction of the Temple under Vespasian, shall so have
another time then has been yet mentioned for the course of Abia in the
conception of St. John, and by consequence another Birthday of our Savior, if
we keep still the vulgar supputation of time collected out of St. Luke. That
Jew is Rabbi Jose, whose words in the Seder Olam Edit. Basil. p. 125.
Rabba are these; when the Temple was first destroyed, it was Evening of the
Sabbath, and the end also of the Sabbatical year, (...), that is, and the
weekly course was that of Jehoiarib, and it was day of Ab; and so it was also
in the time of the second destruction. If we find the course of Jehoiarib fixed
at the second destruction under Vespasian, that is, in the 70. year of the
vulgar account from the birth, and that about the beginning of August, to which
the 9. day of Ab answers: From hence therefore reckon by the cycles backwards
into the year that precedes the Julian year, in which our Saviors birth is
commonly fixed, and so between the beginning of this August in the year of the
destruction, and the beginning of August preceding the vulgarly supposed time
of the conception of St. John, will intercede ^1. complete years, that is, 154.
cycles of those courses of 24. and 9. courses over; therefore plainly in that
year the course of Ichoiarth is about the 9. week from the beginning of August,
that is, in the end of September; and so it follows, that the end of the course
of Abia, being the 8. fell in the end of November, or 8. weeks later than in
the old calculation, which placed it in the end of September: And the birth of
St. John (as it is now celebrated) would thus have been in the 7. Month from
the conception, which in nature were reasonable enough; but the holy D. L^c: c.
1. com. 36. and 56.
Text well endures the common and most ancient interpretation, which denotes it
to be in the 9. at least. And were this authority of Rabbi Iose to be insisted
on, and the perpetual succession in the cycles of those courses in this age
preceding the destruction to be resolved on, there were cause enough here to
seek for another exposition of the time of the birth out of the words of the
holy Text* For the common account from Zacharies Ministration will so fall
wholly, unless we change the vulgarly-received year of our Saviors birth, and
(as some do) place three or four years back more than the Dionysian account
does; for so will the course of Abia be brought into September: and if we make
it fall four years sooner (as Susligd does) that course with and also in the
end of September. according to the common calculation herein used by the Fathers:
But I will avoid here the making of such uncertainties of thronology of years
to be arguments to justiste what is otherwise certain enough in the day.
Neither can we rely here, either upon the perpetual succession of the course,
or on the testimony of that Rabbi; for the constant continuance of the courses
in their succession, there is great reason in this time after Augustus to doubt
of it, in regard both of the Jews doing frequently otherwise than their Canons
bind them, as also in regard of some mere necessity which might occasion some
change in the succession, when they were in those later days subject to the
State of Rome. And for that of the course of Iehoiarib then ministering, there
is not credit enough in the Author to make us believe him: For, besides that
while he tells us so, he is mistaken in the true day of the second destruction
of the Temple, which fell on the 10. of Lous or August, in that Joseph (...).
year, not on the 4. which answers to his 9. of Ab; the Sacrifices, and so the
courses of the Priests ceased about three weeks before, that is, on the 17 day
of the Month Tamuz, and this for the want of Priests, as Josephus, who knew it
of himself, expressly has written: But he tells us not a word of what course
then ministered, no more does Abraham Ben David in his Cabala, or he that
extracted the Seder Olam Zuta out of the Seder Olam Rabba, where this is
reported from Rabbi Iose; although both these Authors speak most particularly
of the second destruction of the Temple, but they abstain from this of the
course then in service, as from what had been delivered without warrant by
Rabbi Iose, who indeed had learned from an old groundless tradition, that at
the first destruction under Nebuchadnezzar, the course of Iohoiarib served in
the Temple, and that this second destruction was upon the same day of the same
Month which the first was on; and because he would have all in both
destructions alike, he added also, that the course of Iehoiarib served now at
the second destruction, when indeed no service at all was in the Temple, and
that the Sacrifices and Ministration were ended: So before the destruction
other testimony is in the Jews Liturgy, which confirms that of Josephus to be
infallible; on the Fast of their seventeenth of Tamuz they sing (...) i.
Because in this day the continual Sacrifice ceased, this day the continual
Sacrifice was taken away: If the Sacrifices then, and the courses with them
(for the one of them is not without the other) ceased on the 17. day of Tamuz,
what credit is to be given to him that tells us what course ministered in the
Sacrifices three weeks after? which being so cleared, there is nothing
remaining in the cycles of those courses that can impugn the received
tradition of this birthday.

And for that other argument of the Shepherds watching in the night, what makes
that against this of December? as if the shepherds might not properly be in the
fields watching their sheep in the night at the midst of Winter, especially in
so warm and continually temperate a Climate: For, although in Italy the
precepts of Husbandry were, that in the Winter their sheep should be kept in
Coats Virgil. Georg. 3. and vide Columel. l. 7. c. 4. Varre. l. 2. c. 2. and
Pallad. in November.
rather than in Fields, yet they had their Winter-feedings abroad also; and the
Climate of Bethlehem is of less latitude by ten degrees than that of Rome, and
is also by so much the more temperate always; and even in our Climate, which
is much colder than either of them, we have watching of sheep, feeding, or
remaining in the fields, at this time of the year. The rest objected out of the
circumstances of time, as that the birth of the Redeemer of all men should be
on that day on which the creation of the first man was, that is, as they
without ground suppose, on the 25. of March, and such like, are far more vain,
and not worthy of mention. These things being at length cleared, we need not, I
trust, be at all moved by the opposition of those learned men, Beroald, Paulus
de Midleburgo, Suslyga, Joseph Scaliger, Kepler, (although he stands fot the
same time of the year, but relies on the tradition of the day) Wolfius,
Hospinian, Lidiat, Calvisius, Casaubon, and the rest that have both made it a
question, and showed also their opinions against it.

SECT. VIII. Some other opinions among the ancients touching it, and how some
of them may agree with what we have received, and the rest are of no weight
against it; and there more especially of the ancient confusion of this Feast
with that of the Epiphany.
BUt we have hitherto omitted the different opinions among the ancients,
touching the day of this Birth; which shall be therefore next collected, and
then also it shall be showed, that they bear no weight against what is before
concluded. Those opinions (as they are delivered) are various, and chiefly
five. The first is of them who taught it to be on the 25. day of the Egyptian
Month Pachon, which is the 20. of May in the first Egyptian year. For after
that the Egyptian Month Thoth was fixed in the end of August, and so the rest
of the following Months (30. days being allowed to a Month, which with the
five (...) make up the whole common year) both the Fathers, and the most of
profane writers commonly used the Egyptian Months as fixed; and not as they
are wandering in the years of Nabonassar in the Almagest, this of the 25. of
Pachon is delivered in Clemens Alexandrinus, that lived some eighty years after
the Stremat. 1.
Apostles. (...) (says he) (...). There are some also that more curiously
denote, not only the year, but the very day also of the Birth of our Savior;
which they say was on the 25. of Pachon in the 28. year of Augustus, where the
account is not by the common years of Augustus deduced from the death of Julius
Caesar, but by the years that were past from the Vide sis Censorin. de die
Natali c. 21.
taking of Alexandria, and the death of Anthony. The second (that seems to
differ here) is in the Chronicle (of Edit. Rader. p. 533.
Alexandria, where it is delivered that the birth was on the 25 day of the
Egyptian Month Choiac, which is the 21. of the Julian December. The third is
of those which supposed the day to have been Clem. Alex. Stremat. 1.
on the 24. or 25. of Pharmathi, (that is, the Month preceding Pachon) which
agrees with the 19. or 20. of April: And with this may be reckoned the 4. which
is found in Mahomet, that says it was upon the 23. of the Arabique Month
Rumadhau, but in what year he designs not. But however in the Hagaren or
Arabian year, this cannot come near our December, for according to that year of
the Month Ramadhau falls in June and July, about the time of our Saviors
birth, Vigesimo tertio die Ramadhan (are the words in the Translation of a most
impious Book of his long since done by Hermannus) natus est Christus filius
Mariae, orationes Dei super eum, For the Mahumedans celebrate our Savior as a
great Prophet, and his Birth, of the Virgin Mary Alcor. Azoar. 5. Cantacuzon
(...). and 4. and Postel. de Orbis concord. l. 1. c. 3 and l. 2. c. 2. ad cap.
Eltur.
also is related in their Alcoran; although with much difference from the holy
Story, as most other things are which occur there with reference to either of
the Testaments. A fifth is of those who thought the day to be the 11 of the
Egyptian Month Tybi, that is, the 6. of our January, on which we celebrate the
Epiphany: So Epiphanius, l. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 51. ita etiam ad extr. l. 3.
(...). The Birthday (of our Savior) that is, the Epiphaby fell upon the 6.
day of January, being the 11. of the Egyptian Month Tybi; which opinion is
remembered by Stephanus Gobarus Apud Phot. cod. 232.
Tritheithes, where yet the fifth of January is in the stead of the 6. as also
in some places of some Editions of Epiphanius: But Stephanus plainly meant the
6. day, for he interprets it by the 8. Ides of January, which is the 6. day;
and herewith agrees the common opinion of the ancient Church of Egypt, which
kept the Feast of the Birth on the 6. of January, so confounding it with the
Feast of his Baptism: Callian Collat. 10. c. ^ and vid^ sis Orig. homil. de
diverse. 8.
relates so of him; Intrae Egypti regionem mos iste antiqua traditione
servatur, ut peracto Epiphaniorum die, quem provinciae illius sacerdotes, vel
Dominici Baptismi, vel secundum carnem Nativitatis esse definiunt; and idcirco
utriusque Sacramenti solennitatem, non bifariam, ut in occiduis provinciis, sed
sub una diei hujus festivitate concelebrant, etc. And other D. Hier^^. ad
Ezethiel l. 1: D. Chrysostom. tom. 2: edit. Erasmiana p. 119:
testimonies there are of this observation of the Feast on the 6. day with the
Epiphany. But there is none of these opinions but that may be either so
interpreted, that they may stand with what is before delivered of the 25. of
December, or else so showed to insist upon false, or no grounds, that they are
no authority at all against it. For the first, which casts it on the 25. of
Pachan, and is very ancient; it may be well interpreted to agree with this of
December, for in consideration of it we must, first, remember that according to
the old Jews, there was among the Fathers of the Primitive times a reckoning of
their Months as well by the order of enumeration as by proper names; so that
September and October were known as well by the names of the 7. and 8. Months
(as also their names denote) as by their names themselves being accounted from
March, which was the first. But the Greek Fathers frequently took April,
instead of March, for the first Month of the year, as we see expressly in St.
In Panegyr. (...).
Chrysostom, in Anastasius MS. apud Scal. deemend. p. 509.
Patriarch of Antioch, in those Constitutions Lib. (...). 4 Cedren. p. 143 etc.
attributed to the Apostles in Homilia 5.
Macarius Apud Photium cod. 232.
Stephanus, Gobarus, and in other testimonies of the ancients, where the Julian
April is made the first, as the Hebrew Month Nisan was; and therefore also
they had the very day of this Birth known by the name of the 25. day of the 9.
Month December, being the 9. from April; and this kind of noting it is like
enough to have deceived those which said it was on the 25. of Pachon; for
Pachon is the 9. Month reckoned from Thoth, being the first among the
Egyptians, as December is, being accounted from April; so that when the
tradition was delivered in those terms of the 9. Month, no desighation being
of the account of the Months, nor of what Months were meant, it was perhaps
rashly received by some, and instead of the 25. of the 9. Month in the Roman
year (account to that account of the Fathers) it was apprehended to be, and so
by miltaking placed on the 25. of the 9. of the Egyptian year; neither is this
conjecture for intetpretation of the original of that mistaking so new, but
the others, and those which are very learned and Herword and Replerus. Vide
Repler. de anno natali c. 15.
judicious, have also used it; and by a like or easier way may the second which
is before related be understood: For though the 25. of Choiac fall upon the 21.
of December, taken strictly according to the Egyptian account from the first of
Thoth, being the 29. of August; yet in regard that all December, except the
last five days, falls within Choiac, and so the very Birthday in the same
Month, that is, on the 29. of Choiac (which truly answers to the 25. of
December) it is reason enough that we suppose that Choiac was taken there for
December it self, so that the 25 of the one and the other-went with the Author
for the same day: And such examples are frequent, as applying of Hebrew,
Arabique, Greek and Egyptian Months to the Roman; and therefore also the
Translator of that Chronicle has well expressed it (pref^^^^ing upon this
reason) by the 25. of December; For the third and fourth neither of them having
any ground at all, are as easily and as reasonably denied as affirmed, nothing
is brought to justify them, therefore as little will serve to confute them;
especially that of Mahome^ can have little weight here, when as he is so false
in the whole relation of the Birth of our Savior, in his Alcoran, that he
makes the Virgin Mary to be the same with Mar, or M^riam Az^^r. 5. and 29.
the Sister of Aharon; and talks of Zach^ries being three days only dumb; and
of our Saviors precepts given as soon as he was born, touching Prayers and
Al^es (as Robert Reading, that anciently translated the Alcoran, turns it; but
the word being (...) Zachawath, frequently occurring in the Alcoran for Alms or
good works, is in that place by Postellus a De O bis concordia l. 2. c. 2.
translated Tithes; it being indeed in the Arabique Testament Fpist; ad Ebud.
c. 7. comm. 4.
expressly used for first fruits also) with other impudent falsehoods like the
rest which are every where in that absurd Volume of his Law; and there also the
season of the year is noted by a tale of the Blessed Virgins having dates
presently upon the Birth (which as the Musulmans say) Postellus de Orbis
concerdia l. 2. c. 2.
is yet growing. But for the fifth opinion, which is from confounding of the
Feasts of the Epiphany with this of the Birth, (a custom also retained in the
latter ages Catholicus Armen an legate. ad Armenios.
in the Churches of Armenia) and made by Stephanus, Gobarus, Treitheites in his
Contrarieties of ancient opinions of the Church, to be the main and as the
only one that crosses that of the 25. of December; however it be so often
taken clear in Epiphanius, and rashly also affirmed by the General or
Patriarch of the Armenians, that all Churches had observed it so even from the
Apostles: yet doubtless there is great reason that we should think that this
confusion began both without any sufficient ground, and was also bred by some
such mistakings as may be observed to have been in their consideration, both of
the name and time of the Feast of the Epiphany. For their grounds (besides what
is in mistaking the name and circumstances of the time of this Feast) there
appears none that has any color of power of truth among those which have so
noted it: But for the name first of the Epiphany, the Feast being anciently
observed for the Vide sis A^^m. Marcel^^. l. 21. in ^^^stantio and ^^^tano. and
(...) homil. de (...) 8.
Baptism of our Savior in January as at this day; and that in the Eastern
Churches, before such time as they had learned of the Western the true day of
the Birth, they first thought that the tradition of the Feast under the name of
(...), or (...), might well denote the Birth it self, and so teach them that on
this very day our Savior was born; for the Birth being of it self the first
apparition of the Son of God in the Flesh, and Epiphania denoting in the
language of the then both past and present ages the apparition of a Deity (as
is especially noted also by the most learned Casaubon) they took it at length
here to denote also the first apparition of our Saviout to the World, and that
in the Feast Day kept on the 6. of January; and so conconcluded that this was
the Birthday. Now for the circumstance of the time of the Epiphany, this
confusion of the Feasts doubtless was much confirmed to them by an
interpretation of a passage of Saint Luke, where the Baptism of our Savior
(which is celebrated in the Epiphany, though Epiphanius place that also upon
another day in November) is delivered to have been, when he was (...), i.
beginning to be about 30. years of age; which words are interpreted by some as
if he had been of 30. complete, and beginning to be 31. on that day, which must
so of necessity be on his birthday: And so this way also one and the same day
became sacred among them to the Baptism and the Birth. But all this and what
other mistakings the Greek Church herein had was embraced by the most of them,
but till they were better informed from the Western Church: and the General of
the Armenians In leg^^^^ ad Armen^^^n.
expressly tells Theorianus (who objects to him that Sermon of Saint Chysostom
touching it) that they knew not yet, nor had not heard of any Sermon of St.
Chrysostoms to this purpose: So that want of instruction only continued this
error among them, which has been long since reformed in the Syrian, Egyptian,
and Ethiopian Churches, as well as in the Greek; as is before showed in their
agreement with us in the celebration of this Birth: But for those collections
out of the name of the Epiphany, and circumstances of time of the Baptism, it
will soon appear that they justify nothing here against the received
tradition. And first for that of the name of Epiphania, denoting the apparition
of a Deity, it is otherwise enough satisfied; and there was no need at all to
have it restrained to the noting of the Birthday: For though the work (...) be
used in the holy Epist. 2. ad Timoth. c. 1. comm. 10.
Text, both for the first appearing of our Savior, or his Incarnation, as also
for his coming at the Panegyr. (...) tom. 5. edit. Savil. p. 525.
last day; yet in the first institution of this Feast of the Epiphany, it was
used (I suppose) for neither, but for that public apparition or Manifestation
(by which the Latin Fathers denote Epiphania) of him to the World at his
Baptism, in regard whereof he was before but privately known. So expressly Saint
Chrysostom, whose authority is here beyond exception; (...), says he, (...).
Why then is it called Epiphanie? (in regard, as he before had said, it is not
the celebration of the Birthday, but of the day of the Baptism;) because
(says he) when he was born, he was not then manifested to all men, but when he
was baptized; for till then he was unknown to the multitude: and to this
purpose also he brings that of Saint John, I baptize with water, but there
stands one among you whom ye know not, speaking of our Savior and the same
Evangelist expressly; I knew him not, but (...), i. That he might be manifested
to Israel; therefore I came baptizing with water. So Saint Jerome tells In
commen^. ad Ezechiel. l. 1.
us what the name of Epiphany denotes; Significat (says he) baptisma in quo
aperti sunt Christo Coeli, and Epiphaniorum dies hucusque venerabilis est, non,
ut quidem putant, natalis in carne, tunc enim absconditus est and non apparuit.
Others of the Fathers have as much.

Hereto may be added the consent of posterity, after such time as the true day
of the birth was discovered to them in the Eastern Church; and in a Poem (as
they call it) used in the Service of the Epiphany in the Greek Church, made by
Euchologium p. 93 b.
Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem, an express passage is fully to this
purpose; (...). i. We glorify thee that art without Father of a Mother, and
without Mother of a Father; and in a preceding Feast (of the Nativity) we knew
thee an Infant, but in this present Feast (of the Epiphany) we see thee at full
growth, appearing to be our most perfect God. According whereto also St.
Augustine Sermon. in E^iphan. and (...) diversis 64.
has express words, and that often: For however they had anciently in the
Greek Church confounded the Feasts of the Baptism, or Epiphany, and the
Nativity; yet, being admonished from the Western Church, they confessed their
error in this, that they severed the commemoration of the Baptism from this of
the Birth, and placed the Birth on his proper day in December; and yet they
retained still for the Baptism the name of Epiphania, which also is sometimes
Vide sis Theonhil. Alexand. in edicto tom. bibl. Patrum edit. Paris. p. 161.
(...), as in the Menology, and in the Apostoloevangela of the Greek Church,
(...), i.e. On the sixth of the same month the holy Theophania of our Lord
Jesus Christ; for then was the first public apparition of his Godhead. In the
Church of Egypt also this day is severally kept by the Comput. Elcophi apud
Scalig. de emendat. l. 7. p. 661.
name of (...) Alchamim, i. the Feast of Washing or Bathing; Quod Ecclesia
vetus Aegyptiaca baptismum eo dic iteraret, says Joseph Scaliger; though
perhaps that name may have reference to that old custom used in the Church, of
providing water in the night of that day for the holy uses of the whole year
following; which St. Chrysostom (...). edit. Savil. p. 524. tom 5.
remembers, and is yet retained in the Greek Church (as it appears by their
Euchologium or Common Prayer Book) as also in the Syriack Church, which has
this Feast severed (as ours here) from the Birth, and keeps it iridimonstad. in
subaexis Taste. Syriaco.
under the name of (...) Ilhada dinohora, i. (...), (as Nazianzen calls it) or
the Feast of Lights; and (...) Didinacha, i. e. Of Light appearing in the East;
according whereto also they, as others, use in this Feast great store of
Lights; which has reference to the very word Epiphania doubtless, which
denotes Enlightening also, or Illumination in the Vulgar Translation of the New
Testament; and both in that sense, as also in the other of Apparition or
Manifestation, it may verbally besides signify the apparition of the Star to
the Wise men: Stella, quae Solis rotam
Vincit decore ac lumine.
As Prudentius of it: and Sedulius of the Wise men, Stellam sequentes praeviam,
Lumen requirunt lumine.
Both in their Hymns made proper to this of the Epiphany.

So that the name of the Epiphany is from the ancient and primitive times fully
satisfied, either in that of the Baptism, or in the apparition of the Star:
Whence also the Dutch, French, Italian and Spaniard note it by The day of the
three Kings, for so those wise men are commonly reputed to have been; and also
the Feast it self has been long since, after the truth learned from the
Western Church, observed apart by it self, as having in the first observation
of it no community with this of the Birthday; and that among those which
before had confounded them. It follows then, that even by their own confession
that had been the Authors of this confusion, they had been deceived in
application of the name of Epiphany to the birth of our Savior: and for that
collection of time out of the testimony of St. Luke, it is clear that no
certainty of the day can be thence extracted; the word (...), i. as it were
about, expressly excludes such certainty: So St. John, (...), i. it was about
the tenth hour, which clearly denotes not the beginning or end of the hour;
neither needs there farther proof of the weakness of that collection.

At length to conclude therefore, the Authorities of the Ancients, and the
consent of Christian Churches for this Birthday, as it is now anniversarily
kept, being as before declared, the mistaken reasons being rejected (lest their
falsehoods might prejudice the clearness of the Truth) the Objections of later
time being answered, and the different Opinions of the Ancients touching it
being either groundless, or not in truth opposing it; it rests that we resolve
on it, as upon as certain and clear a Truth of Tradition, as by rational
inference, by express testimony of the Ancients, by common and continual
practice of several Churches, and by accurate inquiry, may be discovered.

FINIS.
These Books following are printed for Nathanael Brook, and we to besold all
his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions.
1. THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils and
ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vain's Lost sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesensale Esquire; in octavo.

2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in fol.

3. The grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup
from the Laity at the Lords Table: by Dr. Dan. Featly, in quarto.

4. Quakers cause at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets.

5. Re-assertion of Grace, Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the
Gospel, a Reply to Mr. Anthony Burges's Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford:
by Robert Towers.

6. Anabaptist anatomized and silenced, or a Dispute with Mr. Tombs: by Mr. J.
Cragg, where all may receive clear satisfaction.

A Cabinet Jewel; Man's misery, Gods mercy, in 8. Sermons, with an Appendix
concerning Tithes, with the expediency of marriages in public assemblies: by
the same Author Mr. John Cragg.

7. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an explication of some passages exhibited
to the Commissioners at White Hall for approbation of public Preachers,
against I. Harrison of Land Chapel, Laneashire.

8. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon by T. Threscos, quarto.

9. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, quarto, in the
year 1651.

10. Divinity no enemy to Astrology, a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers in
the year 1643. by Dr. Thomas Swaddling.

11. Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, August 1648. by I. Shaw
Minister of Hull.

12. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March 24. by I. Shaw.

13. Judgment set and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or man,
in several Sermons, by I. Webster, quarto.

14. Isreal's Redemption, or the prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth: by K. Matton.

15. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error and Profaneness; or a more hopeful
way to grace and salvation: by K. Young, octavo.

16. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the
wavering, to stay the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by I. Brinsley
of Yarmouth.

17. Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are discovered several
evidences of the work of grace: by I. Collins of Norwich.

18. Jacobs seed, or the excellency of seeking God by prayer: by Jer. Buroughs.

19. The sum of Practical Divinity, or the grounds of Religion in a
Catechistical way: by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel; an
useful piece.

20. Heaven and Earth shaken, a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, and all
other Governments, are turned and changed: by J. Davis Minister in Dover;
admirably useful, and seriously to be considered in these times.

21. The Treasure of the soul, wherein we are taught by dying to sin to attain
to the perfect love of God.

22. A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times: by I.
Hall Bishop of Norwich.

23. Select Thoughts, or choice helps for a pious spirit beholding the
excellency of her Lord Jesus: by I. Hall Bishop of Norwich.

24. The holy Order or Fraternity of Mourners in Sion; to which is added, Songs
in the Night, or cheerfulness under afflictions: by I. Hall Bishop of Norwich.

25. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness; by T. Fotiplace.

26. The Moderate Baptist in two parts, showing the Scripture-way for the
Administering of the Sacrament of Baptism, discovering the old error of
Original sin in Babes; by W. Brittin.

27. Dr. Martin Luther Treatise of Liberty of Christians; an useful Treatise
for the stating Controversies so much disputed in these times about this great
point.

28. The Key of Knowledge; a little Book by way of Questions and Answers,
intended for the use of all degrees of Christians, especially for the Saints of
Religious familes, by old Mr. John Iackson that famous Divine.

29. The true Evangelical Temper, a Treatise modestly and soberly fitted to the
present grand concernments of the State and Church, by old Mr. John Iackson.

30. The Book of Conscience opened and read by the same Author.

31. The so much desired and Learned Commentary on the whole 15. Psalm, by that
Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Cartwright Minister of the Gospel
in York, to which is affixed a brief account of the Authors Life and Work by R.
Bolton.

32. The Judges Charge delivered in a Sermon before Mr. Justice Hall and
Sergeant Crook Judges of Assize at St. Mary Overs in Southwark, by R. Parr M.
A. Pastor of Camerwell in the County of Surry. A Sermon worthy perusal of all
such persons as endeavor to be honest and just practioners in the Law.

33. The Saints Tombstone, being the Life of that Virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs.
Dorothy Shaw, late Wife of Mr. John Shaw Minister of the Gospel at Kingston
upon Hull.

Admirable and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chiromancy.
34. Magic and Astrology vindicated by H. Warren.

35. Lux veritatis, Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted: by
W. Ramsey, Gent.

36. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
Original of the soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter-House in Cambridge.

37. Cornelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy;
Magical Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of spirits, made English by R.
Turner.

38. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the Mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy.

39. An Astrological Discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations; proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies: by Sir Christ.
Heyden Knight.

40. Merlinus Anglicus Junior: the English Merlin revived, or a Prediction upon
the Affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644. by W. Lilly.

41. Englands Prophetical Merlin, foretelling to all Nations of Europe, till
1663. the actions depending upon the Influences of the Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter, 1642. by W. Lilly.

42. The Starry messenger, or an interpretation of that strange apparition of
three Suns seen in London the 19. of November 1644. being the Birthday of K.
Charles, by W. Lilly.

43. The Worlds Catastrophe, or Europes many mutations, until 1666. by W.
Lilly.

44. An Astrologicall prediction of the Occurrences in England, part in the
years 1648. 1649. 1650. by W. Lilly.

45. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England, the prophecy of the White King,
Grebner his prophesies concerning Charles Son of Charles his Greatness,
illustrated with several Hieroglyphics, by W. Lilly.

46. Aunus Tenebrasus, or the dark year; or Astrological judgments upon two
Lunary Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of the Sun in England, 1652. by W.
Lilly.

47. An easy and familiar way whereby to judge the effects depending on
Eclipses, by W. Lilly.

48. Supernatural sights and apparitions seen in London, June 30. 1644. by W.
Lilly; as also all his Works in one Volume.

49. Catastrophe Magnatum, an Ephemetides for the year 1652. by N. Culpeper.

50. Teratologia, or a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody Rain and
Waters: by J. S.

51. Chyromancy, or the art of divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of
man, by dame Nature, in 198. Genitures; with a learned Discourse of the soul of
the World: by G. Wharton, Esquire;

52. The admired piece of Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the
symmetrical proportions and signal moles of the body, the Interpretation of
Dreams, to which is added the art of memory illustrated with Figures: by R.
Sanders, folio.

53. The no less exquisite then admirable work, Theatrum Chemycum Britannicum;
containing several Poetical pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have
written the Hermetick mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully
collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable
Industry of Elias Ashmole, Esquire; illustrated with Figures.

54. The way to Bliss, in three Books, a very Learned Treatise of the
Philosophers Stone, made public by Elias Ashmole, Esquire;

Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanics.
55. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed after a new and most expeditious
manner, together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of mensural comparison, and
in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Dimension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any metal assigned: together with useful
experiments of measures and weights, observations on gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the art Metricald: by T. Wybard.

56. Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares,
Timber, Stones, Steeples, Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the
Carpenters, Rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners,
Carpenters, and Masons: by D. Diggs.

57. The unparalleled work for ease and expedition, entitled, The exact
Surveyor, or the whole art of surveying of Land, showing how to plot all manner
of grounds, whether small enclosures, champian, plain, wood-lands or mountains,
by the plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or content of any Land, to
protect, reduce, or Divide the same; as also to take the plot or chart, to make
a map of any manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other eminent
surveyors method; a Book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or
are otherwise employed about Buildings: by J. Air.

58. The Golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals;
the Theory and practice united in a simpathetical proportion betwixt Line and
Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of form, figure,
magnitude and affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations,
and confirmed with variety of examples in every Species; made compendious and
easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by Tho. Wilsford
corrector of the last Edition of Record.

59. Semigraphy, or the art of short-writing, as is has been proved by many
hundreds in the City of London, and other places by them practiced, and
acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest and swiftest method; the meanest
capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours practice may attain to a
perfection in this art: by J. Rich Author and teacher thereof, dwelling in
Swithins-Lane in London.

60. Milk for Children, a plain and easy method teaching to read and write,
useful for Schools and Families: by J. Thomas D. D.

61. The Painting of the ancients, the History of the beginning, progress, and
consummating of the practice of that noble art of painting: by F. Iunius.

Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
62. Culpeper's Semiatica Vranica, his Astrological Judgment of Diseases from
the decumbiture of the sick much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hypocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpepers censure of Urines.

63. Culpepers last Legacy left to his Wife for the public good, being the
choicest and most profitable of those secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery, which
whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast, and resolved never to be
published till after his death.

64. The Yorkshire Spaw, or the virtue and use of that water in curing of
desperate Diseases, with directions and Rules necessary to be considered by all
that repair thither.

65. Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of man:
by A. Read Doctor in Physic.

66. The art of simpling, an Introduction to the knowledge of gathering of
Plants, wherein the definitions, divisions, places, descriptions, differences,
names, virtues, times, of gathering, temperatures of them, are compendiously
discoursed of: also a discovery of the lesser World: by W. Coals.

67. Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and
Flowers, with their several original names, the places where they grow, their
descriptions and kinds, their times of slourishing and decreasing; as also
their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular physical
virtues; with necessary observations on the seasons of planting and gathering
of our English plants. A work admirable useful for Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons,
and other ingenious persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the
English physical simples, that Gerard or Parkinson in their two voluminous
Herbals have discoursed of; even so as to be on emergent occasions their own
Physicians, the Ingredients being to be had in their own Fields and Gardens:
published for the general good, by W. Coals M.D.

68. The complete midwives practice in the high and weighty concernments of the
body of mankind: the second Edition corrected and enlarged, with a full supply
of such most useful and admirable secrets which Mr. Nicholas Culpeper in his
brief Treatise, and other English Writers in the art of Midwifry have hitherto
wilfully passed by, kept close to themselves, or wholly omitted: by T.
Chamberlain, M. P. illustrated with Copper Figures.

69. The Queens Closet opened, incomparable secrets in physic, chyrurgery,
preserving, candying, and cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the
most experienced persons of our times; many whereof were honored with her own
practice.

70. William Clows his Chirurgical Observations for those that are burned with
the flames of Gunpowder, as also for the curing of wounds and lues venerea.

71. The expert Doctors Dispensatory, the whole art of Physic restored to
practice, with a survey of most Dispensatories extant; a work for the plainness
and method not to be paralleled by any, with a Preface of Mr. Nich. Culpepers
to the Reader in its commendation: by P. Morebius, Physician to the King:
France.

72. The perfect Cook, a right method in the art of Cookery, whether for Pastry
or A la mode Kickshaws, with 55. ways of dressing Eggs: by M. M.

Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Description of Countries, Romances and
Poetry.
73. Times Treasury or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry in
arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
characters of Honor: by R. Brathwait Esquire;

74. Oedipus, or the Resolver of the secrets of Love and other natural
problems, by way of Question and Answer.

75. The admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
plantation there in the year 1628. brought down to these times: all the
material passages performed there, exactly related.

76. America painted to the Life, the History of the Conquest, and first
Original undertaking of the advancement of plantation in those parts, with an
exact Map: by F. Gorges, Esquire;

77. The tears of the Indians, the History of the most bloody and most cruel
proceedings of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica,
Mexico, Peru, and other places of the West Indies; in which to the life are
discovered the tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so
successefully managed against them.

78. The Illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother, written origionally
in Spanish by that Incomparable Wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans; translated
at the requests of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess of
Strafford: by E. P.

79. The History of the golden Ass, as also the Loves of Cupid and his
Mistress Psiche: by L. Apuleius, translated into English.

80. The Unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, by T. N.

81. The Rebellion: a Comedy, by T. Rawlins.

82. The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate Roman Empress: by N. Richards.

83. The Floating Island: a Trage-Comedy acted before the King, by the Students
of Christ-Church in Oxon. by that Renowned Wit W. Strode; the songs were set by
Mr. Henry Laws.

84. Harvey's Divine Poems, the History of Balaam, of Jonah, and of St. John
the Evangelist.

85. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet
Jeremiah in Verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by I. Quarles.

86. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs: by R.
Chamberlain.

87. The admirable ingenuous Satyr against Hypocrites.

88. Wit Restored, in several select Poems, not formerly published by Sr. John
Menis and Mr. Smith, with others.

89. Sportive Wit, the Muses meriment, a new Spring of Drollery, Jovill
Fancies, etc.

Poetical, with several other accurately ingenuous Treatises lately printed.
90. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus: or a sure Guide to those
admirable accomplishments that complete the English Gentry, in the most
acceptable Qualifications of discourse or writing. An art of Logic, accurate
Complements, Fancies, Devises, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and A
la mode Letters: by I.C.

91. Wit and Drollery, with other Jovial Poems with new additions: by Sir
I.M.M.L.M.S.W.D.

92. The conveyance of Light, or the complete Clerk and Scriveners guide; being
an exact draught of all presidents and assurances now in use; as they were
penned and perfected by diverse Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great
Conveyancers, both ancient and modern: whereunto is added a Concordance from
King Richard the Third to this present.

93. Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which the
occult secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englished by T. H.

94. The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand; a Prophetical Treatise.

95. Medicina Magica tamen Physica, magical but natural physic, containing the
general cures of Infirmities and diseases belonging to the bodies of men, as
also to other animals and domestic Creatures, by way of transplantation, with
a description of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold by Sam. Boulton of
Salop.

96. I. Tradescant's Rarities published by himself.

97. The proceedings of the High Court of Justice against the late King
Charles, with his speech upon the Scaffold and other proceedings, Ian. 30. 1648.

Admirable Useful Treatises newly printed.
98. Natures Secrets, or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation
of meteors, describing the temperatures of the elements, the heights,
magnitudes and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges,
Epidemical Diseases, and prodigies of precedent times: with presages of the
weather, and descriptions of the weather-glass: by T. Wilsford.

99. The mysteries of Love and Eloquence, or the arts of Wooing and
Complementing, as they are managed in the Spring-Garden, Hide Park, the New
Exchange, and other eminent places: A work in which is drawn to the life the
Deportments of the most accomplished persons: the mode of their Courtly
entertainments, treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed Sports,
Drolls and Fancies, the Witchcrafts of their persuasive Language in their
approaches, or other more secret dispatches, etc. by E.P.

100. Helmont disguised, or the vulgar errors of impartial and unskilful
practisers of physic confuted, more especially as they concern the Cures of
Fevers, the Stone, the plague, and some other Diseases by way of Dialogue, in
which the chief rarities of physic are admirably discoursed of: by I.T.

Books in the Press and now printing.
1. Geometry demonstrated by lines and numbers; from thence Astronomy,
Cosmography and Navigation proved and delineated by the doctrine of plain and
spherical Triangles: by T. Willsford.

2. The English Annals, from the Invasion made by Julius Caesar to these times:
by T. Willsford.

3. The Fool transformed, a Comedy.

4. The History of Lewis the eleventh King of France, a Trage-comedy.

5. The chaste Woman against her will, a Comedy.

6. The Tooth-drawer, a Comedy.

7. Honor in the end, a Comedy.

8. Tell-tale, a Comedy.

9. The History of Donquixot, or the Knight of the ill-favored face, a Comedy.

10. The fair Spanish Captive, a Trage-comedy.

11. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other Persons of Honor, their rare and incomparable
secrets of Physic, Surgery, Cookery, Preserving, Conserving, Candying,
distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils, compounding of the costliest
Perfumes, with other admirable inventions and select experiments, as they
offered themselves to their observations, whether here or in foreign Countries.

Books lately printed.
12. The so well entertained work, the New World of English words, or a general
Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect
Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words, throughout
the Arts and Sciences Liberal or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are
useful or appertain to the Language of our Nation: to which is added the
signification of proper Names, Mythology and Poetical Fictions, Historical
Relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the world,
especially of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles,
and other most remarkable passages are mentioned: a work very necessary for
strangers as well as our own countrymen, for all persons that would rightly
understand what they discourse or read: collected and published by E.P. for the
greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been assistant
in the most practical Sciences, their names are presented before the Book.

13. The modern Assurancer, the Clerks Directory, containing the practick part
of the Law, in the exact forms and draughts of all manner of Presidents for
Bargains and Sales, Grants, Feoffments, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants,
Joyntures, Indentures, to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries, with good
Proviso's and Covenants to stand seized, Charter-parties for Ships, Leases,
Releases, Surrenders, etc. and all other Instruments and Assurances now in use,
intended for all young Students and Practicers of the Law: by John Hern.

14. Moor's Arithmetic, the second Edition, much refined and diligently
cleared from the former mistakes of the press; a work containing the whole art
of Arithmetic as well in numbers as species, together with many additions by
the Author, is come forth.

15. Likewise Exercitatio Eleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation
on the Oval Figure called an Eleipsis; together with the two first Books of
Mydorgius his Conicks Analiz'd and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical
sections may be easily understood; a Work much desired and never before
published in the English Tongue: by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great
Level of the Fennes.

16. Naps upon Parnassus, a sleepy muse nipt and pinched though not awakened:
such Voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verses as were lately received from some of
the Wits of the Universities in a Frolic; Dedicated to Gondiberts Mistress,
by Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is added for Demonstration of the
Authors Prosaick Excellencies, his Epistle to one of the Universities, with the
Answer; together with two Satirical Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and
an Antiquary, with marginal notes by a Friend to the Reader.

17. Culpepers School of Physic, or the Experimental practice of the whole
Art, so reduced either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the
freeborn Students of the three Kingdoms may in this method find perfect ways
for the operation of such medicines, so Astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the Cures of
their patients: by N. C.

18. Blagrave's admirable Ephemerides for the year 1659. and 1660.

19. J. Cleaveland Revived, Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
incomparable pieces: a second impression with many additions.

20. The Exquisite Letters of Master Robert Loveday, the late admired
Translatour of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating
his memory; published by his dear Brother, Mr. A. L.

21. Englands Worthies, Select Lives of 47. most Eminent persons from
Constantine the Great to the late times: by W. Winstanley, Gent.

22. The Accomplished Cook, the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery revealed in
a more easy and perfect method then has been published in any Language;
expert and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, the raising of
Pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the most poinant
Sauces, with the terms of carving and sewing: the Bills of Fare, and exact
account of all dishes for the season, with other A la mode Curiofities,
together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary figures as are
referred to practice: approved by the many years experience, and careful
industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on several persons of
Honor.

23. The Scales of Commerce and Trade, the Mystery revealed as to traffic with
a Debtor or Creditor, for Merchants Accounts after the Italian way, and
easiest method; as also a Treatise of Architecture, and a computation as to all
the charges of building: by T. Wilsford, Gent.

24. Arts Masterpiece, or the beautifying part of physic; whereby all defects
of Nature of both sexes are amended, age renewed, youth continued, and all
imperfections fairly remedied: by B. T. Doctor of physic.

25. A Discourse concerning Liberty of Conscience, in which are contained
proposals about what liberty in this kind is now politically expedient to be
given, and several reasons to show how much the peace and welfare is concerned
therein: by R.T.

26. Christian Reformation, being an earnest swasion to the speedy practice of
it: proposed to all, but especially designed for the serious consideration of
my dear Kindred and countrymen of the County of Cork in Ireland, and the people
of Riegat and Camerwell in the County of Surrey: by Richard Parr, Doctor in
Divinity there.

27. The Character of Spain, or an Epitomy of their Virtues and Vices.

28. The Character of Italy, or the Italian anatomized by an English Surgeon.

29. The Character of France, to which is added Gallus castratus, or an Answer
to a pamphlet called The character of England, as also a fresh Whip for the
Monsieur in answer to his Letter: the second Edit.

30. No necessity of Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church of
England: by John Pearson D.D.

31. An Answer to Dr. Burges's Word by way of postscript, in vindication of No
Necessity of Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church of England: by
John Pearson D.D.

32. A Treatise of peace between the two visible divided parties; wherein is
inquired, What peace is intended, who the parties that differ, wherein the
difference consists, how they fell out, wherein they ought to agree, how they
may be persuaded unto peace, by what means reconciliation may be made between
them.

33. Dr. Daniel Featly Revived, proving that the Protestant Church, and not the
Catholic, is the only visible and true Church; in a Manual preserved from the
hands of the plunderers, with a succinct History of his life and death:
published by John Featly, Chaplain to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

34. Scotch Covenant condemned, being a full answer to Mr. Duglas his Sermon,
preached at the Kings Coronation in Scotland, wherein His Sacred Majesty is
vindicated: by a loyal and orthodox hand.

35. Englands Triumph, a more exact History of His Majesty's Escape after the
Battle of Worcester, with a Chronological discourse of His Straits and
Dangerous Adventures into France, and His Removes from place to place till His
return into England, with the most Remarkable Memorials till September last.

36. Euclides Elements in 15. Books in English, completed by Mr. Barrow of
Cambridge.

37. (...), or God made Man. A Tract proving the Nativity of our Savior to be
on the 25. of December: by I. Seldom.

These are to give notice, that the true and right Lozenges and Pectorals so
generally known and approved of for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs, Astama's,
Colds in general, and all other Diseases incident to the Head, are rightly made
only by John Piercy, Gent. the first Inventor of them; and whosoever makes
them besides, do but counterfeit them: they are to be sold by Nath. Brook at
the Angel in Cornhill.

FINIS.

