Antinomianisme ANATOMIZED. OR, A GLASS FOR The Lawless: Who deny the Ruling
use of the Moral LAW unto Christians under the GOSPEL.

By John Sedgwick, B. D. and Pastor of the Church of God at Alphag^, near
Cripple-gate, London.

It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy Law. Psalm.
119. 126. LONDON: Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1643.

To the Reader, Loving the Law of our God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
Faith, and Obedience.
Beloved,
WHen I looked upon the old odious Heresy of the Antinomians (condemned by the
Art. 7.
Doctrine of our Church) taking the advantage of the times Distractions newly
to revive it self, and to appear with its wonted face, that cannot blush. I
thought at first, following Saint Augustine, to have said, Non Cont. Petil.
lib. 2.
in venio quomodo te refellerem, nisi ut aut jocantem irriderem, aut
insanientem dolerem: And so to have passed them over in silence: But finding
the Fomenters to prevail, and the Gangrene to spread, especially among the
weaker, more ignorant, and rude sort; and that whilst some did seem to teach,
they did but infect, using this cunning, to utter some Truths, to make way for
their damnable Doctrines; v. g. by crying up Free Grace, Christ's
Righteousness, and Gospel Liberty (Doctrines of singular consequence, and
great use, if rightly and purely opened, and such as no man would suspect
should be held out as Baits and Snares to entangle or draw men aside from the
power of Faith) to cast down Obedience, and keep Christians from their duty to
God, which stands in a care of keeping up their communion with him, observing
of his Mind and Will laid down in his Law, Repenting and Mourning for Sin,
together with a special watchfulness against all sinful courses. I could do
no less then show my self in the Field against them, not in respect of their
Magis misericordia digni quam invidia.
Persons, but their Positions and Practices, desirous to imitate those two
worthy Lights, Hierome and Augustine, the one saying, That Feci ut hosts
Ecclesiae mei quoque bostes fierent. Hier. Incomparabiliter pulc^rior est
veritas Christianorum quam Helena Graecorum. Aug. Ep. 9.
he made the enemies of the Church and Truth his enemies: And the other, That
he made the Truths of God more precious to him, then Helene of the Grecians.

I am already resolved to bear with patience (by the strength of Christ) the
hatred and the railings of the Fathers and Fautors of this Heresy, not passing
much their judgment: Well I know with Hierome, The Truth may be blamed, but
not shamed; Veritas laborare potest, vinci non potest.
And that all their approbrious words (the fruits of their Licentious Doctrine)
are like to the cry of an enemy afar off; and, as Hailstones which do fall down
about our ears, without any harm: I wish them soundness of head, heart,
speech, and Life: As for you who know and feel the power of Holy Truths, and
do desire to walk in Jesus Christ, according to the Rule of Faith and Love,
laid down in the Law and Gospel; Come and see: Try all things, 1 These. 5. 21.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God; because
many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. Be not of the
fools mind, to believe every thing: Be not of the sick man's mind, to be given
to changes: Neither be of their minds, who love to be picking and scraping in
the dirt when heaps of corn are before them: So root and ground your selves in
the Truth, that you be not carried away, like children with every wind of
Doctrine, and endeavor so to behave your selves, That in Agesilaus.
changes you be not changed.

I hope that this ensuing Dialogue shall have as good success as the Sermons
themselves: The Antinomians about the City were startled; some of them were
convinced, confessing that they had been mis^led: other of them* began to be
ashamed of their own Doctrines, affirming, That they never taught against the
Law, it was only their hearers mistake; wherein they have made Sententias ejus
prodidisse, superasse est.
good that saying of Hierome, It is a sufficient confutation of Heresy, to lay
it open. I hope to hear that those few Ministers (whose Parts and Lives are
looked upon, and into) will be made wise, and in stead of floods of words, and
shows of Truth (which carry reality of poison) to address themselves to
soundness of Doctrine, and to a form of wholesome words, wherein they may
express themselves, and benefit those poor souls, who yet are seduced and
hardened by them: if they shall continue in this Law-destroying, and
Dutie-casting-down course, still infecting and infesting the people of God; do
you, my brethren, beware of them, and withdraw your selves from them, as
enemies to the soveraigntie of God over Christians, though they hatch and vent
errors, yet be not you entangled by them, Let no man beguile you with entising
words, Col. 2. 4. For hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. This course of Obedience (which is the grace of your
Faith, the credit of the Gospel, the Will of God in Jesus Christ, and the main
drift of the ensuing Treatise) keep up in Sincerity and Constancy, hereby you
shall rejoice the soul of

Your souls Servant John Sedgwick.

Perlegi Tractatum hunc cui Tirulus, The Anatomy of the Antinomian, quem quia
singulari usui futurum Ecclesiis judico, praelo mandandum censeo.

Julii 27. 1643. Ja. Cranford.

This Book, entitled, The Anatomy of the Antinomian, I judge very fit to be
Printed, and very necessary for these times.

Edm. Calamy.

Errata.
In Page 12. l. 7. for command r. declare. In p. 23. l. 29. for dot, r. does.
In p. 24. l. 2. for unfft. r. unsit. In p. 24. l. 3. for vave r. have. In p.
30. l. 7. for adminstration r. administration. In p. 35. l. 13. for 12. r. 2.
In p. 46. l. 2. for and r. which.

The ANATOMY of the ANTINOMIAN.
The Nomist. MY loving friend, and old acquaintance, you seem by your
countenance to be somewhat vexed in mind?


The Antinomist. I have been at your end of the Town, hearing one of your
Legal Preachers, who has Preached such Stuff as has made me almost mad, I
could have found in my heart to have plucked him out of the Pulpit.


Nomist. Who are those whom you do style Legal Preachers?


Antinomist. To speak my mind freely unto you; Set aside some six or The
Antinomians modest language.
seven rare Phoenixes, sprung out of the ashes of one Mr. Trask, Eaton, Shaw,
and others of that stamp, I hold all the Ministers in London, yea and of the
whole Kingdom to be but Legal Preachers; for as yet the Light is not revealed
to them, and they neither do or can tell how to Preach Jesus Christ, or advance
the free grace of God in Jesus; they in their Preaching do hold men to the
direction of the Law; tell them that there is an use of it, not only to
unbeleevers, but believers; they press men to duty, make them Dutie-mongers,
as if that Christ had not done all for them.


Nomist. Truly Sir your expression is harsh, and charge deep: Can men and
women of Catechized heads and broken hearts thus speak? I think that your
passion does too far transport you: give me leave to tell you that the Churches
of God never had any honorable opinion of the men you name, and I would have
you to know that it is a great disgrace for any Minister of Jesus Christ not to
be a Preacher of the Law, and it has been, and shall be the great credit and
glory of all true Ministers, to be right Preachers of the Law.


Antinomist. That I can never believe.


Nomist. Yet you ought to believe it; for Christ himself, who was a Preacher of
the Law, says, Whosoever therefore shall break one The Ministers glory is to
Preach the Law. Mat. 5 19.
of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least
in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach the same, shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven: Sir, you do but bring your self and Way
into suspicion, when you give out that you are in a new Way, and led by a new
Light; the wiser and the better sort of Christians do wonder at your ignorance
and pride, and they tell us that they have seen and known the coming in and the
going out of these fancies and false Lights; and are sure that such whom you do
cry down for Legal Preachers, are the men whose Ministry God has used and
blessed in bringing them and many thousands to sweet enjoyment of Jesus Christ
the Lord.


Antinomist. Sir, be not angry with me, I must tell you that your Ministers are
a company of Scribes and Pharisees, even such who The false accusation of the
Antinomians.
with a show of Phylosophie and vain Learning, do set up Moses and cry down
Christ; advance Duty, and cast down Free Grace; nay they make it their work by
Preaching the Law to terrify peoples consciences, that thereby they may suck
no small advantage to themselves.


Nomist. Now your speech bewrays you to be much imbittered in your spirit;
how dare you to charge the holy ones of God (whose approved integrity is
manifest to the Churches) to be Scribes and Pharisees? give me leave to tell
you, that though you speak much of the Free Grace of God in Christ, yet unless
you hold (as some say you do) That you cannot sin in saying what you will, or
sinning you need not to be sorry for the same; This loose language of yours
will one day be trouble to your spirits: and further give me leave to tell you,
That I never The Preachers of the Law justified.
heard any Preachers more advance Jesus Christ into the Throne of Redemption,
or set up the Free Grace of God to poor believing penitent sinners then our
Preachers do; all of them, in their Preaching, do beat man out of himself,
making him beholding to Christ alone for Redemption and Salvation.

Lo, yonder is one of them coming toward us, if you please we will confer
with him about this matter, and I would have you to make your Objections and
Exceptions known, for it is a good thing that the heart be established in the
truth.


Antinomist. Content, I like well of your motion.


Nomist. Sir, you are kindly welcome into our company, I perceive that you have
been taking pains, may I ask you upon what subject you were this day?


The Evangelist. I was upon a Morrall Law maintaining Scripture, and that
because we live in Morrall Law opposing times, there being certain men crept in
among us who turn the grace of God into wantonness, and under the color of
advancing Christ, do lead away simple men and women into loose opinions and
licentious conversations.


Nomist. Unto what Scripture did Divine Providence direct you for the beating
down of this lawless way?


Evangelist. It was that known Text in Romans 3. and Verse 31. the words are
these; Do we then make void the Law through Rom 3 31
faith? God forbid, yea we establish the Law.


Nomist. What occasioned Paul to utter these words?


Evangelist. The Apostle having in his Ministry denied all power to the
Morrall Law to justify sinners, and avouching justification to be through
Faith alone: there were some who did vainly imagine that he did render the
Morrall Law useless unto men, and hereupon they were ready to cry down all the
use of that Law; and to say (as men in our days) Away with Moses, Out of doors
with Moses, we believers can no longer abide his voice; the Law is no fit
Doctrine to be taught or heard, to be believed or obeyed: This injury or abuse
ready to fall upon the Doctrine, Paul takes notice of, and seeing that his
wholesome Doctrine was turned quite out of its meaning, made to run contrary and
cross to other useful and profitable Doctrines; after the raising of the
objection (by way of anticipation or praeoccupation) he does not only express
the abhorrencie of his Spirit, in detesting any such licentious or
Law-destroying inference, showing that his heart was so far from closing with,
or liking of this opinion, that it did rise up against the same, intimated in
the word, God forbid, q. d. The great and good Lord never suffer such a thought
to come into my mind: I do here take God to witness, that with horror of
Spirit I do disclaim from the same: but he does also by a Rhetorical inversion
turn the contrary upon the head of the objecters, and in plain terms shows,
That he was so far from Antiquating the Doctrine of the Law, in, and by
preaching the Gospel, that the Gospel which was Preached by him, did mightily
establish and strongly confirm the Doctrine of the Law, he utterly denies the
making void the Law by Preaching the Doctrine of ^aith and Free Grace, and does
stiffely assert the authority and use of the Law unto Christians under the
Gospel.


Nomist. In your opening the meaning of this Scripture, there came these two
things into mind.

some there be who will make sinful argument against them, or corruptly
interpret and misapply them; what is spoken in one sense, men will be ready to
take in another, and which way their crooked and cross conceits do lead, that
way would they have truth to follow; men are not willing to set their Watch by
the Sun, but the Sun by their Watch.


Evangelist. I subscribe to your inference, and do conceive that this 4 Springs
of abusing holy Doctrines.
arises;



They speak evil of those things they know not. Jude v. 10.




raise Objections against, and study the diversions of holy Truths: the Whore
blows out the candle, that she may not be espied; the fish Polypus muds the
water, that she may not be taken; and men of loose spirits do cry down and
pervert holy Truths, that they may the more freely sin and be wicked. But I
pray you what is the other thing you took notice of?


Nomist. Paul's spirit rejecting with Apostolical indignation, the lawless
Inference of vain men.


Evangelist. You have spoken the truth, and each Christian should learn from
the Apostle, 1. In his judgment to disallow. 2. With his heart to abominate.
3. By his speech to declaim against. 4. By all endeavors to suppress and
silence all false deductions from holy Doctrines: Truth should be precious and
lovely to us, but error vile and abominable; we are enemies to Truth, so far
as we are friends with error: Oh that men would know, That it is a great sin
to be taken with odd and new Opinions, and to forsake old Truths for new
errors: I wish that you and all my friends would try before you trust; winter
and summer new men, and their new doctrines, Bring them to the Law and the
Testimony.


Nomist. I thank you for this help; and now I shall desire you to open to me
the terms of the Text: which being truly done, will give much satisfaction to
such who seek the truth in love. I pray tell me what does the Apostle mean by
faith, which is the thing that does not make void the Law?


Evangelist. There can be but one of these two meanings in the word; either we
take it for habitual and actual faith, which is called A double Faith. 1.
Habitual.
fides qua; namely, That grace wrought by the Spirit in the soul, inclining it
to the application of Jesus Christ, and his righteousness; which grace is the
condition of the Covenant of grace, and the appointed Instrument to apprehend
justifying righteousness, as along in this Scripture the Apostle shows: Or
we must take it for Doctrinall Faith, which is called 2 Doctrinall.
fides quae; namely, That Gospel or Covenant Doctrine* which propounded free
grace, sets up Jesus Christ in all his Offices, Merits, and Virtues to poor
believing sinners: Now take the Apostle either way, and he holds, That neither
the grace of Faith, nor the doctrine of Faith, does make void the Law of God.


Nomist. Tell me what is that Law which this Faith does not make void?


Evangelist. You must know that there were three sorts of Laws delivered A
threefold Law.
by God to Moses.


1. Ceremonial; which were temporary Ordinances and Rites really pointing to
Christ, of whom they were figures and shadows; and by whose presence and death
they were all fulfilled, terminated and abrogated; Christ was finis inter
ficiens legis Ceremonialis; so that the law of Ceremonies was made void by the
Doctrine of faith, and therefore this law cannot be here meant.

2. Judicial, which were peculiar Ordinances given by God to Moses, for the
well ordering of the Commonwealth of Israel.

This Law concerned the Jews not simply, as men, but as Jews; the National,
personal, or particular binding right of this Law rested so in them, that it
died with the decay of their Commonwealth: only the common equity or right
hereof remains ( i) as far as it was grounded on the Law of Nature, served
directly to confirm any of the Ten Commandments, or to uphold the good of
Family, Church, or Commonwealth, it is still in force, and of good use; but of
this Law the Apostle in this Scripture makes no mention: Now if he speak not of
the Law Ceremonial, nor of the Law Judicial, it follows that we must
understand him speaking of the Law --

3. Morrall, and that not as it is a rule of Justification, but a rule of
Service and Obedience; the whole compass of man's duty respectively to be
manifested, is principally contained in the Law Morrall; which is no other then
the revealed Copy of The Moral Law, what.
Gods will touching man's duty, laid down in the ten Commandments: if we do
cast our eyes upon the scope of the Apostle, it will be very evident that he
speaks of this Law; for he deals against such who sought to be justified and
saved by the works of the Law, and not by faith in Jesus Christ; they went
about to set up the Law of Works, and to destroy the Law of Faith. Now Paul
shows that no man's conformity to the Moral Law could be matter of life and
justification unto him in Gods sight; The Law, by sin, is become weak and
unprofitable to the purpose of righteousness, it could not be a covenant of
life unto man; now having excluded it from being a covenant of life to sinners,
there were those who would have it to be disannulled from being a rule of life
unto men, which the Apostle will not admit of, so that its plain that the
vindication is of the Moral Law, that, as a rule of life is not made void unto
Christians.


Nomist. How shall I understand the Apostle when he denies the making void of
the Law by Faith?


Evangelist. I shall open it thus unto you.

1. By showing to you what it is to make void the Law; which does note, The
taking away from the Law all regulating or directive power over man's life and
actions; when it is held to be useless, or of no more effect unto Christians
then an Almanac The making void the Law, what.
that is out of date; or to be a Doctrine inconsistent with, or repugnant unto
the Doctrine of Free Grace, this is the making of it void: Now then take it up
thus, That the Doctrine of the Gospel and the Doctrine of the Law, though for
matter they are distinct and diverse, yet they are not so divided and opposite,
but that they both may be well admitted into the Ministry, and taught unto
Christians; they are so far from real contradiction, that they ho^d a
friendly concurrence in point of duty; they are not destructive nor devouring
one unto another, but sweetly coordinate, standing more firmly one by the
other.

2. By declaring whether the Moral Law in no respect is not made void by the
Doctrine and grace of Faith: And here consider, if we look upon the Moral Law
in that notion as it was given to Adam in Paradise, I mean as it was a Covenant
of Works, or as the Covenant thereof was Works; so that whosoever would receive
life and salvation, must perform perfect obedience to the same, according as it
is written, He that does Gal 3. 12.
these things shall live in them. And again, Moses describes the Romans 10 5
righteousness which is of the Law, That the man which does these things shall
live by them: in this sense as it was given to Adam in Paradise to justify or
save men, the Doctrine of Faith does make void the Moral Law. I will not stand
disputing, whether the Law, as given by Moses, could have given life and
righteousness; or whether God did primarily intend in publshing this Law by
Moses on mount Sinai, to send man to fetch his life out of the Law; this we
know, that what ever strength there is in the Law ex se. Yet by reason of sin
it is weakened, and it is impossible that life and salvation should come to man
by it, as the case now stands: it was long since concluded. That by the Works
of the Law, there shall no Rom 3 20.
flesh be justified in his sight. And Paul confesses, We are become Romans 7. 4.
Gal 2. 19.
dead to the Law by the body of Christ: And again, I through the Law am dead to
the Law: We constantly teach, That every Christian by the Gospel, is freed from
expecting life by any obedience to the Law. Again, if we look upon the Moral
Law in its execration, and as it is enabled with a power to curse men to hell
for their sins; I say, as it is a sentencing, killing, and death-ministring
Letter, the Gospel has made it void unto believers; it has no power to fasten
the curse of heaven upon the person of any believer; though all their sins are
cursed sins, even such as deserve the grand curses of the Law, yet no curse for
sin can come from the Law upon them; the curse of the Law seized on Christ to
the utmost, that the blessing might befall them: Further, if we shall look upon
the Law in its strictness and rigor, as it has a power to challenge and
exact a punctual and personal obedience to it self, without which, it allows
no man favor with God, or life from (...) Rom 8. 4.
God, then it is also made void by the Doctrine of Faith, the right and
strictness of the Law is fulfilled in us by our surety, its not expected that
it should be fulfilled by us in our own persons. Besides, if we shall consider
the Moral Law in its coactive or coercive power, as it does by fears and
terrors wrought in the conscience, urge and constrain an obedience to it self,
making men and women servile and slavish in all acts of duty; thus is it made
void to believers under the Gospel: I do not conceive that the Spirit of
bondage, or the Spirit of fear, or the Spirit of unwillingnesse, lays so upon
a believer, that he must be forced to do required service; nay, rather he is a
Law unto himself, willingly performing what is right and required, Luke 1. 74.
Romans 8. 15. 1 Timothy 1. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 7. 1 John 5. 3. For this is the Love of God,
that we keep his Commandments; and his Commandments are not grievous. To
conclude, if we shall consider the Law Moral in its irritation, as it has in
it an accidental or occasional secret sin-provoking, enraging, or
exasperating power, whereby it stirs up in men an earnestness to the
commission of sin; thus is it made void to the believer. Consider, that the
Moral Law is not sin, nor was it ordained to beget sin, it is holy, and just,
and good: Romans 7. 12. Yet such is the venomous and malicious quality which is
in sin, remaining in man's nature, that if you for bid man any thing, or limit
him to do this or that duty, now his lust rises up the more to desire that
which is forbidden, and swells over all the banks and baies which should
confine it; according to the old sayings, Nitimur in vetitum, semper cupimusque
negata: Gens humana ruit in vetitum nefas; Men do many things which they would
never have done, had not God forbidden the same: Our base natures take
occasions from an holy Law to do wickedly; this stirs them up to be more
wicked; but now lust has no more such working in believers from the Law, the
Law cannot provoke a godly man to be more wicked; nay, rather if he see any
commandment of God against him, it is a sufficient discouragement to him to for
bear that sin; with Joseph he says, How can I do this great wickedness Genesis
39 9.
and sin against God?

3. By showing to you in what respects, and unto whom the Moral Law is not
made void by the Gospel. And here we shall consider the Moral Law four ways.

The Moral Law not made void four ways.
men offending or transgressing: the Doctrine of the Gospel does not disa^le
the Law from threatening sinners, and telling them of the evil of punishment
which is due to them for the evil of sinning; We read how Paul once and again
does turn the flaming sword of the ^aw against his hearers; in one place
telling them, That if they live after the flesh, they should die, Romans 8. 13.
And in another place he faith, Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade
mer, 2 Cor. 5. 11. I conceive, that the threats of the Law are of much good use
to the sons and daughters of men: They do awaken and rouse them out of their
security and sinfulness; I am of his opinion who would Chrysosto^^.
have hell preached daily unto men, being persuaded it would prove an excellent
means to keep many out of hell: When I look upon that body of sin which
remains in the best; I cannot see but the threats of the Law may be of good
use unto them; not that I fancy Christians should be carried into, and along
duty, by a spirit of fear, as slaves; that they must have the rod shaking over
them, or else they cannot, or will not do duty: I know that they are led by a
more free and ingenuous Spirit, into acts of duty; namely, by the Law of Love:
yet let me tell you, That the carnal and unregenerate part of the godly, needs
this whip and harsh voice of the Law; and I see no reason but a Christian may
make that motive to himself which God makes motive unto him.

showing mercy to thousands of them that love him, and keep his commandments:
And again, the fifth Commandment is called, The first Commandment with promise,
Ephesians. 6. 2. Surely the Doctrine of Faith does not make void these promises in
the Law; nay, it gives the Law a power to promise, and allows that men may
set the joy before them, and have an eye to the recompense of reward, though
not chi^fly and principally, or in a way of merit.

1. Of Declaration, to reveal and make known the will of God touching duties,
to teach, tell, and acquaint men with the same; hence it is called a Lamp and a
Light: the Gospel does continue it to be an eternal Doctrine, teaching men
what to do, and how to live. 2. Of Obligation; it does not only command things
honest and to be done, but it does tie men to yield obedience to it self for
the Lawgivers sake; hence it is called, Lex a Ligando: for if you destroy the
Obligation of the Law you make void the Law:


Now the Gospel will have it to be a ruling, commanding, and binding Law unto
Christians, it does set up the authority of the Law Moral, making it to be a
Law indeed.

John the Baptist, to make way for Christ, a manuduction to Christ and Faith;
Paul says, Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that
we might be justified by Faith, Gal. 3. 24. I do not say that the Law formally
does beget Faith in Christ, it does it only by way of Preparation and
manuduction, and that partly as it does convince men of sin, laying open to
them that exceeding wickedness which lies upon the soul; By the Law comes
the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. And, I had not known that lust had been sin,
unless the Law had said, Thou shall not covet, Romans 7. 7. Hence is it compared
to a glass, whose property is to represent those objects that present
themselves before it in all their colors; thus the holy Law does yield up unto
men by way of reflection, the true and certain face and nature of their
sinfulness, it lays sin out and open in its true proportion and countenance;
the light does not more demonstrate visible objects then the Law (which is the
candle of the Lord) does make known sins, and that by the help of spirit, and
the use of conscience, partly as it does deject and humble men for sin: the Law
does so open the debt and death of sin to the soul, that it sees it self
enclosed with the curse that belongs to sin; and that Divine wrath is ready to
pour it self o^ him, and how to avoid the same he knows not; he is as a man
shut up in a close room, having his mortal enemy standing at the door with a
drawn sword in his hand; entering upon him, thus the Law falls upon the
conscience of a sinner, whipping and tormenting him; loading and burdening him;
laying him as it were upon the mouth of hell, passing the doom of damnation
upon him, from which it can of it self no way deliver it self; it leaves him a
sinner without a Savior, without all hope of salvation: Only it is brought to
this wishing, O that there were any possiibility of mercy, that I might be
saved from this condition of insufferable misery. Again, we may consider the
The Law is not made void: 1. To unbelievers.
subjects in respect of whom the Law is not made void, and they are of two
sorts.

1. Unbeleevers, who are yet in the state of nature, and to such the Law is
enlightening, a wakening, judging, and terrifying, through the application of
the curse and wrath; The 1 Timothy 1. 9
Law is made for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners,
etc. It is their whip and rod to scourge them.

2. Believers, who are under Grace and Love; and to such 2. To believers.
it is a glass, discovering their many hidden corruptions, by which they may
daily try and examine themselves, it is their bridle, to cohibite and restrain
them from sinning; it is their hedge and mound to keep them in order and due
compass; in a word it is their rule, by which they are to guide and moderate
the inward and the outward conversation of soul and life: And thus far it is
not made void by the Doctrine of the Gospel.


Nomist. Will you be pleased to demonstrate this a little farther unto me and
my friend?


Evangelist. I shall prove unto you that the Doctrine of Faith does not make
void the doctrine and duty of the Moral Law, by these ten instances.

Adam in the state of innocence; I say that Adam in the state of integrity was
not without a Law, nay nor without this Law, for the substance of it; though he
was a righ^eous man, and in his height of dignity, yet he was commanded by the
will of God, and his work was to be ruled by the precept of God in all things;
as you may read, Genesis 3 16. The Law Moral, and the Law given to Adam, was the
same Law for the matter of duty, as I look upon the Law given to Adam for a
covenant of life and salvation, God intending to give, and tying him to expect
life upon, and for his obedience, and withal do consider that God in justice
might have h^ld his posterity to the same condition and covenant of works; here
I conceive that the Law given to Adam, and the Law received by Moses, are not
one and the same; for I think that God never intended that the Law given by
Moses should become a Covenant of Works unto the sons of men: nay, we find
that there were merciful and Evangelicall intentions in God in giving the
same, as may appear in the Preface to the Commandments; in his Preaching Christ
to Adam in Paradise immediately upon the fall; and in his ordering that it
should be a means to beat man out of himself, and to bring him unto Christ: Yet
when I look upon Adams Law, as it was a rule of life and obedience unto him, in
this respect they do agree; virtually the Law given to Adam and received by
Moses was one and the same, the mind of God for duty being constant and
perpetual, one at all times, and in all places; according as we pray, Thy will
be done on earth as it is in heaven.

Man's nature has this Law written and engraven indelebly in it: I will not
dispute whether the Law of Nature be a relic of the old image left in Adam;
of this I am sure, That the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the
things Rom 2. 14
contained in the Law: these having not the Law, are a Law unto 15
themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts. Out of
which Scripture, it is clear, that God presently upon the Fall, planted in the
heart of all mankind, not only The Law of Nature, what.
an opinion of Divine Sovereignty and authority; but a knowledge of certain
practical Principles, in an obliging and prosecuting way: Thus in a word, the
understanding and judgment (which is called the Speculative faculty) was, and
is enabled with an apprehension and conception of things to be done and to be
forborne, as their honesty and dishonestie did appear: the conscience and will
(which is called the Practical faculty) had imprinted on it a desire or
endeavor to prosecute all those things which should be revealed to the
understanding; they reasoned from their light, to their life, inferring the
practice of all revealed principles, Mat. 7. 12.

Now this Law had such a firm and fast engraving in man^ understanding and
conscience by God himself, that iniquity it self cannot eradicate or obliterate
the same; it is written in man's nature as with a pen of iron, for ever to
remain with the nature of mankind; and this is no other then a Summary or
Abridgement of the Moral Law; for the Law of Moses written in Tables of stone,
materially is no other then what was written or imprinted in the heart;
according to the rule, Praecepta Decalogi sunt explicationes juris naturae; The
Law Moral The difference that is between the Law of Nature and the Law of Adam
and Moses*
is the explication of the Law Natural. I grant that this Law of Nature, by
reason of man's corruption and preposterousnesse of affection, is not so clear,
perfect, and easy, as was the Law in Creation to Adam; for he had in his
created estate a more shining light, quick apprehension, steadie will, and able
resolution, then his posterity naturally now have; nay, this Law of Nature does
in many circumstances differ from the Law Moral; v. g. This we have by
infusion, that by public voice; This is written in tables of flesh, that in
tables of stone; This contains duty impliedly, without method and order,
that expressly and orderly, etc. The Argument lies thus, If God has indelebly
written the Moral Law in man's nature, then the Doctrine of the Gospel does not
make it void: but God, etc.

The Moral Law is a Doctrine spiritual, holy, good, just, and perfectly
containing the good and acceptable will of God, and therefore not to be made
void; that it is a Doctrine, the Hebrew word Torah will make evident, it being
derived of Horah, which signifies to teach and to instruct, how to live, and
how to walk; even as a Schoolmaster does teach his Scholars what is evil, and
how to avoid it; what is good, and how to do it; that it is spiritual, holy,
good, and just; The Romans 7. 12, 14.
Apostle says, We know that the Law is spiritual; And, Wherefore the
commandment is holy, and just, and good: And thus it is not only originally as
the holy, good, and just God, who is a spirit, is the Author of it; but also
materially, and effectively, it is pure and undefiled, free from all stain of
error and falsehood, having not the least iniquity cleaving to it, it carries
in it the good and acceptable will of God, it is indeed the wisdom and the will
of God; the Law is not good, and then willed of God; but it is good, because it
is willed of God; whose will alone is the rule of all goodness; yea, and men
by it become Spiritual, holy, good, and just: Now if it be every way absolute
and perfect (as it is styled, The perfect Law of Liberty) there can be no
reason rendered why it should be abolished; I conceive that the Lawmakers was in
wisdom infinite, and so he did foresee beforehand how to prevent any
inconvenience which might fall upon it, and become a reason to abrogate it:
show me the least flaw in the Moral Law, as it stands a rule for duty, and
then you may talk rationally of disannulling it: Will you take upon you to make
void and of none effect that which is holy and good?

endure for ever, Psalm. 119. 89. Christ says, Till heaven and earth pass, one
jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, Mat. 5. 18. It is of an
unperishing nature; you may as soon destroy God himself, as destroy that:
though man's Laws may be repealed, Gods Laws admit of no repeal; had it been a
temporary Ordinance, then it might have been made void.

The Law is universally extensive: The commands thereof are commands to all
Christians, in all ages: now look how far any Commandment extends, so far
does obedience thereunto extend it self: If the Moral Law reach to us
Christians as well as to the Jews, then we stand obliged by it: now to make it
evident that this Law concerned all men, even us The extensivenesse of the Law
to Jews and Gentiles.
Christians under the Gospel, consider 1. The Moral Law was no Type of Christ,
neither did it concern the Jew only as he was a Jew; if so, then the Jew only
did sin in Idolatry and Adultery, and the Gentiles did not: I demand, What Law
of God did forbid these sins? Did not the Moral Law? It did. And will you say
that the Jew only was tied to it? If he was not, then the Gentiles came in
also, and so the Commandment concerned them, which must be yielded, unless you
will say that the Gentiles did not sin by Idolatry, Adultery, etc. 2. The
Gentiles heretofore did, and Christians now do sin in breaking the Moral Law;
for all sin is the transgression of the 1 Jo. 3. 4.
Law. Now if they were not bound to keep the Moral Precepts, they did not and
could not offend; such must hold that believers cannot, and do not sin, who
make void the Law unto believers; the Apostle shows that the Moral Law
concludes all under sin; now that Law which concludes all men to have sinned,
concludes that all men have broken that Law; if it conclude that Jews and
Gentiles have sinned and broken it, then it extends it self to them. 3. If the
Commandments of the Moral Law do not equally and universally bind men to
their observance, then the curse threatened upon the breach of that Law, does
not appertain equally and universally to them; for we read, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to
do them, Gal. 3. 10. Here I would ask a proud Antinomist, Does the curse of the
Law belong to all men, yea or no? If it does, then the Law concerns us
Christians; if he shall say, It does not; then I affirm, That he denies his
part in Christ; it being written, Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the
Law, being made a Gal. 3. 13.
curse for us.

The spirit of God does write this Law in the hearts of all God; children;
according to the promise, I will put my Law Jer. 31. 33.
into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. If any shall scruple at
the expression, and think that by this Law is not meant the Moral Law. I would
desire them to consider what the Prophet Ez^kiel says, I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I pray note. 1. That the Spirit The
Spirit writing the Law, what.
makes it his work to convey the mind of God in the Law into the mind of
every Christian, he does by an enlightening act sufficiently instruct them in
Gods authority over them, and his will concerning them. 2. That the Spirit does
by an act of efficacy engrave and write the Law in their hearts, which is no
other thing then the fastening of the power and authority of the Law, together
with a disposition to obedience upon the heart, so that the heart shall be no
more contrary to it, but sweetly concurring with it. I mean there shall be
found these four things in a Christian.

1. Obedientiall apprehension; which is the basis and ground of all duty to
God; for without a clear and distinct knowledge, and a spiritual discerning of
the inward meaning, and binding power of Gods Commandments, a man shall never
submit to the Law of God, as the only rule of life and obedience.

2. Obedientiall disposition; the frame of the heart shall be fitted unto acts
of obedience, and the disposition sweetly inclined to take up the yoke of all
Divine injunctions, so that with David they shall say, I am ready to do thy
will, O my God, I^^l. ^ 40. 8.
yea thy Law is within my heart.

3. Obedientiall desire; such have wrought in them solid desires, that the
goings and steps of their hearts and lives, may be answerably suited and
matched with the righteous and pure Laws of God, and all swerving from the same
are grievous to them, as being contrary to their mind and will; they wish with
David* O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statut^s, Is^^ 19 5
and it is with them, as it was with Paul, Who did consent to the Rom 7 19.
Law in his soul, though he did swerve from the same in many particular
actions: the Spirit works this temper in the godly, that there shall be an
equal latitude between Gods Precepts and his desires ( i) though there be much
duty which a Christian cannot do, yet there is no duty but he would do: he
says, I would keep good Laws, but always I do not keep them; or, always I do
not, yet always I would obey.

4. Obedientiall expression; the life of obedience is the obedience of the
life, and therefore the Spirit draws them out, not only into an outward
profession, but a sincere and real practice of obedience; that as the will, so
the deed; as the heart, so the hand shall be theirs; they shall be made to put
out their strength, employ their endeavors, and to overcome themselves, that
they may obey the commands of heaven: Now is this the work of the Spirit on the
godly, and shall we imagine that the Law is made void?

Christ himself has established and ratified the Moral Law for a Doctrine of
obedience; he does profess that he Mat. 5. 17.
came not to destroy; or to put a period to it, but to fulfill it; now the
fulfilling of it, is not the destroying of it; and if it be not destroyed by
Christ, then it remains the Law still; and if a Law, it binds us to obedience:
Nay, Christ made it his 4 Actions of Christ about the Law.
work in his Preaching to vindicate and assert the genuine and proper sense of
the Law, from the Pharisees corrupt, and imposed glosses and interpretations:
further, he became himself a pattern and an example of obedience to the rule of
the Moral Law, in no one point swerving from the direction thereof: and in a
word, he did frequently enjoin men the right observation of the Law, according
as Moses had done before him.

The Apostles of Jesus Christ have maintained the Doctrine of the Law, in the
o^ligation thereof unto duty: besides the Text now opening to you; Consider,
how often does he say, Love is the fulfilling of the Law: What frequent Romans 13.
recitals are there of the Commandments of God in the Epistles? The Apostle
presses on children the duty of reverence unto their Parents from the fifth
Commandment, saying, Honor Ephesians. 6. 2.
thy father and thy mother, which is the first Commandment with promise: S.
James does second S. Paul, saying, If ye fulfill Iam. 2. 8.
the royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, ye do well: and the Apostle John, in his Epistle, does set on this
Doctrine, as you may easily observe.

Believers before and after Christ's time, have reckoned themselves to be under
the duty and obligation of this Law: David, Hezekiah, Josiah, with many
others, stand upon record for their respect to Gods commandments, and walking
in the way of his will. Zachary and Elizabeth kept them close to the Moral
Law, Luke 1. 6. And Paul did not only consent Rom 7 16 22
to the Law that it was good; And delight in it after the inner man: but he
professes, that with his mind he himself did serve the 25
Law of God. Mark the phrase, he did serve the Law which expressly notes his
obligation by it, and obedience to it: nay, the whole seed of the woman, with
whom the Dragon makes war, are said to keep the Commandments of God, as well
Rev. 12. 17
as to have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

The Moral Law shall be a rule for Gods judging of men at the last day; hence
says the Apostle, So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the
Law of liberty, Jam. 2. 12. In which Scripture we man observe, that in the day
of judgment God will call men to account for words and actions: and that the
rule upon, or by which he will proceed with men, is his Law; its clear by the
Scripture, that the Law shall at the last day be condemning and judging unto
impenitent and unbeleeving sinners; Hence says Christ, Do not think that I
will accuse you to the Father, there is one that accuses you, even Moses, in
whom ye trust, John 5. 45. And again the Apostle says, As many as have sinned
in the Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2. 12. Where it is plain, that the
wilful breach of the Moral Law shall be imputed to every child of Adam, unto
just condemnation; such as have the Law written in their hearts shall be
condemned, because they did not obey the Law, as it was revealed to them: such
as have the Law more clearly written in the Scriptures, and do violate it that
shall condemn them; not but that men shall be judged in that day according to
the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. Now then if God shall make the Law Moral his rule by
which he will proceed to judgment at the last day. I conclude, it is not made
void by the Doctrine of Faith; it was to me strange Divinity which one of the
new lights vented in public, saying. That the Moral Law shall be a rule for
God to condemn an unbeleever by, but it is no rule for him to walk by. I wonld
ask of this man, how men do draw their inditements against tiplers and
quarrellers in the country? Is there not a Law broken, which should have been
observed; and because its not observed, does not the penalty come upon a man;
does not that strengthen the Law to judge and condemn man? Does not all judging
and condemning by the Law, both strengthen and enforce the obedience which is
principally intended by the Law? I think that the Law neither could have cursed
or judged man at all, if his disobedience had not ^ade way thereunto.


Nomist. I shall desire you to show me how the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is
called, The Law of Faith, does establish and confirm the authority and
obligation of the Moral Law?


Evangelist. Sir, I hope that you can tell how to distinguish between the
making of the Moral Law to be a Law, and the maintaining or strengthening of
it, being so made, we teach that there is no efficiency or causalitie in the
Grace or Doctrine of Faith to make the Moral Law, it had no other Author then
God, the great Lawgiver and Lawmakers.


Nomist. I yield to this, and do look upon the Doctrine of Faith, as
maintaining or making strong the Law to be a rule for life, and would fain be
satisfied in the ways how this is done.


Evangelist. I do conceive that the Moral Law receives strength and
confirmation by the Doctrine of Faith these 12. ways. The Gospel does stablish
the Law 12 ways.


Is the Law against the promises of God? God forbid: What, Gal 3 21.
does the Law say one thing and the Gospel say another? I speak to the matter
in hand: and do aver that the Gospel and the word of Free Grace directs men
to no other obedience, then that of which the Law is formally or virtually the
rule: Vice in the Law, is Vice in the Gospel; and Virtue in the Law, is Virtue
in the Gospel; as it is the same water which runs through several Pipes; so it
is the same obedience which is contained in the Law and in the Gospel; they
have but one mind of God in them, and do speak the same things; the work of
duty in both, is coordinate and sub-ordinate, not contrary or repugnant.


Nomist. Do they agree in all things for duty?


Evangelist. You may note these two things.

1. That though they do both declare and require duties showing what is to be
done and forborne, yet the Doctrine of Faith has more helps, or more obliging
virtue and ability then the Law has or can afford; the Doctrine of the Law is
only de^larative; that of the Gospel is also effective and operative. 2. That
the Doctrine of Faith does require the exercise of some duties and graces, in a
more special and determining way then the Doctrine of the Law does: I shall
instance in this one point; That man should believe what ever God would have
him to believe is a duty of the Moral Law; but that man's Faith should
determine itself in the Son of God, apprehending and applying his
righteousness for justification in Gods sight; This is a duty of the Gospel:
I conceive that justifying Faith is formally req^ired in the Gospel, at the
most but virtually commanded in the Law of Moses.


Nomist. Proceed I pray you.


Evangelist. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save Jam. 4 12.
and destroy.

I am. 2. 8.
the Moral Law is called, The Royal Law, because it is the mind of the great
King of heaven; It is the great Kings Law, according to which, every of his
Subjects ought to walk, and Mi^ 6 8.
to order their lives and conversations; he has showed thee, O man, what is
good, and what the Lord thy God requires of thee, etc.

better to obey, then to stand disputing against duty; and that though the
command be repugnant to some self respects, yet there neither is or can be
given any sufficient reason why a man should deny obedience to the Will of God,
and not do duty.

sin is the transgression of Gods Law; and that which God is so displeased
with, that he will most severely punish; but it does show it self every way
opposite to all, even the appearances of wickedness; this teaches men to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and calls upon Tit 2. 11. 2 Cor. 7 1.
them to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.



per modum justitiae () in a way of satisfaction unto justice, which cannor be
done until that right be done to the Law; the right of the Law must be
fulfilled in us, as satisfaction was made unto it in our names, by our Surety
and Rom 8. 4.
Savior; till when no man is by the Gospel admitted to love and life.



humble self-denying heart is never above duty; all the while the heart is
proud and selfish, its disobedient, and unfft for duty; where self reigns,
there carnal reasonings vave mastery and base ends do over-bear the heart,
carrying it from duty: Now the Gospel calls upon men to deny themselves, and to
be lowly minded, and humble hearted; it would have men to loose their wills in
Gods, as the wife does lose her name in her husbands.

Paul puts all love upon Faith; if men love, they cannot but obey; if they
believe, they cannot but love; as love is a part of duty, so it is a provoker
to duty, The love of Christ does mightily constrain. 2 Cor 5. 14


Without me you can do nothing: and in another place, I am Ioh. 15 4.
able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. It
woes and wins men to come to Jesus Christ, seeking obeying virtue from him.

Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: In Phil. 2. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
I^^ 2
another place, Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure: In a
third place, Show me thy says by thy works. Thus it is in the Gospel; works do
not justify persons in Gods ^ight, yet they justify faith to a man's own
conscience, and all the world. We are not to be ignorant, that as Faith has an
immediate and primary act, called Application, which is the taking hold of
special and saving objects; so it has a mediate, derived, or resulting act,
called Su^jection, which is the delivery up of the person to be ruled and
governed by the Lord in all things; the grace of Faith, in life, will make men
and women to apply themselves to keep Gods Commandments with cheerfulness; as
the Gospel does show that God is gracious, so it teaches that man must be
dutiful; he that said, I am God all-suffi^ient, said also, Walk before me;
that covenant which makes God to be a loving Father, does style Christians
obedient children.


Nomist. If it might not be troublesome unto you, I would gladly hear the uses
you made of these Doctrines.


Evangelist. It is meat and drink to me to do my Masters will, and your
Spirituali profit is my souls pleasure. I gladly yield to your motion, and do
acquaint you, that this Scripture thus opened.

Bellarmine in his fourth Book, De justification^, and fifth Bellar. de
justifi* ^ 4. c. 5.
Chapter, uses these words, ^gitur adversarii, ut supra diximus, in co ponunt
Christianam libertatem, ut nulli legi subjecti sint in conscientia, and coram
deo; and Christum habeant pro*redemptore, non pro*legis-latore; Moses autem cum
suo Decalogo nihil ad eos pertineat: (i) The Adversaries to us do place
Christian Liberty in this, that they are altogether freed from the obedience
and subjection of the Law, so that Moses and his Commandments do no way belong
to them: We reject this charge as false and unjust, and do from our hearts
abhor any such opinions; we only teach a freedom from the Law, as men would
make it a covenant of Works* and seek justification thereby: we constantly and
earnestly maintain, That the Moral Law is a binding rule for duty, and ties
all sorts of persons to the observation of it self, and such who teach
otherwise we do oppose as Antinomians; We do not abolish the Law, but rather as
the Apostle says, We establish it to be an immutable and perpetual Doctrine
and rule of life and holy walking, binding not by a natural, but a Divine
obligation, I shall conclude this* with the saying of a learned Divine, Vnanimi
consensu docemus omnes Christianos Andr^as Rivet in (...) Dec^l^gi* p. 17
fid l^s l^gis moralis regulae; directioni, imperio and obligationi subjectos
esse, and omnium mandatorum divinorum, quibus ^liquod officium nobis imponitur;
quae libertas non destruit legis obligati^n^m, and obedi^ntiam, sed auget and
excitat: And that the liberty from justification by the Law, does not destroy,
but increase and stir up the obligation of, and obedience to the Law. I could,
if need were, bring in the Testimony of Luther, Calvin, B^z, ^hemnitius,
Zanchius, with many other learned and godly Divines in all the ages of the
Church since the Apostles days, maintaining that the Moral Law is not
abolished by the Gospel in i^s power, to be a rule of life to Christians: see
Reverend Doctor Tailor in his Regula vitae, page 190. Nay I dare affirm, that
never did any one both godly and learned man teach the contrary.


Nomist. I thank you for this, for I have heard some of those who say they
Preach Free grace, and are not Legal Preachers, say that Luther is of their
judgment, and that their Honey comb; Eatons book. Ttaske. Eaton. Richardson.
Gospel grounds; The discovery of the dangerous dead faith; News from Heaven,
or, A Treatise of Peace: together with other Books which past secretly among
them, were the milk sucked out of his ^r^st; nay they give out that learned
Rivet, whose words you have quoted, was wholly of their judgment.


Evangelist. Sir, believe me that neither Luther or Rivet, did ever conceive or
teach that the Moral Law was thrust out of its ruling use by the Gosp^l; nay,
I will loose all my credit I have with the Churches of God, if I do not prove
to them and all the world, that there is not a stronger enemy against that
Sect of Libertines who would a^rogate the Moral Law in its use, as I have
opened, then Luther was: If they dare make him judge in this Controversy, I
shall stand or fall by his own Sentence: O that the name of this holy man
should suffer, as it does, among Papists and Libertines; But leaving this I
proceed.

Lam. 2. 14.
vain and foolish things, and not to discover iniquity; O how many are there
yet unacquain^ed with their heart and their life vileness, because this glass
is not set open to them, and pressed upon them? O how many unbroken and
unhumbled hearts are there among us, and all because the Law is not Preached;
men are yet strongly wedded to their sins, scorn all tenders of mercy; cannot
be drawn to think of, much less to welcome Jesus Christ, and all for want of
the Preaching of the Law: Was it ever known, that until the soul was broken
and brought low, and John Baptist had done his part (which is the work of the
Law) that any man was prepared for Jesus Christ? Go out therefore O you
Ministers of God, gird your sword upon your thighs, and make your arrows keen
in the hearts of all obstinate and rebellious sinners; Preach down all those
who cry down the Preaching of the Law; and Preach you the Law to discover men
unto themselves, to drive them to Christ, and to keep them on duty: Know thus
much, when you Preach the Law rightly, you Preach salvation to them that fear
it; as when you Preach the Gospel, you Preach damnation to them that neglect or
contemn it: I would have every Minister wary in Preaching the Law; Its possible
that there may be an ill dispensation of the Law; The Chyrurgeon that launceth,
may do as much hurt as he that does not use the Instrument at all; Such as
Preach The Law is to be Preached.
not the Law at all may make dead and loose ^earers, and such as Preach the Law
too far may make desperate hearers. The golden mean is to be observed: The
thing I would is this. 1. I 1* With the Gospel.
would not have the Law to be Preached alone by it self, without a mixture of
some of the Promises of the Gospel; The fire has its heat and light, and a
Minister should have both Law and Gospel in his mouth. 2. I would have the Law
to be 2 For the Gospel.
Preached* as it was published, for Evangelicall and merciful intentions and
purposes; not for destruction and desparation, but for edification: I find
that it was published in the hand of a Mediator, I would have it to be
Preached in the same hand; he preaches the Law best who preaches it with
reference to Jesus Christ; as I would in Preaching the Law show men h^ll, so I
would seek thereby to save them from hell; the wound should neither be made
wider or deeper then the Plaster, etc.


Nomist. Your council is good, and I would that all Gods Ministers would apply
themselves to this course: I verily think that the condition of their hearers
do require it; for whereas we have one tender brokenhearted hearer, there are
a thousand stubborn-hearted men and women, who need the hammering of the Law:
only give me leave to tell you, that I have heard men thus objecting, That the
Preaching of the Law does affright men, and bring them to despair.


Evangelist. This is the objection of carnal men, who make it their hell upon
earth to be disquieted in their course of sin, the Law nakedly encountering wi^h
such, shows them such wrath from God, and torment in hell belonging to them,
(they in mean time having no eyes to look upon the remedy) that it drives them
into total despair; the fault is not in the Law but in themselves.


Nomist. I am satisfied in this matter, I pray go on.


Evangelist. Antinomians, such as were the Manichees, the Marcionites, the
Montanists, the Muscovites, the Anabaptists, the Socinians, together with their
offspring and followers the Antinomians, a generation of Libertines, who under
a color of Prea^hing and practicing Free grace, fill the land with
drunkenness, uncleanness, disobedience to authority, neglect and scorn of
duty, yea, and all manner of licentiousness, as woeful exprience witnesses,
and if need were, just testimony and proof can make good; Antinomianisme has
been a corrupt and evil tree; and oh that it were cut down root and branch,
that our City and Kingdom might be no more pestered therewith.


Nomist. I beseech you good Sir, discover these Antinomians unto me, that I may
know them.


Evangelist. You shall find them to be full of subtilty and cunning, well
knowing that the open profession of themselves is full of hatred and scorn, and
yet though they shun the name, they are the Two sorts of Antinomians.
men, their speech and practice will bewray them: wherefore learn that there
are two sorts of Antinomians.

1. One Doctrinall; Such who in opinion and judgment 1 Doctrinall
do presume to outlaw the Law of God, making the Moral Law it self, and the
preaching thereof useless, both to unbelievers and believers, even a thing
abrogated by the Gospel, which is as clear a dismission or making void the Law,
as can be imagined: there are who do reject the whole Old Testament, showing
themselves therein adversaries to the Law and the Prophets. I mean among our
new lights, which I thus evidence by their own sayings; one of them teaches,
That no other Word must be pressed upon men, or preached unto men, but the
Gospel, and the promises thereof: Another says, That to preach only the
Gospel, and to cast away Moses, is the true way of preaching, with which few of
our Preachers have acquaintance: Another teaches, He that mak^th the Law a
Rule of his life, whatever he be in heart, he is a Papist in practice: And the
same man was bold to vent, That the Law was not of force to a believer, no, not
as a Rule. And as if he had not spoken enough, his learned brother comes up the
next day, saying, I deny that the Law is a Rule for believers; nay, let me tell
you, That it is no Rule for the unbelievers to walk by; it shall be a Rule for
God to condemn him by, but it is no Rule for him to walk by. Another of them
says, That after a man is justified by Christ, he is no more subject to the
Commandments of the Moral Law, he must do nothing in conscience of that Law,
he must not take himself to be bound to or by it. Nay, let me tell you, beside
this and the like stuff vented by them, this they hold a Rule, That you may not
regard any thing that can be said against these, or any other of their Tenets,
which shall be brought out of the Old Testament; if you urge them with the
Doctrine or examples thereof, as against their way, they presently give you
this answer; What do you tell us of these things, they concerned Christians
before Christ's time, and were done and spoken by men under another Covenant and
adminstration of grace and life then we are; show me these and these things out
of the New Testament, and then I will hearken to you. I pray tell me, Is not
this to make void the Law, and to be a direct Antinomian?

2. Another practical; This you shall observe, That a Lawless 2. Practical.
head, a lawless heart, and a lawless life, seldom are divided; Ministers
that preach against the Law, do practice against the Law, though they carry the
matter smoothly and covertly; and people who are the followers and admi^e^s of
such lawless Preachers, do show themselves to be sons of Belial, whose wills
are their Laws; for they do profess, That no Law of Moses shall bind them;
they trample Gods Commands under their feet, saying, Let us break their bands
asunder, and Psalm. 2. 3.
cast away their cords from us. It may be justly said of them as it was of
Ephraim; I have written to them the great things of Hos. 1. 12.
my Law, but they were counted as a strange thing: Mark well the place, in the
Law there was Honorabilia and eximia; but the people accounted them ali^na and
vilia: I find a fivefold evil among these men; 1. That they break from the
Moral Five evils in Antinomians.
Law by falling into forbidden courses, and yet they can cry, They sin not; To
be drunk, to whore, to lie, to steal, etc. with such persons, is no sin in
them; What (says an impudent creature of their way, prostituting her self to
unclennesse) you do think you should sin if you should lie with me, What Law
does forbid it unto us? O horrible practice! blush you Antinomians, who are
taught, and do believe, That being in Christ, you cannot sin; or if you do, God
cannot see it; and Whether yon r^pent or not repent, it is all one, for they
are remitted unto you in an indifferent way. 2. That they despise in their
hearts, and scorn in their speeches all such Christians who will not run wild
with them in their loose Opinions and ways; these they reproach under the
names of Duty-mongers, Duty-doers and followers of Legal Preachers: they sit in
the seat of the scornful, deriding in a public way that word of the Law and
Gospel which does detect and reprove the Doctrines and courses of
licentiousness: their Principles lead them into most shameful and rude
behavior, whilst they are in hearing of Grave, Learned, and godly Ministers,
who are not of their loose cut. 3. That they ^all into a dislike of the duties
of holiness, and the ways of godliness: the madness of their minds is
such, that they cry out, What have we to do with the dungie, dirtie duties of
sanctification; We thank God, through Jesus Christ, that we have nothing to do
with them; We have a new Gospel, that takes us off from Confession of Sins,
asking Pardon at Gods hands for Sins; Mourning and repenting for Sin, Fastings
and Humblings, these are works for Horn-book Christians: Nay, they do not stick
to tell us, That believers are to do duties only in respect of men, for God
looks for none at their hands. 4. That they leave off the Scripture in
Sanctification as litigious, to evidence their estate in grace; they are drawn
up to the old way of the Enthusiasts, telling us, That they are assured by
Lights and Revelations; one of them reports, Delusions.
That since she came under these Preachers of Free Grace, Jesus Christ came and
took her by the hand, asked her, Why she was so sad? bid her to leave off her
mourning for her sin, and to be cheerful, for she did greatly dishonor the
Gospel in being troubled for her sins: And another of them reports, That as she
was sitting by the fire, Christ came to her, and bade her to pray that such a
one who was of her acquaintance might have full assurance; which she did, and
presently the party received by a light from heaven full assurance. 5. That
they make such head against the Moral Law, that they do exceed Papists and
Prelates, and do equal the fiercest Persecuters that ever the Church of God
had; the Papists blot out the second Commandment only, and the Prelates the
fourth Commandment only, but these uno ictu destroy the whole Law; imitating
Manasses and Ammon, who having drawn the people into Idolatry, to hold them the
better under it, sought to suppress the book of the Law; you hold it to be a
bold part in J^hoiakim to cut the Roll in Pieces and to throw it into the fire:
You will say that the practice of Antio hus and Diocl^sian was abominable, for
they did cut in pieces all the books of the Law which they could come by;
making a wicked Edict forbidding the same, threatening death to all those with
whom this Book was found: I pray tell me, in what is the Practice of the
Antinomians inferior to theirs, save in this, That they have not the power of
Tyranny in their hands?


Nomist. If this be their Doctrine and their doings, that they cast off the
binding power of Moses Law, as it is a Rule for Service and Obedience, I shall
desire to bless my self from them, and to keep me close to those faithful
Ministers of the Gospel who do make the Moral Law a Rule for life; and I hope
neighbor you will do so too.


Antinomian. No verily not I: for I am not of Master Evangelists mind, nor do
I intend ever to be; once I confess I was of his mind, and did walk by the
Law as a Rule, but I must tell you, that I was then kept in such bondage and
fear, and held so close to Duty and Obedience, that all my Christian Liberty
purchased for me was denied unto me, I could not do many things which now I do.


Evangelist. I pray you Sir be entreated to open you self, that we may
understand one another aright ere we part, it may please God that satisfaction
may be given.


Antinomian. My meaning is this, That you and such as you are, by Preaching and
pressing the use of the Moral Law laid a heavy yoke upon my self and others,
kept us in a state of fear and bondage all our days; drew us into a way of
Popery, and led us about the wood, making the way and work long and tedious
unto us: But now, blessed be God for Jesus Christ and for the New Light that is
revealed to us; We hear the Gospel, understand the Free Grace of God, and have
a more easy and short cut to heaven then you allow of.


Evangelist. Surely my friend, I conceive that the yoke of Christ is easy* and
his Commandments are not grievous; Nay, the Law, as it is an ordained Rule for
life, is the sweet yoke of Jesus Christ, unto which every good Christian does
yield a willing and cheerful obedience, I mean the obedience of children not
of slaves; this I find, that it is a trouble to Christians, that they are not
more obedient to the Law, but it never troubled them that they have been
obedient to it, they in their inner man do delight in the Law of God, and it is
meat and drink unto them to do the will of their Father, yea, it is their daily
prayer, that they may do it. Besides, the Law preached and pressed as a rule
for life, leads no man directly into Popery; to set it up as a covenant of
Works, so it may lead men into Popery; it is not the right doing of duty out of
obedience, in Faith and humility, but the trusting in duty done, which does
make men Justiciaries and Papists. And further, I must tell you, That the
Royal Law is a straight Law, and we hold in the Mathematics, that the
straitest Line is the shortest Line, and therefore you do not go about the
wood, when you walk by this Line: It is an observation of one, That the Moral
Law is like to the Ecliptic Line, wherein the Sun keeps his course, and men
and women are like to the Planets, which are on this or that side of the Line;
if any of them chance to fall into the Ecliptic Line, they are nearer the Sun
then any other the Planets. I may apply it thus; When Christians walk in
Holiness and Righteousness, they are nearest to God and Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness. On the contrary, to cast off the Law and care of holy walking,
and to fall into courses of sin and wickedness, is the going from God and
Christ: and I shall ask you this one question, and let your conscience answer
me; Have not you heard the openings of the Gospel and the Free grace of God in
Jesus Christ, by those who are both known and settled Ministers in this City?


Antinomist. But you do not Preach it purely, you seem to lift up Jesus Christ,
but on a sudden you cast him down; we have such a deal of Law Preached to us,
as if we were unbeleevers; and there is such pressing of men to duty, as if
that Christ had not satisfied Gods justice for them.


Evangelist. Sir, I am glad to hear this come our of your mouth, it seems that
the Law may be Preached to unbeleevers. I see you are not run up so high as to
deny legal humiliation to be a way to bring men to Christ; you only conceive
that the Gospel would be more purely Preached by us, if that we did not press
the Law for duty; Is the teaching of duty among you held to be no Gospel way
of teaching? Are you not in the relation of sons and servants to God? Is not
Christ as well a King and Lord as a Priest? Surely Sir, nor you, nor your
Teachers can by the Scriptures prove what you say against the Law, it is a
Doctrine to be taught, and a rule for Christians to walk by.


Antinomist. Yea Sir, we have such Scripture grounds for our truth, that you
and all the world can never disproove.


Evangelist. Will you be pleased to propound them to us in a methodicall way,
and if you can convince us by the Scriptures, we shall yield to you.


Antinomist. Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were till John: That of
Paul, Wherefore then Gal 3. 19.
serves the Law? it was added because of transgressions, till the seed should
come to whom the promise was made: And he says in the same Chapter, But after
that Faith is come, we are Verse. 23.
no longer undr a Schoolmaster. Out of these Scriptures, I thus argue; If the
Law was till John, till the seed should come, and it is no longer a
Schoolmaster unto us; then its useless under the Gospel, and no Doctrine to
be taught unto Christians: But thus these Scriptures say. Ergo. What answer can
be made to this argument?


Evangelist. Luke it makes nothing to the matter in hand; Luke 16. 16.
expounded.
For 1. Christ does not positively deny the use of the Law and the Prophets,
after the time of John; he says, they were till John; he does not say that
they shall be no longer after John. 12. We know that after John's Nativity,
Preaching, or Martyrdom, the Law and the Prophets were in use: there were many
Prophets after John's days, and the Law continued and was Preached by Christ
and his Apostles after his days: Wherefore 3 We must learn to distinguish of
the Law and the Prophets. There were typical Laws, and there were prefiguring
Prophets, such as did foreshew the coming of Christ in the flesh: Now this
kind of Law, and these kind of Prophets were till John, who lived to see and
point at the substance of them all, as appears in that saying of his, Behold
that Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the Ioh. 1. 20.
world: And this way our ancient and modern Interpreters do understand this
Text; not that Christ did mean there should be a destruction, and an
abolishment of the Moral Law in its use, or the writings of the Prophets in
their Doctrines; but he did teach, and instruct men in the use of the
Ceremonial Law; and all that Prophetical Doctrine which did refer it self
unto his Person who was to come a Savior for sinners, which received a full
accomplishment in himself who was the Tr^eth: and by how much the more the
Gospel did set him out to be come in the Flesh, by so much the more would all
forerunning Prophecies, Types, and Figures of Jesus Christ vanish and die:
Hence says learned Rivet, Hoc intelligendum esse de lege Prophetante per
Figuras, In Exodus 20.
non de lege instituente mores hominum. And long before him Tertullian,
Cessavit per ad impletionem non per destructionem: ^ib 4. co^t. Marc.
Vide Ambrosium Hom. 38. in Luc. Chrysostom. Hieronimum, etc. Tell me now, Is
this place rightly alleged for your purpose? If it be not, then see how you
are misled. As for your other Scriptures, I shall desire you to know, the main
scope of the Apostle in that place, is to show that God Gal. 3. 39. expounded.
neither endued the Law of Moses with a justifying or an abrogating power, as
it could not give life by it self to man, so it could not hinder life by the
Covenant or Promise of Grace: Upon the hearing of this, some were ready to say;
What then, Is the Law a vain thing? Wherefore then serves the Law? To this the
Apostle makes answer; That the Law was added because of transgressions, until
the seed should come, etc. (i. e.) The whole Mosaicall Law was very
serviceable, to open and discover sin, in such a way that it made them flee to
Christ for Sanctuary, and to learn to cast all their Faith and expectation for
righteousness on him: This is all that the Apostle aims at. I say, he treats
only of the use of the Law in bringing men to Christ, that they may be
justified by him: he speaks, De justificandis, non de justificatis: And of the
molesting not of the ruling office of the Law of Moses, as Luther Vide Luth. in
Com^nt.
well observes; he does not destroy the use of it, as a rule, after a man
believes in Christ, but notes the convincing and terrifying power of it, before
a man comes to Christ. Here is no ground for cashiering of the Law, as if it
were to be excluded the Churches in succeeding times, but rather an
establishing of it, to be an excellent and useful Doctrine to be taught to the
sons of men, in bringing them to Christ.

As for that in the five and twentieth Verse, After that Faith is come, we are
no longer under a Schoolmaster; The meaning is the same with the former, That
we are no longer under the Verse 25. (...).
Ceremonial Law, as it did point and figure out Christ unto man, he himself
being come who was the substance; Neither are we under the rigor and
sharpness of the Moral ^aw; it can and does no longer rigorously exact at our
hands perfect obedience upon pain of damnation; The Apostle does no way speak
of the Moral Law, as it is a rule of life for obedience to Gods will; so that
the Scripture is no way properly alleged to your purpose: If that we should
teach man dependence on the Law for Justification, you had said somewhat: What
else have you to say?


Antinomist. Romans 6. 14. You are not under the Law, but under Grace. Gal. 3.
10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse. And 1 Timothy 1.
9. The Law is not made for a righteous man. Out of these Scriptures I thus
argue; If the Law belong not to the righteous who are under Grace; and if it be
a bringing men under the curse, to urge them to obey the Law; then it is plain
that believers have nothing to do with the Law, as its an obliging rule: But so
is this, Ergo.


Evangelist. Donatists, allege Scripture, more for Hab^nt Scriptur^^ ad
speciem non ad salatem Aug. Romans 6 14. opened.
show then Truth, as will easily appear when I have opened these places: for
that place in the Romans it is clear, That the Apostle does intend nothing
less then the absolute discharging of Christians from observance of, or
obedience to the Moral Law: For, 1. He speaks of man's being under the Law,
in the Minatory and Damnatory sentence thereof; The meaning of the place is
this; God having set them into favor, and they having obtained their pardon in
justification, were acquitted from the curse and damnation of the Law, that
could not now any longer hold them under to death; as a malefactor having
obtained his Princes pardon, is freed from the sentence of condemnation under
which he did lay with much fear and grief, that death which must have befallen
him by the Law, was prevented by the coming in of his pardon; thus God had set
them under his grace, and bestowed his favor on them, and by this means they
were not under the death of the Law: Now unless you will confess, that the
giving and granting of a Pardon does naturally and directly take off all duty
to a man's Sovereign, and give him a dispensation to practice Rebellion more
freely; it cannot be granted that discharges from the damnation of sin by
grace, can take off all loyalty and duty unto God in his requirements. 2. It
is most evident by the following words, that the Apostle intends no dismission
from obedience to the Law, for he says, What, shall we sin, because we are
Verse. 15.
not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid. Certainly, if by an estate of
Grace men were totally discharged from walking according to the Doctrine and
command of the Law, the Apostle needed not to have spoken of sinning; it being
impossible that such should sin who are not tied to keep in compass of any
Law; Sin being (as we all know) the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.

To that place in the Galatians, the scope will be a sufficient answer; Paul's
drift is to take off men from depending on the works of the Law for their
justification: this was the infection Gal 3 10. opened.
by the false teachers which were crept into the Church at Galatia, they had
leavened the people with an opinion of merit, who began to be full of pride,
and would be little beholding to God for heaven; they would not beg, but buy a
place in heaven, and did seek by their own works, to become their own Saviors:
This practice and doctrine, the Apostle shows, was the ready way to bring
down a curse upon them; and this curse he brings in as an argument to take them
off from cleaving to the Law for Justification: and the words are as if he
should have said, When a man shall put himself under the Law for Justification,
shall promise to himself an estate of eternal life for his obedience sake,
place his righteousness in graces received, or duties performed, this man puts
himself under the curse: Now tell me, How does this Scripture overthrow the
binding power of the Law to duty? May not a man believe in Christ, and obey
too? Obedience has the blessing, not the curse annexed to it.

As for that place in Timothy, I think it makes nothing at all for you; for
the Apostle speaks of the right managing of the Law, saying, That the Law is
good, if a man use it lawfully. 1 Timothy 1 9. opened. Verse. ^.
Now how is the Law used lawfully? Is it not when it is rightly applied to the
punishing of offenders? God nor man ever intended that any Law should be made
to punish good men, or that such should suffer under the color of Law; this
were a great abuse of the Law, and in it no small injury is done to an honest
man, that the Law, which should be his protection, should become his
punishment: nay, he leads them on to such persons for whom the Law was ordained
by way of punishment, namely, The lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and
for sinners, for unholy and profane, etc. This being the proper sense of the
place, How does it take away the Law as a rule of obedience unto Christians?
Nay, out of this Scripture I do infer a Christians obedience to the ^aw, he
is one that walks so regularly unto it, that it cannot be justly used against
him, as a rod to punish him: Besides this, I answer, That the Moral Law is not
yet put or given against a righteous man as a Bill of Indictment to accuse him;
as a Judge to condemn him to punishment, or as a rod or whip to compel and
force him to obedience; he is carried with such an ingenious spirit to obey the
Law of God, that saepe legem praevenit and transcendit, as Chrysostom says, (
i) he does prevent the Law; and is ( potius in illa, quam sub illa) rather in
the Law, or a Law to himself, then under the Law, as Augustine says. I hope
Sir you see your mistake, and are convinced that the Scriptures will not own
your opinion: Have you any thing else to say for your self?


Antinomian. Romans 7, 6. Verse. 8. 14
That we are led by the Spirit, and must serve God in newness of spirit, and
not in the oldnesse of the l^tter: That we are to perform all acts of obedience
dictamine charitatis ( i. e.) by the instructing power and force of love, and
not by any Command of the Word, much less of the Moral Law; they resemble
Christians unto trees, which grow not by arguments and commands.


Evangelist. Perkins in Gal. 23.
call the one the inward, and the other the out ward rule, and this I find,
That the Spirit and the Word are in such conjunction in this work, that he does
guide and lead men into acts of obedience in and by the Law which he himself
writes in their hearts: God says, This is my Covenant with them, My Isa 59 21.
Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put into thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and forever. Besides,
David says, Thy Word Psalm. 11^. 105.
is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. 2. That the serving God in
newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter, does only mean*
That Christians should yield spiritual and soul-obedience to Gods commands,
and not content themselves with an external, formal, and ceremonial serving
of him; according to that of Christ, The hour comes, Jo. 4. 23.
and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and
in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. 3. For that force and
power of love, which you make the rule and motive to obedience and duty, give
me leave to ask you, Whether that love you speak of, be not a duty laid down
and required in the word of command? Do you love God and Christ, without or
upon a command. I conceive you will say you do it by virtue of a command.
Again, I must tell you, that as love springs from the command which enjoins man
to love; so it does manifest its life and soundness, by looking to the command
by way of dutiful Jo. 14 15.
observance, according to that of Christ, If ye love me, keep my Commandments:
And that of the beloved Disciple, 1 Jo. 5. 3.
This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments
are not grievous. 4. For that comparison of theirs, I will not say it is
senseless, I am sure it is strained, or misapplied: what though the principle
of bearing good fruit lay in that sap which is enclosed in the root, does not
the tree need outward influence and helps from the Sun, the Air, the Soil,
etc.? This cannot be denied: the case is the same here Christ is the root, and
inward principle, without whom a true Believer can do nothing: yet you must
know that the means of his own appointing, are needful and necessary; he has
ordained Ministers, and left the Word for the gathering, edifying, and growth
of the body; besides, to make Christ an inward principle of obedience, is to
set up a Law and Commandment unto men, unless you will say there is an
obedience without a Law.


Antinomist. Ere I pass from you* I will open my heart unto you; when we
cannot draw men to our opinion against the Law, we do use our wits in devising
strange expressions which can hardly be understood; or we have our distinctious
and evasions, that when men shall tell us that we are Antinomians, we may
stoutly deny the same: v. g. We tell them that the Moral Law is Evangelized in
the hearts of believers, by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus: nay, we take the
boldness to say, That we only deny the use of the Law as it was in the hand
of Moses, not as it is in the hand of Christ our Mediator.


Evangelist. It has been the manner of Heretics to draw a cloud over their
Tenets; by using odd and unusual expressions: and fearing a discovery to
speak doubtfully, that to they may have a back door to get out at, whereas
truth seeks no corners, and does not blush to show her face: how to English
your meaning about the Evangelizing of the Law in the hearts of believers, I as
yet cannot; happily I may mistake your meaning, when your Preachers have told
you their sen^e, I shall be able to give my answer: As for that expression,
That they will not admit the Law to be a rule of life, as Moses brought it down
from Mount (...). I think (...) wear bound to the Law, not for Moses sake, but
for the Lawgivers sake; surely the Law which Moses did deliver, does bind us
to obedience; let the Ministry of it be considered in its place; and the
matter of it regarded in its place; still in whose hands soever we consider it,
it is a binding rule for duty, yea and it binds in this sense, as much as it
was in Moses hand, as it is in the hand of any Mediator; this is but a shift
let them discover the ground for this distinction out of Gods Word, and I have
done; I mean, That the Moral Law, considered in the hand of Christ, does
oblige to duty; but not as it was in the hand of Moses: we speak not of the
terror which did accompany the delivery of it on Mount Sinai: but of the
matter of it as given unto Moses, consult Rivet, and the Authors which are
cited by him, and let me, if you be not satisfied with this Answer, hear
further from you.


Nomist. I hope Sir, ere you break off, you will give us some council and
exhortation touching our respect to the Moral Law.


Evangelist.

6 Ways of maintaining the Law.


to David, as was Gods Commandments; he did esteem them above all things, and
so must we account highly and worthily of them; this will show that we
reverence God himself, may prove an excellent means of endearing our affections
to them; and keep off all scorn and contempton our parts from them.

Paul Rom 7. 16. 22
did consent to the Law that it was good, and did delight in it in his inner
man: And David prays, Make me to go in the paths Ps 119. 35.
of thy Commandments, for thy Law is my delight: It is the nature of faith to
make every Commandment of God easy and welcome to the soul; the Law,
considered as the Covenant of works, was such a yoke as no man was able to
bear; but take it in the dutiful part of it, and each Christian should with
joy and delight bear it: I delight to do thy will, O my God: q. d. Psalm. 40.
O Lord, this is that I would do, and desire to do, and am glad when I can do
it.

1 These. 4. 6, 7.
men many temporal afflictions: Let no man defraud, or go beyond his brother,
for God is an avenger of all such things.

4 Motives to obedience to the Law.
1. That the Law was given to man, that it might be kept and observed by man;
surely obedience was the main thing which God intended in giving the Law. 2.
That the consequent of keeping Gods Commandments, is much gain, and great
reward; obedience does not merit, yet the Scripture says, In keeping them
there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. Prove 7. 2. Isa. 1. 19. Rom 2. 6, 7
and we find that many temporal and heavenly blessings are assured to such
who are obedient to Gods will, his mercy being From everlasting to everlasting,
on those who remember ^^ Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103, 17, 18. 3. That it
is the glory of knowledge, and the power of affections, to obey the
Commandments of God: I conceive, that knowledge is given us, that we may be fit
to obey; and affections, to stir us up to obedience; and indeed we are very
dishonorable to our selves, and lose the glory and power of our understanding
and affections, if we fail willingly in our obedience to Gods Law; hence says
God, Keep them therefore, and to them, for this is D^ut. 4. 6.
your wisdom and understanding, etc. 4. That conscionable obedience is a spring
of soul-consolation: understand me rightly; I do not say, That a Christians
comfort does originally arise from his obedience to, and observance of the Law;
neither does it constantly spring hence; for experience tells us, that many
times much is done, and yet little warmth or heat does flow from it to the
soul: yet this is true, That a Christians comforts are multiplied, maintained,
and cherished is and from acts of sincere obedience to Gods Laws; the heart is
not so full of horror and unquietness when it keeps close to duty, as it
would be when it hangs loose to, or omits the same.


Nomist. What is the right way of obedience to Gods Laws?


Evang list. Right obedience to Gods Law, stands in 6 things.
It stands in these six things:

Luke 17. 10.

Then shall I not be confounded, Psalm. 119. 6
when I have respect to all thy Commandments, ^aith David: And it was the
commendation of ^^chary and Elizabeth, That they walked in all the (...) and
Ordinances (...) ^. ^.
of the Lord blameless. We are to look to one and all the Commandments of God;
we must set the whole Law of God before us, taking heed of making any
difference by obeying in greater, and refusing in lesser Commands, or yielding
to those Commands which have a comparative easiness, and refusing in those
which have a Spiritual strictness or harshnesse: surely we must equally hate
all sin, and love all virtue, remembering that of the Apostle; For whosoever
shall keep the I am 2. 1^.
whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.



Psalm. 27. 8. and 110. 2.

David, My heart stands in awe of thy word: And Joseph Tenderness of
obedience in 4 things.
durst not do wickedly, because of Gods displeasure, Genesis 39. 9. 2. A manifest
grief, and heart trouble, upon apprehended breaches of Gods Law; a gracious
disposition, is a mourning disposition, it dares not say as does our
Libertines, It does greatly trouble me, that ever I was troubled for my sins:
3. A speedy care to take off the offense, and to make up the breaches between
God and a man's self, which can no way be done, but by running to Jesus Christ,
who is our Peacemaker. 4. A precise watchfulness against future offendings
and displeasings, Ezra 9. 13, 14.

keeping it to the Ps. 119. 33.
end, knowing that the Commands of God are perpetual to us, even such as no
time or age can wear out, and our whole life is a time of duty, and ought to
be spent in acts of obedience. Say therefore with David, I will always keep
thy Law, for ever and ever, Psalm. 119. 44.




Nomist. Sir, the day is far spent, and all our occasions do call us away; I
and my friend owe you thanks, and for my part I am resolved to establish the
Law in its authority, by making it the rule of my life.


Antinomist. For my part, I intend to acquaint my teachers with what you have
said; and if they do not give you a confounding answer, then I resolve to be of
your mind: In the mean time, I will not allow the Law to be a rule of my life.


Evangelist. A good evening I wish unto you both, with an happy success of
this conference, not fearing any true report that can be made of my Doctrine;
and if any of your Teachers shall be pleased to answer me with Arguments from
the Truth, I shall be ready to make a Reply.


FINIS.

