Elisha his Lamentation, Upon the sudden Translation of ELIJAH. Opened in a
SERMON At the Funeral of Mr. William Strong, That Eminently Faithful Servant
and Minister of CHRIST.

By Obadiah Sedgwick, B. D. and Preacher of the Gospel in Covent Garden.

ZACHARY 1. 5. And the Prophets, do they live for ever?

HEBREVVS 3. 7. To day if ye will hear his Voice.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, at the Sign of the three Daggers
in Fleet Street, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1654.

To the Right Worshipful, Colonel Boswell, Henry Scobel, Esquire Mr. Thomas
Rushall; and to all the rest of the Congregation, lately pertaining unto the
care of that Faithful Pastor, Mr. WILLIAM STRONG, Preacher of the Gospel at
Westminster ABBEY.
YOu were pleased to put me upon that sad service of Preaching at the Funeral
of your worthy and dear Pastor; And shortly after that, upon another service of
Printing what I then had publicly Preached; I confess that I never Preached a
Sermon (in this kind) with more grief of heart, and never did I discern a
Sermon heard and attended with more weeping eyes: certainly God had given in
unto him the affections of many persons, who loved him in his life, and
bitterly lamented him at his death.

I was almost fallen out with the thoughts of publishing any occasional
Sermons, as being most proper for scope, and use, and working, to the present
Auditory: But your general desire has prevailed upon me to deny my own
judgment; and since it must be so, here you have those sudden and weak fruits
(such as they are) and the blessing of the Lord go with them.

Of what other advantage they may be (besides the keeping up a while the name
and memory of so precious a servant of Christ) I know not; but yet I trust that
God may intend them, and now does send them abroad for the good of the living.

Of this I am sure, that every personal change in the world is an effect of his
providence; and that there is a doctrinal will for the living, in every
providential will of God concerning the dead: and the greater that any person
is in his relation of usefulness, and serviceableness to Christ and his Church,
the more emphatical Selah does the Lord (in the removal of him) print out for
the children of men.

There was honey found by Sampson in the carcass of the dead Lion, so are there
many sweet instructions and lessons to be gathered, not only out of the lives,
but also out of the deaths of the Ministers of Christ. The last Sermon which a
people are to study, and diligently to peruse, is the death of their Godly
Pastor; for in this God himself does immediately preach unto them.

As when Ministers do live, it is but hypocrisy to give them only a few good
words: so when they dye, it is but a formality only to shed over them a few
sad tears.

O that you your selves, (and the many other Congregations) who of late have
carried their Faithful and laborious Ministers to the grave, would seriously
remember that you must answer God for the quick and for the dead, for your
living Ministers, and for your dead Ministers: there are living uses to be made
out of dead instances: Live, and live the better, live up to the power of Truth
and Godliness, live like such as are even parting with life, and in hazard
about a season: Live like such, who did enjoy, and who again would enjoy a
choice servant to your Minister.

Though Minsters dye, yet Christ lives, and he is present with you, and he
observes all your heart and ways: therefore as you formerly have, so now
especially strive to abound much more in heavenly wisdom, in sound Judgment,
in Faith and Love to our Lord Jesus, in meekness, and gentleness, and
profitableness one toward another, and in all exactness of holy walking before
your God; hereupon shall you find your late great loss graciously supplied in
the answer of your fervent prayers: hereupon shall you find the testimony of a
good conscience; hereupon shall you find peace in death, and after that, the
Crown of life, which God will give to all that love him.

And for other People, let them Repent of the evil handling of their Faithful
Ministers, and beseech the Lord to give them hearts in their day of Grace, yet
to know the things which do concern their Peace; which that we all may do,
shall be the prayer of

Your Servant in the Faith of Christ Obadiah Sedgwick.

A SERMON LATELY PREACHED In the Abbey of Westminster, July 4th. 1654. At the
Funeral of Mr. William Strong, Preacher of the Gospel there.
2 KINGS 2. 12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My Father, My Father; The
Charet of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: and he saw him no more, and he took
hold of his own Clothes, and Rent them in two pieces.
IN the Former Verse, Elijah and Elisha are passing on, and discoursing
together: What that Discourse was, it is not Expressed. Some do presume to tell
us particularly what it was: but very probable it is, that the discourse As
Lyra and others of the Papists.
was altogether suitable unto so great and Holy a Prophet as Elijah was: It was
very profitable, and very Heavenly, he being presently to be taken up into
Heaven.

Whiles they were thus discoursing, on a sudden there appeared a Charet of
fire, and Horses of fire, and parted Verse 11.
them both asunder, and Elijah went up by a Whirlwind into heaven. By the
Charet and horses of fire, Peter Martyr P. Martyr In Locum.
understands the Angels of God, who at this time did put on the species or
appearance of fire: And with this fiery Apparition God was pleased to honor
Elijah at his departure: who in his life time had so much honored his God with
the fire of Zeal for his Truth, and Worship.

And he went up by a Whirlwind into heaven. Some do read it, that he went up by
a Whirlwind of heaven, or by an heavenly Whirlwind: which denotes the manner of
his Ascension: but our General Translation and Reading is best, which does more
significantly denote the place unto which he was then carried, Namely, Heaven.

Therefore that Opinion of the Papists is very fond: who do Affirm that Elijah
was carried into Paradise, there to stay with Enoch until toward the end of
the world, and then both of them are to come forth, and to Preach against
Antichrist. But this is a mere fancy all along, the Text says plainly, Elijah
went up by a Whirlwind Contra perfidium Antichristi.
into heaven. But what heaven he went into, is somewhat argued, especially by
the Papists, who it A threefold Heaven.
seems will by no means have that Zealous enemy to Idolatry to be carried into
the heaven of the blessed: There is indeed Coelum Aerium (the Aerie Heaven,
where the Fowls of Heaven do flee) and there is Coelum Astriferum, where the
Stars of heaven are: and there is Coelum Beatorum, the heaven of the Blessed,
where God appears in eminency, and where Jesus Christ is in Glory, and the
souls of just men made perfect, thither is Elijah carried up, after all his
Pains, and Sufferings, and Troubles, and Faithfulness: Thither I say, is he
carried up, to receive his Reward, and Elisha is left behind to do his Master
more service.

But how does Elisha take this sudden parting, and loss of precious Elijah?
The Text tells you (Elisha saw it, and he cried my Father! my Father!)

These words may be called, The Lamentations of Elisha: upon the sudden
Translation of that eminent Prophet Elijah: In which you may discern.

1. His exceeding Grief and Sorrow: He cried out, and until he saw him no more
(so Junius and Tremellius Read those words, And he saw him no more) And he rent
his clothes in two pieces, as Anciently was the Practice upon the loss, and at
the Funerals of dear friends, and of choice and eminent Persons.

2. The causes of this his great grief and sorrow: And they were 1. His own
particular loss. The loss of Elijah was unto Elisha as the loss a loving and
dear Father, unto a loving and dear Child (my Father! my Father!) As David once
about Absalom, my Son, my Son! So Elisha here for Elijah, my Father, my Father!
Ah my Father! my Father! Oh I have lost a Father, my Father, such a Father --
The Chaldee Interpreter renders it, Rabbi, Rabbi: my Master, my Master: But in
the Hebrew it is, Abba, Abba: my Father, my Father!

2. The public loss (The Charret of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof) As if
he had said, one of the best Instrumental helps and safeties that all Israel
enjoyed, is now taken away; O the Staff and the stay is broken!

What the Charet and the horsemen are to an Army, or to a State, and what the
loss of them is unto a State; That was the life, and that was the loss of this
Prophet Elijah unto all Israel.

There are two Propositions only which I would briefly discourse upon from
this Text, at this time, and with respect to this sad occasion.

1. That even the most eminently Faithful and Zealous Prophets of God, may be,
and shall be taken away from a people. 2. That the loss of any one eminently
Faithful and Zealous Prophet of God, should affect the hearts of people with
exceeding Grief and Lamentation.
I begin with the first of these: That even the most eminently 1. Proposition.
Faithful and Zealous Prophets of God, may be, and shall be taken away from a
people.

The Prophets or Ministers of God, they are of different Parts and Gifts, and
they are of different Spirits, and they are of different Use and Service: Put
them in Comparison one with another, some are as Stars of the first Magnitude,
and others of a lesser Magnitude: some are as the Cedars, and others are but as
ordinary Trees: Some are more richly and plentifully endowed and furnished,
others are not so, they are lower by the As Elijah, Paul, Calvin and Luther.
head: some are vigorously active, and are raised up, and laid out for the
General Advantages and Managements of Religion, yet others are not so; though
al be Builders, yet all of them are not Master Builders. They differ much in
their Gifts, in their Graces, in their Services, Gifts will free from
Indiscretion, and Grace from Hell, but nothing from Death.
in their Usefulness: Nevertheless they must all agree in this, they must all
dye, they must all be taken away: Here in the Text, Elijah was taken away, and
what was he? he was a Prophet, and in some sense more then a Prophet: He was a
Prophet of the highest rate, most eminent for Faithfulness and Zeal, (That was
his excellency) Noah was eminent for Uprightness, and Moses for Meekness, and
Job for Patience, and Solomon for Wisdom, and Joshua for Prowess, and Josiah
for Tenderness, and Elisha for Miracles, and Elijah for Zeal, and Courage, and
Faithfulness: All the false Prophets were nothing to him, nor Jezabel the
Queen, nor Ahab the King: and although (in his Opinion) he was left alone to
sustain the cause of God; yet he alone continued Faithful and Zealous.
Nevertheless this Holy and Excellent man of God is taken away, and suddenly,
and in a very needful time.

Zachariah 1. 5. Your Fathers, where are they? And the Prophets, do they live
for ever?

No, No, they do not live for ever; Nor yet (many times) very long! You may
find them for a while in the Study, and for a while in the Pulpit, and after a
little while you may find them in their Graves.

The Reasons of this Divine dispensation (besides many other) are these: 4.
Reasons why God takes away his most Faithful Prophets.


1. Because even the most Faithful Prophets of God, are Stewards but for a
time; of them as well as of others it must be said, Ye shall be no longer
Stewards: they have their determined work, and their allotted time for that
work; Their Reward shall be measured by Eternity. But their work and their life
are measured by time; So much work for so much time, and then their Master
calls them home.

In Scripture you Read that they are sometimes called Ambassadors, who are
choice persons sent abroad by a 2 Cor. 5. 20.
special Commission; And when they have finished their Legation or Treaty, then
must they return back unto their Prince; The Prophets or ministers of God, are
the Ambassadors of God in a special manner, Authorized to treat with sinners to
be reconciled, perhaps sinners will hearken unto them, and conclude upon terms
of saving agreement, perhaps they will not: These have but their time to
hearken, and they have but their time to offer and persuade, and when that is
expired, the Lord calls them home.

Again, you find them sometimes called laborers and workmen; the labourer goes
forth in the morning, 2 Cor. 3. 9.
and he does his days work, which when he has finished, then he comes home
and takes his Rest. Thus it is, and thus it shall be with the best of Gods
Prophets and Ministers, who are also called the Messengers of God, and must
return unto him an answer, what they have done, and how they have sped.

2. There is a day of recompense for them, their reward is with the Lord, they
are employed by a good Master; and as there are the works of faithful servants
for them todo, so there is the reward of a faithful master for them to receive:
there is a Prophets work here, and a Prophets reward hereafter; Christ calls it
our Masters joy, and Paul calls it a Crown of Righteousness; the faithful and
laborious Ministers of God, though despised and injured by men on earth, yet
they are loved and encouraged by Christ; and as they are a means to save
others, so they themselves shall be saved, and shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever, they shall be with the Lord for ever, they shall be everlastingly
blessed.

And therefore they must dye, they must away, else they cannot take possession
of the inheritance reserved for them, nor of the Crown laid up for them; indeed
in this life they have the assured hopes of eternal blessedness, and the first
fruits, and some Tastes; but the full and perfect possession and fruition comes
not to them, nor to any in this life: that comes only after death, and
therefore Paul desires to be dissolved, and so to be with Christ.

3. The Lord does this, to punish the ingratitude of people, who do despise,
and disgrace, and despightfully use his servants, the Prophets, and injuriously
handle them, and there is no man that will plead for them, and right them.

Of all the men in the world, the faithful Prophets of God do the most good to
others, and find the worst reception from them.

Jesus Christ charge this unworthy dealing upon Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 37. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee! And Stephen charge it upon them, Act. 7. 52. Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And Paul complains in 1 Cor. 4. 13.
We are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things
to this very day. Men do affront and contemn, they do revile and reproach, they
do oppose and contradict, they do threaten and persecute the faithful Prophets
of God, and those of them who are most faithful and most zealous, are most
hated and most persecuted.

Now the Lord will not bear with this odious ingratitude, and with this
barbarous injuriousness done unto his faithful servants; he is extremely
sensible of all the evil done unto them, of all the evil words spoken against
them, and of all the evil counsel and devices taken against them, and of all
the evil works done against them: Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets
Psa. 105. 15. Act. 9. 4.
no harm, says God: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? says Christ.

And therefore he takes away his choice Prophets and Servants in Judgment,
from such an ungracious and ungrateful people, in effect saying unto them thus
much. Ye will not be taught, and you shall not be taught any more, and you will
not hearken unto my messengers, but mock and despise them; therefore they shall
speak no more unto you in my name, your house shall be left unto you desolate.
Ye shall not see me henceforth (said Christ) till ye shall say, blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord. Mat. 23. 39.


4. The fourth and last reason why the Lord takes away his most eminently,
faithful and zealous Prophets from a people, is this, To show unto a people
the uncertainty and instability even of spiritual opportunities, that they are
but a season (which is precious, but unsure) that they are a short day, and a
Sun that may set a noon day.

There are four things which do admit of much uncertainty.

1. One is all our earthly possessions and comforts; will thou set thine eyes
on that which is not? says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5. There is no earthly comfort
whatsoever, which is not altogether uncertain, nay altogether uncertainty; it
is but as the shade on the dyall, on which you look, and may be gone before you
turn back to look on it again.

2. The second is, The gracious motions of the Spirit of God working upon our
spirits: My spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6. 3. Rara Hora,
Brevis mora, says Bernard. The dealings of Gods Spirit with us, are many times
like Peter's vision of the sheet, which was let down, but quickly drawn up to
heaven again; and indeed there is no man who resists or neglects any one motion
of Gods Spirit, but he puts it upon an uncertainty, whether he shall meet with
any other motion more.

3. The third is the day of Grace, our Gospel-day, wherein Christ reveals
himself, and offers himself, and mercy, and peace, and salvation; this is a day
for eternity, but it is not an eternal day: It may quickly be lost, and for
ever lost. O if thou had known (said Christ to Jerusalem) even Thou, at the
least in this thy day, the things which concern thy peace -- But now they are
hid from Luke 19. 42.
thine eyes: q. d. Thou had thy day, Thou did not make use of thy day, and
now thou have lost thy day.

4. The fourth is, all the life's, and pains, and labors of the Prophets and
Ministers of God, they are all fluent and uncertain.

This day the Minister lives and preaches, the next day he is sick and dies;
you cannot say of the best Minister on earth, he shall be ours for ever, or
long, or a week, or a day: such an instability is there, not only in the best
of our outward comforts, but also in the best of our spiritual helps.

And there is much of the wisdom of God in this very particular contingency, he
has his good ends in it, to awaken the hearts of people from carnal security
and presumption, from all carelessness and neglects, and to stir and quicken
them to all heavenly seriousness, and wise carefulness, both to know the day of
their visitation, and likewise to improve the light, whiles they enjoy the
light.

There are two works upon which all spiritual uncertainties (in Friends or
Ministers) should put us.

1. One is therefore to prize what is present; there is no certainty but in
that which is present, that is ours, and nothing but that is ours: The present
Sermon, that is ours, and the present offer of Christ; prize what is present,
for the future is uncertain.

2. Another is therefore to act with all our power, to do as much in a little
time, as others are doing in a long time. Nay, to be striving and treasuring up
in a little time so fervently, and so diligently, as if we had no more time.

There is an uncertainty in the lives of Gods Prophets, therefore people should
ply their doctrine, and their help with all theirs strength; hear them as if
they should never hear them more, and confer and draw from them, as if they
should never speak with them any more; but more of this in the uses now
following:

May and does God translate even an Elijah? does he take away the most
eminently faithful, and zealous Use. 1. A double Advertisement.
Prophets? Hence a double advertisement, 1. One to Ministers. 2. The other to
People.

First to Ministers; loyter not, loose no time, stand not idle at all, up and
be doing your Masters work; do not talk of this pain, and of that ach, nor of
this weakness, nor of that indisposition, but spend and be spent, be instant in
season and out of season, watch and labor, pray and instruct, reprove and
comfort, pull down, and build up, always abounding in the work of the Lord, O
said that eminently religious, and judicious Calvin, (who had worn himself to
the very bone with often praying, and studying, and preaching, and writing; and
therefore, being entreated by his friends a little to spare himself, no says
he, but) I desire that when my Master comes, he should find me working: And so
that precious Jewel, his desire was that he Nec propter vitam, vivendi perdere
finem.
might dye preaching: And learned and pious Reynolds, he would not lose time,
he looked at the end of life, more then at life it self.

O Brethren! Ye also have but your day, ye have but your day to serve the Lord
Jesus Christ, and ye have but your day to save you own souls; and ye have but
your day to save the souls of them that hear you: And your day of working seems
to be more variable and contingent then the day of other men; for if ye be
impartially faithful, and zealous, ye shall be sure to meet with all
discouragements and oppositions from all sorts of ungodly men: who if they
cannot stop your mouths, will yet do all they can to break your hearts. And
besides that, your constant studies, and diligent labors, and public
preachings, and private conferences, and several other employments, will weaken
your spirits, spend your lungs, consume your strength, and hasten your death.

However, the Lord will take you away, and perhaps he will come and take you
away suddenly: therefore be diligent still, and laborious still, and faithful
still, and zealous still, and wise still, in giving unto every servant his
proper portion. Blessed is that servant, whom when his Master comes, he shall
find so doing: this is he who shall meet with that welcome, well done, good and
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

2. Secondly to the People; Seeing that their faithful Prophets and Ministers
shall be taken away from them, let them remember two things for their parts.

1. Let them encourage faithful and zealous Prophets, who do enjoy them: O do
not kill them, and break their hearts, and thrust them into their graves by
slightings, by revilings, by quarrellings, by troublings, by remaining still
ignorant, and unprofitable, and barren; nor by continuing obstinate,
disobedient, hardened, and unbelieving.

No, by no means, but honor them, and love them, and deal kindly with them,
and pray for them, and encourage them all you can: Why Sirs, They do pity your
souls, and they do watch for your souls, and they do pray for your souls, and
they do study and weep, and preach to save your souls. And therefore let them
have love for love, and care for care, and respect for respect; they give you
bread, do not give them stones; they bring mercies to you, do not you cast your
curses upon them; they attend to your salvation, and peace, and comfort, do not
requite them evil for good, but let them have good for good, etc.

2. Improve their present survivance, and your own They are given to you, and
for you, they are your servants.
present freedom: O it is a naughty frame of spirit to praise the dead, but not
to prize the living; To set out with a large commendation the manifold virtues
and sayings of Ministers that are dead; yet not to regard, nor make use of the
parts and pains of those that are living, and Preaching unto us.

But let us be more wise; Elisha here is found traveling and conferring with
Elijah before he is taken away: Now you may hear your Ministers instructing and
persuading you, but within a short time you shall never see, nor hear them
more. Now you may go unto them, and open your doubts, and discover your souls
wants, and diseases, and crave their Counsel, and take their Directions, and
partake of their Instructions, and receive comforts by them; But within a short
time they are changing, and fainting, and dying, and giving up the Ghost, and
can never be Instrumental to your souls any more!

O loose not your tide, and loose not your Spiritual Opportunity: Every
faithful and Godly Minister is Simile.
like a Garden in the Springtime, and the people should be like so many Bees,
flying every day unto the Flowers in that Garden, to suck out the Honey, and
carry it home to the Hive.

You may now get that Counsel, that Direction, that Satisfaction about the
condition of your souls, which may stick by you all the days of your life.

Remember Sirs! As it will be an heavy Judgment if you make no use of your
Faithful Ministers, so it will cut you to the very heart, when your Ministers
are dead (and then can be of no more use unto you) that you made so little use
of them living, that you Traded so slightly, that you have been such strangers
to them, that you did not enrich your souls by them. O that people, who do
enjoy able and faithful Ministers, were (then) possessed of two Graces; one is
of humility, to see their own wants; the other is of wisdom, to see their
season for the supply of them: Wherefore is there a price put into the hand of
a fool seeing he has no heart to make use of it?

Thus have I finished the first Proposition; Namely, That even the most
eminently faithful and zealous Prophets of God may be, and shall be taken away
from a people: I now proceed to the second Proposition, which is this.

That the loss of any one eminently Faithful and Zealous 2. Proposition.
Prophet of God, should affect the hearts of the people of God with much Grief
and Lamentation: (my Father, my Father; The Charet of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof!)

When Moses that eminent Prophet died (There arose not a Prophet since in
Israel like unto Moses) The children of Israel wept for him in the plains of
Moab thirty days; Deuteronomy. 34. 8.
So the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended. When Samuel, that
faithful and eminent Prophet died, what a Mourning and Lamentation was made for
him? Samuel died, and all the Israelites were gathered together 1 Samuel 25. 1.
and lamented him.

The like you Read of Steven, Devout men carried Acts 8. 2.
Steven to his burial, and made great Lamentations over him.

There are three things which do concern us, when God takes away any faithful
servants of his.

1. One is a serious consideration of the hand of God in this: For though their
death be a mercy unto them, (Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord: And
precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.) yet Rev. 14 13.
Psalm. 116. 15.
their death may be a Judgment to us.

As a Godly Ministers Life and Doctrine is either in Remedium, or in Judieium;
either they are the Savor of life unto life, or they are the Savor of death
unto death: So the loss of them is certainly an advantage to themselves, and
ordinarily it is a Judgment and punishment unto a people: And therefore we
should not slightly pass over their death, but consider, and lay such strokes
of God to our hearts, The living will lay it to his heart: Surely he should,
surely he will. Eccles. 7. 2.


2. The second is a prudent reflection upon our selves; what there is in our
selves which has contributed unto so great a loss: For not only diseases in a
Minister, but also sins in a people may have a great hand to take away the life
of their Minister: and therefore there is reason for us to reflect and search.

In every ordinary loss that befalls us, we should search our hearts, and try
our ways, and say, Why is this evil come upon us? much more should this be
done, when a Spiritual loss befalls us: When the Lord takes away from us the
staff and the stay, the Judge and the Prophet. Isa. 3. 1, 2.
When he smites the Shepherd, and the Sheep are like to be scattered; when he
removes his Angels from his Churches.

Now is it a time to stand still, and to gather our selves together, and to
say, what have we been? and what have we done? how have we walked? what has
been our deportment under the Gospel? what our answerableness thereunto? has
not our unthankfulness, has not our barrenness, has not our disregard, has
not our disobedience caused the Lord to make this breach? to take away the
light from us?

3. The third is a mournful Lamentation; we should be very sensible of such a
loss: yea, in some proportion unto the kind and greatness of it: For as the
enjoyment of an eminently faithful Prophet (or Pastor) is an exceeding blessing
(it is promised amongst the chiefest of mercies, I will give them Pastors after
mine own heart, and thine eyes shall see thy Teacher.) So the death of such a
Isa. 30. 20.
one is an exceeding loss, and consequently requires exceeding Grief and
Lamentation.

There are six great losses, and do you judge whether Six great losses.
they be not so.

1. The first is the loss of a soul, how great is that loss? all is lost if
that be lost. 2. The second is the loss of true Religion, and the glory is
departed from Israel, when that is gone. 3. The third is the loss of Gods
smiling favor and presence; when that withdraws, then the Sun is set, and it
is night, and darkness, and fear, and trouble with the soul. 4. The fourth is
the loss of peace in conscience; Now beginns the Wars and Tumuls, and the bones
are broken. 5. The fifth is the loss of the Gospel; Now the gates of Heaven are
shut up, and the worst of famines seizes our souls. 6. The sixth is the loss
of faithful Prophets, and Ministers of God; Now the stones are fallen, and the
shields of the earth are fallen, and the interpreters, the men of thousands,
and the watchmen set upon the Towers, and Bull-works, are cut off, and the
Ambassadors of Christ, and of peace are called home, and the servants and
furtherers of our salvation are discharged.
Now the more that any loss borders upon souls, and upon salvation, the more
heavy and sharp is that loss, and with that loss we should be much afflicted
and troubled.

Q. But may some say, why all this Ado? Why such a crying out and such a laying
to heart, such a grieving and mourning, and taking on, and troubling of our
selves upon the loss and death of faithful and zealous Prophets? What are they
more then other men, For place, for use, for service, that there must be such a
stir for them? They are a company of busy and troublesome Fellows, the
troublers of Israel.

Sol. So indeed did Ahab speak of gracious and zealous Elijah; Ahab (who sold
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord.) He said thus unto Elijah,
Art thou he that troubles Israel? But to let railers go, there are two Reasons
to be found in the Text, for a mournful lamentation upon the death of the
faithful Ministers or Prophets of God; whereof one respects the people of God,
who stood in relation unto them, as children unto a father, and the Prophets
stood in relation to them as fathers unto children; and the other Reason
respects the public civil State.

1. In respect of the Relation between Faithful Ministers and a People.

Their Relation is that of Father and Children (my Father, my Father, cries
Elisha here) and truly this Relation has in it more of Love, and more of Grief
then any other Relation; When Joseph buried Jacob his Father, They mourned with
a great, and a very sore Lamentation. Genesis 50. 10.


Now every faithful Prophet or Minister of God is a Father unto the Saints or
people of God.

1. For Spiritual Generation: under God he is a Spiritual Father, and begets
them again by the Gospel; this the Apostle expr^sly delivers in several places.

1 Cor. 4. 15. Though you have ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye
not many Fathers: For in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.
He was an Instrument or means used by God for their New Birth. So Philimon ver.
10. speaking unto him of Onesimus, whom (says Paul there) I have begotten in
my Bonds.

2. For loving and tender affection; A Father does not more love his Natural
child, then the faithful Minister does those whom he has begotten unto Christ;
Take thine only Son Isaac whom thou love, said God to Abraham, Genesis 22. 2.
The Elder unto the Elect Lady and her children, whom I love in the Truth. 2 John 1. So Paul to the Corinthians, Apologizing for himself in not being
burdensome unto them, 2 Cor. 11 11. Wherefore? says he, because I love you
not? q. d. Do you think that the want of love in me unto you is the reason of
that forbearance? God knows: q. d. God himself who knows all hearts, he does
know that I love you.

Nay, so great is the love of benevolence in a faithful Minister unto his
people, That he is contented for a while to delay his own eternal Salvation and
Happiness, that he may be a little more helpful and useful unto his people;
This prevalent affection you may read expressly in the Apostle Paul.

Philippians 1. 23. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. (i. e.) For my self.

Verse 24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

Verse 25. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide, and continue
with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith.

The Apostles difficulty and straight was about his own personal interest, and
their common spiritual good. If I die, I shall gain by death, I shall be with
Christ: But then you will loose, I must no more be with you, to serve, and
further your Faith and Joy: well says he, I am content, I am willing to live a
little longer for the beneficial service of your souls, rather then presently
to depart and enjoy my happiness with Christ: O what a love was this?

3. For care and watchfulness; How careful is the Father for his Children?
Children are the uncertain comforts, and the certain cares of their parents:
and how watchful is the Father for the good of his Children, and against any
evil that they may fall into? They Counsel them, they look after them, they
follow them with their tears, and with their many Prayers. This likewise is
applied unto the faithful Ministers of God: They do Naturally care for the
estate of their People. Philippians 2. 20. As if they were led thereunto by
inward Bowels, and by a Natural instinct: And they are watchful for them, and
over them. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls: Ah Brethren! when you are sleeping, they
are watching; when you are minding your Trades, then are they studying your
Salvation; when you are following your delights, then are they Mourning and
Praying for your Souls: They are caring and watching how to get your hearts
changed, how to bring in your souls to Christ, how to get your sins mortified,
your Temptations answered, your doubts Resolved, your Consciences to be settled
and comforted: They fear in your fears, and they are troubled in your troubles,
they mourn in your sorrows, they rejoice in your peace, etc.

4. For all the Offices and Duties of a Father: You read in Scripture of the
several Duties of a Father. As First, Instruction and Direction. Secondly,
Reproof and Correction. Thirdly, Compassion and Comfort. Fourthly, Provision
and Expenses. In all these does every Faithful and Zealous Minister of God
abundantly appear, and put forth himself: He instructs the ignorant, directs
the doubtful, warns and reproves the unruly, pitties the weak, comforts those
that are cast down, provides food of all sorts for his people, milk for Babes,
and meat for those of full Age: Lays out himself, Heb. 5. 14. 2 Cor 13 11.
spends and is spent; lays out all his received Treasure, and stock of
spiritual goods amongst them; Is grieved if his children walk unworthy of the
Gospel, and nothing does more rejoice him then to see them walking in the
truth, and prospering in Christ; As his first great desire is to match every
one of them to Christ, so his next great endeavor is that they may abound with
all the fruits of Righteousness which are by Jesus Christ.

Now judge what the loss of such a person is: It is sad to loose such a
faithful friend as Jonathan, and such a loving and tender Father as Jacob was;
much more sad and heavy is it to loose such a Father whom God has made an
Instrument to Regenerate our Souls, to rescue us from the power of darkness, to
bring us unto Jesus Christ, and unto Salvation by him: When a person can say of
a Minister, had not the Lord sent such a one, I had (for ought I know) been
damned, I had gone on in my sinful cursed ways, and had everlastingly perished:
But it pleased the Lord by his Ministry to open mine eyes, and to awaken my
conscience, to make me to see my sins, and all my spiritual misery, and to
humble and break my heart, and to direct me in the way how my poor soul might
be brought in to Christ: Yea, and did work so effectually, that at length I did
by faith close with Christ, and since that my soul has been refreshed with the
joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost: And besides all this, I have received (at
several times) special directions for my walking, singular helps against
Doubts, Fears, and Temptations, etc. Truly the loss of such a Minister, of such
a Father will distress us, will melt us, will make our hearts to mourn and
lament.

2. In respect of the Public Civil State.

Unto which Faithful and Zealous Prophets are the Charet of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof; Some Render the words, Currus Israelis and militia ejus.

Faithful and Zealous Drophets of God are useful, and serviceable: Not only for
the spiritual estate of men's Souls, but also for the Temporal Interest of a
Civil State; Micah said, Now I know that the Lord will do me good, seeing I
have a Levite to my Priest. I dare confidently Judge. 17. 13.
affirm that the Faithful Ministers of God are so far from being a Curse and
Detriment unto a Nation, that they are a blessing unto it, and a strength and
safety unto it; Nay, let me speak truly, They are of more strength and safety
then all Charets and Horsemen.

There is (I confess) some strength unto a people by them, and so there is some
strength unto a people by wise Counselors, and so there is some strength unto
a people by Unity and Concord at home, and so there is some strength by
confederations abroad: but the chiefest strength of a state (under God) lies in
Faithful and Zealous Prophets, and in Faithful and Godly persons.

Quest. You will say, how can this be? what are they but a company of weak men?
and (commonly) despised men? what good can they do to a Civil State, or for it?

Sol. It is granted they are but weak men, and they are despised men in the
world: yet it was the poor man (whom no man remembered) who did by his wisdom
Eccle. 9 16.
deliver the City: And you read that by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out
of Egypt, and by a Prophet was he Hos. 12. 13.
preserved: But I shall by a few Arguments demonstrate that the faithful and
zealous Ministers of God are the greatest strength and safety unto a Nation.

1. There is no greater strength and safety for a people then this, that God
owns them, and God is present Romans 8. 31.
with them: The greatest people on earth are nothing if the Lord leaves them,
and departs from them: Therefore said Moses unto the Lord, If thy presence goes
Exo. 33. 15.
not with us, carry us not hence. q. d. Lord! We are nothing without thy
presence, we cannot be a sufficiency to our selves, nor a safety to our selves
at all: Thy presence is all in all, to us, and for us.

But the faithful and zealous Prophets (or Ministers) of God, are a special
means of Gods presence with a people, which may thus appear.

1. They are a means to engage a people unto God, to bring their hearts unto
him, and to acknowledge and own him only; you read this in Elijah, who brought
back the hearts of the people of Israel unto the Lord, 1 King 18. 37 3^
and they cried out, The Lord is God, the Lord is God.

2. They are a means to keep the worship of God and his Ordinances pure, and
remember this, that as long as a people do own God, and as long as his worship
and Ordinances are preserved pure amongst them, so long God is present with
them, who is their only rock and safety.

2. They are the special Instruments which God does use to keep a people from
sin, and to bring them unto Repentance in case of sinning: They warn and
threaten them from the Lord, and testify and cry aloud against their
transgressions, and will not suffer them to go on in wickedness, but strive
with them, and exhort them daily, and press upon them all sorts of Arguments
(from Judgments and mercies) to cease to do evil, and to learn to do well, to
forsake their evil ways, and to turn to the Lord* this we find in Scripture,
and this we find in experience, and therefore they are the most eminent means
of safety unto a people.

Beloved, they are our sins (and they only are) the fountains of all our
miseries; our sinful evils brings upon us all our miserable evils; Thy ways and
thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy wickedness (i. e.)
the fruit and effect thereof. Jer. 4. 18.


And if sins be removed, then miseries are removed, and all danger is over: God
is again wel-pleased, and returns with loving kindness, and much prosperity
unto a people, as you may read in the times of the Judges, and of the Kings.

3. They are the choicest Instruments which God does use to teach a people his
will and ways; by them does God make known his Laws and Statutes, and 1 Samuel
12. 23. I will teach you the good, and the right way.
ways; This is the way, walk ye in it; In these paths you shall find rest unto
your souls: and by them does God keep a people in his ways, they are the
Instruments used by God to keep a people upright and steadfast in walking before
him.

And this is a peoples strength and safety: Gods ways (and none but his) are
ways of safety, while a people walks in his ways, he will be their sun and
shield, their rock and strength, their God, and their salvation.

4. They are of singular use and benefit to the leaders of a people (if they
will receive such among them) the faithful Prophets of God have been a means
to convert wicked Governors, and to keep others of them right in the ways of
God; you read of Iehoash, that he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, all his days; wherein Iehoida the Priest instructed him: See of what
excellent use that good man was unto Jehoash. 2 King. 12. 2.


There are none who will deal with the Governors of a people so plainly, so
conscientiously, so seriously, so earnestly, as the faithful Prophets of God:
They will speak to them, when none else dare speak to them; they will tell them
of their sins, as well as their inferiors; they will make known unto them all
the mind and will of God concerning them; they will put them upon the power and
practice of Godliness, as well as others, nay, more then others; they will stir
up their hearts to be zealous for God, and his truth, and his ways, and not to
suffer any provocation of God in the Land.

Now this comes to be of great strength and safety to a people: As a peoples
misery lies very much in the iniquity of Rulers, so a peoples happiness lies
much in the godliness of their Rulers; if the Judgments of Rulers are right in
the things of God, if their hearts do indeed love God, if they themselves do
make conscience to walk in the ways of God, if they once come to be tender of
the honor of God, and will own and encourage the power and pract^^^ of
Godliness: why such Rulers are a singular blessing unto a people, and they are
a means of manifold blessings unto them: And therefore faithful and zealous
Prophets are an eminent strength and safety to a Nation, who are special helps
for all those gracious Qualities in such as do Govern a Nation.

5. I might add one thing more to demonstrate the assertion, and that is this;
Faithful Prophets are much in prayer for a Civil State; and their prayers are
very 1 Samuel 7. 5. 9. 2.
prevailing with God: Said Samuel, Gather all Israel together to Mizpeh, and I
will pray for you unto the Lord: And he cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the
Lord heard him. His prayer was a means to discomfit the Host of the Philist^^s:
so when there was a great drought in the Land of Israel, that it was like to
perish, Elijah prayed, Jam. 5. 18.
and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruits: His prayer
was a means to preserve the Land: many more instances might be given, but I
must hasten to the Application of all this unto our selves.

Is the death and loss of any one faithful and zealous Use. 1.
Prophet of God, a just cause of grief and lamentation? Then what sad thoughts,
and melting affections should take us up for the death and loss of many
eminently faithful and zealous Prophets of God? We have (of Doctor Hill. Mr.
Wilson.. Mr. Whitaker, etc.
late) lost many precious Servants of Christ, many faithful laborers in his
vineyard, I fear that we have not laid those losses to heart; that may be
affirmed of most of us, which is spoken in Isa. 57. 1. The righteous perishes,
and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, and no man
considers that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come.

There are (unto me) yet four sad presages of some future evil, and they are;

1. The great Indifferency about the great Truths of Christ. 2. The great want
of the power of Godliness in the Land: superstition and profaneness still
abounding. 3. The great contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel. 4. The great
Inconsideration of the death of so many choice Prophets and Servants of God: To
many persons their life is a burden, and their death is a rejoyceing.
When Metullus heard of the death of Scipio Africanus, he ran out into the
public Forum, or Marketplace, and cried out, O Citizens, come ye forth, and
consult Concurrite cives, ^^bis vestrae moenia corruerunt.
what is to be done, for the walls of your City are fallen down: Surely there
is matter of deep thoughts, and sad afflictions in these solemn dispensations
of God of late. For an Husbandman to pull out the weeds in the Garden, this is
nothing: But for him to pluck up the Flowers, and the choice Plants, there is
something in this: for him to take away the rotten Hedge, this is nothing, but
to break down the walls about the Vineyard, there is something in this. To
take off a Tile from the top of the house, it is nothing, O but to take away
the Pillars, there is some great change now indeed. We read that when Noah
(that Preacher of righteousness) was taken into the Ark, then the flood
followed; seldom does God gather his Prophets by clusters (as it were) but
there is some great evil near unto a people: nevertheless people (generally)
are secure, and stupid, and foolish, though God smites them in one of the
choicest blessings which he vouchsafes to the Sons of men.

They see loss upon loss, and death upon death; here a Minister dead, and there
a Minister carried to his grave, and usually this is all the fruits of it; Is
such a one dead? and I pray you how long was he sick? and whereof did he dye?
and what has he left his poor wife and children? It is great pity, the man
was an honest man, and preached well; and here is all.

Now to such careless, and cold, and dull persons (especially if any such have
had any reference unto faithful and laborious Ministers) who can thus slightly
pass over the death of their Pastors, I have four things to say.

1. It is a sign that you never truly loved their persons; No, no, for all your
complements, and for all your pretenses, yet you never truly loved them; of all
affections, love is most apprehensive and sensible. If it enjoyes, there is
much delight: If it loses, there is much sorrow: love is very sensible of
what it enjoyes, and of what it looses.

2. It is a sign that you never prized them in their Ministry: if you make no
more of them being dead, certainly you made little of them being living:
Affections do most appear and discover themselves upon death: absence, and
difficulties, and oppositions, and death, these are trials and discoveries of
true love, and therefore if you can so slightly bear the loss of your faithful
Ministers, assuredly you never knew the worth and use of them, as Ministers of
Christ.

3. It is a sign that you never received any Spiritual good by them at all: If
you had done so, your hearts would have been knit unto them in life, and at
least have shed a tear for them in death.

Their death would presently call up all those heavenly counsels, and all those
seasonable directions, and all those spiritual satisfactions, and all those
sweet comforts of God, which you by them did receive: At such a time I remember
how he thus spoke, and at such a Sermon, and at such a meeting, and in such a
conference; and now I shall never see him more, nor confer with him more: The
heart would melt to think of these things.

4. It is a sign that God has in Judgment taken away your faithful Ministers
from you, even for your want of love to the Truth, and for your slighting and
neglecting the means of Grace, for which you must give a severe account unto
God.

And let me tell you, that so many faithful Ministers as you have heard, and so
many heavenly Sermons as you have heard, (or should have heard) the more heavy
will the account be unto God, and the more dreadful will Gods Judgments be
upon you for your unthankfulness and unprofitableness: I grant that the
Prophets dye, but remember, that a peoples accounts for the pains and labors
of those Prophets never die, but do remain upon Record as a witness against you.

The next use shall be an Item unto all of us here this Use. 2.
day, and more especially to them who are particularly interessed in our great
loss; That they would in a singular manner lay to heart this great breach which
God has made and this great loss which has suddenly, and unexpectedly
befallen us! Ah Sirs, Who that saw and heard that precious Minister of Christ,
the beginning of the last week, did think to hear of his death toward the
latter end of the same week? who that heard him preaching of laying up Treasure
in heaven, did imagine that such a treasure should be taken away from earth,
and himself (so suddenly) be laid up in heaven!

Alas! For me to speak of this Prophet, and of one common loss, of the many
losses in this one loss; truly I am not fit, I am not able, because I knew him
much, and honored him much, and loved him much: only this I will say of him;
That one so plain in heart, so deep in judgment, so painful in studies, so
frequent and powerful, and exact in preaching, so laborious with, and useful to
his Congregation, so able to convince the Gain* sayer, so zealous in contending
for the truths of Christ, so fit for all Ministerial services, (besides his
Personal and Domestical course of Godliness) of his time, I have not known the
like.

Really, he was another Elijah; let me a little compare them: How zealous was
Elijah against the false Prophets of Baal? How laborious was Elijah to bring
back the people of Israel to the true God, and to the true worship of God? How
stout and resolute was Elijah in delivering the Message of God, even to the
face of King Ahab? How quick was he with Ahaziah for sending messengers unto
Baalzebub the God of Ekron? How fervent and potent in prayer? How diligently
laborious to his dying day? How sudden was his remove and departute? All this
Spirit, and much more then this of the Spirit of Elijah was found in him.

Now if you do but consider what eminent Gifts and Graces appeared in him, and
how seriously, and humbly, and dexteriously these were laid out for the glory
of Christ, and for the service and benefit of the Church of Christ, we have
cause in the loss of such a Prophet to cry out, My Father, my Father; The
Charet of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

But I will speak no more of him, nor to you of him; his death I see has made
a general and deep Impression Use. 3.
upon your hearts: All that remains to be spoken, shall be unto you his
Hearers, and especially unto you his late Congregation, there are four things
which I would briefly offer unto you.

1. Grieve in a Spiritual way, and upon Spiritual considerations, that God has
deprived you of such a Spiritual Pastor, and Helper, and Comforter.

2. Remember and lay up those soul-saving Truths which you have so often heard
from him, and wisely improve them, in all your occasions: when Elijah was wrapped
up to heaven, Elisha took up the cloak which fell from him, and made use
thereof: O take up all those gracious Instructions which fell from him in his
life, and make use of them now after his death, keep them alive, and so you
shall find him still living.

3. Hold fast that form of wholesome words by him from Christ delivered unto you;
and as you have received, so walk in them, let not your stedfastness dye, now
he is dead.

4. Most humbly and earnestly strive with the Lord, by Fasting and Prayer, that
seeing it is his will to take away Elijah from you, that he would be pleased in
his love and mercy to give unto you an Elisha in his room.

FINIS.

