THE Self Afflicter. Lively described in the whole course of the Life of Mr.
John Lilburn, sometimes Lieut. Colonel in the Army of the PARLIAMENT.

His being Whipped, Gagged, and committed Prisoner to the Fleet by the sentence
of the Bishops, and the Star Chamber.

His Arraignment for his life by the Express command of the late King before
the house of Lords.

The arraignment of him for his life at Oxford being taken Prisoner at
Brainford.

His commitment to the Tower by the House of Lords, and his long imprisonment
there.

His arraignment before the Commissioners at Guild Hall for Treason.

His banishment beyond the Seas. His arraignment afterward at the Sessions in
the Old Bailey, and his confinment again beyond the Seas. With his natural
death at last by sickness.

Together, With the Notable Difference betwixt the Levellers and Quakers about
the black cloth to be laid over his Coffin when he was ^o be interred.

Pri^ted purposely to vindicate the truth against a ^ate Foolish Pamhlet lately
pub^ished called an Exact and true Narra^ion.

Printed for Tho. Vere and VV. Gil^e^tson 1657.

A True Account of the most Memorable Passages on the Life and Death of Mr.
JOHN LILBURN: sometimes Lieutenant Colonel in the Victorious Army of the
PARLIAMENT, etc.
TO give you a view of his whole Life, and how much at all times he opposed
with all his power this present Government. is to swell that up into a volum,
which is meant for a single sheet: we shall proportion our discourse according
to the Emergency of the Advantages, in which we shall be careful, not to be
injurious to ye Reader, nor unprofitable to our selves.

Some are of Opinion that this man of extraordinary Spirit and understanding
did not so much strike at the present Government, as at the Enormities which he
conceived to be too rank, or gnawing in that Government: Let them think what
they please, we shall represent unto you the most Material passages that
concerned him, And that without flattery, or affection, the causes whereof are
far asunder from us.

John Lilburn the famous subject of this present discourse, was born in the
Year 1618. At Thickley in the County of Durham; He was Descended of Ancient
and worshipful parentage, and being very young he was brought up to London, and
bound an Apprentice to a Packer of Cloth in St. Swithens Lane: he was from his
Cradle of a high and undanted Spirit, of a quick and pregnant Apprehension, of
an excellent memory, but al ways extremely addicted to contention, a lover of
novelties an opposer of Government, unsettled in his judgment, and violent and
bitter in his expressions.

About the year 1632. he disliking his trade, had a mind to the Law, and became
a servant to Mr. William Prin of Lincolns-Inne, who for wrighting some Books
and amongst others that called Histriomastix, in which the State as the Players
were whipped, was imprissoned with those that vended the Book, and censured by
the Bishops.

John Lilburn did then begin the quarrel, and full of his Masters Cause did
write a Book against the Bishops, for which he was committed prisoner to the
Fleet, and whipped at a Carts tail from the prison of the Fleet, to
Westminster.

The Indignity whereof sat so heavy upon his Spirits, that even when the
punishment was inflicting on him he ceased nort^ratle against his persecutors,
insomuch that they caused him to be gagged.

In the year 1640 he was released by the Parliament, and took upon him the
place of a Captain in their service, and in the year 1642. not long after the
battle at Edge Hill he was taken prisoner at Brainford, And carried to Oxford,
where he was Arraigned not long Afterward as a Traitor, for levying war
against the person of the King, but his life was never in so much jeopardy as
when he was arraigned at Guild Hall for indeavoring to disturb the peace and
subvert the Government of this Nation, established without a King.

Several books to this purpose were laid to his charge, as a traytorous and
scandalous book entitled a Salva Liberate: Also a traiterous and a scandalous
book entitled An Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his
Son in Law Henry Ireton Esquire. Also a scandalous and a traiterous book
entitled, The ^u^-cry of the young men, and the Aprentices of London, or an
inquisition after the lost fundamental laws and liberties of England, etc.
Also another scandalous and traiterous book entitled The legal fundamental
liberties of the people of England revived. Also another scandalous book
entitled, A preparation to a hue and cry after sir Arthur H^selrigge, In which
Books it was laid to his charge, that he did publish that the Government then
in present was tyrannical usurped, And unlawful, And that the Commons then in
Parliament Assembled were not the supreme Authority of the Nation.

He stood also further indicted, that he as a falls traitor did maliciously plot
and contrive to raise forces against the present Government for the subversion
and Alteration of it, And did also maliciously endeavor to withdraw certain
Soldiers of the Lord Fai fax his Army, from their obedience to their superior
offices. It was also laid to his h^rge that traitorously and contumeliouesly he
had spoken very reproachful words against the Lord General, sir Thomas Fai
fax, as also against the high Court of Justice.

The Indictment held a long time. being read, Mr. Attorney did present unto the
^ury of what Dangerous Consequence were these traiterous books, and how much
Derogating from the honor of the Parliament And the Counsel of state, And of
the chief Captain and General of the Army. And other Officers Included in the
Indictment whose fame does ring through the world, Never Army (said Mr.
Attorney) has done greater things, and yet they have not escaped from being
Slandered by Mr. Lilburns tongue and pen, And not long after upon consideration
of the evidence and witnesses he told the Jury that if they did respect the
Government of the Parliament the honor of the Counsel of State, And the honor
of the Nation, or of the Army, or the persecutions of the Laws of the Nation,
they could not say but the prisoner was guilty of those crimes and treasons of
which he was Accused And that they were obliged accordingly so to find him,
And then Addressing his speech to Mr. Keeble, who was Lord chief Commissioner
And to the Judges and Barrons. He declares unto them how the Indictment was
proved by witness And evidences, and that the traiterous book entitled the
Legal fundamental liberties was owned by Mr. Lilburn himself in his
Impeachment of high Treason against Lieutenant General Cromwell. And his Son
in Law Commissary Jreton, my Lords said he, you have heard the several charges
wherewith he stands accused, you have heard a great deal of foul matter and
dirt, that is fit for nothing but to be cast upon the ground, and returns to
Mr. Lilburn again: the prisoner has cast those Accusations and blemishes upon
others but they return to his own face. Certainly the Parliament of England,
the Army, And all the Officers of it (whose fame both as Parliment and Army are
known in an extraordinary manner) Are now put in a balance against Mr.
Lilburn. And as for the Army and the Officers of it, no man can say but that
they have been faithful and true in their trust. valiant, courageous, And
Succesfull to Admiration, even to the Peace and the Happiness of this Nation,
And God is pleased at this instant to own them and bless them in a miraculous
manner.

This and much more excellently spoken by Mr. Attorney, was to lay open to the
Lord Judges, And to the Jury, the crimes of the offender, And the Lord Keeble,
who was Lord Commissioner, having suggested unto the Jury what their duty was,
And the Relligion of an oath did represent unto them, that they should consider
the strength of the Accusation, which did consist in those scandalous and
traiterous Books, which did consist of three heads.

The first was to vilify the Parliament and State, as it was then established
in England: the second to take into their considerations, his counsels and
Invitations therein for the stiring up of tumults, wars, And Commotions in the
Nation.

And the third, was the thing cited in the book to divide the Army, that the
other might take effect. These (said he) are the three main charges, And these
the Books that do come from him do plainly testify. Then directing his speech
to Mr. Lilburn, at ye bar. In this Act says he, of yours thus declared (if
your intentions had taken effect the plot was the greatest that ever England
saw: For it struck at no less then at the Subvertion of the Common Wealth; of
this state to have laid and put us al in blood: Your plot was such as never was
seen in the world before to proceed from a private man as you are, And it must
needs sit heavy upon your conscience. Therefore (turning again to the Jury) he
said you my Masters of the Jury, look into your consciences, And see what that
says unto you. That which the prisoner stands too much upon. Viz. the
witnesses is made plain and good in Law. I do not know in one particular that
there is a single Testimony but it is Agravated with many circumstances
therefore let not that trouble you, ^ou are the proper Judges of the matter of
Fact, being of the Country, And if you have fully Apprehended the dangerous
things plotted in these books of Mr. Lilburn, you shall find that the like
creason was never hatched in England, and so in Gods name As the prisoner does
lead to your consciences, so go and do

Mr. Lilburn in the mean time who had much wasted his Spirits, And had with
great earnestness been pleading for his life two days before at the Bar,
did omit nothing to insinuate into the Jury an Apprehension of his innocence,
He protested that he never owned nor signed any Book that was proved against
him* he diclaimed every Little of them. He certified ye Bench that no book in
the eye of the Law could be accounted his, unless it were Legally proved or
voluntary confessed to be his by himself.

To prove this he Alleged by several* Statutes, that it should be by two
witnesses which he said they failed in, although Mr. Attorney. And the Lord
Keeble did endeavor to give the Jury all possible satisfaction therein.

He much insisted to have Counsel to plead his Case in Law, which would not
then be granted, Although he urged Examples as he said both by Law and
president, which made him sometimes to use exclaimations more violent then
became the condition of a prisoner.

He represented what a serviceable Instrument he had been in the common cause
of the Nation in which to the hazard of his life one handred times over be had
engaged for them with his sword in his hand, with as much resolution and
faithfulness as ever man on earth served a Generation of men, having never
betrayed his trust, nor ever given any Suspicion in the least that be would,
nor ever so much as stagered in his principles, nor never so much as disputed
any Commands though never so desperate that were laid upon him.

Addressing himself to the Jury, he said unto them, you Gentlemen of the Jury,
my sole Judges, the Keepers of my life, At whose hands the Lord will require my
blood in case you leave any part of my Indictment to these -- I desire you to
know your power, And consider your duty both to God, and me, to your ow^
selves; And to your Country, And the gracious Assisting spirit, And the
presence of the Lord God, Omnipotent, the Governor of Heaven and Earth, And all
things therein contained, go along with you guide, counsel you, and direct you
to that which is just And for his glory.

The Jury having withdrawn themselves, And consulted about the prisoner and his
offenses, for the space of three quarters of an hour, Did come into the Court
again, And did bring in their verdict of him as not Guilty, At which the
multitude that Attended in the Hall, to observe the event, did make so loud an
acclamation for almost half an hour together, that the like was seldom heard.
Mr. Lilburn being that Night conveyed to the Tower, where at that time he had
been prisoner for the space of seven months, was about a fortnight afterward
released from thence by the order of the Counsel of state.

Being now at liberty he was much inclined to the study of the Law, which in
his hardest distress he found so successeful unto him.

But it was not long before he again fell under the displeasure of the
Parliment, whereupon he was by an Act Fined, banished the Common wealth of
England, And if ever he returned again he was to die as a Traitor.

In obedience hereunto he want over into the Netherlands, And it was laid to
his charge that there he came Acquainted with the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord
Hopten, Captain Titus, Mr. Bartlet and others, and yt for ye sum of ten
thousand pound he offered to setle the Government of this Nation in the same
state as it was before the wars began, which whether true or false I will not
take upon me to dispute: But howsoever it was, he had a great mind to return
unto his Native Country, insomuch that without any leave he returned again
into England, And thereupon being Apprehended and brought to Newgate, he was
tried for his life at the Sessions house in the Old Bailey, on Saturday the 20.
of August, in the year 1653, where he found such favor, that the Jury did again
Acquit him.

Nor long afterward he was conducted by a Troop of horse to Portsmouth, being
once more bound for beyond ye Seas, where making use of all his friends, and
putting in security for the peaceablenesse of his future deportment. he Landed
at Dover. And falling at first into the Acquaintance of that Generation of men
called Quakers, he was to taken with their H^at of Zeal and their hatred of
the world, y^ he never afterward Abandoned them but preaching after their
Garb and method, Sometimes on the Lords day at Eltham, And sometimes at
Woolidge he surrendered his prepared soul to him that gave it him.

One thing I cannot well omit that happened at his Burial, which is that his
wife, or some Levellers of his old Acquaintance (as others say) had brought a
Black Cloth to cover his hearse, the Quakers would by no means admit of it,
Alleging that the less there was of pomp, there was the more of piety. And
thus through many Contentions and variety of opinions, he at l st wrangled
himself into the grave, dying on Saturday the 29. of August, 1657. And was
buried the Monday, following in the new Church yard near Bedlam.

An Epitaph on Mr. JOHN LILBVRN,
HE in his life who nere did cease,
To beat down Government and peace
who his own sword abhord to se
The Iron with the Steel agree,
And scornd the pen that did not drink
Far more of Copres then of Ink.
The scourge of peace, the soul of Jars,
The hur-burly of the Stars,
Whom neither creatures force nor fame,
Nor Love, nor fear alive could tame,
But Orders would and Laws forestall,
And level Church, and state, and all,
Lies now to have one Dust expressed,
What wonders Death can do at rest.
Another Epitaph on John Lilburn,
Here Is John Lilburn in good time deceast
After much wrangling now he is gone to rest.
If Factious Spirits still much coyl do keep.
Pray blame not him. he is fairly laid asleep
whether in the right or wrong he has thus left us.
stout death of this stout champion has bereft us
Who liking not the furious noise he made,
Threw dust upon him. so the storm was laid.
Upon the late untimely death of JOHN LILBURN:
Untimely cause so late. and late because,
To save much. mischief: it no sooner was,
Is John departed? and is Lilburn gone?
Farewell to both, to Lilburn and to John,
Yet being dead. take this advice from me
Let them not both in one grave buried be,
But lay John here. lay Lilburn hereabout.
For if they ever meet they will fall out.
FINIS.

