THE Humbled sinner RESOLVED What he should do to be Saved. OR Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ the only way of salvation for sensible sinners.

DISCOVERING The quality, object, acts, seat, subject, inseparable concomitants
and degrees of justifying faith.

The agreement and difference of a strong and weak faith; the difficulty of
believing, the facility of mistake about it, and the misery of unbelief. The
nature of living by faith, and the improvement of it to a full Assurance.

Wherein several Cases are Resolved, and Objections Answered.

By Obadiah Sedgwick, Batchelour in Divinity and late Minister of the Gospel in
Covent Garden.

Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Adoniram Byfield at the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbardstreet. 1656.

To The RIGHT HONORABLE William EARL of BEDFORD Barron of Thornaugh.
OBadiah Sedgwick, in Testimony of his real thankfulness for all his singular
Respect unto him, and great encouragement in the work of the Ministry in
Covent Garden, and of his Pious care in settling so able and faithful a
successor to carry on the work of the Gospel in the said place. Presents
this ensuing Treatise.

TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT is sufficient commendation to the ensuing Treatise to let thee know, that
it was Written and completed by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick in the time of his
health. It has now pleased God by sickness to disenable him for public
service in the way of preaching, and if by Printing that he has formerly
preached, he may become further useful to the Church of Christ, as it will be
much comfort to him, so I doubt not but it will be matter of much rejoicing,
and great benefit unto many others. These Sermons handle the doctrine of
justifying faith, and if they shall prove instrumental, either to work or
increase faith in thee, Let God have the glory, and the Author thy fervent
prayers for his recovery.

Thy Servant in the work of Christ, EDM. CALAMY.

To the READER.
Good Reader,
THis Treatise commends it self to thy acceptance upon a double account, the
one is the known worth of the Author, the other is the great usefulness of the
subject matter: The Author is Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, no novice in the things of
God, but one that for a long time, both beyond the seas, and at home, in City
and in Country, has kept up the vigor of a convincing Ministry, which the
Lord has abundantly prospered to the converting of some, and building up of
others, and no doubt to the conviction of many more, who shall one day know
that a Prophet of the Lord has been amongst them: Besides, one of an exemplary
godliness, and long experience in the ways of God; of whose excellent spirit
the world has had a sufficient taste in those choice Treatises that are
already published under his name; certainly from such an able head, and holy
heart, nothing can be expected that is cheap and mean.

It Is a loss, a loss that cannot enough be bewailed, that so eminent and
useful an instrument, is now by bodily weakness, and prevailing
indispositions, taken off from his public Ministerial labors: there is no
murmuring against the hand of God, but the wasting of the old stock of our able
Ministers should be more laid to heart; alas we that are to succeed in the
Lords work (I am sure I can accuse one) with what a weak and unequal pace do we
follow their great examples? and being too too early by the removal of such
choice instruments, put upon public services, no wonder if we faint under the
burden.

It Is some recompense for this loss, that this worthy servant of God is yet
alive, not only to honor his own Ministry (which was most consolatory) by his
private discourses, full of faith and spirit, and patient, yea, cheerful
submission to the Will of God concerning him; but also to single out such
Treatises of his own, as may be of most use to public benefit and edification.
The other reason is the usefulness of the subject matter. Of all graces faith
is the chiefest, of the most universal and constant influence on the spiritual
life; we work by love, but we live by faith; in the chain of graces described,
2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. the first link is faith, as giving strength and efficacy to
all the rest; what is the grace that yields the Lord the glory of his mercy,
veracity and power, but faith? it honors God more then an uniforme entire
obedience to the whole moral Law in innocence could possibly have done, and
pleases him more then he was displeased with the sin of Adam; All graces keep
time and pace with faith, if faith be weak, love cannot be strong, nor
obedience carried on in an even tenor, the back of patience will soon be
broken, and temperance exercise but a weak and feeble restraint on our lusts
and passions, till we learn to counter-ballance present delights with future
enjoyments. Faith is the eye of the soul to see things to come, and the hand of
the soul, to receive Jesus Christ, and all benefits in him: Faith, -- But I
will not digress into the common place, certainly no Treatise of Faith can be
unwelcome to a gracious heart, especially such an one as this is; where matters
are carried on with such evidence and demonstration of the spirit, and as to
the style, with a sweet eligancy, and yet tempered with gravity and judgment.

I could speak more, but to avoid suspicion of partiality, and private
affection to my worthy Predecessor and Father: I shall only add this, 'twere
pity that so excellent a Treatise should come forth in an age pestred with such
a throng of needless Writers, but that it is likely to be found out by its own
luster and brightness, like a sparkling diamond among an heap of pibbles and
common stones; The Lord continue the life of, and (if it be his gracious will)
restore so much of strength to the Author, that he may increase the Churches
treasure by publishing those excellent Discourses concerning the Covenant of
grace, and other such like spiritual arguments, which he has in store by him.
Reader, I am

Thine in all Christian offices, THO. MANTON.

The humble sinner resolved what he should do to be saved.
Acts 16. 30, 31. Sirs! What must I do to be saved.

And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and
thy house.


CHAP. I. The Dependence of the words.
PAul and Silas (on their journey) make a step to Philippi, a chief City in
Macedonia, verse. 12. They had a special call for it, ver. 9. Being there the
next Sabba^h, they apply themselves to Praying and Preaching, ver. 13. and each
of these was crowned with a blessed effect.

By the former, Lydia is converted, ver. 14, 15. By the latter, the Devils is
dispossessed out of a Damsel, ver. 16, 18. The Word and Prayer are the great
power of God to change the heart and conquer Satan.

But if we trouble the Devil, the Devil will not cease to trouble us. It has
been the lot of the best Ministers, to do most good, and find most affliction.
Look but in the 19. ver. and there you shall see Paul and Silas caught and
drawn before the Rulers.

Good God! That Paul should be questioned because he did cast out a Devil! But
this is not the matter objected, nor the immediate ground of the trouble (Her
Master saw that the hope of their gains was gone.) How far will the love of
the world thrust a man against Gods servants, even Paul himself is brought to
the Bar, when he cuts off the gains which the Devil brought. Covetous hearts
and good Ministers can never agree. They will rather sell ^he Truth than lose
their Gain.

But being now before the Magistrate, what is their accusation? What! That Paul
and Silas did cast out the Devil? No That they who were the Masters of the
Damosel were impaired and disadvantaged by their Preaching? No, though this was
the ground, yet something else was the Pretense. This would seem somewhat too
base, and therefore they urge against them another allegation, which they knew
would easily take, verse. 20. These being Jews exceedingly trouble our City, and
ver. 21. Teach Customs which are not lawful for us to receive, nor to observe,
being Romans.

As if he said, they are a couple of factious and schymatical fellows, men of a
singular spirit, given to innovation* speak strange things of one Christ, and
of Believing, and of Repenting, and we know not what.

They need say no more, presently there is an uprore, and without any more ado,
right or wrong, they have Justice. The Magistrates rent their clothes, and
command to bear them. ver. 22.

And this is not enough, besides the whip, they must to the Prison, and be kept
safe and close, verse 23. Hatred of goodness does many times precipitate evil
men to the acts of injustice; and he who hates a good man, will many times
become a bad Judge.

But in the prison and stocks they are, and the layler is as strict to execute,
as they unjust to command, verse 24. He did thrust them into the inner prison,
and made their feet fast in the stocks.

A strange Providence is that of God, Paul and Silas are sent to prison to
convert a Jayler, to unloose him, who bound them, to heal him, who scourged
them, God has some special ends in the times and places of his servants
sufferings. Well, at Midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises to God,
verse 25. No prison can bolt out our Communion with God. Prayer will get up to
heaven in dispite of all opposition, and even a suffering Christian may be very
cheerful.

But now see the consequents of this, their prayers shook the Heaven, and the
Heaven shook the Earth, so that the foundations of the Prison were shaken, and
immediately all the doors were opened, and every ones bands were loosed, ver.
26. I do not marvel that Prayer can break the bonds of Iron, when I know it is
able to break asunder the bonds of death it self.

The Iayler awakes, sees the prison doors open, and for ought he knew, an
escape of all his prisoners, for whose lives, probable it is, that he must pay
his own, and therefore in a passionate desperateness, draws out his sword to
kill himself.

Paul espies him, and cries out with a loud voice, (hold, hold) Do thy self no
harm, for we are all here, not a man of us that has stirred.

Which when he had searched, and found, O, what a strange alteration is in this
Jayler, verse 29. He came in trembling. What! he who before made them to bleed,
does he now tremble! he that before cast them into the stocks, does he come
trembling to them! What were they, or what could they do shackled, and
scourged, and imprisoned persons, that he trembled before them! But so he did.
Scorners will become Tremblers, when God has once touched their hearts; yet
this is not all. He also falls down before them. He is upon his knees to ask
them forgiveness, for his cruel usage. And then he brings them forth.

But what of all this. All this may arise from sparks of pity and

Nay, but there is a greater matter then all this: Sirs, said he, what shall I
do to be saved? (As if he said) I am in a miserable condition, I have lived
wickedly, and done wrong to many of the people of God, and in particular to
you; Good Lord what shall become of me; you are the Ministers of Christ, I
beseech you have pity on me, and show unto me what I may do to save this poor
soul of mine.

What does Paul, and Silas Answer him? they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. And I beseech you mark it, how immediate
their answer is to his question; they do not say, as the High Priests to
afflicted Judas, look thou to that, they do not upbraid him with his hard and
cruel usage. They take not that advantage, and say, nay, now does thy
conscience trouble thee for being so wicked, and scourging us so sharply? yea,
and so let it; do thou come for direction and comfort to us, whom thou have
so shamefully abused?

No, they forget the injuries, and presently pour in the Oil. They instantly
direct him into the true way of life, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved. But more of this anon.

I have chosen this text on purpose that I may proceed to the next article of
the Creed (I believe in Jesus Christ our Lord) you see it is expressed in the
next.

But before I handle it, give me leave to Analyze the words, and to touch upon
some singular conclusions, and then I will set down upon the Article it self
more fully.

CHAP. II. The opening of the words with the several Doctrines in the text.
THe words of the text do contain two parts.

A case of Conscience to be propounded by a troubled and trembling sinner: The
case is not for another, but for himself, what shall I do? And not about his
Riches, or wealth, or his body, but about his soul: And that not for mere
speculation, but for practicals, it is a case about his salvation, and about
the means which he should take to attain: Sirs, what shall I do to be saved?

Secondly, The case fully resolved: (Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved,) As if he said, Christ is the only way to Heaven, and faith is
the only way to Christ; God has given Jesus Christ to sinners, and salvation
in him; And whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have eternal
life. Now then, believe in him, and you shall be saved.

There are many conclusions emergent from these words, I will omit most of
them, and only insist on the latter.

Change of heart breeds change of estimation toward the Ministers of the
Gospel. The Jayler a little before had a base Paul and Silas, but now Lords,
Sirs, what shall I do?

As the Heart is, so the Judgment is, and Newness of Nature, has with it
Newness of Light. We can now see the men and their authority, and their
office, and embassage, and the end of all their reproves, and instructions,
and therefore the very feet of them who bring good tidings, and publish peace
and salvation, are beautiful.

It argues the heart to be base and sordid, which can slight and scorn the
Messengers of Christ; he has no grace, who can contemn and vilify a Minister
of grace. But two things God ever works, when he confers grace, (viz.) A love
of the word of Grace, and an Honoring of the Messengers of Peace.

Sensible sinners are ever inqu^sitive. Sirs what shall I do? and so, Act. 2.
37. Even they were pricked in their hearts, they cry out, men and brethren what
shall we do?

There are two sorts of sinners.

First, some are hardened, unsensible, wholly overgrown with sin, and are past
feeling, Ephesians. 4 18. Their sin is in them, like the waters in the Ocean; under
all which, if a man does lie, yet he feels no weight nor burden, because the
Elements in their proper places are not sensibly weighty: so where sin is in
its center, men are unsensible of the burden of it. They feel it not, nor
their misery, and therefore neither complain nor enquire.

Secondly, others are made sensible, not only by the ordinary light of a
natural conscience, but by the contrary principle of new and infused Grace: It
is with them like as with a man recovering out of a deep sickness, his health
comes in, and makes him now sensible of his weakness, and complaining, and
desiring help. So when God does by his blessed spirit work the lively sense of
sin in the heart of a person, the baseness of it, the danger and misery of
it. O he cannot now remain thus, live thus, he must have a guide, he goes to a
Messenger, one of a thousand, to instruct and direct him.

For first, conscience truly awakned, cannot bear its own burden, its own
divisions, fears, accusations, present condition, and therefore the person
will enquire whether there be no balm in Gilead.

Secondly, again, sensiblenesse of sin is Opus respectivum, it is a work for
further work. God does for this very end make us sensible of our sin and
misery, that we might enquire after the means of grace and safety.

Thirdly, once more, scarce one sensible sinner of many thousands that is able
to be his own Counselor, or comforter, we are not able always to apply those
sweet directions, those proper and heavenly comforts as God promises, to our
own necessities, which yet we may distribute with a full and tender heart to
others in their exigencies: for there is a great difference betwixt the
proposing of comfort and the applying of comfort. He who is to propose it, has
a medicine to deliver; He who is to apply it, has a medicine to take. There be
many contrary arguments and risings of an unbelieving and fearful nature, in
the person who is to apply the truth, and goodness of Gods promise to himself,
so that he is not always able to see the reach, and compass of them to
himself; and therefore no marvel if he seeks out for direction, in the midst of
his own confusions, and for a help to apply, in the midst of his own fears and
distractions.

The maine and choice thing which the troubled soul looks after, is how to
save it self. (Sirs, what shall I do to be saved?)

There be diverse sorts of troubles, and according to their grounds and
qualities, does every person lay out for help and remedy. Some are troubled
with mere sickness, and health is the thing which they would have. Some with
poverty; and riches are the things which they would have. Some with ignominy;
and favor, and good opinion is the thing which they would have.

Some with outward afflaction and punishment; and exemption is the thing which
they would have. Remove from me this Plague only said Pharaoh.

Some are troubled with mere terrors of conscience; and quiet and ease is the
thing which they would have.

Others are troubled in soul for their sins, by which God is dishonored,
and their heart polluted; now how these may be saved; This is the thing which
these would have.

Come to a soul, sensibly groaning under the weight of sin, and say, why?
Soul be of good cheer, thou have goods laid up for many years: Oh says that
soul, miserable comforters are they to me, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
Come again and say, you have many good and kind friends, Alas says the soul,
friends are Physicians of no value to my troubled and perplexed soul: Lord be
merciful to me a sinner. Come to that soul, and discourse to him of the defect
of sin, of the richness of divine mercy, of the Grace that God has promised
to give, of that sorrow, of that repentance, of that faith, of that blood of
Christ; O now says that soul, say on, give not over, mercy is that which I
would have, and Grace, and Christ, and Salvation, this is it which I would
have, how I may be brought out of this miserable and damnable condition.
Suppose a man were very sick, and one should come and tell him many merry
tales, to delude the sense of his sickness, this were nothing to a man sick
indeed; for it is not a tale, but wholesome Physic which would help him; he had
rather by much hear the Physician discoursing and counselling, and applying.
So it is with the truly troubled soul, yea that is it which he desires and
would have, to be set in the right way how to save his soul. Show us the
Father, said Philip, and that is sufficient, so here, show me the way of
salvation, and I desire no more.

And the reason of it is this, because,

There is nothing which suit^ with the troubled soul, but the way of salvation:
the helps and remedies of it are not to be found unless in these ways.

If a man has a burden on his back, take it off, and that is the way to ease
him; if a man has a feavour, cure him of that, and this is the way to help
him; if a man's bone be out of joint, set it in his proper location, and this is
the way to comfort him. In like manner is it here. The distresses of the soul
are spiritual, and only spiritual ways relieve spiritual troubles; I now see
God at difference with me, how may I be reconciled to him? I see the dishonor
against him, how may I pacify him? I feel the guilt of sin, who shall take
that off for me? I would be a changed and new person, who will work this in me?
what course must I take to get God to look graciously on me, to get these sins
pardoned, this heart to be sanctified?

I cannot pass over this point without a word of application.

If salvation be the maine enquiry of a truly troubled soul,

The Psalmist speaks of some, that God was not in their thoughts; and we may
say of some, that Salvation is not in their minds. He who has abundance has
this question, who will show us any good? and he who is in want, has this
question, what shall I do? But, what shall I do to be saved? few think of this,
it is a marvelous thing that so noble a creature as man, who carries in him the
singular stamp of heaven (a spiritual and immortal soul) should so infinitely
forget both himself and his errand into this world. I am a miserable sinner
(said Saint Hicrome) and born only to repent. We are born transgressors from
the womb, and with hell at our heels; God is pleased to draw out the thread
of our life, and to vouchsafe to give us this hint, that we are sinners, and
must dye, and if we change not our condition we perish forever. And besides
that, he has addressed the ways of Salvation to our hands, so plainly, that
he who runs may read. Yea, and there is something implanted in men, which
secretly inclines them to be affected with a general desire of Salvation;
nevertheless, to observe men how variously they fly off, how little they mind
that, which most of all concerns them; how infinitely one drudgeth for riches;
how illimitedly another pursues pleasures; so that when we come to dye, we have
hardly thought wherefore we were borne. There is a Salvation, and a way tending
thereunto, but we forget that all our days: We have other employments, but let
us soberly recall our selves.

Is there any thing better then Salvation?

Is there a nearer thing then the soul?

Is there not a necessity to be working in the way, if ever we

O then let this take us up; let heaven take us up; let our souls take us up;
but let not our sins, let not the world take us up. Vbi pompa (said Saint
Augustine) ubi exquisita convivia? ubi gentiorum ambitio? ubi argenti and auri
pondus immensum? Transient omnia ab oculis ejus, putatur requiesere corpus
ejus, and habitat in inferno anima ejus, multipl^cavit agros, plantavit vineas,
implevit horrea, yet says he. S^ul^e hac nocte. He enlarges his Fields,
plants his vines, fills his Barnes, loses his soul. The like says Saint
Bernard. Dic mihi ubi sunt amatores seculi, qui jam diu fuerint! Dic, quid eis
profuit inanis gloria? Brevis laetitia? mundipotentia? Quid carnis voluptas?
quid falsae divitiae? ubirisus? ubi jocus? ubi jactantia? Hic, caro eorum
vermibus; illic, anima ignibus deputatur infernalibus.

I say no more, but labor to save that, which if it be lost, the world cannot
procure it, and believe it, that the soul can never be saved by that which is
not worth a soul.

Another conclusion from the words of the text may be this That persons rightly
sensible, are as thoroughly resolved, for the means and ways, as for the end
and scope.

The Jayler does not say I desire Salvation barely, but what must I do to be
saved? as if he said, I desire Salvation, and I do conjecture that it is an
end, and therefore means there are leading to it: now whatsoever they are,
point them out unto me, that I may apply my self for the prosecution of the end.

There are two things which deceive a man's heart.

One is presumption, which is a skipping over the lesson, and

Another is hypocrisy, which is an inquality of the heart to all the ways of
Salvation: No hypocrite will apply himself to every thing which may indeed save
him. But where the heart is rightly understanding, and truly sensible, there is
not only a consideration of means, but an illimited resolution for all the
ways of Salvation: whatsoever course God does by his Word reveal and
prescribe, for that it is resolved and purp^sed, though they may be contrary to
my proud reasoning and capacity; though they may be contrary to the bent of my
affections; though they may require much time and employment, etc.

What the Princes speak with a disembling heart, that the sinner rightly
sensible of his condition, affirms with a plain spirit, of true intention. The
Lord be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to
all things for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us. Whether it be
good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God to whom
we send thee, that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of the Lord
our God.

He who will be saved must come to this, to deny his own will; to crucify his
own affections; to captivate his own imaginations; to resign up his own
desires and pleasures; to afflict his heart for his sins; to give up himself to
the rule and command of Gods Word; to draw off his heart from the world; to
settle all his confidence upon Jesus Christ; to watch over his own spirit; To
love the Lord God with all his soul, and with all his might: These and other
things are required as the way to life, and unto them all, does a sinner,
rightly sensible, yield up himself with all readiness and gladness.

For as much as, though there may be some difficulty in these, yet there is
Salvation by them; yea, and there is a singular help for them, as well as a
special reward, but the present and former condition and way of sin is
engraven with much pains, and sore horror, and death, and hell; But I pass on.

Another conclusion from the words is this, When God does thoroughly work upon
men's consciences:, personal injuriousnesses must be forgotten by them who are
to deal with them.

You see here that Paul and Silas speaks not a word of this cruel usage
toward them, but instantly address themselves to the direction of his safety
and comfort, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

We read of the Father of the Prodigal, that when his son came humbling and
bewailing his fore-past miscarriages of Prodigality and Luxury. He saw him a
far off, and ran to meet him, and kissed him, and put the raiment on him, and a
gold Ring. He did not rate and upbraid him; Nay, I will not look on thee, I
will not accept of thee, go now to thy Harlots, amongst whom thou have
riotously wasted all that goodly portion which I put into thy hands: O, no, he
accuses not him, whom he hears to accuse himself, and reviles not him, whom
he sees to condemn himself. It is enough that his Son who was lost, is now
returned; and that he who was dead, is now alive.

We must imitate our heavenly Father in this, who in the Covenant of Grace,
will forgive our iniquities, and remember our sins Jer. 31. 34.
no more. So in another place, If the wicked will turn from all his sins that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes, etc. All Ezekiel 18. 21, 22.
his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him. Why? Brethren, If God forgives the man, all the wrongs done against him,
should not we forgive the smaller trespasses against us? and what have we to do
to upbraid, when God is pleased to forgive and convert? and what should we
stand upon our respects, when God has past by all the indignities cast upon
his honor and glory?

There are two sorts of sinners.

Stout, and resolute, who know how to slight mercy, neglect

Bleeding and afflicted, who tremble at threatenings, gasp for mercy, faint for
deliverance, and change. Here now Ministers eyes of pity, and tongues and hands
of Oil; they must not pour in scorpions, nor add terrors to the afflicted, but
Preach liberty to the Captives. They must bind up the broken hearted, and give
them beauty for ashes, the Oil of joy for mournings, the garment Esaias 61.
of prayer, for the spirit of heaviness, that they may be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3. In these cases, we
are not to look on our selves, but on our office; not on our own indignities,
but on the patients necessities that way which God looks, and speaks, that must
we speak also. Now God looks on the Contrite to revive them, and speaks
comfort to the troubled souls, and therefore we must be silent to upbraid, and
ready to direct and comfort afflicted souls.

Troubled souls must be directed to Christ: for this is it which Paul and Silas
advises the afflicted Jayler, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. They do
not direct him to any man or Angel, to any pilgrimage or Saints, they set him
not up on any selfe-standing project, but, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

But why to Christ?

Because none is appointed to relieve a troubled soul but Christ. Him has God
the father sealed, and he was anointed to preach glad tidings.

Secondly, none is able to pacify and quiet a troubled soul, perfect
righteousness; he has wrought full redemption, he is able to save to the
utmost.

That which cannot satisfy Gods Justice, can never pacify an afflicted heart;
but if God might be fully satisfied, if he might be made peace, and become a
curse, and is a propitiation, etc.

He will relieve the afflicted heart. He is called a merciful High Priest, and
one who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and he will not break
the bruised reed, and he calls the heavy laden to come to him to be eased.

There be three things which would marvelously ease and refresh a troubled soul
One, if he could get off the guilt of former he is made sin for us, that we may
be made the righteousness of God in him; and he can change our natures by his
blessed Spirit. Therefore the Apostle says, that he is made, redemption,
righteousness, and sanctification unto us.

But I pass over all these conclusions, and come to that upon which I must
somewhat insist.

CHAP. III. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ the only way to salvation.
TO believe in the Lord Jesus Christ is the only way of Salvation. The text is
clear for it.

Parallel places are these. Mark. 16. 15. Go ye into all the world and preach
the Gospel to every creature, 16. he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved. Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
Act. 4. 12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no other name
under heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved.

For the discovery of this assertion, we must open these particulars.

First, the meaning of each of these titles, (viz.) Jesus, and Christ, and Lord.

Secondly, what the believing in the Lord Jesus Christ does import.

Thirdly, how it may appear to be the only way of salvation.

Fourthly, the useful application of all this to our selves.

What is the sense and sum of those three titles Jesus, Christ, Lord, I shall
resolve them distinctly.

SECT. I.
JEsus signifies a Savior: as it was a name imposed from the Sect. 1.
pleasure of heaven, by an Angel, Mat. 1. 21. Thou shall cast his name Jesus,
for he shall save his people from their sins. The first name that you read of
imposed on Christ in the New Testament, is this name of Jesus; for the best
name that sinners could possibly desire to hear, was this, that God has
provided a Savior for them. The Prophet Isaiah 9. 6. says, that his name
shall be called wonderful, and indeed Jesus is a wonderful name: It is a name
which breeds just wonder and admiration to all the world, to men and Angels; it
may make our hearts to wonder at the hyperbole, of Gods love (as one of the
Fathers speaks) that he Mirandum Amoris.
should (notwithstanding our vile deserts) bestow a Savior upon us, who else
had been lost for ever.

The Apostle says, Phil. 2. 9, 10. That it is a name above all names, no name
like it, either for the authority which was conferred on him, who bare that
name; or for the comfort which that name bears in it, for a sinner.

Therefore said the Angel to the Shepherds, fear not, for behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people, for unto you is borne
this day in the City of David, a Savior, Luke 2. 11. yea, that is good news
indeed. A Savior for a sinner: What kind of Savior Christ is.
no such news as that!

Now here observe diverse things. The Son of God is a singular Savior. No
Savior in all the world like him. Joshuah is called a Savior: and the Judges
were called so, yet the Son of God is a Savior infinitely beyond them. For.

They could save bodies only, they could not save souls, not Jesus Christ is a
Savior of souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Rev. 20 4. the price of our souls is in his
blood, with it he bought them and redeemed them.

They could save from some outward misery, the tyranny and inward servitude and
thraldom they could never save; they could not deliver the persons from the
tyranny of their sins, whom they have been able to deliver from the tyranny
of sinful men. But the Son of God can save from inward and spiritual miseries,
he can save from sin; Mat. 11. 21. He shall save his people from their
sins. Sin has gilt in it, he saves us from that, by shedding his blood, and
procuring remission. Ephesians. 1. 7. And sin has pollution in it: He saves us from
that, by cleansing the heart; 1 John 1. 9. And sin has dominion with it; but
Christ has assured that he will make us free, Joh. 8. And that no sin shall
have dominion over us, Romans 6. He can save from Satan, Heb. 2. 14. He did
through death destroy him who had the power of death ((...)) the Devil, and
ver. 15. did deliver them who through the fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage.

He can save from the wrath of God, so he did, by becoming a On me my son (said
Rebeckah) be the cu^se: see Gal 3. 13.
curse for us, by suffering the sensible and marvelous impressions of his
displeasure for our sins. Jesus (says the Apostle) 1 These. 1. 10. delivered
us from the wrath to come.

They were such Saviors, as did need a Savior: Christ was

Whiles they lived, they could save, but dying, they could not Christ Jesus
saved us by his death, the losing of his own life caused ours; we are saved by
his death, the son of Matthew. 20. 28.
man came to give his life a ransom for many.

He is a general Savior, Joh. 4. 42. The Savior of the world: The Savior of
all men, 1 Timothy 4. 10 Therefore Jude, ver. 4 calls the Salvation by Christ, the
Common Salvation. Mistake me not, when I say that Christ is a general Savior,
as if every man in the world should be saved by Christ: He is not a general
Soviour in respect of individual persons; but,

First, in respect of successions of persons. That is, there never was any age
succeeding a former age, but in every age Christ was a Savior, Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He is the Savior in
the days of old, and in our days, and in the times after us.

In respect of Nations. He is not the Soviour of the Jews He justifies
Circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith, Romans 3. 30. The Jew
cannot boast, nor the Gentile complain, but there is Salvation for them both
in Jesus Christ.

In respect of conditions. He is not the Savior of the great

In respect of relations. He is not the Savior of the Master Gal. 3. 28. There
is neither Jew nor Gentile, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither
male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

He is a mighty Savior: he is able to save to the utmost, Heb. 7.

The greatness of his satisfaction. That he was able alone to

The greatness of his passions. That he endured the

He did stand at the Bar, not to suffer and satisfy for one sin only, nor for
all the sins of one man only, nor for some sins of most men only, nor for
all the sins of all men in former ages; but for all the sins of all that
shall be saved, from the first man that lived, to the last man that shall dye.
Yet though he had all their sins to answer for, though he had a severe
justice to deal with all, though he had a perfect law to fulfill, though four
mighty enemies to conquer, Sin, World, Death, and Hell, yet he went through
all, satisfied, suffered, conquered.

He is a perfect Savior, the perfection of his saving consists in three
things.

First in the alonenesse of it, whatsoever was required meritoriously to save
men is in him alone, there is no other name beside his, nor with his, but he
alone is a Savior, there is one mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus, said the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is no concurrence of any Angel, nor
of the Prayers of any Saints departed, and glorified, nor yet in the inherent
sanctity in any man living nor yet of any works before, or after grace, which
comes in with Christ as a meritorious cause of our Salvation: But Jesus Christ
alone, is sufficient, and effectual to save the sinner: as the government is
upon his shoulder, so is our Salvation. Thou can not come to an Angel, nor to
a Saint, and say such and such sins are the burden now upon my soul, do you
by your righteousness ease me, such and such debts are upon my soul, do you
satisfy for me: Thou can not come to God and say, truly Lord I have sinned
against thee, but here are so many floods of tears which I have shed, now for
their sakes wash and pardon me; Here are so many prayers offered up unto thee,
for their sakes hear and harken, and forgive; here are so many charitable
works by which I have clothed the naked, fed the hungry, relieved the poor, for
their sakes look upon me and accept of me.

It is very true, that these things are required of Christians, and I shall
hereafter show unto you the necessity, use and efficacy of them; but if we
speak of the meritorious cause of Salvation, None but Christ, Christ alone.

In the fullness of it: from whatsoever we need to be saved, from that he can
save us, he is not a surety, who undertakes such

In the efficacy of it: Being God and man he suffered and dyed, imperfection,
for that which is still in doing, is not perfectly done; as the Philosopher
speaks of things in motion, that whiles they are in motion they are imperfect,
but when they attain that end and form for which they move, then they rest;
now Christ having once offered himself for to save us, he rose again and sat
down at the right hand of his Father: he repeates his sufferings no more. Heb.
10. 14. By once offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto Salvation.

Thus, for the importance of the title Jesus: the next title is,

SECT. II.
CHrist, Messiah in the Old Testament, and Christ in the New, of the same
signification, Joh. 1. 41. We have found the Messiah which is by interpretation
the Christ, and this is a sweet word unto us, that Jesus was Christ, that he,
who was our Savior, was anointed. The Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings, Isaiah 61. 1. And he was anointed with the Oil of gladness, Psalm. 45.
7. will you give me leave to let you see much excellencies in this short word?
We do speak much of Jesus, and yet we are ignorant of the form of his saving;
and we hear much of Christ, but perhaps we understand not what force, what
comfort, what happiness is couched therein; therefore I will unfold unto you,
1. What this anointing of our Savior does import. 2. Unto what he was anointed.

For the first, the anointing of him in whom we are to believe, does signify.

His singular and assured ordination to be our Mediator, and to Prophet had
poured the Oil on the head of Jehu, they presently blew the trumpet, and said,
Jehu is King: so when Zadock the Priest took a horn of Oil out of the
Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon, they blew the trumpet, and all the people
said, God save King Solomon 1 Kin. 1. 39. (as if he said) this is the very
person who^ God has appointed to rule over us. In like manner, because the Son
of God is made a Christ, because he is anointed, we may infallibly conclude,
that that person, who was God and man, was appointed, and singularly designed
to be our Savior and Redeemer; so that we may with John, point at him, Behold
the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. And therefore it is
said that he was called, that he was sealed, that he was sent; it was the Act
of the whole Trinity, to set the son apart, to become our Savior: So now for
Christ to be our Redeemer, is no fiction, but a real thing; nor was it
undertaken presumptuously, without a calling, but by ordination and the
institution of God.

An abundant qualification (that is,) that person, the Son of God, being
anointed or designed to be our Redeemer, was enabled with all the richness of
Grace, and fitness of gifts, every way required to perform the work of our
redemption; I have laid help (said the Prophet, Psalm. 89. 19.) on one that is
Mighty; so is it here, our Salvation is to be wrought by one who is enabled to
compass and perform it.

Therefore we read of the pouring forth of the spirit on him, and Jer. 31. 34.
Psa. 45. 7. Act. 10. 38.
that without measure, in a most eminent fullness, even to an overflowing.
There was no want of holiness which the Law could require, either for nature
or actions, and no word of power to suffer or conquer. Yea, he was so adorned
and beautified with abilities to save, that he did not only at once go through
the hard task of our Redemption, but he still distills virtue down by his
Spirit, to save us more and more from our corruption, etc.

A sweet and pleasant acceptance both to God and man, look as the sweet
composition of Gifts and Graces, so when it was poured forth it did cast abroad
a most delightful favor. In like manner does the anointing of Christ imply, A
most marvelous and gracious acceptance.

With God, and so his Sacrifice was a sweet smelling odor, Golden Altar with
Incense, Rev. 8. 3. which went up to heaven, with a sweet and delightful
well-pleasingness.

With men: This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, Tim. 1. 1. How much is the Church
(in the Canticles) affected with the savor of this precious ointment!

O how much more precious then gold, more delightful then all the rivers of
Carnal pleasures, is that Oil of gladness wherewith the Son of God was
anointed: anointed to become the Savior of my sinful soul!

Solomon speaks of Oil which did give a cheerful countenance, sure I am, if
there be any thing which can revive the heart of a drooping sinner, which can
cheer or quicken his spirits, which can put life into him, it is this, that
God has appointed his Son to dye for him and to save him.

SECT. III.
NOw for the second question, (viz) unto what was Christ anointed? For a
satisfaction to this demand, we must know that those who were anointed, by Gods
command, were sequestered to singular and special offices thereby, and there
were three sorts of persons, who were to execute three sorts of offices, who
were anointed.

First, the Priest, as we read of Aaron and the rest of that order.

Secondly, The Prophet, as Elisha by Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 16.

Thirdly, the King as David by Samuel, and Solomon, by Zadock.

Now Christ differs from all others, who were anointed, we read that some were
anointed to be Kings, but not to be Priests nor Prophets; others were anointed
to be Priests; but neither to be Prophets, nor Kings: others were anointed to
be Prophets, but neither to be Kings, nor Priests.

Again we read of some who were to be Kings, and Priests, as Melchisedek,
others to be Prophets, and Kings, as David, some to be Priests and Prophets,
but not any one was anointed a King and a Priest and a Prophet conjunctively.
Now here is the excellency and the eminence of Christ's anointing, He was
anointed to all those three offices, not only to be a Priest, but also a
Prophet, not only to be a Prophet, but also to be a King.

Had he been a Priest only, he might have offered sacrifice, for our sinful
gilt. But who should have then been the Prophet, to have opened the eyes of the
blind, and to give the ignorant knowledge?

Had he been a Priest, to suffer and a Prophet, to instruct only, who should
then have been a King, to have abolished the confusions of the Heart, and Life,
and to have subdued our sins and so to lead captivity captive?

Nay that he might be a complete Savior and Mediator. He was anointed to be
Priest Prophet and King. I will open something in every one of these.

He was anointed, to be a Priest. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedek, Psalm. 110. 4. so Heb. 3. 1. Jesus Christ is called the Apostle and
High Priest of our profession ver. 2. He was faithful to him that appointed
him, see Heb 4. 10. 7. 26. There are these things employed in his anointing to
be our Priest..

1. That he was designed perfectly to fulfill the Law of God for us. He was a
satisfactory Priest, there was the ceremonial Law which he fulfilled by
abrogation, and there was the Moral Law, which he fulfilled by obedience.
Whatsoever the Law of God could require, either for the holiness of nature, or
of life, that was to be found in Christ: And such a high Priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, etc. Heb. 7. 26. Hence
is he often called the holy and just one, Act. 3. 14. and Chap. 4. 27, 30. and
is said to be without sin. He had no sin at all of which he was personally
gilty, but he was every way a righteous person and fulfilled all righteousness.

I say fulfilled it, not for himself only, but for us; so that if you would now
look for a righteousness which can every way satisfy, and which is every way
punctually exact, and unblameable, you must look out of your selves, unto the
righteousness of Christ as Paul did, Phil. 3. and therefore he says, that
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that believes,
Romans 10. 4.

To make expiation for sins: He was an expiatory Priest. There was in the
Law, sacrifices offered by the Priest, of which some were Gratulatory, wherein
God was praised; and others were Expiatory, wherein God was appeased; as in the
oblations of the Lamb, etc. thus it stands with us. As we are creatures, we are
bound to obey God; as rational and righteous creatures, we were bound to obey
the Moral Law of God, and now as sinful creatures, we are bound to answer the
transgressions of that Law, by exposing our persons to the endurance of the
great curse of that Law, and the wrath of God: The Law is broken by us, Gods
justice is wronged, his indignation moved, and our own gilt, like so many cords
hold us fast, and deliver us bound hand and foot to the vengeance and
punishment of Gods pure and righteous justice.

Now suppose you saw a number of Malefactors going to execution, the Kings Son
meets them, they are heavy, weeping and sobbing because death is approaching;
Why? says the Kings Son weep not, you have provoked my father, and have
deserved death, but fear you not, I will take a course to preserve your lives:
How so? Thus, I will lay down my own life for you, I will dye for you, to
deliver you. It is even thus betwixt Christ and us, we all have sinned, and by
reason of sin are bound over to death, and hell, how now shall we escape?
Thus, God did give his own Son, and he did take our sins on him, and did dye
and shed his blood to expiate our gilt and procure our pardon. Hence is he
called a sacrifice for sin, and he is 2 Cor. 3. 1 Pet. 2. Esaias 53. Romans 4.
said to be made sin for us. And to bear our sins in his own body on the tree,
and that our iniquities was laid on him. and that the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and to be delivered to death for our sins and that Christ our
Passover was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. And observe the phrase, Christ
our Passover, etc. You know that the Passover had a Lamb, and the Lamb lost
his life and blood, and that blood was sprinkled upon the doors of the Children
of Israel, and the destroying Angel did pass by the doors where it was
sprinkled, and their lives were preserved, so it is here, we should have been
destroyed, but Jesus Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, (i. e.) he did
pour out his own blood, which did answer for our gilt, and so preserved our
souls.

Now concerning his Priestly expiation of our sins observe.

First, the Priest, who did offer this expiatory sacrifice.

Secondly, the sacrifice it self.

Thirdly, the Altar upon which it was offered.

Fourthly, The dignity and efficacy thereof.

The Priest, was Jesus Christ, as God and man, as our Mediator, for that did
belong to the Priest, who was to offer sacrifice, Aaron was to bear upon him
the sins of the people, and to offer for them; so Jesus Christ, as God and
man, was he who did offer up that sacrifice, which did expiate our sins, Heb.
5. 5. He that said unto him, thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee,
verse. 6. He says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeck.

The sacrifice it self, was Christ as consisting of soul and body: made his
soul an offering for sint, Isai. 53. 10. And that his soul was exceeding
sorrowful, even to death, Mat. 26. 38. In it he felt the bitter anguish and
wrath, which made him to sweat, even drops of blood; And, as for his body, that
was prepared for him to suffer for us; hence it is said, that he bore our sins
on his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. It is very true, that the Godhead
formally, was not the sacrifice, that could neither suffer, nor be afflicted,
only it did aid and assist the humane nature, which was offered up as a
sacrifice.

The Altar on which this sacrifice was offered, which did expiate The Altar
sanctifies the gift, not the gift the Altar; for here that which did make up
the high efficacy of the sacrifice, was the divine nature of Christ. That Jesus
Christ who was God and man did offer up himself as a sacrifice for sins, was
more then if all the holy Angels and holy men in the world had suffered; there
is now, by reason of the divine nature an infinite dignity to answer for all
our sins which else had stood uncancelled.

The efficacy of this sacrifice, which is this, that he took away

Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, 10, 11. Every
High Priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same
sacrifice which can never take away sins. 12. But this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God.

He did by his sacrifice take away all the gilt of sin, and all the
satisfactory punishment, for all this was charged upon him as our Mediator, our
Priest, and our surety, yea and he made a perfect reconciliation betwixt his
father and us, and therefore as our Priest he is our propitiation, 1 John 2. 1.
and our reconciliator and peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. and our atonement, Romans 5. 11.

So that to give the sum of all this, Jesus Christ was anointed, that is,
designed by God the Father to be our Priest, (i. e.) to offer up himself, as a
perfect satisfaction to divine Justice, for the remission of all our sins, and
punishments, and this he did perfectly perform for us, and this was accepted
of God for us.

I say for us, he was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him; and who is made righteousness, redemption, and sanctification,
and wisdom to us, and that of God, whatsoever he did, or suffered from his
Father, it was as our surety, in our stead, and so it is reputed.

A third part of his Priestly office is this, that he does make intercession,
Isa. 53. 12. He bare the sins of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors, so Romans 8. 34. It is Christ that dyed, or rather that is risen
again, and is even at the right hand of God who also makes intercession for
us. And therefore he is called our advocate, 1 John 2. 1. and is said to appear
for us, Heb. 9. 24. He is as it were the Deputy, or rather our Attorney, to
Negotiate for us, with the Father.

There is a two fold intercession, one by way of duty, another by way of merit,
one of charity, another of dignity, When I pray for any man in distress, I am
said to be an intercessor, to deal for him with God, as a matter of my duty,
and out of a charitable respect; But Christ he only interceeds meritoriously,
and by way of dignity. His intercession, as I conceive, intimates three things.

The exhibition of his person before the Father, as our Surety,

This exhibition of his glorious merits: for he does not nakedly went up to
heaven with the price of his blood, with the ransom which he purchased, with
the righteousness, and satisfaction made with the merits of his oblation and
sacrifice, and there he presents them continually before his father, as if
Christ should still say, Father I am he that dyed for to get pardon, to get
favor, to get grace, and to get such or such good things, this is the blood
that I shed, the price that I paid, to satisfy thy justice, to fulfill thy Law,
to remit these sins, to confer these graces, etc.

The ingratiating us with the Father: which he does by the application of his
own merits; when sin gets up to accuse our persons, and our prayers, then
Christ shows himself our intercessor by putting aside the force of the bill of
complaint, and answers for our persons, and for our services.

True O Father! this man has sinned thus against thee, but I am his surety, to
satisfy for these his sins, and I did shed my blood for them, therefore now
look not on him, but on me, and for my sake, accept of him and be propitious to
him.

So for infirmities, true O Father! his imperfections in duty are many, but I
am to bear the iniquity of the holy offerings: and my righteousness is
perfect, and that I present unto thee for him; now notwithstanding his
weaknesses, for my merits, accept of his person, grant him his request, do him
good. Thus Christ is the Angel, who offered up the prayers of the Saints with
incense, Rev. 8. 3, 4. Nay, Father accept and incline thine ears, I have
deserved acceptance, and audience, etc.

SECT. IV.
SEcondly, Christ was anointed to be a Prophet, so Deuteronomy. 18. 18. I will raise
you up a Prophet from among their brethren, the which is expressly interpreted
to be Christ, by Peter, in Act. 3. 20, 22. Therefore Christ is called
Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. one who does advise, and direct his Church; and the
Doctor or Teacher, Mat. 23. 8. and the Apostle of our profession, Heb. 3. 1.
and the faithful witness, Rev. 1. 5. And a witness to the people, Isa. 55. 4.
A Leader and a Commander, yea, he is called the Light of his Church, Isai. 61.
1. And the light of the world, Luke 2. 32. (that is) it is he who did reveal to
the world, the true Doctrine of eternal life, and the Angel of the Covenant,
Mal. 3. 1. and the Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. and the wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1. 24.

The anointing of Christ to be a Prophet implies,

That he was to reveal the will of his Father, and the ways of life, Joh. 15.
15 All things that I have heard of my father, have I made known unto you: So
Heb. 1. 2. In these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, Joh. 6. 68.
Master, to whom should we go, thou have the words of eternal life? see Isaiah
61. 2. Matthew 11. 27.

There is no person, who must dare to prescribe any other doctrine, but such as
Christ has delivered. He may not coin new Articles of faith nor of obedience;
Christ is appointed to be the Prophet of his Church, (that is) to deliver unto
them, all such truths from his father, which shall and do concern their
everlasting salvation.

That he is to make us know effectually the things which he as dark as
darkness it self, yet he can make the light of knowledge to arise in the
thickest darkness of the mind, though the judgment be corrupt, and full of
errors, yet Christ can erect a throne of truth, and direct us into the paths
of righteousness; though the heart be dull, yet his words are as fire to
quicken that heart; though it be as hard as the rock, yet his word can be as
the hammer to break that stony heart: His teaching can soften the most
unflexible adamant, he is able to convince, and bend, and alter, and bow it;
the very dead shall hear his voice, and live. So that if any person does need
any directions, any enablement for heaven, or the way thither, he must know
that Christ is the Prophet anointed; whatsoever belongs to an heavenly
instructing, and to an heavenly drawing, and obeying, that is to be found in
Christ, and had from him who is anointed a Prophet (that is) designed to teach
the Church, and furnishes with all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge,
and ability, etc.

SECT. V.
LAstly, Christ was anointed to be a King; therefore Psalm. 2. 2. he is called
Gods anointed; and ver. 6. the King whom he Psalm. 2. 2.
did set upon his holy hill of Sion. The King of Kings, Rev. 19. 16. He shall
reign over the house of Jacob, Luke 1. 33. so Mat. 28. 18. All power is given
to me in heaven and in earth. He has the Scepter of Royalty, and the Rod of
authority, and the sword of power, and the throne of judgment, and the Laws of
his lips, and the keys of life and death.

Now this regal office of his, to which he was anointed, imports many things.

First, that he is to bear rule over all the Nations; and indeed his natural
kingdom reaches over all the world, from the highest Angel to the lowest
Devil.

Secondly, that he is to Govern and rule the Church, which he has purchased
with his blood; The Government is upon his shoulders; Isai. 9. 6. And therefore
he is called the Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12. and all judgment is committed to his
hand, Joh. 5. 22, 27. to this end you have the rod of his Scepter his holy and
righteous Laws, and his mighty and blessed Spirit, to give force unto them,
even into our hearts, and there to bring every thought into captivity to the
obedience of Christ.

Thirdly, that he is to maintain and uphold his Church, therefore he is said
to Gird his sword upon his th^gh, Psalm 45. 3. and to ride upon a horse with his
garment dipped in blood and armed, as if he were ready to fight. He is the
mighty redeemer of his servants, against all who entrench upon their peace and
safety; and he strikes down Paul to the earth for persecuting him.

It belongs to the King to be the defense of his subjects, so here, God has
appointed all the Protections, and safeties, and deliverances of the Church to
be in Christ.

Fourthly, he is to conquer all his and our enemies; God has given Christ a
Kingdom, but it is such as he must fight for; Not a Subject which he has,
which comes in unto him, but by conquest; If we be in our own hands, peccatum
Hostisest, quamdiu est, said Saint Augustine, and if we be in Satan's hands, we
are in that enemies hands.

More plainly, there are these enemies of Christ and his Church which he is to
conquer for himself and them.

First hell, and we read that he has spoiled principalities and powers, and
made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them, Col. 2. 15.

Secondly death, 1 Cor. 15. 54. Death is swallowed up in victory, 55. O death
where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory, etc. 56, 57. But thanks be to
God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly sin, and this is, Christ also to conquer; he is to cast down all the
strong holds of lusts, and all imaginations, and to captivate the whole man; He
is to subdue our iniquities for us, and not to suffer sin to have dominion over
us.

Fourthly, Wicked men, he will stick his arrows in the breasts of Princes, and
in the hearts of the mighty, and terrible; he is to bruise the Nations with a
rod of Iron, and to dash them in pieces like a potters vessel: He will execute
judgment upon all of them, and cast them all to the dust, who rose up against
his person, or Government, or people. He will set his people at rest from them
that rise against them, and will make his enemies his footstool.

CHAP. IV. What Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ does import.
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ import?

Jesus Christ, is like a ring, and faith is like the finger, which wears it. He
is like a treasury, and faith like the hand, which draws out thence. As David
spoke in another kind, come and I will tell you, what the Lord has done for
my soul! or as Philip to Nathanael, can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip says, come and see. The same is to be said of faith, God has
done great matters for sinful man says faith, Why? but can any good be brought
by any to us who are so bad? yes, says faith, come and see, Christ is very
good, he is a Savior for a poor sinner, but it is faith which finds him so.

Mark the answer of the Apostles here in the text, what shall I do to be
saved, says the Jayler?

They do not answer, there is a Jesus Christ, take thou no more care; he did
dye for sinners, and thou shall do well enough: Nay, this they answer, thou
may be saved by Christ, but thou must believe in Christ. Not a medicine is
the remedy, but a medicine applied. Not the man, but the man taken, becomes the
husband; So the taking of Christ, the believing in him is the way to heaven.

Because this is an excellent point (for our life lies in it) give me leave to
speak somewhat of faith.

First, in the general and there I will be brief.

Secondly in special, as justifying of faith, or faith believing in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

First, Generally.

For the general nature of believing, observe these propositions

First, that believing is an assent to such matters as are known, only by
revelation from another; there are in the soul of man three qualities by which
we came to find out or perceive things.

First, one quality is Scientia, or knowledge, which is a firm assent unto a
thing which may be evidenced to the understanding by solid demonstration of
infallible principles, or else by the undeniable evidence of sense, and
experience: as thus, that every natural body has power to move, or that the
Moon will suffer an Eclipse or that the fire is naturally apt to ascend, and
the water to moisten, etc.

These things have both a natural certainty and truth in themselves, and there
is an undoubted evidence and certainty in the mind of the person, truly
knowing them; and so certain and full is the persuasion of the mind, about
them, that there is no scruple of doubt remaining to discuss, as any
uncertainty whether the things be so or no.

Another is opinion, which is an inevident evident assent, if conjectural. As
take a man in a case of a scrupulous conscience, there is to that man some
evidence of argument which does seem to warrant his action or attempt, and yet
that argument is not so entirely convincing of his judgment, but on the other
side, there starts up a medium or argument, which renders the practice probably
sinful; whereupon, if you come to demand of him; May you do such a thing? he
answers I do not certainly know (that is) I am not entirely and absolutely
resolved of it, yet I think I may, I think it is lawful; and this thinking
(which is opinion) is always accompanied with some fear and suspicion; so that
the mind is like a pair of Scales tottering and tilting to either side.
Things are partly clear, and partly obscure, partly, evident, and partly
inevident, and therefore the assent of opinion is always doubtful.

Another is belief, which is an assent unto things not from any

If I feel the fire to burn my hand, I do not call this a believing, but a
sensitive knowing, if Ahimaaz comes and tells David, that his Son Absalom is
hanged and slain, though this be knowledge in him who saw it, yet it is belief
in David, who did hear and credit the tidings; so that (to be brief) belief
differs from knowledge in this, that knowledge depends on the evidence of
things themselves; but belief, though the things be certainly true to which it
does assent, yet it assents unto them for the testimony or authority of him who
relates and reports them. Though this be most true, That Jesus Christ was borne
of the Virgin Mary, and that he is the Messiah and Savior, yet I believe it to
be true because God has given testimony or report thereof in his Word unto me.

Again, Belief differs from opinion in this, that opinion is an indifferent,
probable, hazarding, and difficultly inclinable assent, but in believing the
assent is firm, certain and fixed especially where testimony and authority is
sufficient.

Believing as it is restrained to a theological and divine consideration,
assent of the soul to the truth, and goodness, of all divine revelations upon
divine testimony. Here much might be said, as for instance.

First, that all divine revelations are the object of belief, as supernaturally
inspired.

Secondly, that the ground of believing them is Gods own testimony. Faith has
sufficient reason to believe all things there to be true in their relation;
because of his truth and authority who does say so (viz.) God himself.

Thirdly, of the general nature of believing, which is an assent unto all
spoken by God as most true and credible.

Secondly, particularly, of justifying Faith.

Faith (as you well know) has a double aspect, one is to the whole revealed
Word of God, another is to God in Christ or to Jesus Christ.

I am not now to speak of it, as an eye which may see all colors, but as an
eye fixing it self on some singular and special object (viz.) on Jesus Christ,
in respect of whom it is called justifying faith: The believing on whom may be
thus described.

CHAP. V. Faith in Christ, what described.
IT is a singular Grace of God, whereby the heart and will of a sensible
sinner, does take and embrace Jesus Christ in his person and offices, and does
wholly or only rest on him for pardon of sin, and eternal life.

There are many things to be opened in this description, forasmuch as all the
force of true faith, cannot at once in a few short words be clearly expressed.

SECT. I.
COnsider therefore, the spring or fountain of this faith is at heaven: Gods
eternal decree, is the radical cause of it: so Causa.
Acts 13. 48 As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. And the
instrumental cause of it is the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. And the immediate and singular cause
of it is the Spirit of God, Gal. 5. 22. there it is an express fruit. So Joh.
1. 12. speaking particularly of believing on the Name of Christ, he adds
verse 13. men come to this not being borne of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

That the will or heart of man should be brought off from it self, and to abhor
its own condition and sufficiency, and to take Christ as God propounds him, to
be the only rock upon which I must built my salvation, to be the only Lord to
whose Law and Will I must resign up my whole soul, and to cleave unto him in a
conjugall union and affection; This I say arises, not from natural
principles, nor from the wisdom of a man's free will, nor from any endeavor or
action which can find footing in man himself.

It is observed that there are two sorts of habits. Two sorts of Habits.


1. Some which are acquired by the industry of the person, and through a right
use of a segacious and understanding mind, and such may be purchased by
practice, and use; as the Scholar by writing, gets the habit of writing, and
the Apprentise by his wise and honest observation, and industry, gets into the
skill of his trade and calling; Now faith is no such quality, we can send forth
no such singular acts or operations, which are able in time to ripen or beget
so excellent a Grace in the soul.

2. Others are plainly and entirely infused. Faith is not water in the Earth,
which a man may pump out, but it is even in the fullness or littleness of it,
in the allnesse of it, as the drops or showers of rain, which come from
heaven: Though the subject of it be below, yet the cause of it is above, it is
man who does believe, but it is Gods Spirit alone who gives him that faith to
believe; it is the will of man which does take and receive Christ; but it is
Gods Spirit who does bestow that grace of faith, by which he does take and
receive.

That a man has a will, none can deny, who know that they are men; Nay, and
that the will is able to send out its own actions, it is willingly confessed;
but infinite is the difference 'twixt the natural actions of the will, and the
supernatural qualities and operation of Gods Spirit in the will: It is true, a
dead carcass is able of it self to send forth a stinking smell, but it is not
able to quicken and enliven it self. That the will can, will I grant, but that
the will can (of it self) enliven it self, to that great part of life, I mean
believing, it is not only a vehement injury and dishonor to the fountain and
freeness of grace, but also a most foolish, and senseless error; the will of
man being naturally so opposite to believing, and believing being an act so
every way unsuitable, and disproportionable to the inclination and ability of
the will. No verily, faith in God comes from God, and so faith in Christ, from
Christ; none ever could see Christ in a justifying and saving way, who had not
that eye of faith put into him by the Spirit of Christ. No grace co^e^ from
any, but the God of Grace. Unto you it is given to believe, Phil. 1. 29.

SECT. II.
THe subject of this faith, is a sensible sinner; I do not as yet Subjectum.
those parts of the soul, wherein this grace is seated; of this I shall speak
anon. But of the subject of denomination, and this subject is a sensible sinner.

There are two sorts of sinners. Two sorts of sinners.


1. Some generally corrupted both in their natures, and in their lives, and
they are as unsensible as they ere sinful. They do not know in any powerful
degree of true reflection and feeling, their own vileness, accursednesse and
miserableness of persons being so, and remaining so in an unsensible condition
of sinfulness, I dare confidently affirm, that though they may have most able
and strong presumptiors, yet they have not (as yet) the least degree of
justifying and saving faith. How can any man by Faith look upon Jesus Christ as
his Physician, who is whole in his own opinion. The unsensible sinner, as he
cannot close with Christ, so he will not care for Christ; for what should now
move such an heart, is it this holiness of Christ's person! Good Lord! How
ridiculous is that motive to a profane and graceless heart, or is it the
sutablenesse of Christ's Office; Why? what is Salvation to him by another, who
as yet sees no ground or reason of condemnation in himself?

2. Others sensibly experienced, who know thus much, that they in particular
are sinful, and there is no Salvation, no hope of it from themselves, but it is
to be found only in Jesus Christ. I confess there are several degrees of
this sensiblenesse; neither dare I to assign the height and latitude of it
unto the terms of horror and terror, (that is) that a person must be always
and necessarily anguished with extremities of amazement and dejections, before
he can believe in Christ: No, though these sharp throws are manifest in some,
yet I dare not make them a rule for all: only this I say, that the heart
believes not, it looks not toward Christ, till it feel it self to be sinful,
and lost by reason of sin; and that there is no possibility of subsistence in
it self: And now there is room for faith when I feel my self a sinner; now
there is reason for me to look upon a Savior, and when I am sensible of my own
vileness; now is there reason to look upon another righteousness; and when I
perceive my own lostness, now is there cause to look after that salvation which
God has put in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Me thinks that of Christ, he came not to call the righteous, but sinners, that
he is sent to find that which is lost, that the whole need not a Physician,
but the sick; that he is sent to preach liberty to the captives, do abundantly
confirm this truth: Yea, and our own experiences gives in a clear evidence,
that not only in the beginning, but in the progress of our conversion, our
eyes are then most upon Christ, to look after him, and to prize him when we are
most sensibly acquainted with our own sinfulness, and miserableness of
condition.

SECT. III.
THe Seat or babitation of faith, is the heart or will: Scriptures Romans 10. 10.
with the heart man Seeds.
believes unto righteousness, Acts 8. 37. And Philip said, if thou believe
with all thy heart thou may, and he answered and said, I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, Rev. 22. ver. 11. whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely.

There be who distinguish 'twixt three kinds of faith.

First, Credere deum, which is a universal and large conception of a God, when
the understanding is persuaded, (beyond Atheism) to believe that there is a
God.

Secondly, Credere Deo, and this is such a disposition of the understanding, by
which it gives credit or belief to that God, speaking and revealing, as to one
who is truth, and cannot lie.

Thirdly, Credere in Deum, which is not only a credence to God, as true in his
Nature and Word; but a reliance on him with the will, and embracing of him and
his truth and goodness with the affections.

Now justifying faith, or faith in Christ, is comprehended in this latter kind
of believing. For the better apprehending of this, observe a few things (viz.)
First, the things which God does propound unto us are of different ends and
uses, some are propounded merely to be known, of which sort some conjecture
many historical pasages in the Word, and many predictions, and many
Genealogies; Some are propounded, not only to be known, but also to be done, as
the Divine Precepts, or Commandments; some are propounded to be known, and to
be avoided, or declined, as all the comminations and threatenings in the Word
against sinners: Some are propounded to be known, and to be embraced with the
will and affections, of which sort are all the Promises of God, and Jesus
Christ our Lord. All those parts of the Word which contain our good, and our
good to be embraced. They have a necessary and natural reference to the will
of man, which is planted in us by God, to be conversant about all that which
respects our good. Since then Jesus Christ is our good, both personally
considered, and also vertually considered; faith therefore as conversant about
him, must naturally be planted in the will.

That there are two parts (as it were) of faith.



Another is perfect, (I speak of an essential perfection, not of Tim. 1. 15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners.

That Jesus Christ came to save sinners, is a truth not to be questioned, and
therefore the understanding is to acknowledge the same: And that he came to
save sinners, is not only a truth revealed, but a goodness offered, and
therefore it is worthy of all acceptance; Now as credence of the truth of it
appertains to the understanding, so the acceptance of the goodness of it does
appertain to the will: Yea, one word more: it is the proper work of faith, to
conjoyne the soul with Christ, to contract and espouse it, (as it were) but the
soul is not conjoined with Christ by the mere opperation of the understanding,
but by the consent of the will; Ergo, faith as justifying, is immediately and
formally in the will, and not nakedly in the understanding.

SECT. IV.
THe proper and genuine act of faith, as justifying, or as conversant
acceptance, or receiving. Actus.
This Doctrine Christ himself does teach, and therefore it is true, and sure,
John 1. 12. To as many as received him, he gave power to be the Sons of God,
even to as many as believed in his Name. There you see expressly that believing
is the receiving of Christ. As if God came in these terms, I have appointed
my Son to be made man, to be a Mediator and Redeemer, and he did live and dye
for sinners, to procure their peace and salvation. Now I offer his person unto
you, and with it all the merits and benefits purchased by him, take him in his
person, in his offices, and in all his virtues, if the heart does now accept of
the Lord Jesus. This is a lively, and justifying, and saving believing.

There are three acts of the soul which are conversant about Christ.

First, one is, I know assuredly, That Jesus Christ the Lord is the Savior of
sinners. The Papists generally make this the Credence.
Royal Act of Faith, but this cannot be justifying faith, because First, this
as so, is but a truth apprehended, and not a good received. Secondly,
unbelieving hearts may enjoy this historical assent merely as assent.

Another is, I take this Jesus Christ to be my Lord and Savior, Acceptance.
I know assuredly he is a Lord and Savior, and he offers himself unto poor
sinners, of whom I am chief, and I do accept of him to be my Lord and Savior:
I cast my soul on him, I rest my self on him, my will and heart does embrace
and accept of him, only to be Lord and Savior, him I do, and none but him I do
accept.

3. A third is, I know assuredly that Jesus Christ is my Lord and Assurance.
my Savior. Many of the Lutherans (and some of our own) bend this way, that
the assentiall and proper Act of faith as justifying, is assurance, and so they
do define it, that it is an assurance, a full assurance, a full persuasion;
whence it follows,

That no man believes, until he can truly say I know that Christ is mine, I
know that he dyed for me, I know that my sins are pardoned.

It is not meet to take Arms, and strike our own brethren; who I think in this
rather, aimed to give us faith in its perfection, then in its proper and
substantial nature.

These things must needs be confessed.

1. That the assurance of faith may be possibly attained unto: God has
exhorted Christians to strive after assurance, yea, full assurance; yea, the
riches of full assurance, and no doubt, that not only Paul, but many a good
Christian, can say, (some time or other) I am verily persuaded, and that Christ
loved me, and gave himself for me.

2. That the assurance of faith is a most heavenly and comfortable condition. O
the heavenly sweetness and divine solace, contentment, affections! When I do
not only possess Christ, but I know that I do possess him. When I do not only
take him to be mine, but see him to be mine; when he says to me, Be of good
cheer, it is I, or, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Thirdly, that believers should strive after this assurance, they should not
rest in the mere acceptance, but should contend in prayer, for the evidence,
and reflection of this faith, that Christ is theirs, and they know him
assuredly to be theirs. For though the estate of mere believing, is sure, yet
that of assurance is comfortable. That is a true day, when the Sun is rising,
but when it comes to the highest, the day is now glorious. Yet this I deny,
that assurance (I mean, that reflexive persuasion that Christ is mine) is the
essential or proper act of faith, that faith is not faith unless it be
assurance.

There are two acts of faith.

One without which faith cannot be justifying faith, and this is the acceptance
or embracing of Christ, or that which some call reliance and recombency.

Another, which in time faith may produce; and so assurance is an act of faith,
not the necessary act, but the circumstantiall act as it were, not the vital
act, but the eminent act; assurance of faith, is fire blazing, the acceptance
of faith is fire truly burning, though not highly flaming; the more high faith
does rise at any time, the less doubtings there are, and the more assurance.
And yet faith may be in truth, though it has no reflexive assurance, but many
doubtings: Why did thou doubt (said Christ) O thou of little faith. Faith,
though little Faith, and faith, though doubting, as fire though much smoke; and
yet no doubting, if faith were essentially assurance.

O how many souls are there who prize none in the world like Christ, who love
him with all their hearts, who honor him with the highest regards of a Lord,
who hates the enemies of his Scepter, with a perfect hatred, who would not
willingly offend, and grieve him in the least measure, who cleave unto him as
the only rock of their salvation, who would not relinquish their interest in
him for millions of worlds. And yet they weep with Mary, (because) they cannot
see their Lord; they conflict day and night with fears and doubts, they have
not this reflexive evidence and assurance, that Christ is their Christ, that
Jesus is their Jesus, that this Lord is their Lord. Yet ask them, are you
willing to accept of him? O, none in the world rather or more: are you willing
that he should be your Savior, he only is salvation? can you submit to have
him to be your Lord Christ? O blessed Savior (says the soul) none to rule me
but thou; none to save me but thou; thy blood is precious, and thy Laws are
righteous, and I could bestow a thousand hearts, and a thousand lives if I had
them, on thee, to be changed, guided, ruled, ordered by thee.

And thus the soul, though it cannot see him, yet it believes on him; it
believes on him, though as yet it cannot say, that my beloved is mine, and I am
his.

CHAP. VI. The object of Justifying faith.
NOw I come to the object of Justifying faith, and that is twofold. First,
Immediate, which is Jesus Christ our Lord. Secondly, Concomitant, Consequent,
which is Remission, and Righteousness, and Salvation for faith: first, takes
Christ himself, and then these, in and for Christ.

SECT. I.
THe immediate object of faith, as justifying, is Jesus Christ himself; as it
is in Marriage, marriage is an action twixt person and person, not twixt person
and estate, that is a resulting thing; so is it in the nature of faith and
Christ. Faith does not match the soul to the portion, to the benefits, but to
the person of Christ.

You hear that God has put salvation into Christ's hand, he has put remission
of sins into his blood; there is eternal life to be had by him. Now if a person
says, I will have this salvation by Christ, which he has purchased, but I
will not have his person, I will have the remission of sins by his blood, but I
care not for his person, I will have his righteousness by which I may stand
before God, but I care not for his person; this now is no faith, it is no
justifying faith. For faith, justifyeth us, when we take the person of Christ.
It is true, that we may, and should have an eye to the purchase and benefit by
Christ, but Christ himself is that which faith looks upon.

But wherein is the person of Christ the Object of justifying faith.

For the resolution of this I will open two things.

First, that whole Christ, is the proper object of faith.

Secondly, how faith does exercise it self about whole Christ.

SECT. II.
WHole Christ is the adequate and proper object; Christ you know (in respect of
his person) is God and man, and he may be considered as a Priest, or as a
Prophet, or as a King We usually say as a Savior, and as a Lord. Now he offers
himself in all these to sinners: says Christ there is no Name under heaven by
which you can be saved but me, no Jesus but my self, and I have been the
Priest, who have offered my heart blood to procure the pardon of your sins, and
salvation: I have satisfied my Father to the utmost, and have fulfilled all
righteousness, Now I am willing to bestow my self on you, as one who can and
will assuredly save you. But if you would have me to be your Priest to save
you, you must also be willing to have me to be your Prophet to instruct you,
and direct you; and to be your King and Lord to command you; you must resign
up your self to my Scepter and Government; for I am a Lord as well as a
Savior, and I will be taken in both, or else you shall have part in neither.

There be three things which lay hard on us.

One is the gilt of sin, which exposes the soul to hell, and wrath, for which
Christ is a Savior and a Priest. He became a curse for us, and bare our
sins, (that is) stood in our stead, and under-went that indignation, which
else should have lighted on us.

Another is the corruption or pollution of sin, which breeds inconformity to
Gods Will, and depraves the whole nature, for which Christ is a Savior and a
Prophet, (that is) he is appointed to inform the mind, and reform the heart.

A third is the rebellion of sin, rising in sinful notions, and sordid
delights and ways, for which Christ is a Savior and a King, (that is) he is
to subdue those iniquities, to give them the bill of divorce, to captivate all
imaginations, and to bring the whole man into the subjection of himself; but
then he will be Jesus and Lord too; thou may not think that Christ must save
thee, and sin shall rule thee; thou must not think that he will pay thy debts,
if thou will give thy heart and service to sin and the world. How ridiculous
is it to conceive that God should raise up Christ, as the Pope raises up his
indulgences, only to keep or fetch souls out of Purgatory; as if Christ were
given only to pay our scores, and not to rule our hearts, for no other end but
to keep us out of prison, that we might do nothing but sin against God, because
Christ can take away the gilt of sin.

Nay, whole Christ is eyed by faith, taken and received by faith. Do I feel my
sanfull gilt? I now by faith take Jesus Christ, whom the father has appointed,
and offered to be my Priest, to be my surety, to bear my sins, to stand 'twixt
God and me? Do I feel my sinful nature and motions, I now take Jesus Christ,
whom the Father has appointed to be my Prophet and King: He has undertaken to
be the teacher of hearts, and conqueror of sin; as so do I take him to be my
Lord.

SECT. III.
THerefore consider in the second place, How faith does exercise it self about
whole Christ: if you please I will discover it in the particulars.

For Christ, as a Savior and Priest: Thus faith looks on him, not only that he
is so, but to be so to me; he was God and man, and dyed, and satisfied, and
took away sin; God proclaims thus much, and offers him to me, here is the
Savior of the world, this is my well beloved Son, here is the blood of
atonement and peace. What does faith now? O faith takes hold on him; I
acknowledge him, I receive him O Lord, to be my Savior and Priest; not I, O
Lord, not I could ever have sustained thy wrath, or satisfied thy justice, I
could never have made my own peace, I could never have blotted out the hand
writing, I could never have paid my debts, but thou have set forth Christ to be
the propitiation for sin. O Lord, I embrace him, my life is in his death, my
healings in his sufferings, my satisfaction in his obedience; in none but him;
I rest on none but him, on him do I believe, he has satisfied to the utmost,
and I trust on him that he has done it for me.

Brethren, the case stands thus, a man is borne in sin, and he goes on in much
sin, (a long time) at length God awakens his conscience, makes him to possess
the iniquities of his heels, of his birth, of his youth, of his age, of his
life, and perhaps besets the soul round about with some sensible dread of his
infinite displeasure. Now the man knows not what to do: good Lord says he,
what a miserable creature am I? here is sin committed over and over, the Law
broken, God provoked, conscience raging, hell gaping; I am violated says the
Law, wronged says Justice, thou have sinned says Conscience, I will be
satisfied says the Lord, says the poor soul, what shall become of me? what
have I to quiet God? I can find nothing, what shall I do to pacify him? I
cannot imagine it: If I say that I have not sinned my conscience tells me I
lie, if I say I will not sin hereafter, Why! yet how will this satisfy for
former gilt? I tell you brethren that a heart brought to this sensible
experience is marvelously oppressed, the very heart cracks, and the sins of
that soul snap a sunder, under the sense of manifold gilt, and Gods displeasure.

But then God comes in the Gospel, and calls out to the poor and distressed
sinner, come hither says God, I will show thee a way of salvation? O how the
soul listens to such a message! but how Lord can this be, what am I, or what
can I do! Nothing says God for thou art an enemy, and thou art without
strength: But I have laid Salvation upon one that is Mighty. Who is that Lord!
It is my own Son, whom I have out of my love sent into the world to be made
man, and to dye, and satisfy for sinners, to bear their iniquities, to answer
for all their transgressions, and he is become a surety, and a Priest, and has
sacrificed his own soul, to be an offering for sin, and I offer him unto thee,
to be thy surety, to be thy Priest, to take away thy sins: Now take him says
God to the soul and with him the discharge of thy sins. Hereupon the soul being
persuaded of the truth of this good testimony, and with many tears admiring at
the riches of divine love and mercy, it does now by faith close in with Christ,
put it self on him, embraces him with all the heart, as a sufficient and
perfect Savior. As if the soul now fastening it self by faith on Christ in this
respect should thus be speak the Lord.

O Lord, thou art pleased justly to charge my sins upon my conscience, I
confess and am ashamed that I have thus sinned against thee; yea, and I
acknowledge that I am never able to answer thee for those sins? But thou have
appointed thine own Son to be my Savior and Priest, whose office it was to
bear the sins of the people, these sins therefore which conscience now
charge upon me, I do by faith charge upon thine own Son, for he was made
sin for us; thou did ordain him to be a surety, and therefore I beseech thee
Lord look for satisfaction of my debts in his precious blood, and take away thy
curse from my soul, for he was made a curse for us, he did sustain thy wrath
in our steed to deliver from wrath: Now therefore O Lord! I put my soul only
upon thy only Son, whom I take to be my sacrifice, him I offer up unto thee as
my propitiation, I have sinned, but thy Son has dyed for my sins: I have
provoked thee; but thy Son has pacified thee, I have wronged thee, but thy Son
has satisfied thee; he did not die for his own sins, but for my sins, he was
not made a curse for himself, but for me, I lay hold on his blood to be my
peace, and satisfaction and salvation. As if a man were like to be carried to
prison for debt, and hunting up and down for a friend to stand for him, at
length he finds one only man and him he brings to the creditor, and says
here is a man will pay you and ransom me; so faith for a troubled and obliged
sinner to God, it finds out Christ, and says, Lo Lord here is thy Son, who is
my surety, he will discharge, he is my ransom.

SECT. IV.
FOr Christ as a Savior and King and Prophet and Lord what is the exercise of
faith there? I tell you what I think of it.

It is a work of a believing heart, whereby it does accept of Christ, to be the
sole teacher and ruler of heart and life, and resign up himself wholly to him,
to be fashioned as it were and guided by him. A man never comes to the truth of
believing, but he shall find this, that faith will change his Master: For
faith changes the heart, and the heart being once changed will quickly change
its Lord: So that to believe on Christ as a King, as a Lord, as a Prophet, it
is to admit him to give him up the whole man into his hands to his holy and
spiritual Government; as if the heart should say thus much, thou art a Holy
Christ and thou art he who art to reign, now I take thee to be my Holy Lord,
and I resign up my self, I passover my self unto thee, I will have no Lord
but thee, and I do with all my heart accept of thee to make me Holy, as thou
art Holy, and to subdue this vile heart of mine, and to rule in me, by thy
blessed and mighty Spirit*

SECT. V.
THus briefly of the immediate object of faith, on which faith immediately
looks (viz) the person of Jesus Christ: to take and receive Christ, as Lord and
Savior. This is true faith; yet by the way note a few things.

First, that this taking is with all the heart, it is not a pretended taking, a
dissembled work; there is a taking of Christ with the tongue, and a taking of
him with the heart: O no, when true faith takes Christ, it brings in the very
strength of the soul: O Lord Jesus, I do embrace thee, accept of thee with all
my soul, with all my might, and with all my affections.

Secondly, this taking of Christ is of all Christ, of Lord as well as Jesus:
when the heart is made sensible of sin and Satan, and world, and Christ, and
now falls off from them, I will have no more to do with you, I will serve you
no longer, Christ only shall be my Savior, and he only shall be my Lord, I
will put my soul under his Scepter and Government.

Thirdly, this taking of Christ is only of Christ. For it is a conjugall
taking, which consists of unity: one (they say in the Metaphysics) is divided
in it self, and divided from all besides it self; so is it in faiths taking of
Christ, One Faith, One Lord, said the Apostle Ephesians. 4. It takes Christ so as
none with Christ, or besides Christ: The Patriarchs had most of them a wife,
and a concubine, it is not so here, Faith does match with an absolute exclusion
of all other matches. It is not the soul, and Christ, and sin: nor the soul and
Christ, and the world: nor the soul, and Christ, and the Devil: it is not the
soul and Christ in chief, and sin in service as a deputy, or a corrivall, a
secondary thing, etc.

Fourthly, this taking is freed from mistaking. Faith knows what it does, it
sees its way it understands, 1. Who that is whom it takes. 2. Upon what terms
he will be taken. 3 Its grounds of taking.

First who it is, (viz.) the Son of God, God and man, a most holy person, a
mighty Redeemer, and Savior.

Secondly, upon what terms, (viz.) He will not come in by the by, he will not
be taken as a vassaile, as a captive, as a drudge: he will not be taken for
base and changeable reasons, merely to stop a gap in the conscience, or only in
fair weather, but he will be taken as Lord and King, to command all the heart,
to dispose all the ways, to rule our very thoughts, he will be taken for his
own sake, out of a judicious love and estimation of his person, he will be
taken with all the estates and conditions that befall on the cross crucified,
as well as in the way to Jerusalem magnified; as one persecuted and distressed
on earth, as well as one raised and glorified in heaven; and thus true faith
takes Christ.

Thirdly, upon what grounds, viz. upon Gods offer of Christ and promise, that
whosoever believes on him, etc. and on his commandment, that we should believe
on the Name of his Son; whereupon faith brings in the soul to Christ, it
believes that God says true, that he does not call upon men, he does not
command men, he does not promise men, and all this to delude men; so that if
you should ask faith what warrant had you to bring in such a soul to Christ?
Why says faith, God revealed, and offered his Son, and commanded me to
believe, and promised not to cast off any that come, etc.

Fifthly, this taking is resolved against untaking. All takings are not of the
same force and power; if I take a servant, I take him so, that upon good
reasons and occasions I can put him off again; but if I take a wife, there can
be no untaking on my part, unless God takes her, I must never forsake her.
Faith takes Christ this way, to be a Savior for ever, to be a Head, an
Husband, a Lord for ever: I observe that there are two kinds of taking Christ
to be a Lord, one is compulsory and violent, as when an enemy is made to rule,
a man in a sickness, in a terror of conscience, in a day of wrath, in an
expectation of death, he will take Christ to be his Lord, he will say, Oh!
sin is vile, I abhor it, I will become a new man, I will have none but the
Lord Christ, and he only shall be my Lord, and hereupon the man sets about the
work of showing that Christ is his Lord, he will command his servants to pray,
to hear, to read, to keep the Sabbath, etc. Yet this man as soon as Gods hand
is off, as soon as ever he is freed from his bands, he will like a lewd
apprentise, break loose from his Lord and Master, he will serve Christ no
longer, he will to his sins again to the world again, to his base society again
etc. Why? because this accepting was only violent, and no actions are steadfast,
or constant, whose causes are compelling and violent.

Another is ingenious of faith, and this taking of Christ, is grounded only in
Christ, in its excellencies, beauties, perfections, which are not like the
light of a candle, this hour very clear, and the next, none at all, but like
light in the Sun, still abiding and remaining; and therefore, when a man does
by faith, take Christ, he takes him for ever: for faith can never change for
the better, and it sees steadfast reason in Christ, to cleave to Christ.

Now I come to the consequent object of faith, and that is, remission of sins
and righteousness, and whatsoever good comes from Christ,

For thus it is, faith does order its motions, or actions according to the
word; Now the word reveals, and offers Christ first, and then the benefits
next. It is not, whosoever believes eternal life shall have Christ the Son of
God, but whosoever believes on the Son of God, shall have eternal life; Nor
is it, whosoever believes the remission of sins, shall have Christ, but
whosoever believes in Christ, shall have the Remission of sins.

Yet when faith has made the soul to take Christ, it goes then from the
person to the portion, from Christ to the good in Christ, and by him; for if
Christ be ours, all is ours, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.

SECT. VI.
I Will therefore speak a word of faith, as conversant about, First, Remission
of sins. Secondly, Righteousness.

For the first of these, viz. the pardon or remission of sins, Consider,

That remission of sins, is an Action of God, acquitting the gilt and the
punishment, so that he will never reckon with the soul any more in a judicial
way for those sins which are pardoned. As when the King thoroughly pardons a
Malefactor, he discharges him, and takes off the gilt, (we speak of it in
respect of redundancy) that it shall not now prejudice the person any longer;
so does God, when he pardons sin: Though he does not in this annihilate the
sin, (that is) make that to be no sin, which was sin, yet he does
prejudice sin (that is) he takes off the guilt, that it shall never redound to
the damnation of the sinner, no nor to his damage.

Jesus Christ has procured remission or pardon of sin for us, hence, Ephesians.
1. 7. In whom you have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
your sins. His blood was shed for many, for the remission of sins, Mat. 26
(that is) he did die, and by his death has merited, and procured our pardon
and discharge: God offering Christ, offers with him the purchase of Christ,
viz. the pardon of sins; If you will take my Son, I will pardon your sins.
Now faith inclines the soul, which is sensible of its sinful guilt, to put it
self on Jesus Christ for the discharge of them: As the wife looks for none, and
goes to none but to her husband to discharge her debts; so faith goes to none
for to procure remission of sins, but only to Christ, and on him does it
rest. O Lord Christ, says Faith, thou did take these my sinful debts upon
thee, and thou did undertake to satisfy for them, and to get them to be
blotted out, yea, and I know that thou did make a full satisfaction. Now I
renounce all hope of pardon from any thing in me, and do rest my soul on thy
precious blood, trusting that it was shed for the remission of my sins; I have
taken thee to be my Christ, and therefore I commit the answering of my sinful
debt, to thy full satisfaction and sufferings. Put the case to a believing
heart, you have many sinful debts to answer for, sins before conversion, and
sins after conversion; sins of ignorance, and sins of knowledge; these
sins have that in them, which binds you over to wrath and curse, now to whom
does it belong to pardon these sins; your soul answers, to God, Who can
forgive sins but God only? And I, even I am he that blotteth out thy sins,
etc. yea, but for whose sake will God pardon them? the soul answers, only for
Christ Jesus sake, for he did shed his blood for their remission, and therefore
faith goes with the soul to Christ, and says, O blessed Savior, thy blood was
shed for the remission of sins, and thou have invited all that are heavy
laden to come unto thee, and thou will ease them: Thou say, if any man
sin, 1 John 2. 1.
he has an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for sins. Now I am thus and thus sinful, and these guilts lie
upon my conscience, I am never able to get them to be pardoned for any thing in
me, but I do put my soul upon thee, and do trust to thee to get off these
sins, I put them on thy account, yea all of them, and do believe that in thy
blood they shall be pardoned, etc.

SECT. VII.
NOw for the second thing which faith looks on in Christ, and that is
Righteousness.

Beloved, this know, that God does never Justify a man, nor will ever save a
man, who has not a perfect Righteousness, for he is a Righteous God, and will
not pronounce the sinner guiltless; his Law and Justice must be satisfied in
all points, or else the sinner shall never come to heaven.

Now the soul of a person is marvellously distressed, when it seriously thinks
of this; How shall I stand before the great and holy God another day, being by
nature so wholly sinful, and at the best being but defectively and imperfectly
good? But faith in this case brings the soul to Christ, and in him it finds a
most perfect and absolute righteousness: For whom says the scrupulous soul?
for thee, says Faith; what for me? yea for thee, for the Scripture says, That
Christ was made the righteousness of 1 Cor. 1. 30.
God for us, and that he was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. So that if thou would 2 Cor. 5. 21.
have such a righteousness, as may answer the Law, and satisfy God, and which
God will accept for Justification: Thou must by faith get out of thy self, and
lay hold on that righteousness which is in Christ. As Paul, I account all
things but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 8, 9.

There is a twofold righteousness.

One inherent, which is in us, and this imperfect, it can never justify us in
the sight of God.

Another is imputed, which is not in us, yet it is for us; And this is the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, both in his nature, and in his obedience;
Active, and Passive, which God reckons unto him who does believe in Christ, of
which the Apostle abundantly in Romans 4. 12. c. 5. and on this does faith rest
only in the matter of justication. Though inherent righteousness be absolutely
required to salvation, yet no righteousness but that only which is Christ's,
and is imputed to believers, is the matter of our justification. When a sinner
comes to account it with God, he can never say, Lord, Lo here I am, see if
there be any sin in my person, or defect in my holiness, I will expostulate
with thee upon bare terms; I have not offended thee, or if I have, here is
grace enough to answer for me, my heart is wholly clean, my duties at all
times in every respect, for matter and manner, have been performed just as thou
requirest in thy holy Law, enter into judgment with me if thou please; I
will be tried by my own holiness, by my own goodness. O no, there can be no
such thing, no sinner can be pronounced just this way, ever the Saints must
cast their crowns to the ground, and give glory to the Lamb who only is worthy.
For when we come to the point of justification before God, we must renounce our
own righteousness as filthy rags, we must cry out, enter not into judgment
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified.

But as they who were in danger, fled to the horns of the Altar for their
lives, so must we, if we would be justified, fly by faith to the Altar of
Christ's perfect righteousness, and so does faith, when it would present the
person of a sinner perfect and unblameable before God; It does bring him unto
Christ, and says before God, I believe in him to be the Lord my righteousness.

CHAP. VII. How it may appear, that to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ is the
only way to be saved.
BEfore I give you the Arguments or Reasons to evince this, I must premise some
particulars, viz.

First, That believing, or faith, may be considered four ways; either,

1. Absolutely, as a simple habit, or quality of grace, apt to change the
unbelievingnesse of the heart, and to send forth the acts of trusting and
acceptance. 3. Premises.
Thus faith is not the only way of salvation, partly because other habits are
required as well as faith, and partly because there is not in faith,
(absolutely considered) any meritorious dignity (of it self) to challenge
salvation. We say that a Ring is worth a hundred pound, not absolutely
considered, not that the gold which makes the Ring, amounts to that value, but
in respect of the Diamond set in that Ring; so faith is a grace of wonderful
price (much more precious then gold) Not so much in respect of it self, as if
it did by its own natural dignity cause our Justification, and salvation, but
in respect of Christ, whose person it takes, and on whose righteousness it
does rely; so though this be true, we are justified by faith, yet this is as
true, we are not justified for faith, but for Christ, on whom faith does trust.

2. Actually, (that is) for the very act of believing: Arminius, and Birtius,
and some of that cut, do say, That not the righteousness of Christ is that
which justifies, but the act of believing on it, is that which is imputed in
our Justification. A righteousness of Christ they do grant, but it is the act
of our believing on this, which (by divine acceptance or favor) is imputed
for righteou^nesse; but this is a rotten opinion.

Because first, it makes void the righteousness of Christ: by his blood we are
justified, Romans 5. 9. By his obedience are we made righteous, verse 19. If this
does justify us, then faith as an act does not, unless we will be doubly
justified.

Secondly, no works of ours, before or after grace, do justify us, but the act
of faith is one of these. E^go,

3. Correlatively (that is) with relation to Christ and his righteousness, and
in this respect faith is the only way: one says well, faith does not justify
as an action, but as a passion; his Bucer.
meaning is this, not faith apprehending, but the thing apprehended by faith
does justify: It is true, I must by faith apprehend Christ if I will be saved;
but it is not the apprehension which saves, but he who is apprehended is the
cause of my salvation. If I were like to be drowned in the water, I must put
forth my hand to him, who stands and reaches out his hand unto me; yet it is
not the mere putting forth of my hand which saves me from drowning, but his
hand which is laid hold on by mine, which draws me forth, and so I am
preserved, both must meet, but the cause is in him.

4. Instrumentally, or in respect of office; you know well how to distinguish
'twixt actions a man does as a man, and actions which a man does as an officer:
If a man be condemned, and ready for execution, and one comes from the King
with the message of pardon, the delivering of this message is an act of his
employment and office, not of his absolute nature as a man only. Thus it is
with faith, it sends out some actions, as an absolute grace, and it performs
others as a grace in office, as an instrument designed and deputed; It
justifies us in this latter respect; not that it is the matter or cause which
cleares all for us with God, but because it is the instrument, laying hold on
him who does this for us: As the hand is said to cloth the body, not that the
hand is any clothing (for a man does not wear his hand) but because it is the
instrument to put on our clothing: or as the cup is said to quench our thirst,
not that the metal of the cup can go down and satisfy that natural appetite,
but because it holds that wine or liquor which does quench; so does faith
justify a sinner, not as the object, not as the cause, but as the instrument
(that is) as the hand of the soul, laying hold on the Robes of Christ's
righteousness, putting on that garment of his, and as an instrument,
receiving, and holding, and bringing to the soul that precious blood of Christ,
which only can (immediately) satisfy God, and appease a thirsty conscience.

2. Again we must distinguish of the manner and peculiar habitudes, or respect
of things unto salvation; some things A twofold reference of things.
have a reference to salvation by way of proper causality, which have in them a
meritorious reason, for the proper dignity of which a person is justified and
saved; And in this respect we say, that believing in Jesus Christ is the only
method, and way of salvation. Not that faith can (from its own worth) dispute
and challenge from God, but because Jesus Christ, (who is the object of faith)
has as a cause merited our pardon, justification and salvation.

Other things have a reference by way of order; As suppose a man were to be
Knighted by the King, to obtain this Knighthood, he must come to the Court,
and stoop down on his knee, and so receive that honor; This access to the
Court, and humbling on his knee, is not a matter of merit or cause, but only of
order and condition: In this latter respect, we deny not but good works look
toward s^lvation, and are required thereto. Not as any cause (Christ only is
the cause) but as conditions, and orderly steps, and ways, which we must
tread, if we will be saved, via ad regnum, non causa regnandi. Bernard.


When we say, that believing in Christ Jesus is the only way to be saved; you
must not understand it so, as if no other grace were required from a man but
faith only, but thus, There is no other grace which lays hold on Christ (who
is the cause of salvation) but faith only: As it was with the father of the
Prodigal, when he met his son, falling down on his knees, he presently
forgave him: but before he brought him into his house, he did cloth him with
other garments: So does God our Father, upon our humbling and believing, freely
confer on us remission of sins for his Christ's sake; yet before he brings us to
heaven, he does invest our souls with the singular graces of his holy Spirit;
yea, though justification be not sanctification, yet where God does the one, he
ever bestows and works the other. Therefore I pray you remember to distinguish
'twixt these two, justification, and sanctification. The person justified and
to be saved. Though this be most true, that there is no other meritorious cause
of our justification and salvation, but only Christ; and there is no other
instrument to lay hold on this, but faith, yet this is as true, that the person
justified, and to be saved, has more graces in him besides his faith; though
there be not a cooperation of faith, and other graces, to justify; yet there
is a co-existance of faith and other graces, in the person justified. Thou must
have a good heart as well as a good Christ, and an holy life, as well as a
precious faith, or else thou shall never come to heaven. You know that in the
body of man, there be Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, and Hands to take, and
Feet to go, of all these which are in the body, yet no members are deputed to
see, but the eyes, nevertheless the eye must not say of the ears, I have no
need of thee, nor the hand to the foot, I have no need of thee: it is granted,
that no member sees but the eye, eats but the mouth, walks but the feet, lays
hold on but the hands. Their offices are singular, yet their con-corporation is
necessary. So, no grace but faith, pitcheth on Christ, lays hold on him as the
cause of salvation, yet there is need of other graces in the person to be
saved. There must be love, and repentance, and godly sorrow, and true fear, and
lively hope, and patience, and zeal, etc. The estate is changed, only by the
blood of Christ, but if we will be saved, the person must also be changed by
the Spirit of Christ.

SECT. I.
THese things being thus premised. I shall now give you some arguments, by
which the truth of the assertion shall appear.

First, there is no other way to be saved, but this (viz.) to believe on Jesus
Christ. Ergo, it is the only way. Three things I take as granted Hypotheses.

First, that there is a Salvation for a sinner.

Secondly, that there is a way tending thereto, as a meritorious 5. Arguments.
cause of it.

Thirdly, that every man is a sinner, for all have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God, Romans 3. 22.

Now then, know that there are but two ways of life, according Two ways of
life.
to which there is a double Covenant. First, one Legal. Secondly, the other
Evangelical. The Legal Covenant is, do this and live; the Evangelical Covenant
is, believe and live. The Legal Covenant grounds salvation in our own persons,
and the Evangelical, in the righteousness of another person. And these
Covenants are opposite, that one cannot consist with the other. For (and mark
this) though the Law and the Gospel may, and do, and shall consist, as the Law
is a word of rule for obedience, yet they cannot possibly consist, is the
Covenant of justification, and salvation: (that is) whosoever will stand to the
Covenant of works, to be justified by it, he rejects the Covenant of grace, and
so Econtra.

Well then, this being true, that our life is to be had by the Covenant of
Works, or of Grace, I will briefly show unto you that we sinners can never be
justified and saved, by the Legal Covenant, which if I clear, then it will be
evident, that our salvation is only by faith in Jesus Christ.

Thus then, all the possibility to be justified and saved by the Legal
Covenant, arises from one of these grounds (viz) either because,

That there is a fullness and exactness in inherent holiness. 3. Things.
That there is a dignity and efficacy in actual obedience, which they call good
works. That there is a latitude, or sufficiency of duty, to fulfill the Law,
which may be conceived to be in a regenerate person; but none of these can
justify and save; Ergo,

For the first, viz inherent holiness, this holiness is that 1. Inherent
holiness.
which is wrought in our whole soul, by the Spirit of God, whereby, of wicked
he makes us good, and of unholy, he makes us holy; and according to the
several degrees of it is the person less or more holy. Now this we say, that
though the justified person has this infused inherent holiness: Yet this is
not that which Cannot justify and save.
can justify him before God, (that is) for the dignity of which he can stand
so before the judgment of God, as to be pronounced just and righteous, and so
acquitted, which I prove thus.

1. That can never be the cause of our justification, which is defective
imperfect, and leaves yet the person in some measure sinful. I 4. Reasons of it.
cannot in the Court of Justice, be pronounced perfectly just, for that
righteousness which is imperfectly just, no more then he can in a strict court
be reputed to make full satisfaction, who has not paid half his debt, or to
be thoroughly well, who is scarce able to walk three turns in the Chamber: But
that holiness which is in us, inherent holiness, is very imperfect, (I speak
of that which is in us here on earth) it is not adequate, or parallel to the
whole will of God, which requires perfection of degrees, as well as of parts.

That it is imperfect, is as clear as day.

First, it is at combat with sin. Ergo, it is not perfect: the argument is
good, for whiles one contrary is mixed with the other, there is still
imperfection; Sin and Grace are contrary, and conflictings show imperfection,
as victory notes perfection.

Secondly, that which may be increased, is not perfect, but our inherent
holiness may receive more increase: Hence those many exhortations to perfect
holiness, 2 Cor. 7 1. and to labor after perfection, 2 Cor. 1. 3.

Thirdly, all the parts of holiness are imperfect. Faith is not so clear an
eye, nor Hope so fixed an Anchor, nor Love so pure a stream, but that each of
them need additions of degrees, of strength, of help: the Moon when it draws
into nearest conjunction with the Sun, and is filled with the longest beams of
communicated light, it has yet her spots, which like so many reproaches stick
in the heart of her; so is it with the holiest person on earth, with the
largest measures of inherent graces, he has yet great measures of sin, which
like so many spots, do blemish and disable the soul to stand perfectly pure and
just before the eyes of God.

That righteousness by which we are justified is manifested without the Law.
See Romans 3. 21. and what that righteousness is, ver. 22. even the
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe. But inherent righteousness is not manifested without the
Law? Why? because the Law commands this inherent righteousness, (viz.) To love
the Lord our God with all our hearts, etc.

That cannot be the cause of our justification and salvation, upon which the
conscience dares not to rest in the secret agonies of conflict, or in the
eminent hours of death: when the soul is to enter conflict with the wrath of
God, being wounded with the sense of sin, and cited as it were before the
tribunal of Gods holy and strict justice, dares it then to put it self
seriously, and in good earnest upon its own holiness, to make its peace, to be
its propitiation, to satisfy the trials and demands of Gods justice? One
Chemnitius.
well observes of the Papists, that when they are to dispute with men, they
will plead for inherent holiness, but when they are to contend with God, they
will fly only to Christ: tutissimum est, said Bellarmine. It was no ill
meditation, that of Anselme, Conscientia mea meruit damnationem, and
Paenitentia mea non sufficit ad Anselme.
satisfactionem, sed certum est, quod miserecordia tua superat omnem
offensionem (that is) O Lord my conscience tells me, I have deserved damnation,
all the repentance that I have or can perform, comes short of satisfaction, but
thy mercy (even thy mercy only) can pardon, and so exceed all my transgressions.

The most holy persons do every day sin, and need daily pardon,

There is no dignity or meritorious efficacy in actual holiness, or 2. Actual
holiness or good works cannot justify. 2. Reasons of it.
in good works, by reason whereof we can be justified and saved.

I know this fields is very large, I will not expatiate, but speak in a word of
it, with a proper respect to the thing in hand, I prove the thing thus.

1. No man (since Adams fall) can perform works, in that perfection which the
Law of God requires, under the pain of eternal damnation. The perfection of
good works (according to the strict exigence of the Law, consists especially in
two things.

1. One is, that a man be able to perform them with all of his heart, and with
a plenary love, without the intervening, or sliping in of any evil inclination,
or motion which abates that due and required intension, or in any measure
sprinkleth or tainteth them with any defilement.

2. Another is, that a man is to perform good works in that manner, with a
perpetual and constant ten our or course all his life. Those two are the
ingredients of perfection, as appears by that of Christ, Thou shall love the
Lord, etc. And that of Paul, He is cursed that does not continue in all that is
written, etc. Gal. 3. 10. These are the conditions of works legally good, and
which must justify a man, if he will be justified according to the legal
Covenant. But who can perform such perfect and good works? Adam might have
done them, and Christ did; but what one sinner can? who can say, my heart is
clean, and that we do not in many things offend all? Paul cries out, I am
carnal, but the Law is spiritual: The good that he would do, he could not do,
and the evil which he would not do, that did he do. Good Lord! how often are we
at a loss in our most retired meditations, and how our hearts lie flat on
earth* when our eyes look toward heaven in prayer? For one good work that we
do, how many bad which we should not do? like boys, for one fair line, twenty
with blots and blurs; or like the Archers, whereas they hit the mark once, they
miss it a hundred times: Let us but cast the accounts of our ill works with
the good, and we shall find with shame and sorrow, that our good works are not
equal with our bad in number, nor so strong in dignity to wipe out the bad; but
the bad, as they are more for number, so their cry of gilt is more meritorious,
to cast both our persons and all our works before the judgment seat of God,
then the good to ingratiate or merit for us.

2. What proportion 'twixt our works, and 'twixt our pardon and salvation? If
Jacob be less then the least of outward benefits, Good God! how far more
unworthy are we of the spiritual, yea of the Eternal? When we have done all, we
have not done more then duty, and that can never be merit, which is but duty;
nay, when we have done all we can, we have not done our duty, we are but
unprofitable servants, and that which fails of duty, comes short of dignity or
merit.

It is true, that God commands, accepts, delights in, will graciously reward
good works; what, for their own sake? No, for his mercies sake he will save the
man whose heart is holy, and whose life is fruitful; What, for the works sake?
No, but for his Christ's sake.

It cannot be denied, but that there is some relation 'twixt good works and
salvation, as between the means and the end; but there is not that relation as
'twixt an efficient cause, and an effect; for the efficient cause of our
salvation is only Gods grace and favor; Nor, as 'twixt a meritorious cause and
the reward, for the meritorious cause of our salvation, is only the obedience
of Jesus Christ; Nor, as 'twixt an apprehensive cause, (may I use such an
improper speech) for that only is faith, the instrument of our salvation, etc.

There is not in regenerate men such an adequation or full 3. Noe ability to
keep the whole Law wholly.
answerablenesse of duty, as to keep and fulfill the Law, as it is the Covenant
of life and salvation.

There are diverse Arguments to clear this, I will touch one or two. 3. Reasons.


1. Imperfect actions do not fulfill a perfect Rule, no more then a short line
answers a long copy, or a line partly crooked does that which is straight: But
the duties which regenerate men perform* are imperfect actions, for as much as
they flow from an imperfect agent, viz. from the soul of a Christian, which is
partly spiritual, and partly carnal not wholly spiritual, nor wholly carnal;
even from this does the Apostle conclude the impossibility (for us) to fulfill
the Law, Romans 8. 3. viz. from the weakness or infirmity of the flesh (that is)
of the old man not yet fully purged and changed.

2. If any man could perfectly fulfill the Law, then some man had no need of
Christ, either to be his Redeemer, or to be his Intercessor; for a Redeemer and
Intercessour is, in case of transgression and failing, and so Christ should be
to a regenerate person, at least an idle and fruitless intercessour; for as
much as it does appertain to his intercession, to pacify, and reconcile, and
ingratiate: but what use of this, where all things and services are just
already, as they should be without any animadvertency of the Law against them?
But Christ is an Intercessor even for the Saints. He makes intercession for us,
says Paul, Romans 8. and Saint John implies that an Advocate is for a sinner,
only for him, 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate, etc. If for a
sinner only, then for a transgressor of the Law, and if for a transgressor of
the Law, then not for one who does perfectly fulfill it.

3. If the just must live by faith, Then he cannot perfectly fulfill the Law;
for then he might live by his works, but the just shall live by his faith, Gal.
3. 11. That no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident,
for the just shall live by faith; Mark the place (shall live by faith) If it
comes to the matter of life and death, then farewell works, Cursed is every one
that does not continue in all that is written to do them; If he will save his
life, he must get him faith to fly to mercy and Christ: yea, and mark of whom
he speaks this, It is not of a person unconverted, but it is of the just, even
the just must live by his faith, (that is) By Christ, on which faith does rest,
not by his own merits, works, obedience.

Now, put all this together, there are but two ways to save a man, either by
faith in Christ, or else by the observance of the Law, But none can observe the
Law, so as to be justified by it; Because, 1. His holiness is short. 2. His
works ineffectual. 3. His performances unanswerable, Ergo, to believe in Christ
is the only way.

Every mouth is stopped (by the Law) and all the world is to become gilty
before God, Therefore by the Deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 19, 20.
Suppose a man had many great debts, and several poor friends, and he seeks to
one of them, good sir be bound for me, alas says he, all my estate will not
reach or extend to satisfy half of what thou owe; Then he goes to another;
Sir be you pleased to engage your self; Alas, says he, I am so poor that the
Creditor will not take my word; Even thus it is when a man will run to
something in himself, to justify him before God; alas, says holiness, I am
not able enough, and says good works, God may find reason enough to discard
us: Therefore, says Faith, To Christ, To Christ, None but Christ.

SECT. II.
SEcondly, All that can justify and save a man, is only to be found in Christ,
as in the meritorious cause, Ergo, the only way to be saved, is to be believe
in Jesus Christ. Hence is Christ called, Heb. 2. 10. The Chaptaine of our
salvation, Heb. 5. 18. The Author of eternal salvation.

There be two things, which if a man had, he should be saved, one is the
forgiveness of his sins. Ergo, says David, Ps. 32. 1. Blessed is the man
whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered, ver. 2. Blessed is the
man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity.

Another is, the possession of a most complete righteousness, by which he
might stand and appear perfectly just before the judgment seat of God; so
that if divine justice should look on it, with the exactest eye, yet it were
every way unspotted and full. Now these two are to be found only in Christ, and
by him,

First, Remission of sins. It is the purchase of his blood only, and
therefore often in Scripture assigned thereto. Thou can not with all thy
tears wipe off (meritoriously) the least of thy sins, nor with all thy
grace, buy out the pardon of thy present failings. All Remission is by blood,
by the only blood of Christ.

Secondly, the righteousness which justifies and saves us, is only in Christ,
He is made righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and Romans 5. 19. As by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous; see verse 21. Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal
life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

I know that this Point of imputed righteousness, is the great quarrel 'twixt
us and the Church of Rome, I shall therefore reserve the handling of it to the
Uses, where I may more fitly clear our doctrine.

Now put things together, Whatsoever will save us, is in Christ, And faith is
the only grace to conjoyne us with Christ, and therefore, To believe in Jesus
Christ is the only way to saved.

SECT. III.
THirdly, Salvation is by grace only, Ephesians. 2. 5. Romans 11. 6. And it is a free
gift, Romans 5. 15. The free gift, the grace of God, and the gift of grace, which
is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many, and v. 16. the free gift
is of many offenses to justification, and v. 18. the free gift came upon all
men to justification of life. Now if it be so, then here is room for believing;
For Faith brings nothing of its own, but receives all as gift from God. It is
the receiving grace, Lord give me thy Son, Lord give me the pardon of my
sins, Lord give me a righteousness, Lord give me eternal life, all these
things are gifts, and faith only receives these gifts, Ergo.

SECT. IV.
FOurthly, Salvation is only conferred in such a way, whereby God only may have
the glory of it. Though God does bestow great matters on us for our good, yet
all the end of them is for his own glory. To commend the riches of his grace
and mercy, Ephesians. 2. 7, 8. so v. 9. Not of works, least any man should boast;
(that is) he should vaunt, and say, I have got heaven by my own merits, I have
my wages for my labor, and my happiness for my penny.

Now the way of believing is the only way of acknowledgeing a God, and of
emptying of our proud imaginations; whatsoever faith has, it has taken the
same out of a gracious hand; All is alms which comes to faith, and it will
confess, I have nothing, and am nothing; but what I have received, and what I
expect, I expect it for his sake who promises it, not for my sake who receives
it, and thus faith puts all the glory on God.

SECT. V.
FIfthly, neither would our salvation be sure, nor our comfort sure, if we were
to be saved any other way then by believing in Jesus Christ.

Salvation would not be sure, because, First, our happiness our own hands, out
of Christ's, then was Adams, left to himself.

Secondly, we would never be sure of salvation by any thing against which God
might take just exception.

No sure comfort, because conscience troubled with the sense of sin, could
never be pacified with imperfections and sins. That which will not satisfy
God, can never pacify conscience. But says the Apostle, Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God: faith finds one who was delivered
for our offenses, who pacified God to the utmost, who was without spot, whose
righteousness is full, imputed to us, accepted for us, and so hereupon does
graciously quiet and still the heart.

We must distinguish 'twixt the root and fountain and ground of our comfort,
and between the testimonies of our interest in the root of our comfort; only
Jesus Christ is the ground of a Christians comfort, and therefore says Paul,
God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of Christ. If
at any time we behold holiness, or any part of it in our hearts, we take
comfort in it, not as the ground, but as in the testimony, because it does
manifest our interest in him, who is our comfort, our peace, our joy, our
salvation, our all in all.

Thus much for the Explication and confirmation of this great assertion, viz.
That to believe in Jesus Christ is the only way of salvation. Now I descend to
the useful Application of all to our selves.

CHAP. VIII. The preaching and hearing of the Gospel of singular use.
THe first Use shall be for Information, which consists in many profitable
consectaries or inferences, which will flow from this truth. If believing in
the Lord Jesus Christ be the only way to be saved. Then first, hence it will
follow; That the preaching of the Gospel is worthy the while, it is of
necessary and singular consequence. Peruse that place, Romans 1. 16. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Chrict, for it is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believes, verse 17. for there is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the just shall live by faith.
The Apostle presents two arguments of his honorable estimation, and confident
preaching of the Gospel.

1. One is, that it is the power of God to salvation (that is) it is the
instrument which God uses, and into which he does imprint a power to save men:
It is called the power of God to salvation, not only in respect of revelation,
because it does manifest and declare the sole means of reconciliation 'twixt
God and man, but also in respect of operation and efficacy, because it does
communicate and produce that faith in Jesus Christ by which we are saved.

2. Another is, that it comprehends the righteousness of God, which faith only
does take: By the righteousness of God, he understands that righteousness
whereby a man is justified in the sight of God, and it is called the
righteousness of God, because God is the Author and giver of it, it is
wrought and given by God in Jesus Christ; and also because it is approved and
of force with God at his Tribunal and judgment seat. See another place, Ephesians.
1. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the
Gospel of your salvation; He in the precedent verses does enumerate many
singular and heavenly blessings, amongst which Christ was one, and he does in
this verse express the order and manner how they come to be interessed in him,
viz. by trusting, or believing and they come to that trusting and believing by
the Gospel, which he styles a word of truth, and a message of salvation.

Tell me seriously, is not salvation the great scope and aim of your most
choice and sober thoughts? and can any attain that but by Christ? and can you
have Christ without faith?

How preciously dear (then) unto you should the Ministry of the Gospel be,
which is the instrument of God, to produce that faith, which lays hold on that
Christ, by whom only we are saved! Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God, so the Apostle, Romans 10 17. and John 6. 45. Every man that has
heard and learned of the Father, comes to me.

He is an enemy to his own salvation, who slights the preaching of the Gospel;
and he is an enemy to the salvation of others, who labors to oppress and
extinguish it: for if salvation be by faith in Christ, and that faith depends
on the Gospel, Then,

For our parts, let us bless God for his Gospel. Let us for ever honor and
respect the message of the Gospel, yea, let us heartily embrace the Doctrine,
and power of the Gospel: Let the feet of them which bring the glad tidings of
salvation, be acceptable unto us, for as much as salvation, and Christ, and
faith are all of them annexed unto the Gospel.

2. Then hence it will follow, that a mere hearing of Christ and his doctrine
will not save, if believing be the only way.

There are diverse sorts of hearing.

One with incogitancy, when perhaps the Ear is open, but the Three sorts of
hearing.
mind is asleep, and heeds not that precious object revealed.

Another with Reluctance, when the ear is open, and the mind attentive, but
the heart striving against the truth and goodness of the word.

Another with Conformity: when the ear hears, and the understanding yields,
and the heart embraces. Now it is this latter kind of hearing, which brings
to salvation. That hearing which consists only in the delivery of the message,
which brings something from God to us, this will not save; but such an hearing
as brings back something from us to God, which is accompanied with believing,
which turns home the soul to the acceptance and embracing of Jesus Christ,
this is the only hearing to save our souls. A motion made and tendered does not
conclude a match, but a motion consented unto and embraced.

3. If believing in Jesus Christ be the only way of life, then Jesus Christ
should be the main scope and mark of all our preaching and studying, 1 Cor. 2.
2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified. It was the maine theme and subject upon which that blessed Apostle
did spend himself: Look as it is with a Physician, that though he does
sometimes lance, and sometimes make very sick, and sometimes restrain to
strictness of diet, and sometime bind and trouble the patient, and sometimes
relieve him with precious cordials; though these actions are different among
themselves, yet they do concenter in one end, which is health and life. So
whether Ministers preach the knowledge of sin, or whether they strive to make
men sensible of sin, or whether they let fly the arrows of Gods threatenings
upon the conscience of sinners, or whether they touch on the mercy Seat; all
the end and scope is, or should be, to bring men to Christ, to make Christ more
glorious in the eyes of sinners, and to incline their hearts to accept and
embrace him.

Christ may be preached two ways.

Either Explicitly, when he in his person, or offices, or benefits, Christ
preached two ways.
is the only matter which is handled and published.

Or Virtually, when he is the end of that matter, which is delivered. One of
these ways, Christ still to be preached; Do I meet with a broken and afflicted
spirit, groaning under the load of sinful Nature and life, panting after the
Prince of life and peace, willing to yield up it self to all the conditions of
God in Christ? Here now I am to lift up Christ on his Cross to spread his
arms, to show unto that broken Spirit, the very heart blood of Jesus Christ
poured out for the remission of sins, to be a propitiatory Sacrifice for his
soul. Do I meet with an obstinate and proud spirit, which dares to defy
justice, and presumtuously to areign mercy. Here I open the indignation of God
against sin, of purpose to awaken the conscience, to cast down the high and
lofty imaginations, and for no other end but this, That such a person being now
come to the sense of his misery, may fitly be directed, and seasonably
encouraged to the sight and fruition of his remedy in Christ.

CHAP. IX. Justification only in Jesus Christ.
FOurthly, If that believing in Jesus Christ be the only way to be saved, Then
this Informs us where to find our justification, viz, only in Jesus Christ;
For there only is the righteousness which can satisfy justice, and in his
blood only is remission of sins.

Now, because this is a fundamental point 'twixt us and the Papists, and it is
the great bottom of comfort to a believing soul; give me therefore leave to
improve the remainder of the time in a brief and distinct explication of it:
Where

First, of the word and title (Justification.)

Secondly, of the nature and definition of it: together with some Arguments to
evince, that it is only by and for Christ; and some Answers to the choicest
Objections.

SECT. I.
FOr the word (justification) it has a double acception amongst Writers.

1. One Intrinsical, and so it signifies to make a man just by an act of
infusion (that is) by the implantation of sanctified or holy qualities.

2. Another Forinsecal, and so it signifies to repute or pronounce a man just
by an act of jurisdiction, (that is) a judiciary sentence to pronounce him
righteous, and free from gilt and condemnation.

And thus is it (for ought I can learn) altogether used and sensed in the
Scriptures, which speak of our justification before God (viz.) for such an
action of God, whereby after the manner of a Judge he absolveth and acquitteth
an accused person. Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? it is God that justifies, verse 34. Who is he that condemns? where
you have a manifest Antithesis, or opposition 'twixt justification and
condemnation; now as condemnation is an action of the Judge, a sentence of his
pronouncing the person gilty and obnoxious, so justification (being contrary to
it) must import an action or sentence acquitting and absolving. Yea, and again,
as condemnation most improperly and abusively must be interpreted, if we
expound it to be a making of a man so, and so sinful by infusion; so is
justification unrightly conceited, when men make it to be a making of a person
just by infusion of holiness.

It is observed, that in this kind of justification, viz. which is judicial.
There are four persons as it were,

First, the Agent. One who begins the suit, accuses, lays such and such
things to the charge of another, the Apostle said it, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge? etc.

Secondly, the Patient, the person accused and charged with default, and
offense, and gilt.

Thirdly, the Advocate, who endeavors to vindicate the party so charged, from
the accusation, either by declaring the innocence of the person, or impleading
satisfaction.

Fourthly, the Judge, who in justification of that person; gives sentence for
the person accused, according to the valid plea of the Advocate, and so
absolveth him. It is thus in the point of our justification; there is Satan
accusing, and something else. There is man accused of sin and gilt; there is
Christ interposing and pleading as an advocate, by his blood and
righteousness; and there is God as a Judge for Christ's sake acquitting, and
absolving and pronouncing righteous, and accepting to everlasting life. So then
the proper and punctual acception of the word justification, is not according
to infusion, but according to absolution and pronunciation: It is not Physical,
as when a man is made whole, but it is judicial, as when a man is cleared at
the bar.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, they are both
an abomination to the Lord, Proverbs 17. 15. There is the word again. Not I
trust to be expounded by way of infusion (that is) he who makes a wicked man a
good man, by impression of righteousness, is an abomination to God, but it is
to be expounded by way of judiciary sentence (that is) he who pronounces of a
wicked man in the Court of Justice, as if he were just, and reputes him as so,
and accepts him as so; This man is an abomination to the Lord. Now, take one
distinction, and then I will to the nature of Justification.

There is a twofold Justification. A twofold Justification.


One of the cause, and this is a particular kind of acquittance, touching such
and such things which are laid to a person, perhaps sometimes very unjustly.

Secondly, another of the person, when he is thoroughly purged and absolved; now
in this respect we speak of justification, which I think for the nature of it
may be thus defined.

SECT. II.
Justification of a sinner, it is a gracious and just action of God, whereby he
imputing the righteousness of Christ to a believing sinner, absolveth or
acquitteth him from his sins, and accepts of him as righteous in Christ, and
as an heir of eternal life.

There are diverse things considerable in this description. 3. Things in this
description.


First, Justification (immediately) belongs to God, it is his action. It is God
that justifies, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 33. And who can forgive sins but
God only? Luke 5. 21. We well distinguish 'twixt officia and beneficia, 'twixt
duties and 'twixt blessings: duties belong to us, but blessings belong to God:
It is God who is offended, and therefore condemnation and absolution belong to
him, to the Judge, not to any other; hence says the Apostle God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. not imputing their sin. You do
well to distinguish of the causes of our Justification. There is first the
prime cause, the Author, and this is God the Father, who gave his only begotten
Son for us, and set him forth to be a propitiation for sin, through faith in
his blood, that all who do believe in him should be justified, Romans 3. 25. And
who is the Judge absolving all that believe, and pronouncing them just in
Christ.

Secondly, The meritorious cause, so the Son of God our Mediator, is said to
justify us, both as our surety, in paying our debt, and laying down the full
price of our redemption, Isai. 53. 11. thereby affording unto us the matter and
merit of our Justification, and as our Intercessor and Advocate, pleading
effectually for us, that his merits may be imputed to us. Hence is it, Isai.
53. 11. My righteous servant shall justify many. God the Father justifies as a
Judge by way of prime authority, and God the Son justifies as a Mediator. The
Son justifies as a surety, paying our debt and giving satisfaction to the
Father for us to the utmost, and the Father justifies us, as a Creditor, fully
accepting of that price and satisfaction.

Thirdly, The applying cause, and thus the Holy Ghost may be said to justify,
in as much as he conjoynes Christ and the soul (by faith,) together, whence
arises a participation of the righteousness of Christ, and the pardon of sin
by him. Once more distinguish of justification, it may be taken two ways,
either actively, as a judiciary sentence absolving, acquitting etc. and so we
say God justifies; Or Passively, as a thing apprehended and rested on, and so
we say that Faith justifies; not as if faith did acquit, but as it takes and
receives the acquittance; not as if faith did impute a righteousness, but
because it receives and rests on the righteousness of Christ, by God
imputed to us: now when we say that justification is an Action of God, it is
meet for you to understand somewhat of the kind of this action. For the
actions of God are of different sorts.

Some, which are produced within us, and make a real alteration 2. Sorts of
actions.
and change in the soul of man; thus sanctification is an action of God, (that
is) such an action of God as is altering the inward frame, and qualities of the
soul, of unholy, making them holy, of unbelieving making them believing, of
hard making them soft, of earthly making them heavenly, etc.

Others are wrought for us, but not in us, and though they import a change of
the condition, and state of the person, yet properly, and formally, they
imprint no change in the inward disposition; And thus Justification is an
action of God, not an action changing the inward frame of the heart, but an
action changing the great estimation of the person; as when one of a bondman
is made free; this alters the state, but not the nature of the person: when a
gilty person is pardoned by his Prince, this alters not his nature, but it does
alter his condition; he is now in the state of life, who before was in the
state of death. So is it in justification, it is such an action, which alters
the state, (that is) the man who is in the state of wrath and condemnation,
being justified, is now acquitted, and so passed into the state of life and
salvation.

A man who before was guilty of sin and damnation, the same man (remaining a
sinner in himself, and in himself worthy of damnation) is in his justification
absolved from the gilt of sin, and accepted as righteous in Christ, and is
passed into the state of salvation. We deny not but the blood and the water
goes together; (that is) whom God justifies by the blood of Christ, him also
he sanctifies, and washes by the Spirit of Christ; but the action of the
blood is one thing, and the action of the water is another thing. The light and
heat in the fire go together, yet the action of light is not the action of
heat: So here, The action of the blood is a justifying action, and this is
without us, yet for us, and of us; The action of the water is a sanctifying
action, and this is for us and in us too.

SECT. III.
THe person justified is a believing sinner: the Apostle is clear. Romans 4. 5.
To him that believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted
for righteousness. There is great dispute which is first, of Faith or
Justification; to me now it seems a fruitless trouble to molest our selves
with priorities in this kind, I conceive we may distinguish 'twixt the
purchase of our Justification, which was long ago in the blood of Christ. He
was a Lamb slain long since for to merit the remission of sins, neither does
he now begin his merit, who has heretofore performed it.

Secondly, 'twixt the imputation of that purchase. It is true, whiles I am an
unbelieving person, my justification is already as a purchase, but until I
believe, God imputes it not unto me. My meaning is this, there is a
righteousness of Christ, which has deserved pardon of sin before ever I
believe, nay, be before ever I was borne, but God imputes this over to me when
I believe, as soon as ever I take Christ by faith, God imputes the
righteousness of Christ unto me, and will not impute my sins to me: And
Scripture is open enough for this, we reading so constantly in the
New Testament for men to come in and believe that they may have remission of
sins in the blood of Christ, and through him also eternal life.

I only propound this scruple, whether faith be to deal with the person of
Christ first, or with his benefits first; Surely we say with his person, and
then with his portion; well then, if faith deals with the person of Christ
immediately, then it appears that a man must believe, and so be justified,
forasmuch as justification is an action of God imputing the righteousness of
Christ, and not imputing sin, which are the general benefits (as I may so
speak) of Christ. It is not handsome to conceive that God should first pardon
me, and then I believe, or that I should have the righteousness of Christ
before I have Christ himself, which must be, if there be a priority of
justification before faith. For my part I conjecture that they are Semultaneous
things (that is) they go both together. If yet any men will be acute, let them
be so: The peril is little on either side, so that I have faith, and then am
justified; or so that I am justified, and then have faith, or so that I have
faith to be justified, will in the substance and event, redound all to one.

SECT. IV.
REmission of sins belong to justification: (that is) when God justifies the
person, he does absolve or forgive him his sins.

There be in sin two things.

One is the stain, pollution, defilement of it, and corrupt inclination; Two
things in sin.
with this Justification deals not, but Sanctification.

Another is the gilt and punishment; and with this does Justification deal.
Suppose you saw a sick thief, there are two sorts of persons to deal with him;
a Physician, because he is sick, and a Judge because he is a thief; If the
Judge acquit or pardon him, this clears him as a thief and guilty person, if
the Physician heal and cure him, this respects him as a sick and diseased
person, the case is our own. Now I say that God in justification remits or
absolves the sinner. Two things are here considerable, First, quid; secondly,
quousque. Remission what.


First, quid, what this remission is; I answer, it is an exempting of the
sinner from guilt redounding to punishment: If any man sin, guilt cleaves
universally to the sin, but then in Justification it shall not be imputed, it
shall be taken away in respect of efficacy and redundancy. Suppose a person
areigned, and cast for a murder, and the King graciously steps in and pardons
him; though this pardon makes not the murder formally to be no murder, and
though it makes not the murder now meritoriously deadly, yet it does hold off
the efficacy of that gilt, that now it shall not prove death to this person,
because he pardons him. So in Justification, where God pardons the sinner, he
does not make sin to be no sin, or that there should not be any natural
condemnability in sin, but that it shall not effectually redound to the death
and damnation and hell of the person, whom he has acquitted for Christ.

Secondly, quousque? How far remission of sins extend in Justification.
There is a twofold remission. A twofold remission.


One particular, which is circumscribed to some particular facts, and is
ordinary in the Courts of humane Princes, who limit and restreine their
discharges of offenders.

Another universal, which reaches to the whole estate of gilt; now this I
take as sure, that whomsoever God justifies, he will forgive unto him all his
sins. All his sins Jer. 33. ^.
before conversion, and all his sins after conversion. But whither this
forgiving of all, be once for all, simul and semel, as they speak, I am not
able to speak my thoughts fully.

It is true, I confess, and embrace that opinion, that justification is not a
divided act, it is not repeated over and over and over, but it is one act only,
but whither it be one transient act, (as if all were dashed out with a pen) or
whither it be one continued act, is very disputable. The Scripture leanes much
to this latter, and therefore describes God to be a God forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sins, importing a course of pardoning, and not a momentany
act.

Again, it is hard to utter how God does forgive a sinner before he has
sinned, which must be if pardon for all sins be a momentany act.

Yet I had rather captivate my judgment, then occasion dispute; only remember
two things.

First, no doubt but the justified person shall have every sin pardoned; not
some only, but all.

Secondly, justification does not admit degrees: though it may a continuance:
The righteousness and merit of Christ which is our justification, is not more
or less, but is at all times one and most perfect.

SECT. V.
THe righteousness of Jesus Christ is that by which only we are justified.

The righteousness of Christ is the matter of our justification; not the
essential righteousness of his Godhead, but the righteousness of Christ, as
Mediator both God and man, which was either,

The habitual holiness of his Person, in the absence of all sin, and in the
rich and plentiful presence of all holy and requisite qualities.

Or the actual holiness of his life and death by obedience; the once perfectly
fulfilling the commands, and by the passive obedience of the other, voluntarily
suffering the penalty, and commination of the Law for transgressions. Now all
this righteousness is imputed to us in justification. For

First, no other righteousness can justify.

Secondly, as Christ was made sin for us, so we are made righteousness by
him, viz. only by imputation.

The Papists call upon us for a righteousness in Justification, they will
bring one forth of their hearts and good works, Menstruous cloths, says the
Scripture, but we produce a righteousness most full, perfect, every way exact,
not in us, but in Christ, yet imputed to us by God.

How clear is the Scripture for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, Jer. 23. 6. The Lord our righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ Jesus is
made unto us of God, etc. righteousness. How often does the Apostle peculiarly
interest imputed righteousness, handling the doctrine of Justification, Romans
4. But the Apostle clears all, Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
Adae peccatum imputabitur mihi and Christi justitia non pertinebit ad me, said
Bernard.

Object. But Christ's righteousness is His, and how can it present us righteous
before God? It is none of ours.

Sol. First, it is his in respect of Inhaesion, but it is ours in respect of
imputation; His personally, ours meritoriously.

Secondly, we may be considered two ways, either absolutely (...) for me.
and alone, or else as conjoined with Christ: and thus being by faith made one
with Christ, he makes over his righteousness unto us, upon which God looks as
ours, in the matter of justification.

Ob. But if Christ's righteousness becomes ours so by imputation, that we may
be truly accounted and accepted of as righteous; Then by the like reason,
because redemption is made ours, we may likewise be reputed true Redeemers and
Saviors.

Sol. This is one of the arrows which Bellarmine draws out of his Quiver
against the imputation of Christ's righteousness, but it is of no force.

For he is to be termed a Redeemer and Savior, not who does receive, and take
the redemption and salvation procured by another, but who brings redemption and
salvation; we are by the Redemption of Christ truly said to be redeemed, though
not our Redeemers, and so by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, are we
truly accounted righteous persons.

Obj. Again, if the righteousness of Christ be so imputed to us in
justification, that for it we are accounted perfectly righteous, as if it were
our own most perfect and intrinsecal; Then why may not we be accounted as
righteous as Christ? yea and having Christ's righteousness, why may we not be
the Saviors of men? Since that is the righteousness which does save all that
are saved.

Sol. I answer,

To compare the same righteousness with the same, is illogical and gross, for
it is one and the same righteousness which is inherent in Christ, and imputed
to the believing soul.

Secondly, the righteousness of Christ is not imputed to any particular
believer according to the whole latitude of its efficacy, but according to the
particular exigence of the person; It is not imputed to Paul as the general
price of redemption for all, but as the price by which his soul in particular
is redeemed.

These things being dispatched, there is a difference amongst some Divines,
about that righteousness which is imputed, some holding the passive only,
others the active and passive.

Sol. The latter seems most solid; Reasons, these

First, there is no Justification* without the fulfilling the whole Law, but
now to the fulfilling of the Law, (since the fall of Adam) two things are
required, one is, perfect and personal conformity to the Law, in answering that
active condition of it, Do this and live. Another is a plenary satisfaction to
the sentence of the Law, by bearing the penalty therein denounced in regard of
sins already committed.

Secondly, Again, faith does not abrogate the Law, but establish it, but if it
should teach justification without Christ's fulfilling of the Law, it should
abrogate the Law.

SECT. VI.
THe last thing which I should have inserted before, is this, That the
justification of a sinner is a gracious and just action. It is a gracious
action, (that is) the gracious love and favor of God was the cause of it; It
was his own free grace and favor that gave Christ his Son to be our
righteousness, and it is his free grace to give us faith to believe on his
Son, and when we do believe, it is his Grace which imputes unto us the
righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, it is a just and righteous action, Romans 3. 25, 26. That he might be
just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Gods justice is such,
that he will forgive no man his sins, for which he is not perfectly
satisfied, neither will he accept of any as righteous, who has not a personal
righteousness, but having received a perfect satisfaction, he will acquit the
sinner believing, for he is just and righteous, and his Justice will not make a
second demand: yet here is the graciousnesse of God which will admit of the
satisfaction, and of the righteousness of another for us.

CHAP. X. The difficulty of believing in Jesus Christ.
A Second Use from this great assertion, shall be to put our selves to a Trial
and Examination. If to believe indeed in Jesus Christ.

There are three things which I will premise as so many grounds, why we should
put our selves upon this enquiry, and then I will give unto you the discoveries
themselves. The premises are these,

First, the difficulty of believing in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, the facility of error, and mistake about believing.

Thirdly, the bitter danger and sure misery of not believing in Jesus Christ.

1. The difficulty of believing is increased by the singularity of so strange
and wonderful a goodness. It is so great and so unparalleled, that a man can
hardly believe it to be true. To have an estate in Christ, in God, freely, all
at once; How can this be? The depth of gilt. I am an enemy, God is Just; I have
run into such high forfeitures, so unnecessarily lost my self, provoked God
so often, and the threatenings are planted against sinners, there is no hope, no
probability, (if a small debt, etc,

But for the difficulty of it, that it is not so easy a thing to believe in
Christ Jesus, this shall appear in diverse particulars.

First, there is no natural principle of justifying faith now in man. An act,
or motion, or quality, which has a rise and bottom within the subject, may
spring forth with some ease: a stone having a natural propension and impetus to
descend, Simile.
if you do but quit the hand of it, it will down; but now to make a mighty
stone to mount the hill, to get up into the air, there being no natural
aptness to this, it is a hard and difficult attempt.

It Is true, that a man has an understanding and will, but the Mystery of Jesus
Christ is a riddle to the natural understanding faculties naturally considered,
have no elevation to this object, unless the Lord by his Almighty power begets
and works faith in the soul. The soul thinks not on him, neither can it draw
it self to him. Like the needle, until it be Simile.
touched, it will not start up toward the pole; so unless the Lord does touch
our hearts by his blessed Spirit, we shall never close with Christ.

So then, this is one thing to show the difficulty of believing, the habit of
it is out of our power, out of our sphere; it cannot be produced by any
strength of nature, but by the sole Arm of God. Hence that of the Prophet,
Isa. 53 1. Unto whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? who has believed our
report? The testimony of the Gospel concerning Christ will not be believed,
unless the Lord does reveal his own Arm, (that is) until he does put forth
his own Almighty strength.

2. There is a natural principle of infidelity and unbelief in every man's
heart. If the paper were fair, if there were no precedent blurs and blots,
then it were not so hard to imprint some legible Characters; Or if the wax were
soft, and the iron heated, now it were easy to engrave what kind of arms the
Artifier pleases; But when the wax and the iron are hard and cold, now the
impression is difficult, because the resistance is strong; if there were in our
hearts any obediential principles, which could before hand temper the mind,
and frame the will, then when God offers Christ, little a do would serve the
turn; But our hearts naturally bend the other way; there is in us a natural
unaptnesse, nay, an enmity to believe. Enmity to the habit and nature of faith,
blindness, error, pride, stubbornness, disobedience in our hearts. We have
such slow and untoward hearts, so armed with all sorts of corrupt reasonings,
so consulting with sense and rational evidences, so ready on every inevidence,
to mistrust, doubt, question, gainsay, that all Arguments will not persuade us
that God will give us Christ, and pardon our sins. You know that when the
Lord Jesus was personally on earth, and did preach himself, and in that manner,
that none spoke with that Authority as he, and confirmed the truth of his
Divinity, and Mediatorship by Scripture and miracles, yet very few believed,
(historically) that he was the Christ, that he was the Son of God. Take me
now a person, who is sensible of his sinful guilts; Tell him of the need he
has of a Savior, he will grant it, represent unto him the sufferings, the
excellency, the tenderness of the Lord Jesus that he is the Mediator, the
Propitiation for sins, that Remission of sins is in his blood, both
intensively, for the great degrees and aggravations of sin, and extensively,
for the several kinds of sin. Tell him, that the Lord Jesus came to seek
such a lost person as he, that he came to loose such a captive as he, that he
came to bind up such a broken spirit as he is, that he came to ease and
refresh such a burdened and laden soul; Yea, and answer objection after
objection, doubt after doubt, fear after fear, that the person cannot put by
the arguments why he should believe, nor urge and reinforce his reasons, why he
should hold off from closing with Christ, and putting his soul on him, yet
this we find, he cannot (when all is said) he cannot believe. Unbelief does
throw up so many mists, and so many fears, and is (many times) so
unreasonable, that yet it will hold off the heart. Neither the goodness of
God, nor the truths of God, nor the mercies of God, nor the freeness of them,
nor the person of Christ, nor the merits of Christ, nor the tenderness of
Christ, nor the gracious offer, invitation, command, threatening of Christ, will
make the heart to come in unto him.

3. There is a natu^al opposition, in the Heart against Christ, and therefore it
is hard to believe on him. The opposition is manifold.

First, to his Person, the Lord Jesus Christ is an holy Person, and A fourfold
opposition.
none can take him in truth, but must take him so, to be holy as he is holy. He
is the holy one of God, and he is called the holy Child Jesus, and an holy,
undefiled high Priest, separated from sinners. Now the heart (naturally) is in
love with sin, and Christ tells us that this very thing is a cause why men
believe not: See John 3. 19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather then light. Christ comes thus to a
man, I am he who will save thy soul if thou will take me, but then know, that
I am an holy person; if thou will have me thou must let go thy sins; Now this
breaks off the match, hinders the bargain, this goes to the heart: A man
naturally will as soon part with his life, as with the sin of his love.

Secondly, to his condition: There is a double condition of A double state of
Christ.
Christ, one is Triumphant, another is Militant; Gloria in excelsis, that is,
the triumphant condition, Tubulationes in Terris, that is the militant
condition; the Crown of Glory, that is the triumphant condition; the Crown of
Thorns, that is the militant condition.

Now the heart naturally is unsuffering: It is a terror to it to speak of
afflictions, sorrows, reproaches, losses; We are willing to enjoy the world,
to taste of pleasures, to handle profits, to rest in ease, to walk at liberty,
to rejoice with our Friends, to be spread abroad with high estimations. The
young man, when Christ bade him sell all that he had, and give it to the poor,
(It was praeceptum experimentale) he goes away sorrowful.

Thirdly, to the Scepter and Government of Christ; we will not have this man
Reign over us, say they; and you read in Psalm 2. How they did consult to
break his bands asunder. The Scepter of Christ is Heavenly, and his Laws are
spiritual, and his Ways are righteous and straight, they lay injunctions on
the inward man, as well as on the outward conversation, and bind the thoughts,
and the intentions and affections. Now what do you mean, to pin up a spirit
which would have elbow room? what, would you have a licentious heart, and a
turning and winding conscience, to be precised, and narrowed, and restrained,
and so every way straitened? You must give it leave to break the Sabbath, to
improve its gains dishonestly, to swear now and then, and to comply, etc.

Fourthly, to the Righteousness of Christ. O what a do had that blessed
Apostle with the Romans, with the Galatians, with others, to break them off
from Justification by Works; And to fasten upon their hearts the Justification
by Faith.

We are apt to stand upon our selves, and to look for the matter of our
acceptance and acquittance in our selves on man; he thinks that his good
meaning shall make him speed; Another thinks that his doing no body any harm
will let him into Heaven, or else God help us; Another stands on his devout
Sacrifices; Another on his charitable bounties; Yea, and those who should know
better in the Doctrine of Justification, how extremely do they cling to their
inherent Graces? much a do, before they can be made to cast their Crowns to the
earth, and to give the glory only to Christ who is worthy. What pains is God
forced to take to break us off from our selves? we are so proud, and so
unwilling to be beholding to Gods free grace, and Christ, that God is feign to
break our heart to pieces, and to split our ship into shivers, that we might
only to Christ.

He must imprint the holy and mighty vigor of the Law on our consciences, to
show us our utter impotency, and sensibly acquaint us with our mavelous
imperfections in graces, and interruptions in duties, and excursions of daily
sinnings, and all to fetch us entirely, to cast our safeties only on the
righteousness of Jesus Christ

CHAP. XI. The facility of error and mistake about believing.
SEcondly, as it is hard to believe, so it is easy to mistake, and delude our
selves in the matter of believing: Four things make it to be so.

1. One is the various kinds of faith. 2. Another is the consimilitude of one
of the extremes of faith. 3. The easiness of both. And, 4 the aptness in our
hearts to be satisfied with these.
First there are diverse kinds of faith: As the Apostle spoke of bodies, all
bodies are not the same bodies, but there are bodies Celestial, and bodies
Terrestial; so I say of Faith, all faith, (I speak of habitual faith) is not
the same kind of faith, we read of a Faith which the Devils have, and we read
of a Faith which the Hypocrites have, and we read of a Faith which even Christ's
enemies (whom he did not dare to trust) had, and we read of a Precious Faith, a
Faith of Gods Elect, a justifying and saving faith. Divines ordinarily
distinguish of faith;

There is an Historical faith, which is a crediting the word relating, but not
an embracing of it promising; it is like the passing through a Garden, and
observing and smelling, but not a flower is gathered, so in Historical Faith,
the eye of the understanding goes over the Word of God, and has some
apprehensions, and general grants, and intellectual submissions, that God does
not lie, but what he says is true. Nevertheless, there is not that quality of
justifying faith in this which makes the heart to close with the goodness of
truth, and to embrace Christ.

2. There is a wonderful faith, a faith of miracles; to remove mountains, to
raise the dead, which had some special and immediate promise, and yet it was a
gift bestowed on those who had no faith to save themselves: Many who have cast
out devils, may at the last day be cast among the devils: Lord, Lord, have not
we Prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils? And yet Christ bid
them depart, Non novi vos.

3. There is a temporary faith: which has in it some great apprehensions of
the truths of God; yea, and reverent assents; yea, and some delightful
contentations in the same; yea, and some fruitful expressions, and with all
these, a singular degree of profession, even to a zealous forwardness, and
notoriousness, so that a man may be in the eye of others like a tall Ship, and
yet there is a Leake in the bottom, which on the sudden sinks all.

This temporary faith* though in many respects it handles the same object with
saving faith, it is tampering much about Christ, and the promises, yet it is
intrinsically, and extremely different from it.

It does not differ from it in respect of eminency or degrees, nor in respect
of existence or duration only, (for the one is a living Spring, and the other
is a decaying Flood,) but in respect of formal nature also: The temporary faith
does not indeed bring all the heart and settle it on Christ.

4. There is this justifying and saving faith, which bestows the whole heart
on Christ, and takes Christ unfeignedly to be Lord and Savior. Now where there
are so many sorts, it is not a great difficulty, nor an impossibility to
mistake, error is manyfold, (said the Philosopher) but the truth i^ single, and
there is but one line to hit the mark, out many to miss it.

Nay, secondly, there is a great consimilitude of one of the extremes of
faith, with faith it self; viz. credulity. It is strange (yet ordinary) that a
man should make a heaven of his own, and a God of his own, and a Christ of his
own, and a faith of his own, and a way to heaven of his own. Presumption is a
work much of an idle fancy, and a graceless heart, like a thief, very apt to
finger the Kings coin, but without a warrant. But to the thing: Is there
knowledge in faith? why, presumption pretends to that: is there confidence in
faith? what more bold then presumption: is there any sweet assurance in faith?
why, presumption never doubted, but could believe ever since a man was borne:
is there any joy in faith? why, presump^ion is as jocond and careless, as if
there were no heaven to be got, no sin to be bewailed, nor course to be
reformed.

Lastly, these are easy and we are apt to content our selves with these,
instead of a true believing in Jesus Christ. To get a little seeming knowledge,
to carry Religion upon the lip, and Christ on the tongue, to be bold upon Gods
mercy, and Christ's death, and with all those, to have a heart glued to the
world, folded up in the love of sin, resolved against all hazards, to shift
off all profession rather then to endure any storm, what so great a task is
this? But to have a mind taught of God, and to have an understanding bowed
with the strength of Divine light, and inward change to the obedience of truth,
and to have a will sweetly renewed, and with an holy trembling, humbly
receiving Christ in his person, and offices, and bestowing the whole soul and
body on him again; here the work sticks.

CHAP. XII.
The sure and dangerous misery of unbelief.

THe last thing which may stir us to try our selves, is the consideration of
that amazing danger, and unspeakable misery, to which the soul is assuredly
obnoxious in case of unbelief.

Why, will you say? What danger if we believe

I answer, there are three special dangers.

First, all thy sins stand upon record against thee, like so many written
with the pen of a Diamond: there is no blotting out of a man's sins, but by
the blood of Christ, and the unbeliever has not his portion in that blood, and
therefore there are all thy sins uncancelled, thy sins of nature, and all
thy sins of life; such a sin, and such a sin, then and there, and again,
committed, etc. O how great is the volume of them, the number of them cannot be
numbered, and the guilt of them cannot be conceived, if one sin binds thee over
to hell, Good God! To what flames of vengeance and horrible degre^s and
intensions of misery and wrath do all thy sins oblige thee?

Yea, and as Solomon said in another case, Prove. 9 12. If thou scornest, thou
alone shall bear it: so I say here, if thou remain an unbeliever, thou alone
must answer for all thy sins. Whatsoever the wrathful displeasure of God is;
whatsoever the horrors of conscience are; whatsoever the gnawings of that worm
are; whatsoever the heat of hell flames are; Whatsoever the doleful separation
from God is; Whatsoever curse the Law implies for sin, that may thou expect,
who wilt not believe in Christ. O! if that wrath was so hot, when it (obliquely
as it were) fell on Christ (where it had no unholy and self-guilty quality to
admix with it self) that he sweat drops of blood, and cried out, my God, etc.
How will thou with any patience, ease, possible quietness; sustain the
extreme wrath of the Almighty Judge, who art vile, and filthy, and have a
conscience with all thy torments, to gall and vex thee with the stings of
misery, guilts, and self-accusations? tell me how art thou able, what can
thou say, how can thou bear up before the Lord, if he should arise, if he
should terribly arise to judge the nations? He is the Holy God and Just, and is
True and Great in power. What satisfaction can thou bring, where are thine
oblations, or with what will thou reconcile thy self to the Lord? Whereby can
thou either make thy former sins, to be no sins, or persuade the Lord to be
propitious to thee without Christ?

Nay, verily, he will judge thee as an unrighteous person, for if no hope for
thee to be acquitted, nay, nor hope to be saved, nay, thou art sure to be
damned.

Mark 16. 15. Go you into all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned.

John 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. 36. He that believes
on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son sha^^ not
see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Rev. 2. 8. The fearful and unbelieving are cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone.

But you will say, Why? This is strange! Why such

It is one of the greatest sins in the world not to believe (that is)

It is a sin against the greatest love to the world, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved
the world that he gave, etc. Rom 5. 8. But God commends his love toward us,
that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us.

God showed the greatness of his love, to bestow his Son, and Christ showed
the greatness of his love, to dye for us. Greater love (said Christ) can no
man show, then to lay down his life, etc. Now for the Lord to find out a way
of Salvation, and in love to our souls to offer this Son of his unto us, and
to beseech us to be reconciled, and then for us (like them who were envited to
the supper) we cannot come, we will not come. O this, etc.

It is a sin for which there can be no remedy for as much as it is a sin against
the only remedy of a sinful soul. The sentence of econtra. There is no plaster
for the soul but the blood of Christ, which yet unbelief will not take and
receive.

It is a sin which (as much as in it lies) makes void all the Covenant of
Grace, turning all the goodness of it into nothing, and all the truths of it
into lies, and makes the blood of Christ to be shed in vain. He that believes
not makes God a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his
Son, 1 John 5. 10.

It is a sin which directly murders the soul: because it does wilfully hold it
off from Christ, who would upon believing pardon

All these things being premised let us now descend toward the trial or
evidences of true faith in Christ, where I beseech you observe.

CHAP. XIII. Rules for the discovery of faith.
FIrst, some Rules of Direction, for the manner of ^vidence and testifying of
faith, that you may neither be deceived by presumption, nor perplexed by error
and doubting. Two things.


Secondly, some lively instance of true faith, as the Word of God does clearly
represent them.

The Rules of discovery and finding out faith, which are these.

SECT. I.
THere are some things without which faith cannot be in the heart, and yet they
do not necessarily and infallibly conclude that a man has faith.

They do well distinguish in the Schools 'twixt an Antecedent, and a Cause, a
Cause is such a thing as is before the effect, and which being put, the effect
also is put, one will not go without the other; But an Antecedent is that which
must go before another thing; yet it is not necessary that if it be, that the
other thing should follow. The rising of the Sun is a cause of day, and
therefore this will always hold; If the Sun be up, it is day; But this now;
Learning, is (or should Simile.
be) an Antecedent to preferment, it should go before it, yet it is not an
infallible truth, that every one who gains learning, should enjoy preferment:
Thus is it in the nature of faith. There are some Antecedents, there are some
things which must of necessity go before faith, yet they alone do not formally
and assuredly conclude that a man has faith, as for instance;

A man cannot believe in Christ, he cannot receive Jesus Christ with all his
heart, he has some historical evidence of Christ, he must have some knowledge
of Christ, what he is, and what he has done, or else he cannot take him to be
his Lord and Savior; Yet this knowledge does not infallibly conclude
justifying and saving faith; for as much as the Devils and Hypocrites may see
much of Christ, they may have a high degree of intellectual apprehension.

Again, a man cannot by faith take Christ to be his Lord and Savior, unless
he has some sensiblenesse of his sinful condition; our heart will not look
toward Christ, it cannot conceive of his excellencies, nor of his own
necessity, until we feel our sinfulness, and lostnesse, and vileness; The
whole neither need, nor look for a Physician, yet a person may be sensible of
his sinful condition; he may not only by the light of natural conscience
apprehend some broader and stirring enormities, but he may by a smart and quick
light let in by the Ministry of the Word, discern heaps of wickedness in his
life and heart, for which his conscience may sting him with wonderfully bitter
accusations, and yet such a person (possibly) may not rise from trouble to
faith, as is evident in Cain and Judas. So then remember this, that in the
searchings and trials for faith, you do not conclude the presence of the habit
from the common antecedent of faith, for as much as faith is but a contingent
consequent of them, sometimes it does follow, sometimes it does not. As in
Marriage, sometimes it does follow the motion which is made, and sometimes it
does not; so the espousing of our souls to Christ by faith, sometimes it does
follow knowledge, sometimes it does not, sometimes it does follow the preaching
of the Word, and yet sometimes it does not; for all have heard, yet who has
believed, said the Apostle? Romans 10. sometimes it does follow the motions, and
inward excitations of the Spirit, and sometimes it does not.

2. There are some things which faith only does produce, yet because it does
not produce them always, a man therefore must not negatively conclude from the
absence of them, the absence of faith.

You know that holy and spiritual joy, it is the sole fruit of faith, therefore
faith the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious. There is nothing which can present to the heart of a Christian, such
full cause of joy as faith, such a God, such a Christ, such a love, such a
blood, such a mercy, such happiness, such unmixt, and proper, and suitable
good. There is a carnal joy which sparkles from the cup of pleasure, and there
is a glistering joy which the rays of gold may produce, and there is a beastly
joy, which the fulfilling of sinful lusts may send forth, and there is a
flashing and transient joy, which the pride of hypocrites may dart out, but
sound, and weighty, and holy, and pure, and spiritual joy, which is a well
grounded, and not to be repented, affecting of the heart, that comes only from
faith: Yet it comes from faith as a separable effect; look as trouble and
sorrow is a Contingent antecedent, so even in actu imperato, true joy is a
separable fruit of faith. Though the branches and green leaves do sprout out of
the living root only, yet this color does not appear at all times; Though the
blade comes only from the grains cast into the earth, yet you cannot always
observe the blade. Though the flesh and natural complexion flows only from
health, yet there may be sad occasions, which though they do not extinguish
health, may yet foul and blubber the complexion. So even the believing person
may sometimes have a tear in his eye, an handkercheif in his hand, a sigh in
his breast, and yet have faith in his heart. He may sit down in ashes, and feed
on tears, as David did, and for all this he may be a true believer: He is not
always able to see the causes of his joy, nor to break through the
contrarieties to his faith, nor to remove the quashings of his comforts.
Therefore when you are to try your selves about your faith, do not make a
negative inference from separable evidences.

3. There are some things which faith only does produce, not as essential
properties, but as magnificent testimonies.

The moral Philosophers distinguish 'twixt the effects and acts of liberality,
as it is absolutely considered, and as it is eminently considered, being raised
to magnificence. To give a farthing according to the rules and circumstances of
morality, even this is an act of liberality, but to build a College, this is
now an act of liberality grown into the greatness of magnificence. So is it in
the matter of faith, there are some fruits of faith which come from it,
absolutely considered according to the vital constitution of it: And there be
other fruits which come from it eminently considered; faith is come to an
height, to a strength, when it sends them forth. Though a child cannot bear a
burden of an hundred pound weight, yet he can desire the breast and suck; the
bearing of such a burden belongs to strength, and yet the very sucking shows
that he has life. Though a Christian be not able in all respects, at all
times, with all moderation and silence, to pass presently through every heavy
occurrence, which shows strength of faith, yet his heart may most
affectionately cling about Christ which shows the truth of faith.

Assurance is a fruit of an eminent faith, and so is a more habitual 3. Eminent
fruits.
steadfastness of quiet submission, and confidence in all estates and
conditions, and so is that maintenance of the heart upon Gods promises in the
times of strong contrarieties. Now as Divines should warily open their lips, so
should you wisely distinguish of the evidences of a true faith, some being (if
I may so term them) essential, and others being eminent, some there are which
discover the truth, others which testify the strength of faith: It is one
thing to show unto you the properties of a man, another thing to show unto you
the properties of a strong man. Many a poor Christian has been deeply
gravelled ^^ others, and extremely afflicted by his own spirit for want of this
distinction of the properties of faith. Because he reads, and has heard what
admirable and singular fruits, and effects faith has sent out as Assurance,
and full assurance, and with these some glorious acts of self-denial, as in
Abraham and his unstaggering embracing of a promise against which both reason
and sense, and nature might have disputed and urged. O say they, we have no
faith, Abraham's faith wrought full assurance, removed all staggerings, our
hearts are still doubting, we can hardly be persuaded, we reel and stagger like
the waves now on the shore, and then instantly off; now we believe, anon we let
go our hold, and doubt: And hence they uncomfortably conclude against their own
souls, the utter absence of faith from the defect of some particular and
eminent expressions of faith, not absolutely as faith, but of faith as strong
and exceedingly ripened: we must not conclude negatively, from the degrees to
the habit:

As if one should conclude that he has no silver in his purse, because another
has a bank of many thousands; or that he has no legs to go, because he is
not so swift as Asahel; or that the Sparrow flies not, because he cannot mount
up to the Sun with the Eagle; or that a child is no man, because he cannot
express the acts of a strong man.

4. There are and will be many inward contrarieties to the intrinsecal acts and
fruits of faith, notwithstanding faith be truly in the soul, and works there.
Faith, though it has the pre-eminence of other graces in respect of its
office, being the only Ambassador (as it were) of the soul to Christ, yet it
has no privilege above them in respect of the subject, (that is) in respect
of the act and workings of it there; but look as every other Grace has some or
other particular corruption opposite to its particular nature, and its
particular actings; So even faith it self has infidelity, and unbelief
opposing it, both in the quality, and in the several exercisings or actings of
it. There may be flame of the smoke, and a hand with shaking, and a tree
trembling and a faith of doubting.

Yea, if any grace has the hardness of a more general and (...) opposition,
then faith is it, it being a grace of general (...) and use to fetch in more
grace and more strength against a^l sin. Now in our trials for faith, it will
be with us as with the Artificer, in his search for the little rays of gold;
It Is true, he shall find much dross here and there, and yet if he can find a
very little piece of gold, (though amidst an heap of dross) he will say this
is gold, and will preciously esteem of it and lay it up. So when we are
searching our hearts by the light of Gods Word for true faith, without all
doubt we shall meet with many doubtings, much unbelief, yet if we can find any
one degree of true faith (which is more precious then gold) we may not cast it
away, because it is found amongst its contraries, but we must cherish and
embrace it, because the touchstone of the Word has approved it to be a
precious faith. For (and mark this) we are not able to give you any evidences
of faith, or any other grace by way of abstraction, but by way of existence,
(that is) not what may discover faith in a notional and the most singularly
conceivable profession of it; but such testimonies you have to discover faith,
as faith is now abiding in sinful persons, who though they may have true faith,
yet as long as they live in earth, will have many things in them contrary to
faith.

There is a double contrariety to faith. A double contrariety.


One is natural, and this more or less will be in the soul of any believing
person, tell you can utterly raise the heart, and eject sin by the alteration
of glory: So long as we have flesh and spirit, there will be a confl^cting
'twixt faith and unbelief. As there was a mixtu^e of joy and sorrow at the
erecting of the Temple.

Another is approved when a man neither does, nor will believe, he neither does
accept of Christ, nor will he have Christ to reign over him, and he likes his
unbeleeving condition, this is a fearful estate: But though the contraries to
faith do arise, yet if they be not approved, yet if they be resisted, we must
not conclude that we have no faith, because of the opposition, but rather
assure our selves that we have it, because of the resistance of that
opposition. We must not conclude against faith, because of opposition inward or
outward.

This inequality of acts conclude not an absence of the habit of faith.
Distinguish of,

1. Radical habits.

2. Actual exercisings, which are, sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes
clear, sometimes interrupted, sometimes the soul is free, sometimes oppressed,
and violently carried by temptation to misjudge the condition.

The censure of our faith must not be allowed, as is given in the time of our
temptation and passion, etc. I said in my haste, Psalm 116.

Obj. But you will say, we grant all this; But how may a man know that his
faith in Jesus Christ is a true and lively faith.

Sol. I answer.

SECT. II.
FIrst, A true love of Christ is an infallible and essential evidence of a true
faith in Christ.

There are four things which will clear this as a lively testimony 4. Things.
of true faith: If we can prove,

First, that love is not separated from faith.



Thirdly, That there is no time, or circumstance into

Fourthly, that no unbeleeving heart can, and does love Christ;

1. Love is not separated from faith, If you peruse the Scripture, you shall
find them go hand in hand. Gal. 5. 6. For in Jesus Christ neither
circumcission avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
love, (that is) Christ is not mine, because I am a Jew; nor is he mine, because
I am a Gentile: but he is mine, because I am a Believer, and if my Faith in him
be true, it will express it self by love. I These. 1. 3. Your work of faith,
and labor of love in our Lord Jesus Christ; Faith and love are like a warm
hand; faith is the hand, and love is the warmth in it; faith cannot be the hand
to take Christ, but love will be the warmth to heat our affections unto Christ.
1 Timothy 1. 14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love
which is in Ghrist Jesus. Faith and love are like the husband and the wife, and
faith and love are like the mother and the daughter; See 2 Timothy 1. 13. and
Phil. 5. And indeed it stands with unanswerable reason, that faith and love
cannot be divided; for as much as faith in Christ,

First, represents the absolute and effectual cause of love to Christ. It does
see such a measure of goodness and mercy from God through Christ, and such a
height, and depth, and breadth of love to us in Christ, and such an excellency
of holy perfections, and amiablenesse in Christ, which draws the soul with
strong affections of love to Christ again.

Secondly, if faith might be without love, then a person in Christ might be
Anathema-maranatha. forasmuch as he who loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, is,
etc. but it is a monstrous wickedness to conceive that a believer in Christ
should be so.

Secondly, there is no believer in any degree of faith, but he weak Christian
as well as the strong, the plant as well as the cedar. The Father of a child
who cried out, I believe, help my unbelief; as well as Abraham the father of
the faithful. Though one Christian may produce some testimonies, which another
cannot: though every one cannot say with Paul I am fully persuaded, yet every
one can say with Peter when Christ demanded of him, Simon son of Jonas, love
thou me? Joh. 21. 17.
He said unto him, Lord thou Know all things, thou know that I love thee.

Yea, thirdly, whatsoever straits the believing soul is cast into I love the
Lord Jesus Christ, I love him, though I can see no sensible testimony of love
from him, my heart is still toward him, he is my Center and Loadstone.

No merely unbelieving person can love the Lord Jesus Christ. settling and
transplanting of the heart: It is such an affection as knits the soul to
Christ, but it is impossible that this should be whiles the heart has no
faith. So then love of Christ is an infallible testimony of faith in Christ.

But you will say this is strange, that love of Christ should be so true faith,
why does not many a man; yea, every man profess that he loves Christ?

Beloved; What men profess is one thing, and what they affect and love may be
another thing; the semblance of love is a thing distinct from the sincere
affection of love. If your love be true and sincere, never question the matter
any further, assuredly thy faith is right.

But this is the doubt, this is it we question as much as the former,

A word to it, and so an end of that trial. If the love be true

It will bestow our hearts on Christ only: Nothing is too good Anima est ubi
amat, non ubi animat, and which way the heart goes, all shall go that way.

It pitches on the person of Christ. Love is base, if it be 'twixt person and
person: I confess that a wicked man, an unbelieving person may have a tooth at
the portion of Christ, he may marvelously desire the merits of Christ, pardon
of sin, exemption from hell, but faith is it which draws out such a love, as
makes the soul to admire it, and to cleave unto the person of Christ.

It is sincere and conjugall: It is not an adulterous love, which is divided
amongst several Paramours; O no; True love of husband but Christ, and no Lord
but Christ, he is the covering of our eyes.

SECT. III.
A Second trial of our true faith in Christ Jesus is this inward change and
sanctity of the heart, is an infallible testimony of a living faith. Divines
distinguish of a common faith and of a special faith, and according to their
nature so are their effects; a common faith may elevate the mind to singular
apprehensions, notable expressions, outward conformities, in matters either not
difficult or dangerous. But special faith has a distinguishing operation, it
works that which no false or pretensive faith can; What Is that? This is it, it
does change the heart, and is ever a companion with inward holiness.

There be three things which I will show you about 3. Things.
this.

First, that true faith does produce a change, there is a twofold condition,
which is, when a man once in the state of death, is now passed over to the
state of life, once in the terms of condemnation, is now translated to the
state of absolution, and this change faith finds for us in Jesus Christ, the
imputation of whose righteousness in justification changes the state, so that
our guilty debts are taken off, and we are reconciled:

Secondly, which is of the person, and this change is the alteration of a man's
nature, for faith is not only a justifying grace, but it is also a sanctifying
grace: Hence these phrases, Acts. 15. 9. purifying their hearts by faith, Acts
26. 18. that they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith that is in Christ. As the blood of Christ is a
pure blood as well as a precious blood, and as it is a clensing blood, as well
as an expiating blood; so faith is a grace, not only to acquit, but also to
purge and renew; It is not only an entitleing grace, (that is) that grace
which does interest us into Christ and his benefits, but it is also a
conforming grace, (that is) such a grace as works into us the virtues and holy
qualities of Christ. And therefore you read that it does engraffe us into the
similitude of his death, To. 8. and into the fellowship of his sufferings and
resurrection, Phil. 3. 10.

Secondly, observe, that every believer has a changed and a holy heart, 2 Cor.
5. 17. If any man be in Christ (and you know that it is faith which unites to
Christ, and plants us into him,) he is a new creature, (that is) that a man is
altered in his inward frame, in his faculties, in his inclinations, all over.

There is a change, either in the cessation of some particular actions newness
of nature when the soul is turned, and biassed, and inclined quite another way.
I confess, the Apostle does not say, if any man be in Christ he is a strong
creature, yet he says he is a new creature, for though every believer has not
that maturity, and ripeness, and strength, yet he has a newness in his
nature, an holy change wrought in him throughout. Look as the first Adam
derived guilt and corruption to his posterity; so the second Adam derives
pardon and holiness, therefore he is called a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. It
is not 'twixt Christ and believers, as 'twixt a root and a dead limb, which
hangs on, but has no life, nor sap: Christ has really no such members in his
body, he is not like Nebuchadnezzars image, whose head is of gold, and the feet
of clay; for a man to boast much of his head, of Christ, of gold, and yet he to
remain a piece of clay; he to have a nature utterly heterogeneous unto Christ,
this man deceives himself. For every plant, every graff that is inserted into
Christ has the aliquality of his nature. Hence those who in John 1. 12. are
styled Believers, they are said in the next ver. 13. to be borne of the Will of
God; Now as in the natural birth there is a new form, so in the heavenly there
is a supernatural and holy frame of grace ingenerated.

Thirdly, No man has a changed nature but a Believer. Why? Because no man has
grace but from Christ, and none have Christ but Believers: Again, it is
impossible for a man to be lovely in the eyes of God without faith, but if any
man might have a changed and sanctified heart, and yet want faith, then one
might be lovely in Gods eyes wanting faith, for as much as God loves and
delights in an holy heart. So then this is most evident, that if faith goes not
without a change, and if every Believer has a change, and no unbeleever has
it, I say this will follow, Therefore if a man can find a change of his heart,
he then has the truth of faith.

Now then enquire; is there virtue gone from Christ to make thy dark mind
seeing, thy stubborn judgment yiedling and prizing thy proud heart, humbling
thy filthy heart, cleansing thy hard hard, relenting and mourning, thy carnal
affections to be heavenly, thy sinful soul to be holy; be confident of this
that it is sound faith. Though there be yet remainders of corruption, yet if
the inclination of the soul be ch^nged by grace, doubt it not, thou have faith:
But for such as talk of a faith which stands in opposition to ho^inesse, and
please themselves in a graceless faith, in such a faith as has no society or
compan^ of graces in the soul; O far be such a faith from any one of us. An
unholy believer is as proper a phrase as an holy devil. Presumption is a most
confident work, but it is a very loose quality, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Be not deceived,
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, verse 10. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkarks, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
Ver. 11. And such were some of you, but you are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. Do not abuse thy soul with a conceit of faith and justification, if thou
have no change of heart by sanctification.

SECT. IV.
THirdly, a third trial of true faith in Christ Jesus is this, It will stoop to
Christ as well as rise to him; It enters the soul into a new service, it takes
Christ and him only to be its Lord. You read that there was a Marriage feast,
to which some did come, and there was the Kings son sent out to rule and
reign, but few yielded unto him. Many men will come to Christ to find a
feast, but few come to Christ to bear his Scepter; they would come under the
safeguard of his blood, who fly the Authority and dominion of his sword; they
like Christ the Priest, but not Christ the Lord.

I will briefly show you two things to clear this trial. 2. Things.


First, no unbeliever will accept of Christ to be his Lord only; because,

1. His heart has another Lord; It has set up some sin or other, or some
part of the world or other, to which it gives service as to his Lord. He is our
Lord to whom we give service, and his servants we are whom we do obey; Now the
unbeleeving heart either serves the world, or obeys sin in the lusts thereof.
Let the commands of sin and Christ come into an ordinary and usual
competition; let the commands of profit, or pleasure, and Christ come into
competition: Now you shall see, that the unbelieving heart will go after its
Lord, it will not hearken to Christ, it prefers sin before him, it will easily
adventure Christ's displeasure to fulfill its own lusts.

2. Again, his heart cannot choose Christ, it cannot like him for a Lord, Why?
because the dominion of Christ is holy and heavenly, and directly opposite to
the fordid principles and affections and ways of an unbeleeving heart: It is a
burden, yea, a very vexation to such a heart, to hear but the report of the
holy Laws of Christ, and of their power and authority to oblige the inward man,
and the outward conversation, Psalm. 2. 2. They take counsel against the Lord,
and against his anointed, saying, ver. 3. Let us break their bands asunder, and
cast away their cords from us.

It Is true, whether wicked men will stoop or no, Christ is a Lord in respect of
designation, but he is not their Lord in respect of approbation; They will not
have this man to rule over them.

Secondly, Every Believer admits of Christ to be his Lord; as Thomas said, My
Lord and My God, John 20. 28. see etc. and so

1. Faith sets up the Scepter of Christ, and sweetly frames the soul to a
willing subjection.

2. Again, faith takes whole Christ, and therefore Christ is the only King and
Lord to faith.

3. Again, faith knows that the whole person is Christ's purchase, his blood
has bought us, and so passed us into the entire dominion of Christ; ye are
bought with a price, ye are not your own, said the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.

Now then try your selves in this, who is your Lord? why brethren? Thus it is,
faith gives the propriety, and title, and disposition of our hearts and ways
to Christ.

Obj. It Is true, before we were called to faith in Christ, we were disobedient,
we served diverse lusts, we set up our sins and the world.

Sol. But now being made partakers of rich mercy and grace in Christ, we shall
surely rebel against other Lords but Christ, (that is) against all other Lords
whose commands are contrary to Jesus Christ; Our hearts are his, and our
affections his, and our strength his, and our service and submission his.

Obj. I deny not but sin will be stirring, even in a believing heart, it will
be assaulting, it will now and then usurp upon the soul, and vex, and captivate.

Sol. But the rebellion of a sinful nature is one thing, and the dominion of it
is another thing: Sin will stir as an enemy where Christ does reign as a
Lord: But it is one thing for thee to be a combitant with sin, another thing
for thee to be a servant of sin. Not who assaults me, but whom I love and
serve, he is my Lord. When the heart goes off from Christ to the approbation,
and love, and habitual obedience of sin; now sin is thy Lord: But if by faith
thou have sworn fealty to Christ, then though all temptations begirt thee,
though the insolences of corrupt nature break in upon thee, to captivate, or
to alienate thy heart from service to Christ, yet amidst all oppressions, yea
under all the knocks and buffettings, and interruptions by sin, the heart
cries out, I acknowledge no Lord but Christ, him I would obey, him I honor, I
love, his I am, and I yet hate those sins which yet I cannot conquer.

SECT. V.
FOurthly, a fourth trial of true faith is this, It makes the heart humble and
lowly. Every unbeleeving heart is proud, and has high imaginations, and stands
upon its own bottom; It has no sound experience, either of God or of it self.
But true faith casts a man quite out of himself, it sees no ground of
confidence and excellency from any thing in our selves.

Faith has a double aspect, 1. One is upon us. 2. Another A double aspect of
faith.
is upon God and Christ: When faith looks down upon us, alas it finds no
matter of boasting in the world, for either it finds sins, which should
abase our hearts, or else imperfections, which should curb our pride, or wants,
which should show unto us our indigence and dependence. The Evil which it
finds may confound us, and the good which it finds may make us ashamed; not
only because it is so short, and defective in what we ought to have, but also
because we have not answered the giving of that good with just thanks, or we
have not improved that good to the advantage as we might have done.

When faith looks upward to God and Christ, there it sees all the causes of all
our mercy, and of all our happiness; have we pardon of sins? why, says
Faith, the cause of this is in Gods love. Have we righteousness? why, says
Faith, the cause of this is in Christ's merits. Have we any gifts, any
acceptance, any remembrance from heaven? why, says faith, the cause of this is
only in Christ's blood. All that I have is given me, and the cause of all that
giving, is utterly out of my self, so that the soul sits down now and says, O
Lord in my self I am nothing; nay, of my self worse then nothing; but what I
am, I am that by thy grace. All I have is thine, my bread, my health, my life,
my body, my soul, all thine; If any love, if any mercy, if any Christ, if any
grace, if any comfort, if any strength, if any steadfastness, if any
performances, if a good work, if a good word, if a good affection, if a good
thought, why, all is thine, thou only art the cause, I am less then the least
of thy mercies, and what is thy servant that thou should look on such a one
as I am? Thou made me, and thou boughtest me, and thou calledst me, and thou
justifiest me, and thou savest me. Though faith makes thy condition high, yet
it makes thy person low: Thou should by faith, be not high minded, but fear,
Romans 11. 20. why, not high minded, because standing by faith: Because this
standing of faith is not of our selves, but in God, but in Christ, Faith is the
foot of the soul, but heaven, the grace of heaven, the strength of heaven is
the ground upon which the foot does stand.

SECT. VI.
FIfthly, true faith is fruitful, James 2. 18. I will show thee my faith by my
works, ver. 21. Was not our father Abraham justified by works? verse 22. see
thou how faith wrought by his works and by works was faith made perfect? The
Apostle in that Chapter speaks of a double faith. A double faith.


One was a counterfeit faith, a shadow as it were, which had the looks, but not
the substance; it was a dead faith, which has the limbs, but not the soul and
life.

But how did it appear that this faith was dead? did it not speak many good
words? yes, says Saint James; It gave g^od words, and praeteria nihil, no good
works; It could say to the poor, be ye clothed, and be ye warm, but gave
nothing to cloth or to feed, why? says he, this man's faith is vain (that is)
he has not the true quality of faith, and it will stand him in no stead.

Another was a lively and justifying faith, It had in it the true nature and
property of faith, but how did that appear?

The Apostle answers, by Works. You know that there is a great difference
'twixt these two, viz. the justifying of a man's person before God, and the
justifying of a man's faith before the world: That which justifies my person
before God, is only faith in Jesus Christ; and that which Justifies (as one
particular) my faith before men not to be a dead, but a living faith, is the
acting of good works. Hence that of Paul, Tit. 3 8. This is a faithful saying,
and those things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God might be careful to maintain good works, these things are good
and profitable unto men. Right is the speech of Saint Augustine, sequuntur
justificatum though non precedunt justificandum. As in a clock, the finger
makes not the clock to Austin.
go, but the clock it, and yet the motion of the finger without, shows whether
the clock goes within.

So although works do not cause or infuse justifying faith, nor yet cause our
Justification, yet they do clearly manifest, whether we have such a faith as
does indeed justify, or not.

Obj. You will say the work of Faith is to look up, and to come and to deal
with God only; and therefore to breath out good works which respect men, seems
not to be any testimony of faith.

Sol. I answer.

1. The Apostle there expressly distinguishes the lively and the dead faith
by works (as if he said) it is so.

2. There is (if you will let me distinguish so) as it were a double act of
faith.

One is proper and personal, and this is circumscribed to that Heavenly
employment of receiving or presenting in and through Christ.

Another is Grateful, and this is extended to the sending forth of good works.
Not as if it were a work of superarogation; for faith finds the doing of good
works under many commands, and also the rewards of them under many promises,
but because faith sees also a sweet and reasonable equity, that if God be good
to me in Christ, I should be good to some for Christ's sake. And verily, as the
worklesse person does not now own Christ by faith, so hereafter Christ will not
own him by mercy, depart from me.

Obj. But yet you will reply, good works cannot be a sure testimony of faith,
because many evil men may perform them, and some believers have not
wherewithal to do them.

Sol. I answer.

1. Good works may be so styled, either, First, materially, because they are
such things as may do good. Secondly, formally, being sealed with all the
circumstances which are required to make them good, both for spiritual
composition, and Divine acceptance. Now though wicked men may perform works
good materially, yel formally they do not, for to make a work formally good,
there must be the concurrence of all circumstances, the person must have a good
heart, and a good ground, and a good end, and a good Christ, etc.

2. Though every Believer cannot actually do every good work, yet some good
works or other he can do: though he cannot give money, yet he can give prayer,
etc. Now think on this ye who have riches and wealth, and profess faith on
Christ, and yet scarce a person, a poor distressed person can bless God for
your fruitful faith; nay, the very doing of a small good work, sometimes does
even try all the faith in the soul; a man does many times believe he shall
surely want, and impoverish his estate if he should be rich in good works.

SECT. VII.
SIxthly, true faith does desire and endeavor after increase: Help my unbelif,
said the unbeleeving father, O Lord increase our faith said the Disciples. I
pray observe a few things.

1. That true faith begins in weakness. Like a child at the first, very
tender; o^ like the light, at the first very broken. Presumption being a work
of fancy, and borne with its strength and perfection, it is fully assured and
utterly confident at first. But Jacobs ladder has many steps.

2. That though it has weakness, yet it has life: as the spark of fire,
though it be little, yet it is hot, and though the child be weak, yet it can
suck; even the weakest faith in Christ will be much about Christ, it will be
weeping at his grave, or washing of his feet, or looking on his person.

3. There are yet many degrees wanting to faith, either thou can not be
persuaded, or not fully persuaded, or not constantly p^rswaded.

4. If the faith be true and living, it will bend after a rising; and that,

First, in respect of its acts, of receiving, trusting, persuading.

Secondly, in respect of its object., It would yet apprehend more, and feel
more of the communion and virtues of Christ. All the preaching in the world
does not increase a false and presumptuous faith, nor does the administration
of the Sacraments add thereto. But the living, they grow, and he must have
more faith, who has any; Paul would apprehend even as he is apprehended. The
soul which has true faith, would have yet more victorious ^ieldings, more
steadfast embracings, more confident restings, etc. like the child which sucks
and thrives.

SECT. VIII.
SEventhly, true faith in Christ and a mournful heart for sin go together,
Zach. 12. 10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and shall mourn
for him as one mourns for his only son.

There are two things which faith will fetch up in the soul, one is love to
Christ. another is sorrow for sin. There may be a terror without faith, the
conscience may be cracked and wounded, but till faith comes, there is no sorrow,
the soul is not altered nor melted; that which melts the soul is kindness and
mercy, and that which (...) them is faith; if thou do cast an eye of Faith
on Christ, that eye will have some tears for forced sinning against Christ. You
shall find in Scripture, that true believers are characterized by this, That
they be mourners in Sion, and they return with weepings and supplications, and
they pour out waters before the Lord: and unbeleeving persons are described by
hearts of Adamant, of rocks of stone, by hardened, by unsensible by irrelenting
hearts; The text says, that when Christ looked on Peter, he went out and wept
bitterly; there is a piercing virtue in a gracious look from Christ. The soul
which has been long humbling it self, and much in seeking for mercy, and a
good look from heaven, It is (when any gracious manifestation of favor darts
down) even resolved into tears: never did the child weep more soberly upon his
reconciliation to his loving father, then the believing Christian does mourn in
sober sadness, when his faith gets to see God reconciled to him in Christ, he
reads his pardon with tears of joy.

There are two parts of sorrow.

One is essential, which consists in a strong displeasure of the will against
the soul, for sinning against a good God.

Another is contingent, which consists in those dreary te^res flowing into the
eyes; now this is contingent, for when the heart is many times filled with
tears, like David's bottle, yet it may so fall out, that the eyes may be silent
in such expressions, etc.

CHAP. XIV. Singular comfort for all true Believers.
IF to believe in Jesus Christ be the only singular comfort to all true
believers. What Solomon spoke of wisdom, that I say of faith, her Prove. 3. 17,
18.
ways are ways of pleasantness; and all her paths are peace. She is a tree
of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that reteineth
her. If this be a happy thing to have the Lord to be our God, (and David judged
it to be a superlative happiness) If this be a blessed thing not to be
offended at Christ, O how sweetly and greatly blessed is the condition of a
believing soul, which has God to be its God, Christ to be its husband, and
heaven to be its portion. Faith and Christ! why! they are the ring, and the
diamond; they are the way and the life; the soul cannot have such a prize as
Christ, nor such a hand as faith; such a match as Christ, nor such a grace to
contract it as faith. Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation, said Simeon: He may cheerfully lay down his body
in the dust, who has by faith given up his soul to Christ.

But to descend to some di^^inct particulars of comfort to the soul which
believes truly in the Lord Jesus Christ, observe.

SECT. I.
FIrst, this is one comfort in the Text, that they are in the way to heaven.
Naturally we are out of our way as soon as we enter into the world, as soon
as they be borne they go aside, said David, and, the way of peace they have not
known; and nothing sets us in the right way but faith, for Christ is the way,
and it is faith which find^s a Christ: It was not Philips natural eye, but his
spiritual faith, which spied the Messiah: Christ is the wa^ to heaven, and
says is the way to Christ Salvation, it is the great object of ^he greatest
desire, and indeed I know no more excellently desi^able thing then God, in a
glorious union with whom is the perfection of our salvation. Now if thou be a
true believer, thou art in the way to salvation.

1. Not in a by way, in a false way, but in a true and direct way: If God does
skill the way to heaven, if he has laid out to sinners the right way, then
believing is it, Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace you are saved through faith, Heb. 10. 39.
We are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul.

2. Not in an uncertain, but firm way; It Is an infallible way of salvation:
Heaven is the assured mansion for thy soul, if thy heart be the true lodging of
says. 1 Pet. 1. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in beaven for you.

Object. True, that may not fade away, but we may fall away; that may remain,
but we man be lost?

Sol. No says the Apostle, but as that is reserved for you, so you shall be
preserved unto that; as mercy and truth, will keep your portion sure, so truth
and power shall keep your persons sure. Ver. 5. Who are kept b^ the power of
God through faith unto salvation, therefore he adds a word more, ver. 9.
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Now is not
this a comfort to a man, that he is in the true and sure way to heaven? Every
man is in a journey, in a way; wicked men have their ways, but the end of them
is bitterness, and hell after all their jollities and pleasures, yet their
ways are the paths of death. But the believing soul is in the way of life,
and therefore he is said already to have eternal life, John 3.
and to be saved. O what is this, I am going to my God, to my Father, to my
inheritance.

SECT. II.
SEcondly, here is another comfort to true believers, there 2. Simile.
is a real and blessed exchange 'twixt them and Christ. As upon the conjugal
knot, there is a mutual resultancy of communion: The wife partakes of the
estate of her husband, and the husband (interchangably) of the estate of his
wife: for the personal union draws with it the real union; If thou be mine,
thine estate is mine; So is it in the spiritual espousing of the soul and
Christ by faith, Christ partakes of our estate, and we shall partake of his
estate: He is ours, and all his are ours, we are his, and therefore ours are
his.

This exchange consists in these things.

1. Christ does take our sins and debts upon himself. Look as the man who
marries the woman, if he take her person he must take her debts, and
satisfaction too: So does Christ, when he takes us to be his, he takes our
sins also to be his; How to be his? not by way of infusion and infection, as
if our sinful qualities were transmitted from our persons into his nature, (O
no he never takes upon him our sins to make his nature sin^u^) ^ut by way of
imputation, and of satisfaction. The guilt of our sins is imputed unto him as
to a willing surety, who does present himself in our stead, to make payment and
satisfaction. As Paul said to Philemon concerning his servant Onesimus, If he
has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that upon mine account. So says
Christ to the penitent and believing Philem. 18.
soul, if thou have any guilt and debt to be answered for unto God, put them
all upon my account, if ^hou have wronged my Father, I will make the
satisfaction to the utmost, for I was made sin for thee, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. I
poured out my soul for thy transgression; It cost me my heart blood to
reconcile thee to my Father, and to slay enmity. And as Rebekah said to Jacob
in another case, upon me, my son, be the curse, so says Christ to the
believing soul. Why, thy sins did expose thee unto the curse of the Law; but
I was made a curse for thee, I did bear that burden my self upon the cross,
and upon my shoulders were all thy griefs, and sorrows borne; I was wounded for
thy transgressions, and I was bruised for thy iniquities: And therefore we are
said to have redemption and remission of sins in his blood, Ephesians. 1. 7.

Now what a comfort is this to a Believer, that Christ has eased him of his
great debts, that he has laid down the price for him, he is his surety, and
has di^charged and has cancelled the Law of Ordinances, and has blotted out
the hand writing. God was in Christ (says the Apostle) reconciling the world
to himself, not imputing their sin unto them, mark it, not imputing 2 Cor. 5.
19.
their tre^passes unto them; what is the not imputing of sin, but the not
charging of it, the not reckoning for it: And what is it which he says (unto
them) trespasses were not imputed unto them, as if God should say let them go I
have nothing to say unto them, my Son has satisfied my justice fully for
them. Now, says Paul (out of David) Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will
not impute sin. Yea, he is blessed Romans 4. 8.
indeed, for if the Lord should single out the most able transgressour for the
least moity and scruple of guilt, and arreigne his conscience with a judicial
and straight severity; O how the sinews of the soul would fly assunder, and
eternal despair of ever satisfying so great, and pure, and infinite a justice,
would swallow up the thought and imaginations? Till a man knows where to lay
down his sinful burden, his soul will be miserably afflicted; but now, if a man
believes in Jesus Christ, Christ will take off his burdens; I will answer for
thee says Christ, I will satisfy for thee. As David spoke in another case,
when Goliath presented himself against the Host of Israel. Let no man's heart
fail because of him, thy servant will go and fight with this Phylestian. So
says Christ to the believing soul, be not dejected, do not despair, though
thy sins 1 Samuel 17. 32.
be many and great, yet I have overcome them, I have discharged them, my
Sacrifice was presented, it was sufficient, it was effectual, it was accepted
for thee.

Secondly, Christ does bestow his righteousness upon us. This is a great
comfort to a sensible and understanding soul, that there is a righteousness
for it, which it may safely and confidently present unto Gods justice.

These things are most true.

First, that we are by nature all of us wretched sinners, the whole Romans 3. 19.
world is guilty before God.

Secondly, Divine justice has a quarrel against every guilty soul, and will
have complete, and full, and perfect satisfaction.

Thirdly, no* not our best graces and performances are commensurate and square
payment in the eyes of pure justice: all of them as inherent in us, and acted
by us, are but imperfect excellencies: No man has so much holiness as is
required, nor does he so much as he is obliged. Every particular grace, though
it be of an heavenly and divine original, yet it is like the stars twinkling,
though placed in the heavens; and every duty though it be a motion, yet it is
like that of Jacobs thigh, which was touched, and halted to his dying day. So
that if God should enter into judgment with the righteous person, even the
righteousness that is in him, would not be safety and defense unto him. As a
man that has a precious ^^ding, dares not to adventure it in any cracked and
broken vessel, so no Christian may or can dare to adventure the safety of his
soul upon the leaking vessels, and bottoms of his own holiness or services.
This very smoke of doubtings which still mount up with our flames of faith, and
the gross affections which cling to the root of our most heavenly love, and
part of that rock of hardness, is seated and complanted with the freshest
spring of softness, and mournings, and those infinite and frequent
intermissions, both of our prayers, and hearings, and readings, and any kind
of dutiful doings, that we are so shufled away from our devotions, by the
invasions and entertainment of strange thoughts in the times of our devotion: I
say, those and infinite emaculations or spots, do so adhere and cling about,
and defile our selves and that which comes from us, that (in proceeding of pure
justice) we may cast down our selves on the ground, and beg for mercy, much
rather then to stand at the bar, and plead for reward: But now here is the
great stay of a believing soul, (which has truly received Christ) that Christ
will find a full, exact, complete, most acep^able righteousness for it, in
which the soul shall stand boldly before the judgment seat.

Romans 3. 19. By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. 2 Cor. 5.
21. We are made the righteousness of God in him. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ye are of him
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, etc.
Jer. 23. 6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely,
and this is the name whereby they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness.

The righteousness of Christ is therefore called the righteousness of God,
Romans 8. 17, because it is it which God has designed, and which God does accept
for us in our justification; and for, and in which he does acquit and pronounce
us righteous. Now in this lies our comfort thus, viz.

1. That though our inherent holiness be imperfect, yet Christ's righteousness
is absolute.

2. That as it is a full righteousness, and every way answerable, so it was
designed by God, to be that which should justify the believing sinner.

3. That God accepts of that righteousness, and will clear any who has it.

4. That, if by faith we have taken Christ, Christ does assuredly bestow his
righteousness on us, not by putting it into our persons, but by improving it
to our good; It is, though not infused into us, yet imputed unto us, and God
will through it pronounce us clear.

SECT. III.
THirdly, a third comfort to a believer in Jesus Christ is this, Covenant with
God: for the Covenant is with faith in Jesus Christ, it was to Abraham and to
his seed (that is) to all the faithful.

Observe a few things here.

1. The Covenant of grace (in the offer and revelation of it) is the treaty of
eternal happiness 'twixt God and sinners; whatsoever good a soul can desire to
exempt it from misery, and to make it truly happy, there it is.

2. The Covenant of Grace, in respect of our entrance and admission into it, is
a most gracious, and spiritual, and firm engagement of God to be our God, and
to perform all the good which he has there undertaken. I will be a God unto
you, I will show mercy unto you, you shall have loving kindness, I will give
you grace in all kinds, I will not fail to assist, and guide, and lead, and
uphold you, I will be a father to you, a rock to you, a Sanctuary, an
alsufficiency, an exceeding great reward. So that if you need any thing, come
to me, I have it for you, and do not fear to come, for I will assuredly do you
good, I am willing to do it, for I have promised it, and be you confident to
possess, for I have obliged my self by Covenant to perform.

3. He that believes in Jesus Christ is assuredly in the Covenant: for Christ
(on whom he believes) is the Messenger of the Covenant, and his blood is the
blood of the Covenant, and in him all the promises of the Covenant are Yea and
Amen. If thou have given thy consent to Christ, if thou have bestowed thy heart
on him, if thou have truly received him to be thy Lord and Savior, undoubtedly
God is become thy God, and all those ample and rich, and congruous, and blessed
undertakings in his Covenant, they are all for thee, thou art the man to whom
God says, I will surely have mercy on him, and to whom he says, Sin shall not
have dominion over him, for he is under grace, and to whom he says, I will
hear him, and heal him; and guide him, and keep him. Thou may go to all
those treasures of divine promises, as to thy own garden, and take of any
flower, lay hold on any promise, respecting thy particular exigence, and say,
this is mine. When thou look down into thy self, thou may read many
wants with wet and sad eyes, but then if thou look up to the Covenant, thou
may by faith espy all thy supplies with a glad heart. Why? God did put thy
good into the Covenant, and there thou shall assuredly find it: Do thou
read of any altering grace, of any pardoning grace, of any enlarging grace, of
any preventing grace, of any assisting grace, of any preserving and upholding
grace, of any recovering and raising grace, of any pacifying and comforting
grace? why all this is for thee, and all that God has there undertaken is
thine.

SECT. IV.
FOurthly, if you do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, you with boldness
approach the throne of grace.

Ephesians. 2. 18. For through him we both have access by one Spirit to the
Father. Heb 10. 21. Having an high Priest over the house of God. Ver. 2^. Let
us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith. 1 John 5. 13. These
things I write unto you that believe in the Name of the Son of God. Ver. 14.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.

Obj. You shall find in your heart many sinful modesties; you are afraid to be
so bold with God, and whether God will do such great matters for you, yea, and
there are many unbeleeving fears our broken services shall never be accepted,
and who are we that the Lord should regard our prayers?

Sol. But if a man does truly believe in Jesus Christ.

1. His way is open to Heaven.

2. He has a friend, and not an enemy to deal with: It is thy Father to whom
thou art bending the knee.

3. He has a mighty intercessor; look as Jesus Christ is the mighty Redeemer
for the persons of men, so he is the mighty intercessor for the services of
men, and he ever lives to make intercession. If thy wants be never so great,
yet thy God is able to supply them, and if thy infirmities be never so many,
yet thy intercessor is able to cover and expiate them. Thy services (as thine ^
carry with them a prejudice, there was iniquity in the holy offering, but then
Aaron did bear the iniquity of them: so thy Priest, thy Christ, thy
intercessor, he does take off by the Application of his merits, whatsoever is
amiss and offensive, and he does ingratiate thy requests, and procures
audience and acceptance for thee.

Therefore now, if thou be a believer then in thy prayers come confidently to
God; if thou can find a promise, and a Christ, and a faith, thou may
cheerfully put up thy petitions to heaven. What should hinder us from being
confident? Is God unwilling? No, he has engated himself unto thee. Is God
unable? Why, He is able to do abundantly above all that we are able to ask or
think. Do thou fear thy own distance? Why, but thou come to a Father, and
thou come by the blood of a gracious, of a beloved, of a powerful Mediator
and Intercessor. Hebrews 4. Having such an High Priest, we may come boldly to
the throne of grace, See Heb. 10. Do thou fear because of enmity? Christ
has! slain that, or because of infirmity? Christ will cure that.

CHAP. XV. The Agreement and difference of strong and weak faith.
BUt now some may reply, These are sweet comforts Eunuch to Philip, of whom
speaks the Prophet this, of himself or of some other? So here, why? to whom
are these comforts, to all, or to some choice believers? are they common
comforts to every believer, or peculiar to the eminent and strong only?

This scruple has made way for a singular point; I will satisfy it by opening
four particulars.

1. The common unity of all true faith, in respect of the habit, yet the
intensive diversity in respect of acts and degrees.

2. The proofs of a strong faith, with the instances of a weak faith in truth.

3. The concordance of faith in all fundamental Comforts.

4. The inequality of strong and weak faith in many true, yet not essential
consequences and consolations.

Concerning the first, which respects the common unity of faith in respect of
the habit, and the diversity of it, in respect of the acts and degrees.

Observe these things for the unity of faith.

SECT. I.
FIrst, that all true faith, though in a comparison of faith with viz.

First, in the immediate and special cause: weak faith, as faith, comes not
from one cause, and strong faith from another cause, but both the one and the
other from one and the same cause, viz. the blessed Spirit of God. Not only
the flames, but the sparks of fire are kindled by that Spirit which blows where
it lists. As in the Orchard, the tree which stands strong, and the tender plant
which stands trembling, both of them were at first set by one and the same
hand, so the faith which is now well grown, and that faith which is as yet
tender, and full of doubtings, both of them are the peculiar fruits of Gods
sanctifying Spirit.

Though this child in the cradle cannot run and move as well as that in the
field at work, yet the father begat the one as well as the other, and owns them
both by virtue of one equal relation. The day of small things are not despised
by God, who sees weakness in the strongest Faith, and Truth in the weakest,
and is the Parent both of this and that.

2. In the remote and singular cause. You know that Gods free grace and love is
the first wheel of all singular good unto men; out of it came that great gift
of Christ, and that great work of Election, from whence does flow all the
graces which sanctify and bring to glory. As many as were ordained to eternal
life believed. Now all faith is a drop out of this fountain, the weak faith is
a fruit of that great love of God Acts 13. 48.
electing us in Christ, as well as the strong, and is, though not so sensibly
evident, yet as really a true testimony of our election: The reason whereof is
this, not grace restrictively considered, but grace in the whole latitude of it
is the fruit of Gods election: my meaning is this, not only Graces as eminent,
as raised and elevated to some more perfect quality and pitch, but grace in the
whole compass of it, from the conception of it to the perfection of it, from
the dawning to the full day, from the nature to the act; from the acts to the
degrees; all of it in nature, in parts, in totum and solidum, all of it whether
more or less, strong or weak, all is out of the same grace of Election.

It was not one love which elected him, who is therefore now strong in
believing with Abraham, and another love which elected him, who is now weak in
believing with the father of the child; No, but it was one and the self-same
love which produced this, and that faith; yea, that electing love was
intensively one in producing of both. It was as equally high toward this
person as toward that, and was as equally causative of the faith that is weak,
as of the faith which is strong, being habitually considered, and also in
relation to the grace of Gods love in election.

3. In the ordinary and usual instrumental cause: the same womb of the word
brought them both forth, being efficaciously assisted by that Almighty Spirit.
That word which discovered misery, and impotency, and necessity to the one, did
so to the other. That word which revealed the Covenant of grace and mercy in
Christ to the one, did so to the other believer also. That word which did
assure the one, that if he would come in and accept of Christ, be should be
saved, did also of this assure the other. That word which did incline the heart
of the one to trust upon Gods promise, and so to accept of Christ, did likewise
(being quickened with the same Spirit) draw, and persuade the other.

4. In the lively nature of believing: look as the strong and weak man, though
they do differ in the measure of power, yet they do agree in the nature of man;
though they differ in respect of working, yet they agree in respect of being.
And as the sick man, and the healthy man, though they vary in their temper, yet
they agree in their nature; though they differ in livelihood, yet not in life.
So, though the strong and weak faith differ exceedingly in respect of
particular abilities and exercises, yet there is a true nature of faith in the
weakest as well as in the strongest. There is as true a knowledge of the sinful
and miserable condition in our selves, and of the blessed condition in Christ,
in the one as well as in the other. There is as true an assent to the word of
grace, the Gospel of salvation, revealed in the one as well as in the other, I
say, as true, though, perhaps not equal and full. There is as true accepting
and embracing of Christ, to be Lord and Savior; the will does as truly receive
Christ offered, though perhaps there be not such a strength of adherence at the
first. There is so much in the weakest faith as makes up the match 'twixt
Christ and the soul, nay, there is not any thing in the strongest faith, which
is an effectual ingredient to espouse the soul with Christ but the same also is
in the weakest faith. Does strong faith take Christ? so does the weakest; does
it acknowledge him the only Savior? so does the weakest, does it embrace him
as its Lord? so does the weakest; does it breed union? so does the weakest;
does it make a man a member of Christ, and heir of promises? so does the
weakest.

Thus you briefly perceive the habitual unity of all true faith.

SECT. II.
SEcondly, now a word of the intensive diversities of faith. How faith differs
from faith, I do not mean a true faith false, but a true faith from true faith.
As one man truly living may differ from another truly living, notwithstanding
they agree in the common nature of man, and life; Or to use the Apostles
Simile, as one star may differ from another star in glory, though all be in the
heavens. The rounds in Jacobs ladder are not all at the top, yet are they every
one of them steps to heaven; so of faith, every faith is not triumphing, yet
every faith is mounting up to the Lord of life and King of glory.

The several and particular habits of faith, though they consent in one truth
of nature, yet they differ in many things.

First, in the strength of the parts and acts: As in the eyes of men, though
the visive faculty be equal in all, yet vision, or the act of seeing, is
diverse, one sees the colors more clearly then another.

So is it in faith, (which is the eye of the soul,) Though the nature be
common, and equal, yet the act of believing is different.

There are three acts of faith, and in respect of all of them, there Three acts.
may be a diversity among believers.

1. Knowledge and apprehension, this is as it were the ground work of faith;
for believing is not rooted in ignorance, but in light. Now every believer has
not so full and distinct a knowledge as another. Divine revelations (which are
the general objects of faith) are not clasped alike by all: No, nor yet the
promises, (which are the special objects of faith) they are not so equally
apprehended. There are several promises, and in them several parts, and
degrees of goodness and truth; now, it is possible for some believers, not to
be acquainted with all their treasuries; they have not been so long acquainted
with the word as to know all the good which does concern them; And that
special good which they do apprehend, one believer reaches the large compass
of it more then another: All (even in Christ) is not equally known by all, who
believe in Christ. Hence it is, that age, and time, and communion, and study,
and use of means, and experience do raise the apprehension and knowledge to
far more degrees and strength then at the first; and the believing soul,
which at first saw things (as the man whose eyes were touched by Christ) dimly,
at length rises by degrees to a more perfect light of the same truths, and to
a more full and enlarged apprehension of other truths, which he was ignorant of
before.

2. Assent, even in this also may one believer differ from another: I confess,
the usual and palpable diversities of faith be most in things as good, rather
then in things as true.

Nevertheless, every believer, as so, assents to all revelations, as in
particular to those of Christ, as true, yet the assents in believers may very
much, not only in the circumstances of the assent, but also in the immediate
workings of the assent. The Judgment is not equally captivated in all, or else
why do some believers question and scruple more then others? yea, and why else
needs there a farther evidence and demonstration, to establish some in
doctrinall truths, if all believers were equally grounded, and rooted in the
word?

Yea, and why are some good people more apt to errors then others? no plausible
error can be taught, or spread with the speciousnesse of taking reason, but
presently they are questioning their old truths, for new opinions, which shows,
that all assents to divine truths are not alike in all believers.

Nay, and this appears to be so by the several instances of diabolical
temptations, which in some are of that great force, as to make them not only
question their particular interests in God and Christ, (which may befall the
highest believer) but also to question the first principles of Religion,
whether there be a God, and whether the Scriptures are his Word, and whether
true or false.

3. Reception, embracing or consent: though it be hearty and sincere in all,
yet one believer cannot so rest on Christ as another, nor does every one take
Christ by the hand alike. Like a child who gives out a trembling hand with some
shruggings, Simile.
even to his Father; so the believer may put forth his hand of faith, even to
Christ, with many fears and shakings; O that I may have him, that I might
receive him, that he would be mine, that I could lay hold on him; O that God
would pardon my sins, says one; yet another raises up the soul, I will rest
on his promise in Christ to pardon all.

In the measure of degrees: Hence you read of that by Christ, I have not found
so great faith, no not in Israel, and, O woman great is thy faith, Abraham
strong in faith, Paul persuaded, etc. and Job I know that my, etc. In a
comparative opposition to which, you read those phrases, O ye of little faith.
And why did thou doubt, O thou of little faith; and of the weak in faith.

The degrees of faith are many (viz.) the habitual inclination of the heart
toward Christ, the actual laying hold on him, the strong embracing of him;
reflection of the act, that I know I take him, as Lord and Savior; reflection
of the object, I know that he is my Lord and Savior; then, a fullness of this
reflexive assurance, I doubt it not; then the reasons of this full assurance
(which whether it mean the great continuance, or the great abundance of the
measure of assurance, is disputable) Again the longer duration of this full
and great assurance. Now in all these respects (except the first) faith in one
may differ from faith in another: How many hearts are set only toward Christ;
O that I could apprehend him, but I cannot believe: How many souls do apprehend
him? yet, O that we were apprehended by him; how many are apprehended by him,
(that is) know him to be theirs, by some gracious and firm evidence? yet by
and by with Mary weeping, they have taken away my Lord.

Yet some others rise high and stay long in restings, in persuasions in
affirmings, that it is heaven with them many days together.

You may see one Christian look up to heaven with tears of joy, (as Job, I
know that my redeemer lives.) Another looking Job. Pub^ican. Paul the fa^aul.
up with tears of grief, (Lord be merciful to me a sinner) You may see one
sitting down with thanks, (who gave himself for me.) Another falling down in
Prayer (I believe Lord help my unbelief.) You may see one triumphing above all
fears and David.
scruples, (I am persuaded that nothing shall separate me from the love of God
in Christ) and yet another combating with many fears, (but will the Lord be
favorable unto me?) One blesses God for assurings, another cries unto God
against doubtings: one is like Mary rejoicing in God my Savior, another like
Hester, in ventring toward the Scepter, and, if I perish I perish. One says,
thou art my rock, my fortress, my strong tower, my portion for ever, and the
horn of my salvation, another sighs and breaks out, O that salvation were
come out of Sion, O that I could believe, O that I were once persuaded. Thus it
is with several believers as with several children: one lies in the cradle,
another is led by the nurse, another is going by the chaires, and another can
run. Or as it is with a flock of sheep, some are strong and bearing, others are
young, and must be gently led or carried; Or as with an Orchard, some trees are
able and well limbed, others are tender plants, and are weakly rising.

Reasons of which diversity may be either the different ages of Causes of it.
Ages. Helps external.
faith. In some it has had a longer time of strengthening; in others it is but
seed newly sown, or else different external helps; some believers are brought
up in a more fertile soil, under powerful ministries, which are
experimentally acquainted with inward conflicts, and therefore are more suited
to weak consciences to understand and remove their fears and doubts, and to
answer objections, either arising from natural unbelief, or from Satan's
subtilties; others live upon a more hard hand, and want those directions and
counsels.

Or else different assistances of Gods Spirit; for as that Spirit Inward
assistances.
breaths where he lists, so he blows where he lists; some he is pleased to
assist more in a way of combat, others more in a way of conquest; though he be
the Spirit of life to all that believe, yet he is the Spirit of assurance, to
some of those more then to others.

Or else the different employments and services; all believers Services.
meet not with equal conflicts, either within or without, they are not put
upon the same trialls, the same crosses, the same difficult duties; Now the
Lord is wise as well as good, and therefore proportions different measures of
faith, according to the diverse degrees of exigencies: A man can do and suffer
much after a day of gracious assurance, whose heart perhaps would have
trembled, if his doubts and fears had been yet to be answered.

Yea, and some hearts are more apt to Pride and forgetfulness, Pride.
which are therefore kept shorter, lest they should swell by multitude of
revelations.

To all which if we add, that sometimes former sinnings Former sinnings.
may justly make the soul to tugge long for assurance, because the Lord will
not give easy and sweet answer, before we know that it is an evil and bitter
thing to sin against him.

SECT. III.
NOw I proceed to the second general, viz. the proofs of a strong faith, with
the instances of a weak faith in truth.

Three queries, how to know, 1. Whether our faith be great, 2. or little, 3.
and yet true.

You see there are two parts of this, I will begin with the first, which
respects the discoveries of faith in strength.

Concerning which take these things briefly. Signs of a great Signs of a
great and strong faith.
and strong faith.

1. Confidence of easy answers for great matters is an argument of a strong
and great faith. As in the Centurion, who came to Christ for the healing of his
servant, who was sick of a palsy and grievously tormented, speak the word only
and my servant shall be healed, (that is) Though he be very weak, yet I am
confident that thy power is very strong, thou need not to trouble thy
person, one word from thy pleasure will heal him, Matthew. 8. 6, 7, 8. What says
Christ now of this faith? See v. 10. Verily, I have not found so great faith,
no not in Israel. The more difficult we esteem things to be in God or Christ,
the weaker is our faith: If we impose a different readiness of help, or mercy,
or pardon, on God, according to the different matter which we are putting up
unto him, this argues want of strength: For it is all one with God to pardon
abundantly, as to pardon singly; and his power, is as able for the greatest
difficulty, as for the least trouble. But when the soul draws near unto him,
and can believe great matters, as well as small things; that he will be
merciful to great transgressions, as well as compassionate to ordinary
infirmities; that he will subdue strong temptations, as well as weak glancings;
that he will in time conquer the busiest inclination to sin, etc. this shows
that faith is come to some strength.

2. Again, a repetition of adherence and a steadfast following of Christ,
notwithstanding the discouragements, which the soul may be apt to take from
Christ's behavior toward it, argues their faith to be strong, and great, 2 Samuel 23. 16. They were the three mighty men that brake through the Host, and
drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, Matthew. 15. 22. As in that woman of
Canaan, who came to Christ to heal her daughter; Have mercy on me O Lord, thou
son of David; how did Christ entertain her? (the text says, he answered her
not a word) yet in the same verse it is said, she cries after thee; (Christ's
silence raised her voice the higher) Again, she came and worshipped him,
saying, Lord, help me, how is she now answered? (It is not meet to take the
childrens bread and to cast it to dogs;) such an answer to some spirits, had
been far worse then silence; But mark it, her faith followed Christ still, and
that very word which would discourage another, encouraged her; (O, that faith
is strong which can urge Christ from a small hint) Truth Lord, said she, yea,
the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters Table. As if she might
say, Be it so Lord Jesus, I am no better then a dog, an unworthy creature,
yet let me have the compassions to a dog, though not plenty, yet the crumbs.
Now, what says Christ of her? Then Jesus answered, and said unto her, O woman,
great is thy faith. Remember it, that the faith which can bring up the soul
which can lead it up to heaven against discouragements. Though God does not
answer, yet I will seek; though he kill me, yet I will trust in him: I say,
such a faith is strong; an expostulating faith, a faith which will make the
soul to press on after denials, Job.
after suspensions; it is come to a great measure of faith, which will not be
answered, or will not be gone; a faith that will not let God go, or Christ
until it speed. Jacob was as a wrestler, he would not let God go except he
blessed him. A faith that can dispute it much with God, which will in a holy
reasoning, take and urge God with God, and will so enforce the promises on him
(which he has made) that God is even feign to yield, Be it unto thee as thou will, this is faith ripened.

3. The more entirely the soul is carried to expectation from the sole strength
of a Divine promise, the greater and the stronger is that faith. As in Abraham's
case; He wanted a son, and God promised him an Isaac; Abraham did not now
stagger through unbelief, he did not consult the truth of it from his own
natural abilities; How unable he was, that he neglected, but how able God was
to perform his own word, upon this his faith did pitch. And for this the text
says, that he was strong in faith, Romans 4. 20. Remember this, that the more
sensible helps the soul needs to draw out the act of believing, the weaker is
the faith; as the man is judged to be very weak, who cannot go without many
crutches and holdings; But the more strength a naked promise has with the
soul, when it alone puts life and quietness into us, now faith is grown; As
David said, The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. So
when we can quash all our troubles with the sight of a promise, I have Gods
word for my pardon, his word for my help, his Word for my comfort, I desire no
better play master then God, no better security then his own promise; though all
things stand contrary in sense and feeling, yet all is sure in Gods promise,
and there I will settle, this argues a great faith.

4. The more ability a man has to deny himself in near and great occurrences,
the greater is his faith: Abraham in leaving of his country, parting with
Isaac: The more easily we can believe great things, and part with great things,
the stronger is our faith. There is nothing more hard then to give up a man's
self.

There is a threefold self.

First, his sinful self in respect of old and dear sins.

Secondly, his natural self, in respect of the separation of soul and body.

Thirdly, his temporal self in respect of the comforts of this life. And it
must be a strong faith which must enable to strong denials of our selves, when
a thing comes nearer to the quick, either when God denies a man a special
comfort, or draws off from him a special comfort; now to submit, now to be
quiet, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, said Paul; I
know how to want, and how to abound, to be exalted and to be abased, I have
learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be contented.

To have the heart pleased with Christ alone, and satisfied with his presence,
mark it, the more entirely that the soul makes up its state in Christ, and the
less power that the world imprints upon the heart in its changes, this imports
the faith is come to strength. Strong faith is like a strong tree, which holds
its body unmovable against great tempests, but weak faith is like a plant which
every wind makes almost to touch the ground.

Fifthly, the weaker the arguments of distrust grow in the heart; this is a
sign that the faith is got to a strength. This I conjecture, that the strength
or weakness of faith is not to be judged by the multiplicity of distrustful
arguments, but by the force and efficacy of them; It is possible that manifold
arguments of fear, and doubts may present themselves to the mind of a strong
believer, as well as unto the judgment of a weak believer, but then, if faith
be strong, it does weigh them down, it does prevail over them, (that is) it
brings the soul to Christ; it cleaves still unto him. The soul maintains its
title to Christ, and owns God in his promises, it will not cast away its hope,
nor its strength, wherein the soul can habitually foil the reasonings which
cross its way, and can clear up and vindicate its state, what God is to it,
and Christ is to it, and what it has received from them, this is an argument,
that it is not weak but strong.

Sixthly, the more easy compliance with change of a man's condition is an
evidence of a faith which is more strong. There are several changes incident to
man's temporal life, the Moon sometimes is full, and anon it is in the Eclipse;
our sea does ebb and flow; sometimes prosperity (like the candle of the Lord)
shines upon us; by and by adversity (like the wind) blows out the candle;
sometimes we abound and our mountain seems strong; anon we are stripped and our
mountain is shaked; one while health and presence of friends; another while
sickness and loss of all. Now in these changes, not to be changed, like the
ship right up in a calm, but tossing and reeling in a storm, but to be as the
rock fixed and settled, holding up, and rejoicing in the God of our salvation,
and encouraging our selves in the Lord our God, and willing to be any thing; in
any condition, yea, to bless God for all as Job did. If I die, I shall go to
God; If I live, I will serve my God; If I enjoy, I will be fruitful; If I want,
I will be thankful; The more Passive the heart is, the more active and strong
the faith is. Paul had been learning that lesson; In every state, therewith to
be content. O when a Christian can comply with contrary states, not through an
insensiblenesse of Spirit, but from an apprehension and approbation of divine
wisdom, goodness, love and authority, his faith is singularly cleared and
well improved.

7. The more satisfaction and quiescence that the soul has in Christ alone,
the greater is the faith; when a naked Christ, is the center and loadstone, and
the All in all, As the Sun to make day, I desire to know nothing but Christ
crucified, said Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 2. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee, said Asaph, Psalm 73. 25. I count
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord, says Paul again, Phil. 3. 8. Lord, let thy servant now depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, said Simeon, Luke 2. 29, 30. As when we
come to heaven, we shall be so heavenly, that heaven alone will be enough to
us, and this shows perfection; so whiles we live on earth, if Christ alone be
heaven and earth to us; if he can fill our hearts, and satisfy them. O Lord
Jesus, thou art righteousness enough, satisfaction enough, wisdom enough,
peace, and comfort, and pleasure enough to my soul: O this comes from great
strength.

8. The more that the body of sin decays in strength, the lesser prevalency
of it, this shows that faith is strong. When sin becomes more dead in its
actions, or more ineffectual in its temptations; When a man can walk and not
stumble, and reele and fall; he is now out-grown his former weakness; It shows
weakness, when every stone makes thee apt to fall; It is a sign the army is
strong, when the enemy many of them are slain, and the rest are easily
discomfited. Sin is our enemy, and Christ is our general, and faith is our
champion, and the more that sins fall, it is an argument that faith is become
stronger. The victorious faith is much more then the combating faith: Sins go
down by believing; the more that any grace is in victory the more it is in
strength. Indeed it argues truth of faith to resist, but to conquer sins,
this shows strength, to wrestle is something, but to overthrow is more; to
oppose sin, is not so much as to vanquish it.

10. The more fruitful a Christian is in his graces and exercises of them, the
stronger is his faith. You know that the extension of the branches arises from
the intension of the sap; if the branches grow big, and yield more fruit, it is
because the root is more full and filled. Faith is (well styled) the radical
grace; though the habits of other graces grow not out of it, yet the measures
and exercises do exceedingly depend upon it: And, according to the latitude of
faith is the latitude of other graces; as the days receive shortness or
length from the Sun. A weak faith is attended but with a weak love, and a
weak patience, and a weak hope, and a weak joy. But if the faith becomes
strong, now it is spring with our graces, they revive and shoot out themselves,
there will be much love, and much labor of love, and strong hope, and the
better heart and life.

11. The more able a person is to live upon Christ, or Gods promises in the
times of desertions and contrarieties, the faith is certainly the greater. The
more use any can make of God or Christ at all, his faith is greater; for the
more that any soul believes, the more is his faith enabled thereby.

But then this is yet more strength, even against hope, to believe in hope, to
look up for that God that hides himself; to venture on an angry God, one who
seems to shut out our prayers, one that speaks bitter things unto us, like
Levi, not to observe our own children, but to keep the Word and Covenant of
God, Deuteronomy. 33 9.

12. The more able the soul is to wait on God; to pray and wait, the stronger
is the Faith. A waiting faith meets with more difficulties, and contrarieties,
and is upheld by the strength of a mere promise. That man not only has faith,
but lives by faith, if he can wait Gods time, etc.

13. When you can glorify many promises at once by believing; yea, when every
promise can be trusted on upon gracious terms, the more fully you can glorify
them by trusting for pardon of great sins, subduing of strong corruptions,
deliverance out of great distresses, the stronger is your faith. The less
difficulty you conceive in God to perform his Word; when you can come for great
matters, with great confidence, less doubts, exceptions, fear, the less
power discouragements have. If you can believe against sense, reason, Though he
kill me, yet will I trust in him. These are discoveries of faith in strength.

SECT. IV.
THe second part of the second general point at the instances of weak faith in
truth. Here are two things which I will touch.

One is, some demonstrations that faith is weak.

Another is, some directions of truth with that weakness.

Concerning the first, observe these things. Signs of a weak faith.


1. The more that doubtings stagger the heart, its is a sign that the faith is
weak. As the more smoke goes up with the fire, it is an argument that the fire
is little, or as the more a person halts and reels in his motion, it discovers
the impotency of his strength and joints. You read in Romans 4. 20. That
staggering at the promise by unbelief, is opposed to a strong faith: observe
that word (staggering) It is such a temper of the soul, wherein it does
suddenly and easily change its thoughts, and acts: As a man who is staggering,
his foot checks (as it were) it self, and alters its pace and place, so when a
man's heart is giving on, and then falling off, may I take? may I not? I will
lay hold, I will not; God will be good to me, he will not; I shall have mercy,
yet I shall not; this is staggering.

The soul lets go its hold, doubtings prevail against actual believing; the
believing soul sees strong arguments to draw it to fasten on Christ, and on
mercy, and then it is putting forth the hand; but then unbelief thrusts forth
contrary arguments of suspicion, and fears, so that the soul is in doubts; may
I indeed lay hold, but will the Lord be merciful to me? Why did thou doubt,
O thou of little faith, said Christ to Peter? and this stands with reason, for
the stronger that quality is which is contrary to faith, the weaker is that
faith which is contrary to that quality, as the stronger sickness is, the
weaker health is, etc.

2. The more easily a man can suspect Gods favor and Christ's love; this is a
sign that faith is weak. See Psalm 77. 7, 8, 9. and then v. 10. They say of
love, that the more pure love has least fear. 1 John 4. 18 and multitude of
jealousies is an argument of mixture in the affections. So it is of faith, the
more steadfastly it can hold up the immutability of Gods love and kindness, and
his ancient grants of favor, the stronger is the faith: But the more apt it is
to question the loving kindness which has been ever of old; now it is the
weaker, Luke 24. 21. We had trusted that it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel, and besides all this to day is the third day.

There be two things which a weak faith is very apt to challenge.

One in God for kindness.

Another in its own estate for soundness. As Gideon said in another case, If
the Lord be with us, why is all this evil befallen us? so where the faith is
weak, the soul is often in suit with God; yea, but if God were my God; had I an
interest in Christ, were my estate good, could it be with me thus, could it be
thus within me, thus without me, thus upon me? etc.

3. The more quick and hastening that the soul is for answer and satisfactions,
the more impatient of Gods delayings, this is a sign that it is now weak in
faith. For did it thoroughly believe, it would not make haste, were it persuaded
fully of Gods goodness, which makes the promise of his wisdom, which will take
the fittest time for the grant, it would now quietly wait and expect: But an
over-hastening, when the soul will scarce allow any time 'twixt the petition
and the speeding of it, but I must presently have it, or else God is not my
God, or else my state is bad. I say, hasty eagerness to be answered, and quick
conclusions from Gods silence, do show much weakness of faith in the soul;
There is an importunity which may come from faith, and this is a holy pressing
of a promise, yet with submission and patience; And there is an hastiness
which comes from fear: As if God would not always be in a good mind toward
us, as if the present testimonies must be the only arguments of his love and
intentions.

These two things will usually meet in a man whose faith is weak.

One is, he will be hasty to be answered.

Another is, he will be faint if delayed.

4. The more inclining the heart is to the life of sense, the weaker is the
faith: like Thomas, unless he sees the print of the nails, etc. he will not
believe, John 20. 25. So unless Christians have promises budding, they will
hardly believe that there is fruit growing on them; unless I feel the
sensible favor of God, I will not believe that he loves me; unless I read my
pardon, I will not believe mercy; unless I discern sensible means, I will
not believe helps; unless I feel sin slain in me, I will not believe that
God will subdue it; All these in promises affect not, and support not the
heart. It is a sign of a weak child, that must still be carried in the arms.
When a man's persuasions cannot be wrought by the naked word of promise, without
some sensible pledges and pawn, he is very weak. When he is puzling his heart
in an endless maze of disorder, viz. he would have the things of the promise,
and then believe the fidelity of the promise, this argues weakness. The
abstractions of things from sense, when God gathers up all a man's estate, or
any particular good, only into his promise, into his own hand, and says, now
can thou believe that I will be good unto thee? I promise thee to be thus and
thus; will thou now trust me, will thou adventure thy soul now upon my word of
pardon and mercy, upon my word of gra^e and help? so to do would evidence much
strength.

Now you may observe a manifest difference 'twixt strong and weak faith; If
strong faith sees its estate in the promise, it has enough, it goes away
rejoicing; if weak faith has not some of the estate in its own hand, as well
as in Gods hand, it is troubled and afraid.

5. The more hardly a believer comes to be persuaded and assured of Gods
undertakings in Covenant, his faith is weak. When one word of God is not
enough, but God must say it once and twice, and yet again more clearly: As
Gideon would have one sign, the fleece must be wet, and the earth dry; and
then another sign, the fleece must be dry, and dew lie upon all the earth,
Judges 6. 37, 39. This showed weakness in his faith; so does it in a
Christian, when not one or two promises, and scarce all of them, with all the
arguments in God and in Christ, can persuade him that God will be merciful to
him, or that Christ belongs to him.

6. The more easy the soul is to let go that assurance, the weaker is faith
in it; when a soul is like a weak hand clasping a staff, and the staff is
easily wristed out; so the soul lets go that promise, which did revive it, and
that Christ, which seemed to embrace it, this argues weakness; as in Peter,
when he believed that it was Christ on the sea, upon Christ's Word he ventures
out, but when the waves met him, he begins to sink, his faith was weak, Why
did thou doubt, O thou of little faith, said Christ to him? Though Christ's
Word drew him out of the ship, yet it did not hold him up all alone; And the
Disciples, We trusted it had been he who should have redeemed Israel. So when a
temptation comes upon a soul, and the soul is ready to be led by it, to credit
it against Gods promise, and Gods testimony in the conscience, this aptness to
let go our hold argues much fear, and much fear argues weak faith.

7. The more apt the soul is to insist on personal and inherent qualities and
abilities, as media fiduciae, means of persuasion, this shows that the faith
is weak: when something in us makes us the more confident, as when it is unapt
to believe, unless it can discern such an inherent strength of graces, to
mourn, and to pray, or to keep down sin, or keep off temptation.

Object. It is true, these abilities are testimonies, but yet they are not
Media.

Sol. They are evidences of a solid faith, but they are not means or causes of
believing. The means or causes are Gods promises, which ought (alone) to be our
foundations and encouragements. Now when a person is unapt to believe that God
will do these things for him, unless these things be done, this is weakness.
Good things, when they are done, they are matters of thankfulness, and when
they are promised, they are matters of faith. They say in Logic, that
demonstratio a posteriori, is the weaker demonstration, that a priori is much
stronger: for this depends on the cause, and that on the effect. So is it in
believing. A believing, a priori, from the persuasion of what God says, (from
his goodness and truth) is more strong then a believing a posteriori (that is)
from a fruition or apprehension of what God does.

8. The more dull and uncheerful the heart is, this shows the faith to be weak:
A sad Spirit and a weak faith, usually are companions: for a strong faith
breeds much peace in the conscience, Romans 5. 1, 2. and rejoicing, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
In whom (though now ye see him not) yet believing ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory: such a faith as this has got to much assurance,
but uncheerfulnesse of heart argues either, as yet the want of all assurance,
or assurance very weak.

9. The more anxious and careful the soul is, it is a sign of a weak faith.
What shall we eat, and what shall we drink, and what shall we put on? This our
Savior says in Matthew 6. shows little faith. For the lesser the things are
for which we are to trust, the more weakness is there if we do distrust,
especially where the helper is sufficient and willing, and has past his
promise; Now, God is willing to do for Believers more then all the earth is
worth, and has done greater matters for them; And therefore a suspicion of him
for small matters, shows but a small persuasion.

10. The more apt the heart is to be offended at the estate of Christ, it is a
sign that faith is weak. This is evident in the Disciples who being weak in
faith, Christ was forced to keep many things in, because they were not able to
bear them; and when he spoke of his sufferings, and departing from them, they
were much amazed and troubled.

SECT. V.
THus for the discoveries of faith in weakness: Now follow the demonstrations
of the truth in faith though weak.

The truth of faith has a great latitude, it is not confined to such an
height, to such a point of eminency, as some conceive: Look as heat has
several degrees, and as health has many species, and as life has many steps
within which the true nature of them may be seated, so is it with faith, the
true nature of it may be in a great measure, and yet in a lesser measure, and
though weak faith be not strong, yet it is faith: weakness is not like death,
which is opposed to life, but like infirmity, which is opposed to strength.
Strong faith is weak faith more perfected, and weak faith is strong faith in
disposition, in tendancy; it is within the compass. Negation is one thing,
imperfection is another thing; no faith is quite opposite to faith, but weak
faith if it be opposed to strength, yet it is not opposed to truth.

Now the truth of weak faith may appear in these 5. Demonstrations of the
truth of weak faith.
things.

First, though weak faith be not sure that Christ is its Savior yet weak faith
will honor Christ as its Lord: though it cannot see Christ, bestowing it self
on the soul, yet it will make the soul to resign up it self to Christ: Though
it cannot find comfort, yet it will oppose sin: though it cannot comprehend
Christ, yet it would not willingly offend Christ. Faith in strength can put out
it self in persuasion, I know that my redeemer lives, Job 19. Yet faith in
weakness, (as was that of Thomas) can put forth it self in subjection, My
Lord, and My God; I will have no Lord but Christ, Io. 20.

The vital act of faith is not reflexive but direct. It is not this Christ is
mine, but this I receive, and embrace Christ, now the weak faith cannot setle
its title to Christ, so as strong faith can do, yet it can vindicate the title
that Christ has to the soul, though it cannot see its own propriety in Christ,
yet it can maintain Christ's propriety to it, it does acknowledge, it does
yield unto no Law, or power, or right, over the soul but Christ's: it looks on
sin as an enemy, though it cannot see Christ as a friend.

2. What weak faith does want in the breadth of persuasion, that it makes up in
the depth of humility. A weak believer, though he cannot see himself great in
Gods eyes, yet he does appear low in his own eyes: it will not quarrel with
God, because he opens himself no more, but abaseth itself, because it is most
unworthy of the least of truth and goodness.

There be two things which all true faith will work.

One is to value Christ.

Another is to under value our selves; It can put glory on Christ, and take
shame to it self; He is the sweetest Savior, and I am the greatest sinner.

Faith usually acts in one of these, either in receiving or in abasing: For
either it makes the soul to see its happiness in Christ, which breeds
joyfulnesse, or to see its own unworthy vileness, because of sin, and so it
causes lowliness of spirit. Strong faith (like John) can be in Christ's bosom
but weak faith, (like Peter) will fall down at Christ's feet; strong faith may
be seen by the eye, and weak faith by the knee, that stands up and blessed God
for Christ, this falls down and begs of God for Christ. And this, not for my
sake O Lord, (for to me belongs nothing but shame and confusion,) but for thy
goodness sake, O Lord, (for to thee belong mercies and forgivenesses.)

3. Weak faith, though it has but tender confidences of its interest in
Christ, yet it has strong dislikes, and combats with that unbelief which
hinders his persuasion. Though weak faith cannot see Christ as its ease, etc.
yet it can feel unbelief as its burden and trouble.

There are two things (if I mistake not) which accompany all true faith, and
the weakest.

One is to magnify the state in Christ.

Another is to dislike the state out of Christ: O happy is that man, who can
comprehend, as he is comprehended, says weak faith, and what shall I do with
this unbelieving heart, this doubting, suspecting, fearful heart? shall I
always question, shall I always find these disputings, carnal reasonings,
reelings, staggerings? Lord help this unbelief, Lord persuade this heart of
mine, cause it to trust in thy salvation in Christ, say unto my soul, that thou
art my salvation.

The weak believer has many prayers in his heart, many tears in his eyes, and
many conflicts in his mind; he believes and doubts, he prays and doubts, he
mornes and doubts, yet though he doubts he will believe, and though he doubts
he will pray, and because he still doubts he will therefore still morn. He
looks often toward Christ, O that I could believe, he looks often on his own
heart, why will thou not yet believe, he looks up to God; O make me to believe,
sometimes he spends his time in prayer for more faith, sometimes in dispute with
his weak faith, one maine difference 'twixt him and the strong believer is
this, that the strong believer has got into Christ's arms; and this weak
believer is fighting for the way unto him.

Weakfaith, will not rest in weakness, if truth be in it. In a Active; another
is this, that it is Progressive, it will be doing, and it will be increasing.
So it is with all true faith, though weak: it is a drawing of the soul unto
Christ, yea it is a drawing of something more from Christ unto the soul; what
hinders it, that grieves it, and what it wants, after that it longs, and
craves. No grace is right which is idle, or labors not to exceed it self. Lord
help my unbelief, said that weak believer. O Luke 9.
Lord increase our faith, said they of little faith. The weak criple, he would
be lying at the Pool, and so will weak faith, it will be at the means of
strength: It loves to be doing about Christ, and to be where the strength of
Christ is revealed.

It is wise to observe the grounds of its fears and doubtings, and careful to
remove them. O how earnest is the weak believer to hear what God will speak
unto him, and if at any time the soul can get by the assistance of the Word, to
close with mercy and Christ, it is revived with joy of tears, and falls down
with thanks, Lord what is thy servant!

Nay, if it has apprehended but a hint, but a crevise, if it be enabled but a
little to step above its dark doubtings, to apprehend but a darting beam, any
persuasion that all is well or will be so, it is refreshed, and says that God
is good. I observe that the weak child will be much after the breasts, and the
weak man will handle his staff much, and the weak believer will be much at the
places and ordinances, and ways of more strength.

It is with faith, as it is with a blade of corn, at the first the ear of
grain is quite skinned over, yet it breaks open aside and at length is the
very top of the stalk. So faith at first is swathed over with doubtings, (none
but a tender and merciful God can see that little mustard seed) but at length,
it opens to more adherence on God and Christ, and promises, and in time it can
triumph against its former fears and suspicions. Or it is like a weak man
recovering: if he can but stand, its well, then if he can set on in a few paces
with his staff, then if his motion can be single, then if longer, then if
stronger; so is it with faith, if it can make the soul to look upon Christ,
then if it could look on him as mine, then if so without fear, then if so with
joy, then if so with strength, and steadfastness.

It will not rest in weakness, though it begins in weakness, but like the weak
Ivy which is winding up the tree, so will faith be winding up the soul higher
and higher into Christ by the help of his Spirit, of his Promises, of his Word,
and of his Sacraments.

5. Weak faith will yet venture the soul upon Christ, though it cannot clear
its title, nor answer its fears, nor (to its own sense) rely on Christ; yet if
the soul be put and determined to one of these, either to renounce all hope in
Christ, and so to be lost, or to put it self upon Christ, though it has no
inward encouragement from it self: I say at such a time, even weak faith will
discover it self, it will not renounce its hidden interest in Christ, but will
roll the soul on him; If I perish, I perish, yet I will cleave to Christ, yet
I will cast my soul on him and on his blood, and righteousness.

SECT. VI.
THe third general which we observed to the former scruple 6. The concordance
of all faith in four things.
was the concordance of all faith which is true (whether strong or weak) in
fundamental comforts.

First, every believer has a sure interest in Christ; It is with the members
of Christ, as with the members of the body, though they are not all of equal
strength, in a comparison one with the other, yet they are of equal
conjunction in a relation of all of them to the head.

So one believer exceeds another in a special measure of faith, yet every
believer is a member firmly and surly knit to Christ, the head of all
believers. Christ is not the Savior and Lord only of the strong, but also of
the weak, not only the old man, nor only the young man, but also the children,
the little children, (to whom Saint John wrote) they are all in Christ: 1 John
2.

There is a wide difference 'twixt reflexive certainty, and 'twixt real
certainty of interest, strong faith has the pre-eminence of weak faith, in
respect of a reflexive and sensible certainty, but not in respect of a real
certainty, this is univocal, the union 'twixt Christ and the soul, does not
depend upon the strength, but upon the truth of faith; If my will consents unto
Christ, if my heart accepts of him upon his own terms, if I take his whole
person and his whole condition, the match is truly made 'twixt Christ and me,
he is surely mine, and I am surely his. Although I am not in an assured
condition, yet I am in a sure union, Christ does certainly own that soul, which
by faith does truly embrace him: All mine are thine, and thine are mine, says
Christ, Joh. 17. 10. He speaks of the Disciples, and of all the Elect, who were
the fathers in respect of a gracious election, and gift, and Christ's in respect
of a tender affection and union. So that here is one concordance of all faith
in respect of fundamental comfort, viz. that the objective unity is one and
common, the weak and the strong eye meet in the same colors as the object, and
weak and strong faith, are two different hands, yet both of them upon one and
the same Christ.

Secondly, every believer has a beneficial interest in Christ: (that i^) weak
faith has an interest in the benefits of Christ, as well as the strong faith.

I will instance in some special and choice benefits.

First, Redemption from the Malediction of the Law, Christ took that off, He
was made a curse for all that believe on him: He did not stand in the room only
of eminent, but of every believer, and endured the wrath to the utmost for
every one who does believe on him.

Thou art freed from a cursed estate by the least faith; every degree of true
faith makes the condition to be a state of life, and passes us from death and
condemnation. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8. 1.

Secondly, Remission of sins, what Christ said to that impotent person, Son
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, that is true of every believer,
Christ has purchased a pardon for him, Acts 13. 38. Be it known unto you, men
and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins. Ver. 39. And by him all that believe are justified, etc.

If any believer went without his discharge, then probable it is that the
weakest should be he, but the Scripture speaking of the weakest faith, makes it
an hand holding a pardon in it. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his names sake; though children, though
little children, yet pardoned children, and mark it, the cause of that pardon
was common to them with the stronger men (viz. for his Names sake) a man is not
pardoned for the strength of his faith, nor debarred of it for the weakness of
his faith, but both the one and the other enjoys it for his Names sake (that is)
for Christ's sake.

Nay, observe it, that though weak and strong faith may vary much in the manner
and degree of the apprehension, or persuasion, or reading of the pardon, yet
they both agree in the strength, and in the latitude of pardon. The weak
believer has as an effectual, and as ample, and full remission as the
strongest believer; for Christ did not become an unequal surety, or an uneven
Sacrifice for sin; my meaning is this, that he did not only undertake the
debts of some believers, but of every one; nor did he undertake some debts only
of some believers, but all the debts of all believers. Therefore it is said,
Esaias 53. 6 The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all; and Jer. 32. 8. I
will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, which words extend
to all believers, because to all that are covenanted.

Thirdly, Justification by imputed righteousness. There is a common equal
interest in this by all believers: It is but one garment for every believer, it
is an entire thing. One believer has not one righteousness to justify him,
and another believer another, but all are justified by the same righteousness
of Christ; neither is the imputation of this righteousness partial, or
unequal, but alike to all that believe. Romans 3. 21. The righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets.
Ver. 22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto
all, and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference. Therefore God
is said (in v. 26) the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, if any man
does truly believe in Christ, God justifies that man, and Christ is made
righteousness unto him, (that is) the Lord will reckon unto him the
righteousness of Christ, he will in Christ pronounce him just and acquit him.

The most elevated believer cannot be presented in a judicial way before Gods
justice safely, in the strength of his own perfections, and therefore has no
reason to glory or boast, and the most weak believer is not excluded, but
adorned with the robe of Christ's complete righteousness, notwithstanding his
own manifold imperfections, and therefore has no reason to be discouraged or
dismayed, for as much as Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.

Fourthly, the inheritance of glory, even those weak Disciples rebuked for
their fears and doubtings, were commanded by Christ to rejoice; because their
names were written in the book of life.

If we be Believers, we are sons, and if sons, then heirs; heirs of life,
and co-heires with Christ in glory, Romans 8. 16, 17. Gal. 4. 26. Ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Verse. 29. And if ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. John 3. 16. Whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, for eternal life
is founded in Christ, God has put all life in him, from him we draw our life
of grace, and by him we possess our life of glory. 1 John 5. 11. God has
given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. Verse 12. He that
has the Son has life.

Obj. Yea, but who are they who have the Son?

Sol. See ver 13. These things I have written unto you, that believe on the
Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, as if he
should say, every believer is he who has the Son, and by him that eternal
life.

3. Every believer has vertual interest in Christ (that is) he shall partake
of the virtues, and graces, and strength of Christ.

The virtues of Christ are many; I will touch at some, viz.

1. A crucifying virtue which subdues the love and dominion of sin, now every
believer shares in this, though one believer be more troubled with the insolent
motions of sin, then another, yet no believer shall lie under the dominion of
sin, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not
under the Law, but under grace. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Every believer is gathered
under the rod and Scepter of Christ, and is made alive to Christ, and dead to
sin, yea, and Christ will more and more mortify his corrupt heart; He will
be made death to the strongest lust in the weakest believer.

2. An assisting virtue, which aides the soul in matter of duty and service;
now Christ will not only guide the strong, but also lead the weak believer: He
will send forth his enabling strength for all the services which he requires, 2
Cor. 12. 9. He said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength
is made perfect in weakness; most gladly therefore will I glory in mine
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. As if he should say,
there was weakness and infirmity on Paul's part. but there was strength and
power on Christ's part, and this strength would Christ make to appear in Paul's
weakness (that is) though Paul saw and felt his own strength insufficient, yet
he should find Christ sufficient, sufficiently inabling him in that particular.
Romans 8. 26. Likewise, the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Mark that place,
though we are very infirm, very weak to any holy duty, to prayer and the rest,
yet Christ will help, he will come in with his Spirit which shall enable us
with supplications, so that even very weak believers may take comfort in this,
that Christ will strengthen and aid them by his Spirit in duties as well as
the strongest.

The greatest believer cannot perform service by his own strength, and the
weakest shall be enabled by Christ's.

There be three things which Christ will communicate to every believer, even to
the weakest, about duty.

One is, an affection and heart.

Another is, strength and assistance.

The last is, pardon and acceptance; what is amiss, and wanting, shall be
pardoned, and what is imperfectly, and weakly good, shall yet through his
intercession be accepted.

His Father (for his merits) will not despise the day of small things.

3. Persevering virtue, by which the soul comes at length to cast Anchor and to
be safely landed. Now the strong faith has (in a sort) heaven already, yet
weak faith shall also make a saving voyage: as it was with them in Paul's
shipwreck, some of them could swim, and quickly, and better get to shore,
others were more unskilful, and therefore laid hold and made use of broken
boards, yet the text says, That they all came safe to land: That I say of
strong and weak faith, though the strong believer can better cut through the
manifold oppositions of the world, though he can rise more easily above the
waves of Satan's temptations then the weak believer, yet both of them shall hold
out to the end, and meet at heaven. You see several bottoms at sea, one makes
more speed then another, and perhaps is better ordered; but those duller and
slower bottoms follow after, and at length they come to the same Haven, and so
cast Anchor together. So, etc.

That Christ, who is the Author, will also be the finisher of all true faith,
and though faith may be very weak, yet the weakest faith is invincible: The
gates (no not) of hell (and they import the strongest opposition) shall not
prevail against it. It is confessed, that Satan may much assault and batter,
and the world may oppose and totter, and sin may weaken, interrupt and
stagger even the foundations of the truest faith; but to be oppressed is one
thing, and to be suppressed is another thing; to be wounded is one thing, to be
killed is another; For faith to fall in its strength is one thing, for faith to
fail in its being, is another; Simon, Simon (said Christ to Peter) Satan has
desired to winnow thee as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail not: O malicious devil, who has strong temptations to weaken faith! O
gracious Savior, who has stronger intercessions to preserve faith! even the
weakest faith is wrought by a divine band, and is kept by an almighty guard;
See 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation;
Answering the prayer of Christ, John 17. 11. Holy Father keep them through thy
own Name, those whom thou have given me. Verse 20. Neither pray I for these
only, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word.
Whosoever believes on me shall not perish, said Christ.

Again, this is a sweet comfort, that the weak believer shall hold out as well
as the strong, and that Christ is the Guardian of both; verily, that must needs
be good which God gives, and that must needs be sure which Christ keeps; the
weakest believer is held by a strong hand, and is secured by an inseparable
arm.

4. Every believer is in the same fundamental league with God, he is reconciled
unto him, and has a true (nay for ought I yet understand) an equal interest in
his special love and tenderness: It is freely confessed, that the strong
believer has more Love.
sensible discoveries of the streams, yet the weak believer is as deep in the
fountain. They say in Logic. that substantial relations do not admit of
degrees of more and less, as the Father is an equal Father to every child, his
paternity, and their filiation are indivisible things; So is it I am sure in
this business, God is one and the same Father to all that believe; his radical
love is alike, his fundamental gifts (which testify that love) are all alike
one and the same Word, one and the same Christ, one and the same Sacraments,
one and the same Spirit. And for his tenderness, why? If any child finds the
gentle voice and easy Tenderness.
hand, it is the weak child; If any believer finds soft and encouraging
expressions from God, it is the weak believer. God would have them comforted,
yea he has prepared the breasts of consolation for such sucklings; yea, and the
knees to dandle Isa. 66. 11, 12, 13. Isa. 40. 11.
them; yea, the hands to lead them; yea, the arms to carry them; And Christ
will not quench the smoking flax, nor bruise the broken reed. How often does
God call upon the weak ones, to look up and behold their King, and their
salvation, and to trust upon him, and not to fear, nor to be dismayed; nay, for
his sake does he often double and treble the promise; yea, he confirms the
promise, I will surely have mercy on him; yea, he takes his oath, he swears by
himself, that he will not lie unto them, nor fail them; yea, he ratifies and
seals his word with blood and truth.

O how does God condescend in his nature, in his Word, in his ways, in his
dealings, in his forbearances toward weak believers? how has he prevented and
answered all objections to their hands? all which shows his singular love and
tenderness unto them.

SECT. VII.
NOw I proceed to the fourth and last discovery, viz.

The inequality of strong and weak faith in respect of circumstantial comforts
and some other consequences; thus they differ exceedingly, though both be in a
sure and saving condition.

1. The weak believer falls short of that joy which the strong believer
possesses.

Joy may be considered three ways, either in its cause, which Joy three ways
considered.
is the love of God and the blood of Christ; or in its title and claim, which
belongs to faith receiving Christ; or in its actual presence and feeling, which
depends upon a believing apprehension and persuasion. Now, though the weakest
believer has cause of great joy, for as the Angel spoke to the shepherds, that
may be said to him, Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy,
for unto you is borne this day in the City of of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord, Luke 2. 9, 10.

And though he has a true title to the sweetest joy, for faith does unite him
to Christ, and Christ entitles him to joy, yet he has, not such an actual
presence of joy as the strong believer. Every faith is an hand, holding, but
the strong faith is the mouth, tasting that sweet wine. He has not such full
apprehensions of his own state, he does not yet so clearly conceive of that
great love and goodness which God has put in Christ for him; He has not such
an evident view of his own particular interests in God or Christ, but is
infinitely tossed with doubtings and suspicions, whether he may yet take Christ
as his, whether he may own the promises of mercy, and appropriate the great
loving kindness of a Father. Now ignorance is apt to breed suspicions, and
doubts are apt to raise fears, both of which keeps off or under, actual joy: No
man can well joy in a concealed good, or joy much in a questioned title: All
the good which God has firmly and largely made over unto me in his Son; it
does not affect my heart with gladness and rejoicing, whiles I am in dispute
with it, and am rather apt to conclude, it is not for me, then that it is my
portion. The strong believer therefore has this advantage of the weak, he is
more acquainted in particular about his good, and so his heart rejoices with
joy unspeakable and glorious, his soul does rejoice in God his Savior, but the
weak believer cannot yet see his pardon, yea often suspects whether it shall be
drawn or no: one is in a fair day, the other in a wet; It is day to both.

The matter is clear to the strong believer, and therefore his heart goes away
rejoicing, the matter is doubtful to the weak believer, and therefore his soul
goes away weeping. One of them has a good Christ, and a glad heart too, the
other has a good Christ, but yet a very heavy heart: His possession is
doubtful, and therefore his heart is sorrowful.

2. The weak believer has not that sweet peace that the strong believer has:
where faith is weak there the conscience is not thoroughly settled.

Peace in the conscience is, as it were, the harmonious tuning of Peace, wh^t.
the soul, it is a heavenly tranquillity, a serenity, a gracious quieting and
pacifying of the spirit of man, springing from a persuasion of Gods love in
Christ: Now, the weak faith has strong scruples, it has many troubles, it is
not sure that all is right, and all is clear. It may be, that God is my God,
and it may be he is not; it may be Christ is mine, and perhaps not; it may be
my sins are pardoned, and it may be they are not; it may be that God is my
friend, and reconciled, and it may be he is not. You know that the peace of a
Christian must be seen ratified in a double Court, or else the soul will not be
quiet; One is in the Court of heaven, another is in the Court of conscience;
Nay, and the peace in this lower Court is not clear til it comes from the
higher Court; conscience cannot be quiet till God be quiet, it cannot give
testimony and discharge, until God has begun: If God has not yet dismissed
the soul, if he holds up the case of a sinful soul without release, conscience
cannot acquit and free that soul: But weak faith sees its suit and trial yet
depending in the high Court of heaven; a weak believer does not yet see or know
that God will assuredly pardon him, that God is reconciled to him, that God
will indeed do good unto him, here are his doubts and fears, and therefore here
are his troubles and perplexities.

The strong believer is like David in Psalm. 4. 8. I will both lay me down, and
sleep, for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

The weak believer is like David in Psalm. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my
soul, and why art thou thus disquietted within me.

The one is like the Mother which has the child in her arms, or at her
breasts, with many smiling delights and satieties; the other is like the mother
now in labor, and travail with the child which has many bitter throws and
panges one succeeding the other: The one is like a man standing upon a rock,
where his foot stands unmoved and steady; but the other is like a man in a safe
ship, upon unquiet waters, tossed up and down: Weak faith is in a safe ship,
(which is Christ) but tossed upon variety of waves (which are our doubtings;)
sometimes faith and hope, anon faith and fear; sometimes I may have
confidence, anon I am cast out of his sight; now I will look up to God as mine
in Christ, by and by, surely this is presumption, God will not accept of me.

Such a storm, and such a calm is there in the weak believer, such an
unsettled settling: The day of his small comforts does easily sit, and the night
of many troubles abide long upon him. You shall seldom see a weak believer
without a tear at his eye, a sigh in his breast, and a fear in his heart, yet
I fear all is not sure, O that God would once assure me that he is my God! I
know not what to do, or what to say, or what to think, I cannot see the hand
writing yet blotted out, nor the heavens opening, and do you think there is any
hope for me? Thus the weak believer. But strong faith can answer many
arguments, and uphold its evidence against many temptations: It can more easily
place and stay the soul upon its rest, it has seen and tasted more then weak
faith, it knows whom it has trusted, and that he will be its God and guide for
ever; that he has pardoned transgressions, and will remember iniquity no more;
where faith is great, there the war is strong with sin, and the love high to
God, and the peace more large and settled in the conscience.

The weak believer has not that sweetness in communion with God as the strong
believer has. Take him in the way of Ordinances, want of them, or hypocrisy
under them, upon himself, either I am not thus as God requires, or if so, yet
not in truth.

When the Box of ointment is opened, I mean the blood of Christ, and the tender
of rich mercy, and spacious promises of God, yet the savor of them is mixed to
his soul, he does more dispute his right, then can close with their goodness;
yea, but how know I that I am intended? and answers, I am not ripe for such
consolations, my wounds, have not bled sufficiently, I am not fitted, I doubt I
should presume, if I should apply.

Again, in matter of duty, here he has not a sweet communion For duties.
with God neither. Sometimes so over-borne, that he thinks it in vain for him
to pray or look up, and therefore is ready (in a fit of temptation) to lay
aside the work, yet he cannot but pray, but then the knee is bended with such
suspicions and conclusions, perhaps this shall be but to harden me more, and
God will not hear me; or if the soul can gather any degrees of better
confidence, that it shall find some grace, and acceptance, then instantly it
questions all this, and suspects even the very grants, and answers, as well as
its own heart and petitions; conjecturing them to be rather, the deluding
fancies of a deceitful heart, wishing well to it self, then the sincere
resolutions and satisfactions of a good and gracious God, who hears prayer.

And thus is the weak believer (for a long time) kept in bitterness, he cannot
taste the goodness of God, which he desires to embrace, nor relish those
promises which he desires to apply; but in all communions with God, either
dis-heartens his way before, or displaceth his comforts afterward, either he
is not fit to pray or else not fit to enjoy, either he cannot desire what is
good, or else still he is questioning what is true. So that oft-times, even the
ways of his own comfort, are uncomfortable to him, and the very method of
peace, is his usual trouble and vexation.

The reasons of all which may be,

Not only the nature of unbelief, which is an uncomforting ingredient, and
disquieting impedient to the soul in all holy communion; But also the
properties of this unbelief, causing the soul to look more on it self then God,
and raising more fears for present want, then hopes for assured and promised
helps, besides the limittings of God to present satisfaction, or else
concluding, no interest in his favor and gracious intentions; besides,
forgetting usually the mediation and intercession of Christ, in whom alone the
soul and petitions are worthy.

4. The weak believer has not that succesfulnesse in communion with God as the
strong believer has.

For all doubtings do prejudice our suits: There is not a more sure and
compendious way to nonsuit our suits, then by delivering them out of an
unbelieving heart: No faith may be sure of denial, and he who delivers up his
requests to God with an hand, and an hand, with an hand of faith, and a hand of
doubting; either he has a longer or else a shorteranswer. According to thy
faith be it unto thee, said Christ; strong faith brings God much glory, and
does fetch in much good to the soul, but the lesser faith, the lesser good; as
according to the largeness of the vessel or strength of the hand, etc. The
higher the Sun is, the more light is in the Horizon, so the greater the faith
is in our requests, the sooner and the larger shall be our promised answers.
You remember what Elisha said unto Joash King of Israel, take the arrows and
he took them, and he said, smite upon the ground, and he smote thrice, and
stayed. And the man of God was wrath with him, and said, thou should have
smitten five or six times, then had 1 King. 13. 18, 19.
thou smitten Syria till thou had consumed it, whereas now thou shall smite
Syria but thrice. Prayer is the arrow of the soul, it is the swift messenger
sent up to heaven, and faith is the hand which dispatcheth it, now according to
the strength of faith is the greatness of prayer in success. Thou did pray
(though) with much weakness of faith, and have got a little comfort, why did
thou not smite the ground six times? why did thou not double thy strength in
believing thou should then have had comfort? like a river, whereas now thou
have only the smaller drops. Thou have prayed, (though) with much weakness of
faith, and have got a little power over thy sinful and rebellious heart, why
did not thou smite the ground six times? why did thou not abound in more
believing? for then thou should have had a fuller victory over thy corrupt
lusts and inclinations. Herein has strong faith the preeminence of weak that
the one has not that full speed at heaven as the other; not that God will not
answer the faith that is weak, but that its answers are not so full, because it
is accompanied with doubtings. This we find experimentally, that our helps
(much of them) yet stick behind in heaven, and our corruptions (much of them)
yet insult below in our hearts, not that we do not hate them, not that we do
not pray against them, but because our faith is new or weak, we rather think
that God will not help, then that he will indeed answer or do us good.

5. The weak believer is more under the power of the creature then the strong.
My meaning is this, that his heart is more apt to sink, and fail, and perplex,
and disquiet him in the changes of outward things; a cross cannot come but he
startles, and if the affliction be close, he can hardly hold up: if he has not
some friends to smooth and cherish him, some calm estate to maintain and
uphold him: If the tide comes not in, if the wind does not blow, if the
fig tree does not blossom, if God puts him upon an unusual way, if he touches
him in his Name, ease, advantage, any near outward support, if the cross be
long* now I am cast off, I shall perish, what shall I eat, what shall I drink,
what shall I put on? we and ours are undone, there is none cares for my body, as
David spoke for his soul. The heart gathers into many agonies, many
prognostications, many challenges of God, many impatient vexations, perhaps
murmurings, repinings, and discontents, and distempers; yea, and has sometimes
vile and inglorious thoughts of the fruitlesseness of serving God, etc. I think
there is scarce any one of these, which the weak believer does not sensibly
feel in the times of his straits and exigences, (which may exceedingly humble
and abase his soul therefore:) But the strong believer is a better Seaman, his
soul is more quiet in the absence, because more loosened by faith in the
presence of the creature. In a fair day God was much better; though others
break with joy in the fruition of wine and oil; yet Lord, says David, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me. As if he should say; I prize and
joy in that more then in any thing else.

In a Fast day God is enough, Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not
want. Verse 4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will
fear none evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.
Verse 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
So Psalm. 93. 3. The floods have lifted up O Lord, the floods have lifted up
their voice, the floods lift up their waves. Psalm. 93. 4. The Lord on high is
mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the mighty waves of the Sea.
So Psalm 118. 6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto
me. Ver. 10. A^l Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord will I
destroy them. Ver. 11. They compassed me about, yea they compassed me about,
but, etc. Ver. 12. They compassed me about like Bees they are quenched as the
fire of thorns, for in the Name of the Lord, etc. So Psalm. 48. 14. This God is
our God for ever and e-ever, he will be our guide even unto death.

(Sin is a greater trouble, and the world is a greater burden to the weak, then
to the strong believer.)

6. The weak believer cannot bring God so much glory as the strong believer.

God has Glory from us many ways. Glory to God three ways.


By acquitting his fidelity, and truth, and power, and other attributes, Romans
4. 20.

By a bearing, and fruitful heart and life, John 15. 8.

By thankful praises and acknowledgements, Psalm. 50. 23.

Now the weak believer he does not acquit God so in his Attributes; It is often
with him, Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be gracious, or will he be
favorable no more? or if thou will thou can do this for me: It does not so
clearly justify God in the greatness of his power, in the readiness of his
mercy, in the immutability of his truth.

He is not so fruitful: for where the root is weak, there the branches are not
so strong, or full; the fruitfulness of the heart consists in the rich
increase of all graces, and in the enlarged heavenlinesse of the affections,
and the fruitfulness of the life depends upon the inward enriching of the
heart, as the streams on the Spring, or the beams on the Sun, and the
fruitfulness of both depends upon the richness of faith.

Though the habits of grace depends immediately on Gods Spirit, and not on
faith, yet the measures of grace depend (instrumentally) very much on faith, it
being the Conduit pipe, that which draws grace for grace from Christ. A weak
believer cannot have such a strength of affection, nor vigor of actions as the
strong.

He is not so thankful; you shall for ever find this to be true, that what is
a weakening to faith, that is a lessening to thanks. No man's tongue is more in
praise then he whose heart is filled with persuasion: God has but cold thanks
from him, who is yet disputing and questioning his receipts; where the mercy is
fully cleared, there the heart is exceedingly enlarged: But till the soul sees
it self indeed a debtor, it will prove but an ill and slow play master; How can
I fully thank God, that he has expressed that Mirandum of love, to give Christ
to me, when yet I do in my soul suspect and question whether this be so or no?

How can I fully bless and praise God for his rich mercy in the pardon of my
sins, whiles my soul does yet suspect that the book is uncrossed, and the
controversy of guilt is not yet taken up 'twixt God and me? But where faith is
strong, there praise is great; when the Moon is fullest of light, then the
tides are higher in their returns; so the more clear apprehensions of Gods
love to us in Christ even raises affections to a greater flow of thankful
retributions. Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within
me bless his holy Name. Ver. 2. Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all
his benefits; See how he charge and rechargeth his soul to praise; but why?
Ver. 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities. Ver. 4. Who crowns thee with
loving kindness and mercies.

7. The weak Believer will be more puzzled to die then the strong believer. It
is with the strong believer as with Simeon, who held Christ in his arms, Now
(said he) let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation: He may easily desire death to let him out of a miserable world, who
has assuredly got, and has Christ, the Author of a better life. Or as with
Paul, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better, 2
Cor. 5. 1. We know if our earthly house, etc. we have a building of God. For
the strong believer knows, that Christ is to him in life and death advantage;
By him we shall go to the God of all mercies, and to the Father of all
consolations. He shall go to that mansion which his Savior has provided, and
there have a glorious union with God, and society with Saints for ever. But the
weak believer will perhaps stagger, and his heart will divide it self; I would
not yet die, if I must, what shall I do? Christ is he whom I have loved and
served, but I am not sure that he is mine; Heavenly glory is the wages for our
service, but I am not sure that I shall go into it, matters are yet doubtful,
and my heart is yet fearful, I know not whether such sins are yet taken off,
and how will God look upon me if I die, of whose loving favor I have not been
assured, whiles I have lived? I hope the best, and yet I see cause to fear;
death may do me good, yet I had rather live to clear accounts 'twixt God and my
soul, that so then I might give up, etc.

8. The weak believer has not such cheerful expectations, nor quiet
submissions as the strong believer.

The strong believer is at it as the Church in Micah, My God will hear me, and
if he denies a particular good, yet he can sit down and sing; when he is going
to prayer he chears up his heart with a confidence on God, and when he finds
God determining and revealing his will, there he blesses God, and follows his
calling. But the weak believer is apt to forestal a mercy, he cannot see a
plain way for his grant, nor an easily quiet heart after his denial.

9. The efficacy of temptations does more entangle the weak believer then the
strong, like the weaker vessel at sea amidst the greater waves; Satan does
cosen his soul with ease, and ever and anon disrobes him of his comforts like
a lewd subtle enemy, he forces the weak believer often to try and clear his
title, and increases mistakes in all passages 'twixt God and the soul.

1. If he does cast himself on mercy, then it is presumption; If he holds off,
then it is infidelity and rejecting of Christ.

2. If he doubts, then it is despair and a forsaking of God.

3. If he sins, then it is unpardonable, because since knowledge and mercy.

4. If he finds distractions in duty, then this is hypocrisy in the heart.

5. If he meets with hellish suggestions (of which Satan is only the Author) O
then, who could be in Christ and have such abominable thoughts!

6. If the Ordinances do not presently comfort, O then, they are sealed up, and
there is no faith, else the Word would profit.

7. If every corruption be not subdued in every degree and motion and act, O
then, virtue is not gone from Christ, the heart is still naught, and the faith
unsound.

8. If not the same constant tenor of smart affections, why then, there was
never any true love of God, no reverence of him now, nor fear, nor duties, but
the soul is dead, utterly hardened, and God has no pleasure in it.

9. If God does answer the soul, yea, but that is but an imagination. If he
does not answer, why? then it is clear that God neither does, nor will ever
regard you.

10. If I do not go to the Sacrament, why? then thou slightest Christ, and his
blood: If I go and come away with tears, O then thou wast unbeleeving, or else
thou had been sent away with joy and increase.

11. If I do not put on for grace, then thou art wicked: If I do put on for
grace, then thou art so wicked that God will not bestow it on thee. Thus does
Satan involve, and distress, and set the soul of a weak Believer (like a man
at chesse) forward and backward; he makes him to suspect every mercy; and every
grace, and every affection, and every duty, and every promise, and every
Ordinance; so violently does he toss, though he cannot totally sink the heart
of a weak believer.

SECT. VIII. Motives to strive to greaten thy faith.
1. THis is a sign of truth. True grace is rising, dead things do moulder, and
artificial things remain the same, but the living child is growing to a full
stature. Phil. 3. Not as though we had already attained the grain of
mustard seed grows, and the smoking flax will flame. Presumption has all its
perfections at first.

2. This is a right answer of great means. To whom much is given, of them much
is required. Pharaohs lean kine are called ill-favored, because in a great
and large pasture. All is not right when the breasts are full, and the child is
still weak. The Gospel should be revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.

3. The greater faith is, the greater perfection: every degree of farther grace
is like a star of greater magnitude, which differ in glory from another, an
addition of faith to faith is an adding to the treasury, an enriching of the
soul, a farther clarifying of it. The less of grace, the more of corruption,
and the more of corruption the more of imperfection.

4. The greater faith, the greater comfort; the Mind will have fewer doubts,
Will has fewer fears, Conscience more settledness, the soul more sights of
God, and tastes of Christ. Experiences in life, and confidence in death.

5. The greater faith will be the greater help in times of desertion, in times
of trial, in times of temptation, in times of affliction, and greater help to
all active duty, and passive changes. Thou know not what may befall thee in
evil times, then thou would be able to commit, to submit, to conquer, to
suffer, to do much better, if thy faith were much greater.

CHAP. XVI. Exhortations to labor for saving faith.
IF to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ be the way to be saved; Then be
exhorted to labor for, and to get this saving faith. Let not the consolations
of God seem small unto thee, said he to Job; so say I, let not the salvation
of thy soul seem a light thing unto thee. If a man were wounded deeply, and
there were but one plaster which could cure, and this were presented unto him,
would he not put out his hand to receive and apply it, the love of life would
easily incline him.

Why? brethren, not a man of us but has a deadly wound by sin, and there is
no remedy for the sinful soul, but in the blood of Christ: O, if the love of
life will constrain us much, let the love of eternal life, the love of our
souls, of our salvation persuade us much more to get faith, which gets Christ,
who gets salvation for our souls.

There are diverse things which I will touch upon in the finishing 4. Branches.
of this Use, viz

1. The Motives to persuade and draw the heart to put out for this saving faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The impediments and hindrances, which stop the soul from believing on the
Lord Jesus Christ, which we must assay to answer and remove, as he did the body
of Asabel which stayed the people in their pursuit.

3. The means or adjuments, and furtherances to breed this believing quality in
the souf.

4. The resolutions or answerings of several doubtful grounds and arguments
which entangle the heart of a sensible sinner, and which he holds out as strong
pretenses, why he should not by faith close with Jesus Christ.

Now that great and holy God, who is the Author of faith, and finisher thereof,
whose word is the word of faith, and by whose Almighty working the hearts of
men are persuaded to believe, let him so direct me in speaking, and all of us
in hearing, that after all his gracious and manifold revelations and offers of
our Lord Jesus Christ, our unbeleeving hearts may be subdued, and true faith
may be wrought in us all to receive the Lord Jesus Christ to our eternal
salvation.

SECT. I. First the Motives.
I speak this day to an understanding and sensible people, to whom the
doctrinal parts of our natural misery, and of our purchased felicity are not
hidden mysteries, and therefore I trust that the succeeding arguments and
motives shall find little stop in your understandings, but shall the more
easily and powerfully pass down into your hearts and affections, to persuade
and excite you to lay out all your strength, and that speedily, to get this
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ: Thus then

First, sadly and seriously consider the state of Positive infidelity. A
twofold indelity.
Divines observe a twofold infidelity.

One is Negative, which is amongst the Heathens to whom Christ is not revealed,
and therefore they do not believe; it consists both in the absence of the
quality of faith, as also in the object and doctrine of faith. This Sun of
the Gospel has not risen unto them, and therefore they sit still in the
regions of darkness, and (for ought we know) in the valley of death.

Another is Positive, which is incident unto us Christians, to whom the arm of
the Lord is revealed; Christ is manifested as the body of the Sun by the beams
of light, so he by the brightness and evidence of the Gospel, and yet the
soul knows him not, receives him not, does not take him both as Lord and
Savior.

Of this there are several degrees, and all of them fearfully dangerous, to
speak the truth plainly, damnable.

1. A careless neglecting of the Lord of life, a not minding of that singular
mercy and goodness which God has treasured in Christ, and reveals and offers
to sinful men.

2. A slighting of him and his excellencies, which is a preferring, as it were,
Barrabas before him; a bestowing of our hearts, and studies, and labors, and
delights, and services, not on him, but either on our sins, or upon the
world, in the rivers of its pleasures, and in the mountains of its profits.

3. A refusing of his Articles and Covenants, which is a breaking off, and vile
disliking of those terms upon which he offers himself to be ours: we would
bring him to terms of competition with sin, or the creature; we would
abridge his holy and Lordly Scepter, like what we please, do what we list, have
him to be our Savior, and sin to be our Ruler, we would bestow our safeties
on him, and our services upon the world, we will not freely and fully consent
to all that he is, nor submit to all that he proposes, or may befall us with
him and for him: And so like the vain Merchant, we miss the pearl, because
we will not go to the price: We enjoy our selves still, and our sins, and our
world too, but we forsake our mercies for lying vanities, the soul is
Christlesse still, because thus sordidly unbeleeving.

1. But then know, of all estates in the world, none so fearful, so damnable,
as the unbeleeving estate. A man may lose every farthing of his inheritance,
and yet faith will bring him to heaven; he may lose every friend that he has,
and yet faith may bring him to heaven; He may lose every spirit in his members,
and every drop of blood in his body, and yet faith may bring him to heaven, He
may be as poor as Job, as distressed as David, as sick as Lazarus, as forsaken
as Paul, as derided as Christ, and yet faith may bring his soul to heaven. But
if a man had as much wisdom as Solomon, greatness as Nebuchadnezzar, strength
as Sampson, days as Methusalah, riches as Dives; were his dwellings like the
doors of the Sanctuary, and shaped into the most imaginable Paradise of all
exquisite and earthly delights. If yet his soul remained, and expired
unbelieving, if he had not faith, His unbelieving soul shall be cast out into
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Revel. 21. 8.

2. Nay again, A man may (perhaps) be guilty of many sins, and those very
foul, high, and crying, he has perhaps been an Idolater, or else an
Adulterer, or else a Blasphemer, or else a Persecutor, yea even of Christ, yet
upon his repentance and faith in Christ his soul shall be saved in the day of
the Lord. For no former sins shall prejudice the soul, which is now truly
turned from them, and has by faith yielded up it self to Christ: But the
unbeleeving person, has every sin and every guilt upon a severe and sure
account; he rejects his own satisfactions by refusing Christ: The Law of God
will sue him cut for every rebellion, and the justice of God will break out
upon him for all his iniquities and conscience, will give up all his guilts;
and because he is unbelieving, vengeance to the utmost shall cease on him, and
there is none to deliver him, nor he ever able to deliver himself. Unbelief it
binds all the sins upon the soul, and condemnation fast unto the sins: It
leaves the sinning soul naked to the eye of divine Justice, neither has the
soul any shelter which is out of Christ. O thou who wilt not kiss the Sun
now, who wilt not have Christ to rule thee, who despisest the tender love of
God, the precious blood of Christ, who wilt receive him for thy Priest, for thy
Prophet, for thy King; In the last day thou shall curse thy heart, and accurse
thy sins, and cry to the mountains, but they will not cover thee, to mercy,
but that will not pity thee; to Christ, but he will not regard thee; to
Justice, but it will not hear thee; thou would not believe, thou would not
receive Christ as Lord and Savior, but thou would have the love of sin, and
therefore thou shall have the portion of a sinner, thou shall not see life, but
the wrath of God shall abide upon thee.

Nay, if the father has given and offered unto thee his own Son, and thou
harden thy heart by unbelief, thou will not take him upon those terms, I tell
thee in the name of the Lord Jesus, that if thou will thus bid Christ farewell,
thou do bid God farewell, all mercy farewell, all salvation farewell, all
hope of it farewell: and thou bindest all thy sins upon thy soul, and all the
curse of the Law upon thy soul; Woe unto thee, its better thou had never been
borne? If thou have any sense as an ordinary creature, any reason as a man, any
understanding as a Christian, any true estimation of an immortal soul, any
conceptions of heaven, or hell; if salvation be any comfortable thing, if
damnation be any miserable thing; then, I beseech thee, I beseech thee, labor
for faith, get out of an unbelieving condition; thou per^shest if thou stay'st
there, thou art lost for ever, he that believes not shall be damned said the
Prince of salvation, O repent and believe, why will you die, O house of Israel?

Consider, thoroughly of the love of God in giving Christ, and of 2. Motive.
the love of Christ in giving himself, and perhaps this may persuade thee to
labor for faith.

The love of God in giving of Christ. See Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life, 17. For God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.

O this love of God to sinners: To give his Son, and not a servant, his own
Son, and not another, his only Son, and not a second, his only begotten Son,
and not an adopted child, and that not for any ill, but for good; he did not
send him as an enemy, but as a friend, not to deliver a poor and mean good, but
the best and highest good, to save us; not to deliver us from an ordinary
danger, but from condemnation; Yea, and he is sent, and given, he was not
sought by us, but given by him; Yea, and no way deserved, but freely given;
yea, and given to us, not friends, but enemies.

Thou have showed this day (said Saul to David 1 Samuel 24. 18) How that thou
have dealt well with me, forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine
hand, thou killedst me not. 19. For if a man find his enemy, will he let him
go well away? Thus here 'twixt man and man, but (says the Apostle) God
commends his love toward us in that whiles we were yet sinners Christ dyed
for us. Now, shall all this love be in vain? shall God think of a Christ and
we pass by him? shall he give a Savior, and we reject him? shall he bring
salvation to our doors, and we not accept of it? Why? you need my Son, and you
are damned, if you take him not, and I freely offer him unto you, that you may
be saved, and shall not we strive for faith to receive him?

The love of Christ: O, how wonderful was his love to us! fallen Angels, but
to fallen man, and such a love to fallen man as the like cannot be found. He
laid aside his glory to do us good, he humbled himself to raise us, he became
poor to enrich us; he fasted and prayed and endured the contradiction of
sinners, Reproaches, Crucifyings, Wrath, Bloody agonies, Conflicts with Satan,
sorrows in his soul, piercings in his body, and a bitter death to satisfy for
us, and to reconcile us, and shall we not accept of him? shall all this be in
vain? Why! do thou not hear Christ calling and crying out unto thee, never
were any sorrows like my sorrows, never was any love like to my love. O
unbelieving and sinning soul! look upon me, why do thou pass by? why do
thou hide thine eyes from me? why do thou stop thine ears at me? I am the
Savior of sinners, and there is none else besides me; thy own miseries might
cause thee to look up and embrace me; And let my love unto thee a little draw
thee, move thee, melt thee. Have thou not heard of the revilings and scoffs
which I sustained? my love to thy soul made me a willing patient; Have thou not
heard of the agonies of my soul, which made me to sweat drops of blood, and my
soul was exceeding heavy even to the death? yet my love to thy soul made me
willing to drink that cup: Have thou not heard of that desertion, and of that
wrath which made me to cry out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And
yet my love to thy soul made me to pass through it: Have thou not heard of
that accursed and despitfull death which I was put to; numbered with
transgressors, cast out of the City, nailed to the cross, pierced through the
heart? and yet my love to thy soul, made me to pour out my soul an offering
for thy sins. Why! and shall I veil my glory under the condition of a servant
in vain? shall I combat, and conquer Satan in vain? shall I bear the scorn
of men, the wrath of God, the terrors of death, the curse of the Law, in vain?
was not all this for thee, should not thou have sustained all this, if I had
not? and must thou not, if thou refusest him who has done it? and yet will thou prefer thy sins before me? yet will thou not accept of me? yet will thou
not get faith to receive me? have I sought thee freely, bought thee so dearly,
and thou neglect and refuse me so easily?

Thirdly, consider, thou have extreme need of a Lord Jesus 3. Motives.
Christ.

Excellency prevails much with an ingenious nature, and necessity with the
worst: when the Lepers saw that they must either venture their lives or die,
they would out into the Camp; when the Prodigal saw he must famish abroad, or
repair home, he would then back to his fathers house. Why Brethren! the
Captive does not more need a Redeemer, and the sick does not more need a
Physician, then the sinner does need a Christ and a Savior.

Were we in Adams created innocence, then we need not to look after a Savior,
but we are fallen, but we are broken, but we are sold under sin, but we are
transgressors from the womb, but we are by nature the children of disobedience
and wrath.

Had we any stock left in our hands to set up our broken souls again, had we
any strength to repair our loss, to recover our good, to purchase our own
peace and salvation, but we are dead in trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. we all fall
short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23. we are all without strength, Romans 5. 6.

Could any thing be a Plank to the Shipwreck, but Christ, or an hand to lay
hold on the rock, but faith then we needed not to give such diligence for faith
to believe; but there is no salvation in any other name, and there is no
quality but faith to get us into Christ.

It is not the confidence which thou may put upon the faith of another,
which will do it: as every man's soul is for his own body, so every man's faith
is for his own soul; the wise virgins had no more oil then would serve their
own Lamps; and no man's faith is more then enough for himself: Though Christ can
save many, yet faith saves him only who has it.

It is not the confidence of a naked decree which will do it, if God has
decreed to save me, I shall be saved; O no his decrees are his own secret
ways, and the way which he has opened to us, is to get faith and to believe
in his Son.

It is not an empty profession, nor the worthless access of all the creatures
that can ensure or save thy soul. Only Christ, none but Christ, thou art
wounded, and Christ is thy plaster; thou art dead, and Christ is thy life;
thou art sold, and Christ is thy ransom; thou art an enemy, and Christ is thy
peace. The debts are infinite, the curse great, the justice of God pure, thy
strength nothing, and nothing satisfies and delivers but Christ, and none has
Christ but the believer, why then will thou not labor for faith?

Fourthly, consider, Christ is every way fitted to thy need: 4. Motive.
Why! Brethren, gold will ransom a debtor to man, it will not ransom a sinner
from the Law, an offender against God. Why! look upon your need aright, and
then judge, who but Christ for a sinner.

There is guilt, much guilt lying upon thy soul, and who is the Priest to
suffer, to offer, to satisfy, to take away transgressions but Christ? None can
blot out the guilt of sin for us, but he who had not a spot of sin in himself.

There is filth, much filth defiling our natures, poisoning our actions, and
who is the Prophet to enlighten, to teach, to change, to cleanse from
sinfulness but Christ? None can teach us holiness, and obedience, but he who
was Holy undefiled separated from sinners and was obedient to the death.

There is dominion, much dominion of sin, prescribing a Law to our members,
sending out all insolent inclinations, holding us in a willing subjection to
every base lust; and who is the King to conquer the heart, to subdue
iniquities, to lead captivity captive, to spoil principalities and powers, to
bid the captive go free, to erect a thorn of righteousness and peace in the
soul but Christ? So that the wise love of God has prepared and fitted Christ
in all respects suitable to the exigencies, and straits of a sinful soul, and
has appointed faith to be that which shall put on this Christ upon the needy
soul; why then will we not labor for faith.

Fifthly, God has not only fitted a Savior for thee, but he 5. (...)
comes near unto thee with him, he deals mightily with thy soul ^o believe on
him.

Thou have the word of revelation (to this very day) wherein the mystery of thy
salvation is made known and clear unto th^e. Thou need not to say in thine
heart, Who shall ascend into heaven to bring Christ down from above, or who
shall descend into the deeps to bring up Christ again from the dead? But the
word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of
faith which we preach. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him him from the
dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 6. 7, 8 9.

Thou have the word of gracious proposition; God has offered Christ with all
his plentiful redemption, with his strong salvation unto thee: yea he has
assured thee by his Word of John 3.
truth (which cannot lie nor deceive) that if thou believe on him, thou shall
be saved by him.

Thou have the word of injunction which lays a bond of duty upon thee, This is
his Commandment, that we believe on the Name John 3. 23.
of his Son Jesus Christ.

Nay, thou have the word of penalty and correction. God has said that he will
judge thee for not believing, and that in the sharpest method of expression, He
that believes not shall be damned.

Nay thou have the word of obsecration and gentle entreaty, God stoops
infinitely below himself he does streine courtesy with thee, God does beseech
you by us, and we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.

Nay thou have the word of expostulation; why will you not believe? why will ye
die in your sins? why will ye not come to me that you may be saved? How often
would I have gathered thee? All the day long have I stretched forth my hands.

Nay, thy unbelief grieves the very heart of Christ, (he grieved at their
unbelief) ^he complains of that slownesse in thy heart to believe (O slow of
heart to believe, etc.) nay, and he sheds tears, because thou do not believe,
and receive him, When he came near the City, he wept over it, O Jerusalem!
thou that, etc. How often would I, etc?

Sixthly, consider how unreasonable, and unequal, and sottish 6. Motive.
a thing it is not to receive Christ, being thus revealed and offered.

1. There is none who have right to thy soul but God and Christ; our souls are
Gods workmanship, and Christ's purchase; Why then should we not give to God that
which belongs to God, and to Christ that which is his own; Ye are not your own,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. for ye are bought with a price. God put
forth his own power to make thy soul, and Christ shed his heart blood to redeem
thy soul, and yet will thou through infidelity withold it from him, and pass
it over into the possession of a stranger, an enemy?

2. Christ out-bids all Merchants for thy soul, he out-bids sin, and he
out-bids all the world, and he out-bids Satan. Can the Son of Jesse give you
vineyards, said Saul? can sin give thee that which Christ can? can the world?
let them now appear and declare their strength and treasury; Is there any one
of them that presents redemption unto thee? Is there any one of them that can
procure remission and pardoning mercy for thee? Is there any one of them which
can satisfy the wrath of God for thee? which can make thy peace, which can
present thee righteous before the judgment seat? which can settle eternal life
upon thee? All this can Christ do, none of this can they do.

3. Thou can not possibly be a loser by receiving or believing on the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Suppose it cost thee many tears, and many prayers, and many searchings, and
many waitings, yet Christ will recompense all these in a moment, one word, I am
thy salvation; It is I, be not afraid; I am thine, as thou art mine, thy sins
are forgiven thee, will be a day for all former nights.

Suppose that the world does cast thee off, as they cast him out of the
Synagogue who believed and professed Christ, yet Christ will come unto thee as
unto him. And as Elkanah said to Hanna, 1 Samuel 1. 8. Am not I better then ten
sons? or as the Prophet answered the King for the hundred talents, God will be
better unto thee, 2 Samuel 20. 9. So will Christ, he will supply all thy losses,
he will be better unto thee then houses and lands then father and mother, an
hundred fold better in this life, and a thousand fold better in the life to
come.

4. What just extremity of shame and blackness of confusion will befall thee,
if thou be so wickedly unreasonable to keep off thy soul from Christ. When thou
art cited before God and Christ, and the holy Angels and just men, And God
shall demand of thee, why? whom have thou served? upon whom have thou bestowed
thy soul? who was it that made thy soul? Thou Lord, who was it that purchased
and redeemed thy soul? Thou Christ, and who beseeched thee to bring back thy
soul; Thou by thy servants in thy Word? And what did they say unto thee, which
should have prevailed upon thee? They did assure me in thy Name, that if I
would come in, and accept of Christ, I should have favor, and pardon, and
eternal life; and what did keep back thy soul from accepting of this? O it was
such a lust that I loved, and it was the world which I preferred. And would
thou prefer earth before heaven, thy profit before thy soul? nay would thou
prefer a base sin before a merciful God, and a blessed Redeemer? Thy own
mouth does testify against thee; was not my mercy better then a sin? was not
my Son better then a sin? take him all ye children of darkness, sease on
him my wrath to the utmost, close him up in the lowest pit of hell, conscience
gnaw on him, and sting him for ever, fire and brimstone consume and torment him
eternally, he shall never have part in my mercy; he shall never have portion in
my Son; He shall never see my face nor heaven, who preferred his sin, his
delights, his profits, before my love, my mercy, my Christ, and his own soul.

Lastly, faith would do great things for thee, and Christ would do wonders for
thy soul, if once thy heart could be persuaded to consent unto him, and to
accept of him as Lord and Savior.

SECT. II. Secondly, the impediments and hindrances.
Obj. But now, as the Eunuch said, There is water, what hinders me that I may
not be baptized? so you may say, why? her is Christ set out to the life, here
are arguments fair enough to draw on my soul, what hinders that we do not
believe and receive Christ?

Sol. After all these discoveries, yet the heart stands off, and why? because
there are yet many cords with which the soul is held, there are yet several
impediments which do entangle and seduce the heart, which keeps it down from
mounting and rising up to the Lord of life, against which we must earnestly
labor if ever we would believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

I will touch some of the choicest of them.

1. One impediment to faith is that natural Atheism in the sons of men. You
know that as in the concoction or digestion of meats, that which is a prejudice
to the first concoction or digestion of meats, is a hindrance to the two other,
and as in points of demonstration, that scruple which weakens the apprehension
of the truth of the principle, it ever disable the strength of ^ssent to the
deduced conclusion. So is it in divinity, whatsoever vile quality in the soul
prejudiceth the reverent respects o^ the most common and first truths, it does
hinder it (...) in the embracing of the depending truths, which receive (...)
authority and strength from the grants of the (...)

Now Atheism, it is a slighting quarrel with the first truths: Atheistical
spirit, it has most sordid and loose conceptions of God and of his Word; it
does not set up God in the greatness of his nature, and Majesty of his
Attributes, and Authority of his Word; God looks not like a God unto him; nor
does the Word of God work upon him like the Word of God. God is not in all his
thoughts, he does not really conceive of him, as one who indeed is omnipotent,
and so holy, and so just, and so merciful as he reveals himself: Those sweet
truths of favor, and kindness, and mercy, and the blood of Christ, they are
either nothing to him, or as empty notions. Those sharp threatenings against an
unbelieving person, with condemnation, and wrath, and hell, they are as
terrible fables and scarcrowes to him; He does not believe any such
displeasures, nor torments, that thus it shall be indeed. Now how can the soul
be inclined to believe in Christ, to part with its dear lusts, with its
worldly advantages and pleasures, and to submit it self to the Laws and
Scepter of Christ, when as it does expressly or vertually deny the nature of
God, and the power of his truths?

Did thou indeed believe that there was a God, did thou indeed believe that
his revelations of man's sinful misery, and of his singular mercy in Christ were
true and real? Did thou believe that God has wrath, and blackness of
darkness, and vials of vengeance for ever to be poured on the unbeliever, and
that the lake which burns with fire and brimstone must be thy assured portion,
(as God has spoken?) how could thou sit still, content thy heart, neglect
thy salvation by Christ, stand off from the ways and endeavors for faith?

Therefore to remove this impediment, beg of God to forgive, and cure the
Atheism of thy Spirit. Strive to set up the true God in thy understanding, and
to believe that he is the Lord who will not lie. Whatsoever he has revealed
himself to be and to do. Why, that he is, and that he will perform; that it is
thy duty to return from sin to him in Christ, and if thou do return, he
will in mercy spare and deliver thy soul from the pit, because he has found a
ransom; but if thou will not return, he will bathe the sword of his flaming
justice for ever in the blood of thy soul.

2. A second impediment to the getting of faith is gross ignorance. Whatsoever
is contrary to knowledge, that same is contrary to faith; for though faith sees
not its ground in natural reason, yet it must have divine evidence to show it
its object, and way, and causes, or else it cannot be wrought in the soul.

The soul must have* light for all its apprehensive operations, for the eye to
see, and the understanding to perceive, and for the heart to embrace.

Now this is it which keeps men off from believing, they are extremely ignorant.

First, of their own sinful condition, they do not know their dead in
tresp^sses and sins; how totally defiled; from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot; How perpetually rebellious against every precept of heaven,
and how sl^ghting of the tenders of salvation and mercy.

Secondly, of Gods just disposition toward the sinful person. They threatenings
and curses of his Law; as Balaam in his passage, he adventured on, for he saw
not the Angel of the Lord with a sword in his hand ready to cleave him asunder.
So men rest securely in their natural state; talk what you will of Christ, and
of God, and of sin, and of faith, they are not moved, they know not the
fearful issues of a natural and unbeleeving condition, they know not that God
will judge them and condemn them for ever.

Thirdly, of the excellencies of Christ what he is, whither God, or man, or
both, even as it pleases him, but favourly labor for this precious faith
which is a stranger to it self, to God, to Christ?

Did thou indeed know thy condition to be the condition of death, would
thou not make out for the Lord of life? did thou indeed know thy condition to
be the condition of enmity, would thou not strive to get unto the Prince of
peace?

So again, as Christ spoke to the woman, If thou knew the gift of God, and
who it is that says unto thee; give me to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living water, John 4. 10. O if men did know
what a gift Christ was; If heaven and earth, men and Angels had studied the
helps of a poor sinner, they could never have imagined such a remedy as God
found in giving his own Son; Now, if men did know him aright, what a
Redeemer, what a Lord he is, what living water is in him. That in him only
there is life for the dead, recovery for the sinner, satisfaction for guilt,
sanctification for the soul, atonement for trespasses, comfort for distresses,
balm for wounds, salvation for their persons: Why? how could it be but that
they should ask of him for a drop (at least) of water, for some faith to
receive him who is the fountain of grace and life?

3. A third impediment to the endeavors for faith, is a vain confidence of
natural righteousness: This was it which kept off many of the Pharisees, the
Text says. That they trusted to their own righteousness. Yea, this is called
the stumbling of the Jews, it cast them flat, that they doted so on legal
abilities. When a base heart has proud imaginations of Christ, and peace, and
safety from something within it self, why? It will never look after Christ. A
proud person who has money in his house, he scorns to be beholding to his
neighbor; the proud sinner, who conceives that all is well 'twixt him and God,
and that he has done no man wrong, and none can say black is his eye, he is
neither whore not thief, and his heart is as good as the best, and his meanings
are always honest, and none can tax him for injustice, and he has kept all
Gods Commandments as well as ever he could, and he has had a good belief, (he
thanks God) ever since he was borne. I tell you such a person will not be
beholding to God for Christ, for he (in his opinion) being so whole, needs not
the Physician neither shall you persuade him to mourn for his sins, or to
repent, and to part with all for Christ, to deny himself and all his own vain
confidences, and to put himself only upon Jesus Christ; he trusts to be saved
by his good deeds, and by his good meanings.

Ah foolish and seduced soul! Who has bewitched thee to forsake thine own
mercies? Think thou that God would have sent his only Son, and to pour
out his own soul for sinners, if that yet there had been ability in sinful man
to have purchased his own safety and happiness? And do thou see no sin in
thy self, which may therefore for ever thrust thee off from resting upon thy
self? and are thy works such absolute bottomes and foundations, when the
Heathens can match them and exceed them? or cannot God espy a flaw in thy Ship,
and much false conveyance in thy title, and much defect in thy deeds, who can
charge folly upon the Angels? And are thy meanings and works so good, while thy
heart is yet so ignorant, thy life yet so profane? Can what thou do find
acceptance or merit, when yet thou trustest not on him who only is the merit
for a sinner? Think thou thy meanings can be good, which dishonor the
Redemption by Christ, and the freeness of mercy; O no my brethren, the soul is
the passenger, graces are the sails, the Spirit is the wind, but Christ, only
Christ is the bottom which carries all safe and sure to heaven.

Nay, if thou can see a Savior in thy own good meanings; if a Savior in thy
own good works, a Savior in any part or degree of inherent righteousness,
either inward, for the change of nature, or outward for the emprovement of
life; this, this will keep thee and Christ asunder. No man will labor for
faith in Christ, who has a faith in himself already as his own Savior.
Therefore as they in the Acts of the Apostles, burned their books when they
came to believe in Chhist, so must we unbottom our selves of our selves.
Renounce our menstrous rags, abhor our selves in dust and ashes, lay flat
before the mercy-seat, cry out with the Leper, I am unclean, unclean; with
Daniel, To us belongs nothing but confusion, for we have sinned; with David,
enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh
righteous be justified; with the Publican stand afar off and say, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner; with Paul, I count all things but as dung and dross
in comparison of Christ, and, I desire to be foundin him, not having my own
righteousness, but that which is of faith, with those Elders, cast (if we had
them) our very crowns to the earth before the Lamb, and say he only is worthy.

If ever thou would get to believe in Christ, labor to get Do not stand in
thy own light.
the mountains to be levelled, the high imaginations to be cast down, to cast
thy self out of thy self: There is nothing that I have been, or have done, or
do, or can do, which I can trust to; I seek for the living among the dead,
whiles I look for a Savior in my self. He is far enough from safety, who
rests on the arm of his flesh, and we shall never close with, or magnify
Christ's righteousness, until we can (in matter of merit or justification) deny
our own.

4. A fourth impediment to believing is, the league of the heart with sin:
Light is come into the world, but men love darkness rather then light, John 3.
19. Sin absolutely does not prejudice the contract of the soul with Christ,
for Christ does not negotiate for any soul, but the sinful soul; He does not
come to a person, and say, if thou have no sin, I will bestow my self on
thee, or if thou have not committed sin, I will be a redeemer, a Savior unto
thee. O no, the offer of Christ is only to the sinner, and it is none but the
sinner who is to believe in Christ. But that which hinders the contract 'twixtt
men and Christ, it is the love of sin: Christ comes in the Ministry of the
Gospel unto us, and reports unto us our own exceeding sinfulness, and then his
exceeding graciousnesse, and invites the soul (by many sweet and tender
arguments) to accept of him, to be Lord and Christ, and assures it of pardon,
and righteousness and salvation. Now says Christ, that which I require of you
is this, leave but your sins, your sins which will damn you, and I will be
yours. Why? says the soul, this is but reason, and I will hearken to it, well
then says Christ, go and quit such a lust, thy uncleanness, or thy Sabbath
breaking, or thy drunkenness, or thy lewd society, etc. Why, now the base and
foolish heart falls off, I cannot live without my nature, I must and will be
allowed in such a course; The heart rises up, O, Benjamine shall not go, nay
any thing but this lust. I will never be divorced from it, if I may have Christ
and this sin too, well and good. Thus the love of sin ste^les aw^^ the
heart, it bestows the heart else where, nay it inf^ames an opposition against
the Lordly power of Christ; the soul will never yield to the dominion of
Christ, which delights in the (...) to sin.

Br^thren, if we could b^^ rip up the secrets of men's hearts unto you, you
should (...) disc^^^^e, that it is the (...) of (...) or (...) all; (...)
(oft-times) can m^ke no exception against Christ* they (...) to come in (...)
know they (...) be saved without him; but (...) will not (...) sins, it ^u^s
their souls to think of such a divorce, come on it what will they will take
their pleasure, and hold fa^t their wickedness.

5. A fifth impediment is the world* The honors of it; how can you believe who
receive honor (...) another, and (...) not the honor that (...) ^od only?
John 5. ^^* The prof^^ of it, He went away sorrow^ul, for he had great
possessions. M^t. 19. 22. The Examples of it, Have any of the (...), or of the
Pharis^es believed on him? John 7* 48. The te^rors of it, the fe^^e of the Jews
kept off many from coming to Christ. The losses of it, and crosses, He that
will be my Disciple mu^^ deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.
The cares and thoughts of it, when a man minds earthly things, and will be
rich, and devours all his prerious thoughts, to compass that which will be but
a fether, a thorn, vanity or vexation. Press men to l^bour for Christ, why!
we have no leisure: press to frequent the ways of getting faith, why lwe must
not neglect our callings. Urge them to embrace Christ as Lord, to shape and
fashion their hearts and ways according to his rules, after his righteous Laws,
and to deny themselves in some sinful compliances, O then we shall not be
esteemed of, we shall be derided and scoffed at as vain and singular.

O these sensible things, which we can see with our eyes, and grasp with our
hands, they put us off from the great moments of our best and eternal good.

And what are the honors of this world, but as the shade of the Sun which
every discontented cloud and frown removes? and what are the profits of it, but
heaps of chaff, which any winde^ from heaven may scatter? and what are the
friends of it, but a gourd, which any worm may gnaw out and shrivel?

And why do thou fear man, whose utmost power exceeds not thy body, and
fear not that God whose vengeance can seize on thy soul? and why will thou
bestow the strength of thy time, to get no more then nothing, and in the mean
time to lose eternity, a soul, a Christ, a heaven? yet thus it is, the poor
creatures (at the best) but our servants have go^ our hearts, whiles Christ
complains against us, we withhold our souls from him, our just Lord and best
Master.

But if there were not more glory in Christ, then honor in the world, if there
were not more gain in Christ, then profit in the world. if there were not more
love in Christ, then friendship in the world; if there were not more comfort in
Christ, then discouragements in the world; if there were not more safe^ies in
Christ* then dangers in the world; nay, if the real and ^rue exceedings of
infinite betternesse, were not on Christ's part, i^ durst not so to incline your
hearts for says in him, etc.

Sixthly, the cunnings of na^ural unb^l of, are a great impedim^nt;

Imaginations of impossibi^i^y: it cannot be, that if I should labor

Now when the heart is thus forestalled with a strength of conceit, that God
never did, nor will bend the ^u^ement of the blood of Christ toward the soul;
Why! the bands sink, no man will be persuaded to compass impossibilities.

Apprehensions of difficulty. Unbelief sets upon Lion in every pa^^, and so
keeps off from all endeavor: First, I shall never be able to pare time, I
shall never be able to pray, I shall never be able to keep on in such a course,
I shall never be able to leave such society, I shall never be able to deny the
world, I cannot take such pains, I cannot wait, I cannot tell how to get off
these sins, to change this heart, to bring it to yield to Christ.

Discourse of carnal reasonings, which try all the promises of

Instances of sense and feeling; Why! if a man will judge of God,

Yea, if I were now sure, I should have mercy, that Christ were mine, that my
sins were pardoned, if I could see my heart changed, and sins dispersed and
subdued, then I would put out for faith, and then I would look up to Christ.
And would thou have thy cure before thy plaster, thy health before the
Physic, thy life before thy soul, the portion before the person, thy nonefast
before thy meal, the benefits of Christ, the virtues of Christ, before Christ
himself.

SECT. III. Thirdly the Means.
NOW I come to direct you unto the use of such means by which God works this
saving faith in the hearts of men.

Where, premise with me some particulars.

1. There is no natural power in man to produce a cause within himself; This
great grace of faith is no fruit of the wisdom of the flesh, nor is it the
birth of a corrupt will, if it were possible for a natural heart to see all the
excellencies of Christ, if it were possible for him to draw out and behold all
the arguments of Scripture, yet could he not by his own strength make his own
heart to believe.

2. The immediate and sole cause of faith is the Spirit of God: He it is who is
greater then the heart, and who can persuade, and draw the heart, and who can
change and renew the spirit, which till it be renewed by him, will never be
moved to believe in Christ.

3. There are means appointed by God, and which God does ordinarily bless,
for the production of faith; as he has ordained means, for the revelation of
Christ, so he has likewise consecrated means, to lead the soul unto him, to
implant faith.

4. Now the great and ordinary means by which God works faith in the hearts
of men (I speak of such as are come to ripeness of years) is the preaching of
the Word.

So Acts 13. 48. When the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified
the Word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed,
Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Ephesians. 1.
13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of truth, the Gospel
of your salvation.

That the Word is the Ministerial instrument, which God uses to beget faith in
Christ, may thus appear.

1. It is that which discovers unto the soul its extreme misery and great need
of Christ; nothing quickens the conscience to that reflexive evidence, to the
clear and true sight of the natural state, which pricks the soul, which in a
sort compels the soul to look after the Redeemer of the world, as the Word
does. You see it has been thus formerly, that when men have heard it, it has
unfolded their state unto them, it has broken all their proud imaginations, it
has driven them to their feet, it has made them to cry out, men and brethren
what shall we do to be saved?

Yea, and we find it in experience to be so, that the preaching of the Word, it
opens the eyes of sinners, it frames in them the sense of sinfulness, and
accursednesse, it makes them indeed to feel the need of a Physician of such an
one as Christ.

2. It is that which discovers a share for a broken ship; which does reveal,
and proclaim to poor sinners Articles of peace in Christ; it makes known the
great love of God and Christ, and how that Christ is the Son of God, and was
sent by God, and satisfied for sinners, and this was accepted.

3. It makes the soul to confess those things as most true and good in
themselves: It convinces a man, that of a truth God means graciously to men,
that his Son was a Sacrifice, was a propitiation, that he did purchase pardon
and salvation for sinners.

4. It is that which casts down all the reasonings, arguments and d^sputes of
the mind against the conditions of Christ, and r^nders all the term^s of
Christ upon which he will be taken, as most equal, and fair, and reasonable.

5. It is that which clears the way for the soul against all its fears and
unbeleeving doubts, from the freeness of Gods mercy, from the fullness of
Christ's redemption, from the willingness on Christ's part, and requests unto us
to accept of him.

6. It is that which does powerfully renew the disposition of the understanding
and will, and so incline them to esteem of Christ, as the highest truth, and
to bend after him as the chiefest good.

7. It is that which stirs up the heart with a choice of Christ, and
resolution to have him what ever may befall it.

8. It is that which makes the heart to cry servently to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to work his blessed grace of faith: Yea, which draws out of us
strong supplications with many tears and longings, and to implead all the
promises of making mercy good, and Christ good, and faith good unto us.

9. It is that which establishes the soul to a patient expectation for ever to
lie at the poole, for ever to attend the doors of the Sanctuary, till the soul
can take and close with Christ by true believing.

But then to open unto you the way more distinctly, I would commend this course
unto a person, that he may at length get a believing heart.

1. Study thy natural condition thoroughly: The right sense of this, 8. Things.
though it does not forma^ly cause faith, yet it may have a compelling force to
make us look after Christ, and to strive for faith.

The Apostle calls the Law a Schoolmaster to Christ, Gal. 3. why? because it
does reveal such a smart and strong evidence of the sinful condition, that it
scourges a man out of himself to look for a Savior; yea, it helps much to
cast the proud soul down, and to break and crush his natural bottom; which
otherwise would st^ve off, and hinder a man from believing. Therefore study thy
natural condition: O I would believe, and I would have Christ: yea, but why?
what need see thou in thy self of him? I tell you, that the more desperate
the soul sees its own natural condition, the more willingly may it be drawn to
apprehend, adore, and embrace its remedies and safeties.

Now there are three things to convince our selves of, about our natural
condition, I mean the state without Christ.

First, the ugly vileness of it. That it is sinful and stark naught, it is no
such thing as God does like or approve, but his soul abhors and hates it. For
it is compounded of nothing, but want of good, and inclination to evil to all
that is opposite to God and holiness: That thou art in it, poor, and blind,
and miserable, and naked, an ignorant, opposing, unconceiving creature of any
spiritual good, proud, and sensual, and vain, and earthly, loathsome and dead.

Secondly, the sure and fearful misery of it: Thou art without God, without
Christ, without the Covenant, not a drop of mercy for thee, whiles thou
remain'st thus; but all the wrath of God is against thee, and thou art under
the dominion of sin, and terrible curse of the Law, all the threatenings in
the book of God are ever ready to sease on thee, and how soon may they arrest
thee, if God gives them commission?

Thirdly, the utter insufficiency to deliver thy self out of this state: Thou
art never able to merit the least mercy, nor to offer thousands of lambs, and
ten thousand rivers of oil; thou art so totally broken in thy strength, that
thou can not pay a farthing, and never can thou be a Redeemer to thy self,
from thy sins, or Gods justice.

Now drive and fasten these things as real and experimental truths into thy
heart, till thou art shut up under sin, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3. (that
is) so convinced on all sides concerning thy natural self, that thou art feign
to fall down and cry out, O Lord, I am unclean, I am unclean, I am unclean, a
miserable wretch, a lost person for ever, unless thou show great compassion to
my poor soul; This condition is deadly and barren, I am full of sin and
without strength; and this condition is so fearful, that verily I will not rest
in it, Men and brethren what shall I do to be saved? Is there no balm in Gilead
for a wounded soul? no City of refuge for a distressed sinner? no Rock of
safety for a shipwrackt person? no hope of salvation yet left for me?

2. Then study the hope; of a sinful soul. Why; though thou have been very
wicked, and have exceeded in transgressions, yet there may be hope. The Gospel;
it is the ^ape of good hope, it is that which thrusts out some sight of land to
a tossed sinner; It is a message from heaven, proclaiming both the hope and
possibility, and also the way and method of salvation for a sinful person:
Look, as the Law points out a way of salvation for a righteous and innocent
man, so the Gospel does for an offending and sinful man. Therefore study it
much, take some accurate pains to be thoroughly and really informemed and
convinced, what Gods dispositions are therein revealed toward sinners.

Now here are two things which I would commend.

1. One is the study of Christ: Study him all over, perhaps thou may see
that in him, which may answer many, yea all thy fears, Perhaps thou may see
so much in him as may win much upon thy heart, to come in and accept of him by
faith.

Therefore peruse him well. First, that he is God and man, and as so, a
Mediator, and because so, therefore an Almighty, and a compassionate Redeemer.
Secondly, that it proceeds from the love and Counsel of God to give him to be
the Savior of sinners: God did see the fallen state and great misery of men,
and his absolute insufficiency to recover himself, and therefore his own love
moved him to give his own Son in whom he did ordain the salvation of sinners.
Thirdly, that Christ was willing to become a Mediator, yea, he did freely give
his life to make peace and procure salvation; and this sacrifice of his was
both acceptable and effectual. Fourthly, that God would have thee to come unto
him for life, and that Christ is the surety, and Mediator, and only hope of
sinners. Fifthly, that Christ has in him all, and enough to make up thy state,
and to reconcile thee and God, and to get full pardon, and to present thee
righteous, and to procure for thee eternal life. Sixthly, that Christ seeks
even after thee by the Ministry of the Gospel, and both offers himself with all
his purchase unto thee, and has, and yet does beseech thee to accept of him: I
say, study these things; who knows how the great studies of Christ may be at
length blessed with faith in Christ? This I am sure of, that the ignorance of
the nature, and offices, and works, and benefits, and alsufficiency, and
mavelous affections, and readiness in Christ is a notable strength to
unbelief; Ergo, on the contrary, the knowledge of them is a good means for
faith.

2. Another is the study of the new Covenant: Why, what may thou not there
see to draw on thy soul to Christ? yea, what arguments does God there fill thy
mouth with to conquer himself? He gives thee in that Covenant, ample and
prevailing grounds by which thou ma^est with an humble confidence even plead
with him for Christ and faith: Thou shall see there all thy good set freely
open, that God stands not for this, nor for that, and it matters not what thou
have been, there is mercy enough for what is past and there is grace to renew
thy heart for the present, and strength for the future, and thou may sue out
the Lord for this faith (of which we now speak) and he will surely give it unto
thee.

3. Study the main hindrances of distance twixt Christ, and the Covenant, and
thy soul. There is one thing (above all the rest) which keeps thee off, and
that is unbelief: For God does not require any other thing of thee in the
entrance of Christ but only to accept of him. He does not say, if thou had
never offended me, then I would have bestowed my Son on thee; or, if thou
had not offended me so much, or if thou can bring any singular nature, and
excellent qualities of thine own, then I will give my Son unto thee, or then
I will give thee leave; No, but all that he requires is this, Believe and
accept of my Son to be thy Lord and Savior, and I will in him give thee
pardon.

Why, now brethren, this is the last and sore check of the match, our hearts
are unbelieving, we will not condescend to this condition, but fly hovering
after some unknown and devised method of our own.

4. Study much the sinfulness of unbelief: that it is a sin, and a great
sin, and that in thee: What! after all sense of misery to hold off from
remedy; not to close with Gods great love, as if God were not wise enough to
show thee the way of salvation, or as if he were not true, that thou dare not
to venture and fasten thy soul and state upon his Word.

5. Study well wherein the nature of faith does consist: Many full assurance,
and in a sensible taste of Gods love in Christ, and in a sensible and clear
persuasion that their sins are pardoned, which, because as yet they never had,
they therefore perplex themselves much about faith.

Therefore inform thy self what faith in Christ is; It is the hearty accepting
of Christ upon his own conditions; if thy heart and soul are willing to accept
of Christ as the only Lord to rule thee, and as the only Redeemer to save thee,
and to cleave unto him for better for worse, through all the changes which may
befall thee for Christ's sake, why this is faith, viz. An accepting of his
person, and a reposing of the soul upon him for its safety, and a cleaving to
him upon all states. If thou can find thus much, that there is no one sin
which shall rule thee, to the love and obedience of which thou will resign thy
self, but Christ is he whom thou choosest for to be thy Lord; And there is no
Name in heaven and earth upon which thou will put confidence for thy
righteousness and discharge, and salvation, but only in Christ. And upon him
thy soul entirely and unfainedly desires to rest it self, thou have true faith.

6. Know this and convince thy self of it, that thou shall never hurt thy self,
nor offend God if thou could believe; wherefore has God given Christ? and
wherefore has Christ given himself? and wherefore is he now offered to
sinners? and wherefore are we commanded to believe, if yet to believe (that is)
to accept of Christ, to consent to the acceptance of his person upon his own
condition were a sin?

7. Withal this beg fervently of God, that he would persuade thy heart to
believe (that is) to accept of Christ to be thy Lord and Savior, and to rest
thy soul upon him: No man comes to me (says Christ) except the Father draw
him, Now then, O Lord draw me, and I shall run after thee, O subdue this
unbeleeving heart, and give unto me the Spirit of faith, and love, and
obedience.

Lastly, look for this gift of faith to be wrought in thee by the Spirit of
Christ in the Ordinances, and wait upon God there continually. Thou shall in
time (perhaps sooner, perhaps later) find thy soul touched, and thy fears
answered, and thy soul made exceedingly willing to accept of Christ as thy
Lord, and to put it self upon him as thy Savior.

Yea, hold on in waiting and seeking and thou shall not only have Christ formed
in thee, and faith formed in thee, but thou shall come to know him, whom thou
have accepted and trusted.

This is a sweet and safe course for a sensible sinner, viz.

1. To present up his request unto God in the Name of Christ, earnestly
beseeching him to declare this Almighty working of his Spirit in causing the
heart to believe.

2. Then to stand in the ways of grant, and come to the Ordinances wherein God
does reveal his arm, and give faith, and so enclines and unites the soul with
Christ. What thou do earnestly seek in a private way, that God does
ordinarily answer and bestow in a public.

3. Then wait and expect, not to limit God just to this time, nor to this
preacher, nor to cast off all confidence of answer, upon present denials, but
to look up from day to day, from week to week, if at length God will give thee
faith. I never read or heard of any whose hearts were thus set, but God has
found a time to give unto them the desires of their souls: He has rep^enished
their souls with his salvation and loving kindness: Therefore go on cheerfully
in the use of these means whatsoever befalls thee, yet it shall be well with
thee; He that has found Christ, cannot but say, that this way is good, and he
who is thus seeking of him shall say, it was not in vain to follow it.

SECT. IV. Fourthly, The Objections.
NOw I proceed to the resolution of those Scruples which do entangle the soul
of a sinful sinner, and hinder him from believing, which beget extreme fears
and doubts, that he may not lay hold on Christ, and that God will never bestow
Christ on him, neither would he take it well of the soul to be so busy and
forward.

Obj. 1. Why; says the sensible sinner, my sinnings have been so great, and
transgressions so mighty, that I may never look up with any confidence upon the
rock of salvation; nay, it is not Satan only, but my own conscience which does
testify against me, the manifold numbers, and the high exceedings of my
rebellions. I tell you, you would tremble to think of such lewdness whereof I
have been and now do stand guilty, and the sensible consideration of them makes
my heart to sink, and checks me with shame and blushing, when I think of laying
hold on Christ.

Sol. For the assoyling of this Objection, consider these particulars.

First, the greatness of sinning should be a strong reason to great humblings,
and sorrow. 2. Another, is great desires, and beseechings for Christ. Suppose a
man owed his whole estate, his only way was to beg a whole discharge; suppose a
man had many wounds, and deep ones too, for this reason should he go to the
Chyrurgion.

Why Brethren! what would you alone do with great sinnings: Can you ever
discharge them? can you ever satisfy for them? Nay, do they not open unto thee
thy great need of Christ, and point the way to him? 1. God has greater mercies
then we sins. 2. Christ has stronger merits, and satisfactions to the utmost.
3. Greater sins should hasten us into the mercy-seat, the greater wounds to the
Physician. 4. The greatest sinners, when humbled, have been accepted and
pardoned, Manasses, Ma^y Magdaline Paul. Some great sinners have miscarried,
because they never came to Christ.

6. Had thou less sins, would thou not come in? Why then? etc.

7. The greatest sinner never miscarried by coming to Christ, and the least
sinner does, for not coming to Christ. Thy not coming to Christ binds all thy
sins on thy soul.

Thy unbelief is a worse sin then all the rest: and that shall appear

First, it is a refusal of all thy remedy, as if it were a small thing to
provoke Justice, thou do now provoke mercy too.

Secondly, it is that which besides its own gilty qualities keep^ also all the
former guilts upon the account: Every sin that thou have committed heretofore,
it does keep its sting, i^s accusation, its force against thee if thou will not
believe; so that this can be neither safety, nor wisdom for thee to hold off,
because of the greatness of thy sins.

Christ is a great Savior: He is called a mighty Savior, and plenteous
redemption. 1 John 21. If any man sin, we have an Advocate wi^h the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. v. 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

I remember, in the Levitical Law there were sacrifices for all sorts of sins;
what did they prefigure, but the ample efficacy in the death of Christ, which
was an atonement for sins of all kinds, and was, as the daily sacrifice for
the expiation of the continued and augmented number of transgressions?

Why! what are thy thoughts of Christ, and of redemption in him? do thou not
know?

First, that the sinner must find his full discharge in his blood? thou must
be beholding to Christ for the payment of the smallest, as well as of the
greatest debt.

Secondly, That the strength and merit of Christ's death exceeds the merit of
all sin? where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more: If it had not,
then the sinner could not have been pardoned, for then justice had not been
satisfied.

Thirdly, What the extension of Christ's death may be, I will not dispu^e; but
this is clear, the intension or merit of his death, is infinite, and exceeds
the greatest sins.

Why! if sins had not been great, or if the greatness of them did prejudice
from Christ really, God would never have given so great a Savior as Christ;
the Apostle says, Heb. 7. that he is able to save to the utmost. And, that he
redeemes us from the law, Gal. 4. From all transgression, whatsoever committed
against the Law, and from all the curses of the Law against them.

Fourthly, Christ has already answered this scruple, by giving instances of
mercy to great sinners; was not David a murderer of Vriah? was not Mary
Magdalen a foul sinner? was not Zacheus a griping oppressor? was not Paul a
bitter and sore persecutor? were not those amongst the Corinthians sinners in
the highest form? and yet Christ called them, and washed them, and justified
them.

Fifthly, the matter is not 'twixt thee and Christ, about the greatness or
littleness of former sinnings, but about the present disposition and affection
of thy soul; not what thou have loved heretofore, but what thou will now love;
not what thou have followed, and served heretofore, but what thou will now
choose and obey. Though the Jews had been a sinful Nation, laden with iniquity,
a seed of evil doers, corrupters of themselves, Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6. Forsakers of
the Lord, provokers of the holy one of Israel, Apostates, Revolters, putrified
from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, stark naught. Yet God comes unto
them, and Articles thus with them, ver. 16. Wash you, make you clean, cease to
do evil, verse. 17. Learn to do well, as if he should say, though you have been
thus abundantly evil, yet now harken unto me, let your hearts be turned from
sins, and bestow them on me and my service.

Object. But what shall we do for pardon of the former

Sol. Why says God, do not you trouble your selves for that, only hearken unto
me, and be willing and obedient for hereafter, and as for former sinnings,
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool, ver. 18. The same I say in this
case, Christ will find blood enough to get the pardon of sins, if thy heart
would come off from sin to accep^ of him: I stand not says Christ upon what
thou have been, I can easily discharge thee, only that which I require, is
this, leave thy sins and accept of me. I beseech you take heed of two things,
one is a secret Pride, that you will not be brought to be beholding to God for
great pardons. Another is a present love of sin. This and not the former
sinnings prejudiceth from Christ.

Obj. But God is just and he will not hold the sinner guiltless, and he has
revealed his wrath from heaven against all unrighteousness, fly to the City
of refuge, yet from thence would he withdraw me, and be avenged of me.

Sol. I Answer.

1. Even this also should constrain thee to believe, forasmuch as by unbelief
thou becomest a great rebel against the Gospel, and he will come in flaming
fire to take vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, 2
These. 1. 8.

2. Unless justice be satisfied, assuredly it will never spare thee, for
Justice will have either thy obedience, or thy satisfaction.

But then the way to present satisfaction to Gods justice, is to believe in
Christ, forasmuch as God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not
imputing their trespasses.

It was Jesus Christ who performed full obedience, and endured an accursed
death, to satisfy Gods justice, and this not for himself, but for the
believer, and for none but for the believer.

So that there is no other way comfortably to answer justice, but by believing
in Christ. For now thou have a surety one who stood in thy stead, and answered
Justice for all thy sins.

3. Divine justice will not desire a double satisfaction: It will not require
satisfaction from thee, and from thy surety too: The quarrel cease 'twixt
thee and God, for Christ has by his own blood taken that up. As Elihu spoke of
uprightness, that I say of believing in the Lord Jesus; if thou do, then
the Lord will be gracious unto thee, and will say, deliver him from going down
to the pit, for I have found a ransom, Job. 33. 23, 24.

Obj. But I, who am I? so totally unworthy; there is nothing in me to move
Christ to engratiate me, he will never bestow himself on such an one as I am;
will ever Christ look on such a dead dog as I am?

I answer to this.

1. Personal unworthiness, it is no prejudice: You read in Mat. 7. Things.
8. 8. that the Centurion came to Christ for his servant, and believed on him,
and sped well.

Yea, will you say, but he was worthy? nay, he professes the

Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof: I am not worthy
to be, etc.

2. Nay, the humble sense of our unworthiness, it is a furtherance; Christ
does not expect any excellencies, and meritorious motives from thee, thou must
come unto him as an empty vessel, the full soul and the sound spirit is not for
him; bring a soul to Christ which is spread all over with misery and need, why
such a soul is a proper object for mercy to deal with; bring a soul to Christ
which is all over with lostnesse, with poverty, with sickness, with
unworthiness; why, this is the soul upon which Christ will look. Its never
well with a man until he can take Christ upon his knee, upon a bare knee, with
an empty hand, (that is) till he be brought to be poor in spirit, that he is
nothing, and deserves nothing, and begs of Christ to accept of him, even for
Christ's sake. The Lord be merciful to me a sinner, went home justified, when
the thank God, I am not as other men, returned as he came, a proud Pharisee.

You shall find it thus, that God looks most on him who looks least on
himself. The humble and contrite spirits, which are broken out of themselves,
and can cry out, O Lord, I am really vile, and mostly unworthy; These the high
God (who inhabits the lofty places) does behold. And Christ is ready to take
him by the hand, who thinks himself unworthy to touch his feet. There are two
tempers which like Christ well one is a believing heart, and another an humble
soul.

3. Personal worthiness is not the motive nor designed ground for faith in
Christ; The ground of belief, that which invites the soul to draw on it self to
Christ, is no deserving or eminent quality in our selves, but the goodness and
fidelity of the promise, and the gracious offer of Christ himself to the soul.
Behold, he calls thee, why, this is enough; if thou can find God holding
forth the golden Scepter, offering Christ unto thee, upon such and such terms,
and thou consent unto them with all thy heart, thou may confidently close
and lay hold on Christ by faith.

This is the wise skill of a Christian, truly to observe the proper rise of
faith.

When God promised Abraham a son, the text says, he did not consider his own
body, Romans 4 19. (that is) he did not consult with the strength of his own
nature, what an able principle there was in himself to compass such an effect,
but he was fully persuaded that what God had promised, that he was able to
perform. The ability and fidelity of Gods promise exceedingly inclined his
heart to believe. So is it here about faith in Christ; if thou do consider
thy own body, thy own deserts, thy own excellencies, thou shall never believe,
for faith can find no ground in these to encourage the soul; but the ground of
faith is without our selves: Why; God offers me Christ, and Christ calls me
unto him, being heavy laden, and he says, that he, who believes in him, shall
have eternal life. Now this is a word of truth, and this word of his is worthy
of all acceptance, I will venture my soul upon it.

It is with faith as with a bird, cast him into the water he cannot fly, that
element is too gross for him, he cannot gather and beat his wings there, and
therefore is kept down, but cast him into the air, which is a more pure
element, then he can clap, and ^pread the wings, and mount: why, faith is the
wing of the soul, and the promise is that spiritual element, that air which
breaths a life and motion to faith; faith is raised by it alone, and it is
checked and hindered whiles the soul would force it to act it self upon those
poor and gross excellencies in our selves. Faith desires no better object then
Christ, nor su^^r pawnes then Gods prom^se.

Fourthly to receive Christ by faith, it is not a matter of merit, but a point
of duty.

When God commands a sinner to repent, and to forsake his sins, and take him,
he shall have mercy i^ ^e will do it: This may not now be said, O Lord I am not
worthy to obey thee in this duty, if I were worthy to repent I would repent;
nay, but O man, divine commands are to be obeyed, it is thy duty to repent. So
God commands the soul to believe in Christ, to accept of him. The soul now
looks on the excellencies of the gift, but forgets the obligation of duty: Its
true, Christ is a most excellent gift and blessing, there is not such a thing
in all the world for a poor sinner as Christ, but then know: that his
excellencies may not take thee off from thy duty; This is his Commandment, that
we believe on the Name of his Son.

Brethren, you are mistaken, to believe in Christ being proposed unto us in the
Gospel, it is not a matter of indifferency, I may, or I may not; nor is it a
matter of courtesy, as if we did a work of supererogation more then God
requires; nay, but it is a matter of conscience, a man sins he violates a
command, an evangelical precept, if he does not believe; It is not a dispute of
worthiness or unworthiness, but it is obedience to the Command which thou art
to look upon.

5. Christ is given out of rich grace, and mercy, and love, and therefore none
can receive him but the unworthy. There is this difference 'twixt the reward of
Justice, and the gift of graciousnesse; Justice has an eye upon the
disposition and acts of the person, and according unto their qualities and
degrees does it commensurate reward or punishment. But graciousnesse has an
eye only upon it self, the free bountifulness of its own nature is the reason
of its gifts and acts. Suppose that a King executes a malefactor, this is an
act of justice, and finds cause in the rebellion of the offender; Suppose that
a King pardons a malefactor, this is an act of graciousnesse, and finds its
reason only in the breast of the King, and not in the worthiness of the
delinquent. Thou stand'st upon thy worthiness, O, if I were worthy of Christ!
why; but is not Christ a gift? he is often said to be given; yea, but is he not
a gracious gift? See Ephesians. 2. 7. God did show the exceeding riches of his
grace in his kindness toward us through Jesus Christ: As if he should say, if
ever there were a gift free-given, it is Christ. If Christ be a gracious gift,
then he is not bestowed on the worthy, but on the unworthy: not on him who can
challenge and say, Lord there is good reason why I should have Christ, and thou
should do me wrong if I have him not; O no, but he is a gracious gift, and
therefore the broken sinner may come in and say, O Lord, though I am unworthy,
yet give me Christ; graciousnesse does not expect any motion out of it self,
and therefore, though in respect of my desert, shame and confusion be my
portion, yet thy gifts of grace are free, for thy exceeding riches of grace,
and mercy, and love, give me thy Christ.

If I meet an old decrepit poor beggar, and seeing misery and poverty in his
face, I freely draw my purse, and say, there is a shilling for thee; O no says
he, Sir! I am not worthy, I am a poor man and ready to starve, give it to that
Gentleman yonder who is in gay clothing, and has thousands in his chests, for
he is worthy, what a proud folly were th^s? why? my alms was a gracious dole,
and if any man in the world had it, he had, who does need, but does not deserve
it: So, etc.

6. Christ is worthy your taking* though thou be unworthy of receiving, 1 Timothy
1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. As if he should
say, this is so necessary a thing so good a thing, so admirable a thing for a
sinner, so meet for him to hearken unto, and to embrace. What, if the choicest
Prince in the world should this day present himself to the foulest,
ill-favoure'dst, neglected woman, one without all beauty, without all parts,
without all estate, and assure her, if she will consent to his terms, he will
bestow himself upon her? Though she be totally unworthy to hear of such a
thing, yet the person is worthy, and the acceptance of the motion is worthy,
all the world sees reason enough that she should hearken. So it is, Jesus
Christ the Prince of peace, the Lord of life, the Author of salvation comes to
a sinful soul, utterly naked, and void of spiritual excellencies, over-runne
with all the spots of inglorious deformities, exposed to all kinds and degrees
of present and future miseries, calls and invites that soul to accept of him
upon his own terms, yet that soul stands off and excep^s, I am not worthy;
Thou wor^hy, says Christ! what do I esteem of thy worthiness? Not for thy
sake be it known unto thee, is it that I offer my self unto thee; not for any
beautiful, or ingratiating ornaments and gifts is this, but for my own sake. Am
I worthy the receiving? if so, then accept of me: Christ has worthiness
enough, and as our helps in the promises, draw us thither, so the treasures in
Christ should do.

Obj. But you will say, Christ has let fall a word, which tells me, that there
must be a subjective worthiness, as well as an objective worthiness in me, as
well as a worthiness in him, Matthew 10. 13. If the house be worthy, let your
peace come upon it.

Sol. I answer, that there is indeed a double worthiness.

First, one of the object, when it is so every way excellent, and necessary,
and suitable to the exigencies of a person; so Christ worthy.

Secondly, another of the subject, which (to restrain it now to the place
alleged) is a worthiness of judgment and affection, not a worthiness of
qualities and action. Then a man is said to be worthy, in reference to Christ,
not because he has any taking and inviting qualities, but when he judges
worthily of the Lord Jesus, and his affections draw after him as most worthy of
all acceptance.

Lastly, what is that which makes thee unworthy? It is sin, all the debasings
of the soul are our sins, and so, there is a twofold unworthiness. 1.
Meritorious. 2. Excluding.

But then, mark, two things could never be, if mere sinnings did effectually
prejudice the soul with an excluding unworthiness; one is, That Christ could
never have been a worthy gift; Another is, That faith could never have believed
truths in Christ; It could never take Christ as a Savior, nor believe in him
for the sure pardon of sins, if that sins absolutely did involve the soul
with such an unworthiness as should for ever exclude it from partaking of
Christ. O no: Though sins make unworthy, yet Christ came to call sinners; and
though ungodliness makes unworthy, yet Christ justifies the ungodly.

4. Obj. But I am not sure that Christ is willing to bestow himself on me, or
that I should lay hold on him, else I should (I think) be able to believe.

Sol. To this I will return two things.

1. One is clearing Christ's willingness.

2. The order of a Christians assurance.

First, That Christ is willing.

I shall but light a candle to the Sun in endeavoring to manifest the
willingness of Christ to accept of sinners; Why? 8. Things.
what can possibly express a willingness which is not espiable in Christ.

First, when thou were a sinner and an enemy, yet then did Christ shed his
blood and die for thee, Rom: 5. 8, 10.

Nay, he did not do this through constraint, but through consent, it was a
free will offering, therefore is he said to offer himself, and lo I come, and
to give himself, and to lay down his life, and to pay a price; nay, to be
straightened till it were accomplished, Luke 12 50.

His death was the putting of the seal to the bond. It ratified all the
Covenant which it had not done, had not Christ been willing. Why? he knew thee
long before, and saw thee in thy blood, before he shed his own: and had he been
unwilling to have done thee any good, or that thou should have received any
good from him, he would never have clothed himself with such a nature, as he
did assume, neither would he have anguished his righteous soul, nor have
suffered such a tormenting and accursed death. Verily, if I would lay down my
life for a person, this would sufficiently argue and declare that I were
willing to bestow my self on the person. So, etc.

Secondly, consider his many personal invitations: he has I counsel thee to
buy gold, and raiment, and eye salve, Rev. 3. 18. The Spirit and the bride say
come, and let him that hears say, come, and let him that is a thirst come,
and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Ho!
every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and be that has no money, come
ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price;
hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight it self in fatness; Incline your ear, and come unto me, and your soul
shall live; And I will make with you an everlasting Covenant, even the sure
mercies of David. Isa. 55. 1, 2. 3. Behold, I have given him for a witness to
the people. Ver. 4. Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst let him
come unto me and drink, John 7. 37.

Thirdly, consider, he has assured thee of acceptance: Him that comes unto me
I will in no wise cast out, John 6. 37. He will not shut the door against thee
when he has envited thee, but thou shall be a welcome guest; nay, he will
surely do thee good, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.

Fourthly, there was never any one who did come unto him, but sped well. Thou
can not find any one Iota of unwillingnesse, nor of his disregard, but all
have found him to be a merciful High Priest, and a compassionate Savior, who
have accepted of him.

Fifthly, consider, that he does still negotiate with thee: Ambassadors in his
Name, to publish, and to call upon thee, and to beseech thee, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Ver. 20. Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. V. 21. For he has made him
to be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Object. If there were any hope of reconciliation (may a man reply) then I
should believe.

Sol. Why, says the Apostle, God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself.

Object. But if God had commanded any in his Name to publish this:

Sol. He has committed to us the word of Reconciliation.

Object. But you may do it out of your compassion, not from a commission.

Sol. We are Ambassadors for Christ, and pray you in Christ's stead.

Object. But our sins will prejudice the Reconciliation.

Sol. He has made him to be sin for us.

Sixthly, consider his mavelous patience: If he were not

But he has followed them, who have fled from him: He has gone after the
sinner, who has many times turned his back, Romans 10. 21. All the day long have
I stretched out my hand unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. In this sense
we may apply that of the Prophet; He does wait that he may be gracious, and yet
continues his Ambassadors to bring thee home unto him.

Seventhly, consider His sad complaints for thy holding off he came near to
Jerusalem, he wept over it, and said, How often would I have gathered thee?
Matthew. 23. 37. And O if thou had known, even thou, at the least in this thy
day, the things which concern thy peace, Luke 19. 41, 42. And why will you not
come unto me? John 5. 40. As if you did see a tender father pursuing a
rebellious child, and working upon him by counsel and entreaties, and by hands
of bounty, and he will not yet hearken, the father steps to a friend, and
powers out tears, O I cannot win him, I cannot turn him, does not this show a
willingness? So, etc.

Lastly, consider his Will is exhibited to us in all the kinds of
willingness: I observe that his will may be manifested three ways.

First, in commands, and there is a preceptive will, and Christ commands thee
to believe.

Secondly, in promises, and there is a gracious and encouraging will, and
Christ has promised himself and all that he has done and suffered, if thou will believe in him.

Thirdly, in threatenings: and there is a just and vindictive will,

Secondly, The order of assurance.

But then for the order of assurance, that Christ is willing.

Observe that there is a double assurance.

1. One which is precedent, and grounds the soul to believe.

2. Another is subsequent, and attends the soul after its believing. That
precedent assurance consists in a clear and convincing demonstration, that
Christ is willing to be taken by the sinner. This subsequent assurance consists
in a reflexive persuasion, that he is my Christ and Savior, being by faith
taken and accepted.

Now if a sinner expects this latter assurance before he will believe, he does
preposterously and vainly perplex his soul; nay, it is an impossibility to
lead on the soul this way; nay, it were a falsehood and a delusion to the soul,
if it had a reflexive assurance, that Christ and his benefits are mine, before
the heart did by faith believe in him, and accept of him: I did cosen my soul
with a lie, for Christ is not that man's who does not yet believe on him; the
ways of this kind of assurance, is as it were the echo of the original ways
of faith a consequent of it, but never an antecedent. For a man to solace
himself, that the estate is his, before the person is his; or that the person
is his, before he has accepted of the person: Why, this is but the fruit of a
vain and idle fancy. But the former assurance that is a sweet inducement unto
the soul to believe, viz. when the soul ban get three things cleared and
resolved. 1. The certainty of a Savior. 2. The alsufficiency of him. 3. His
willingness to embrace and accept of a believing sinner. Now this assurance is
to be drawn from the very nature, and offices, and dispositions of Christ, and
from the command, and invitations, and promises of the Gospel; which when the
soul has thoroughly perused, and scanned, it shall clearly see and freely
acknowledge, (if it will not blasphemously suspect Gods own truths for lies)
that Christ is both an able and also a willing Savior, not only willing to lay
down his life, but most willing that sinners should come to him and believe in
him, and so find eternal life.

So that you may from this take notice of three things.

One, That to be assured of Christ, as mine, is no ground for to move a man to
believe, but it is a consequent of it.

Another, that to be assured that Christ is willing, and ready to be mine, and
to accept of me, this is a sweet motive, and an encouraging ground for the soul
to believe.

A third, there is no better way to feel the sweetness of Christ's being
willing to bestow himself upon a man, then by believing first on him, for it is
faith in Christ which opens to a man all his interests in Christ: And if this
be sure, that Christ's willingness prevents thine, if therefore thou be willing
to accept, the very nature of the treaty and match assures thee sufficiently
that Christ was ready long ago.

5. Obj. But then says the sensible sinner, I am not prepared and humble
enough: Christ is to bind up the broken hearted, but my heart is still hard,
and Christ is to open the prison for them that are bound, but I am not (at
least) in sufficient bondage, and he is to give the oil of joy for mourning,
but I have no melting, nor mourning spirit, and therefore I may not believe on
him, nor take him, for I am distinguished.

Sol. I shall not need to say much to this, because I have touched heretofore
upon in the Exposition of Mal. 1. 1. yet I will touch a little at this time.

1. There is a twofold humbling according to a double cause of it. One is in
the exceedings beating of the conscience, with inward terrors and fears,
springing from the Power of the Law, which quickens the conscience, and wounds
it with the express sense of former guilt, and which presents God in all the
glories and terrors of his justice, and as the great and sure avenger of an
unrighteous person. When the soul is in this kind of humbling, it is filled
with exquisite sense, and exquisite torment, like a man with a burning arrow in
his thigh, or like a thief hearing the sentence of death pronounced upon him by
the judge. Now this kind of humbling, though (sometimes) it may be an
antecedent to faith in Christ, (for God does many times bring a man to heaven
by the gates of hell, he does bruise, and wound, and even kill him by the
terrors of the Law, and then revive him with the workings, and tender goodness
of the Gospel) yet it may be (possibly) without any future access of the soul
to Christ. For this, mark, that though God does many times graciously superad
another work of conversion, to this of legal affliction, yet he may and does
many times distribute these sorrows in wrath, and they are but the testimonies
of his pure and displeased justice, even in this life, to begin an hell of
anguish in the conscience of a proud and daring sinner.

Another is in the tender abasings and sweet bathings or mournings of the
affections, when there is a fountain of sorrow set open within the soul,
giving out it self in several streams of melting, because of sin and
transgression. Now this latter is not an antecedent, but a consequent of faith
in Christ, as you shall hear presently.

A man cannot rightly judge of his fitness to lay hold on Christ by the mere
strength or measure of any legal humbling, but by the Issue and event of them.

If instead of one item from conscience, thou should now hear an hundred;
and instead of one lash from conscience, thou should now feel a thousand,
though thy heart were broken into as many pieces as the glass which is dashed
against the wall; though thy spirits did even fry within thee, for the heat of
horror, and that thou did roar day and night for the disquietment of thy
guilty conscience, yet could thou not confidently affirm by all this, I am
now for Christ, and Christ will assuredly accept of me, I shall not miss of
him.

Reasons whereof are these:

1. Because these may be Gods tokens of just vengeance on thee, mere
punishments and judicial acts.

2. The soul under these may be rather taken up with the stinging guilt and
fears of sin, then with the foul vileness, and base nature, and acts thereof
(standing in contrariety to the holy and good will of a gracious God.)

3. The thus afflicted soul may cry out for Christ, merely out of self-love, to
ease the burden, but not to cure the nature, to deliver it from pain, but not
to heal it of the sinful inclination.

Therefore this I would say to any legal broken spirit, do not judge of
fitness merely by the strength or depth of tears; there is a threefold
enough, 1. Intensive for the degree. 2. Extensive for the time. 3. Dispositive
for the efficacy; therefore do but observe what disposition attends and follows
these: There be five things which if they follow upon legal humblings, may be
subordinate encouragements to the heart, to put it self upon Christ.

First, if quite driven out of ones self.

Secondly, if sin comes to be felt as the basest evil, as the guilt of it has
been found the sorest pain.

A third is if the heart finds it self any way loosened from the league of
iniquity; yea, and that a secret war is begun now 'twixt the soul and the
sinner.

Fourthly, an high estimate and valuation of Christ, as the only and choicest
good of my soul and hope, etc.

An active and fervent desire to put the soul under the Government of the Lord
Jesus.

Whether thy legal humblings be great or small, long or short, more or less,
that is not the thing; but if they be thus attended, thou may safely venture
thy soul upon the Lord Jesus, thou may believe, and he will in no wise
refuse thee.

3. Faith in Christ will not hinder the humblings or meltings of thy soul.

I observe when there is a Thunderclap, then there is such a hurry in the
cloud, that fire flasheth out, and the cloud is brust insunder, and a mighty
deluge of water is thrown down; and you may likewise observe that the Sun does
(though there be no storm) draw up and sweetly open and pierce the clouds,
which thereby give down the most seasonable and refreshing showers of rain. The
Law is like a Thunderclap, it does many times so toss, and hurry, and vex the
conscience, that infinite sighs, and fears, and tears gush out: But then
faith makes the Sun of righteousness to arise within the soul, and nohing
melts the heart more then Christ apprehended by faith. Zach. 12. 10. They shall
look upon him whom they pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns
for his only son, and they shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn.

For faith.

First, sees the greatest love, the sweetest kindness, the freest pardons, 3.
Reasons of it.
the readiest acceptations; all which do even me it the heart into a river, and
works the greatest mournings.

I doubt not but the very behavior of the father of the Prodigal, brake the
heart of him with more thawings and kindly mournings, then ever did his former
misery and hardship; O this, that though he was an ungracious spend-thrift, a
stubborn child, a lewd companion, Luke 15. yet his father should run to meet
him, that he should fall upon his neck and kiss him, the kindness of those
lips wounded his heart with the deeper sense and judging of his own
unkindnesse. So when a sinner shall by faith see Christ steping forward in the
Gospel, putting forth the hand to him, calling him, come, thou have done evil as
thou can, have wronged my father, me, my spirit, my servants, thy self, I
will get thee pardon for all, fear not, nor be dismayed, I will will take upon
me the discharge, I will be thine, my blood thine, my righteousness thine; O,
this melts the heart: thou can not take Christ, but thy heart will break, nor
read thy pardon, but thine eyes will melt; what for me, Lord; yea, for thee,
what after such deep rebellions; yea, after all, and that most freely and
willingly; Good Lord, how the soul weeps now, etc.

Secondly, faith sees sin in the greatest vileness: It is one thing to see
sin, Hell-gates, and another thing to see sin (if I may so allude) at
Heaven-gates, there I see it in its reward, which causes fear, here I see it
in its proper nature, which causes hatred. when I can see sin as the wrong of
a righteous and holy will, as a rebellion against a holy and just Law, as a
provocation of a great and holy God, as the spear thrusting through the heart
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the basest quality, and vilest abuse, and
indignity to love, and mercy, and blood; now, now I begin to melt, to grieve, a
God is wronged, a Father is wronged, a Savior is wronged.

3. Faith melts the promises, and the promises melt the heart: Why? brethren,
our soft and mourning hearts are not first in us, and then in the promises, but
first in them, and from them they come down into us. The heart of flesh is
first in that promise, Ezekiel. 36. I will take away the heart of stone, and give
you an heart of flesh, and thence it comes to the person for to fashion and
mollify his heart. But what draws the promises? Is it not faith: It is the
only hand which reaches out unto them, and receives them; whence it does fully
follow, that believing will be no prejudice, but a great furtherance to thy
mournful humblings and softnings.

Obj. I grant it, when a man can indeed believe; this believing will much
abate, and perhaps remove the actuals of an horrible stumbling; (that is) a man
shall not now feel such a desperate terrifying, bitter, hopeless anguish as
before, but yet it does open a full vein within the soul, which drops with
vital sorrows, with gracious lamentings, with hearty displeasures, with
hopeful tears; and though under them the soul is not so hurried, yet it weeps
bitterly, as the wife which holds the lately reconciled husband by the hand, or
as the child which is newly pardoned and embraced.

This is a truth, that faith can heal the tears of a slave, and breed the
tears of a child: It can rebuke the ragings of the sea, and yet continue its
flowing courses; It can still a raging conscience, and yet beget a stream of
godly sorrow; it can both quiet a troubled spirit, and raise within us a soft
and mourning heart. Yea to speak plainly, a man never till then begins to mourn
as a child, till he has faith to see God as a father, and the gracious looks
of Christ (which only faith espies) they upbraid our sinnings more, and no such
springs of grief as they.

6. Obj. But I have stood out my day, and have refused many invitations, and
offers, as, now I may not believe. I am sure that Christ will never regard me,
because of my former proud refusals of him in his gracious offers and
invitations: Now the day is gone, It is too late.

Sol, To this I answer.

1. That not only the positive refusals, but also the slighting pretermissions
of the voice of the Gospel, are (undoubted) sinful, for if disobedience to the
Law, then much more unto the Gospel is very bad; no man can refuse his remedy,
but he makes his wound the greater.

2. Again it is granted, the greater kind of refusal, add a greater measure
of guilt: the refusals of light against light, is a more dark condition: (that
is) when a man knows the Gospel to be the voice of Christ, and to propound
heaven and mercy upon the only terms, and yet he is not gathered, this is
sin in more degrees then the passing over it, then ignorance, and
inobservation: again, the more wilfully a man refuses his opportunity and
invitations, this also makes the refusal more heinous, and calls upon the soul
for greater humblings.

But then know, 5 s Things.


1. That Christ is not always so quick to break off (for ever) for some
refusals: It is not an incapable condition, (a sealed state) if a man has
stood out against many particular invitations. This simply is not the sin
against the holy Ghost, and therefore it is pardonable, and if the sin be
pardonable, then the sinner is capable of Christ, in whom alone sin is to be
pardoned.

2. Scarce any believer, (who is called after the ripeness of years) but has
often refused (before his conversion) many invitations by grace and mercy. It
were an horrid harshnesse for any Minister to send all them to hell, who once
refuse the news and tender of heaven: Nay, we see that Christ has several
seasons of conversion, some he brings home to himself at the night, at the
later end of the day, who questionless refused him in the former part of the
day; nay, that grace which does gather a man to Christ, conquers our refusing
hearts, Ergo, mere refusing is not an eternal prejudice. It is true, that
whiles I do refuse, I cannot believe, yet though I have formerly refused, I may
yet believe.

There is a double refusal of Christ, and the invitations of the Gospel; one is
malicious, this is fearful; another is temerarious, and this is pardonable:
That is accompanied with a despitefulnesse of spirit, this depends much upon
rashness, temptations, inadvertency.

Again, there is a double refusal; one is total, but temporary; A man does not
hearken, though Christ does call, he will not subscribe, though Christ
propounds, but goes in his own way and course, yet at length with Paul, he may
be struck to the ground, and yield up himself to Christ.

Another is, total and final, which is an impenitent rebellion; A man holds out
against the voice of Christ for ever, there is no hope for such a person.

2. No broken and grieved heart for former refusals can justly say, that it
has stood out its day, and it is too late to believe.

This is a thing of some concernment, and many are very strict in it; I will
only present my thoughts amidst the crowd of conjectures.

First, how punctual Gods day of grace is in the offer of Christ; so that if a
man does not take it in the first moment of tender, I think none can tell.

Secondly, to say of this or that particular man, that he is gone beyond his
day, for ought I know, goes beyond our commission.

Thirdly, that at any time when the Gospel is published, then it ought
presently to be embraced, To day if you will hear his voice, etc.

Fourthly, God does not take away from a man his day always immediately upon
his first refusal, if so, perhaps it would have been night with all the world
ere this.

Fifthly, it is probable that the day of grace is not closed against a
particular person, when his heart begins to be broken for former refusals: for
when men out-stand this day, usually they are given up to a seared conscience,
to a reprobate mind, to a sensible stupidity, and to the works of sin with
greediness; they grow worse and worse, being not only destitute of all
softning qualities, but being more hardened by the Gospel, which they refused
and despised. The man who out-stands his day, is either deprived of the sound
of the Gospel, or else he has only the judicial power of it working upon him.

3. The sense and grief of the heart for former standings out, this, I say,
proclaims that thy day is not set, nay, this is thy singular and special day.

D^vines do distinguish of the day.

One is General, like the rising of the Sun, the very rising and publishing
of the Gospel makes a day.

Another is special which is like one of the twelve hours in the day, when the
Spirit of God begins to make day within the heart, and Christ is dealing and
secretly parling with the soul, by conviction of its former refusals, by sweet
humblings and meltings for such proud and erroneous denials: That the Prince of
my peace should be refused, that the Lord of my life should be refused, that
the terms of righteousness and mercy should be refused, O how the heart
judges, condemns rents, and afflicts it self for it; falls down at the feet of
Christ, not worthy O Lord to look upon thee, whom I have so often undervalued.
This is a special day, here is a season for thee, thou may go to Christ,
Christ has dealt with thee effectually, this is the acceptable time.

4. If thou have stood out against Christ hitherto, thou have therefore now the
more reason to come in, and not to refuse the offer yet continued.

Observe two things.

First, that former rebellions are never taken off by by new and continued: For
this is to make sinning much the worse; perhaps thou did refuse Christ
heretofore through ignorance, (thou did not see his excellencies, nor thine
own necessity) or perhaps through inadvertency or carelessness, thou did not
wisely and seriously heed that great salvation in him: But now thou art
convinced, now thou see thy refusals, and careless pretermissions to be
sinful: Why; is this the way to cure the former by adding more refusals? Did
thou well to refuse him upon his own terms? if thou did ill then cease
refusing; labor to accept of them: Thou can never please God by continuing
in a sin, nor help thy self by pleading against thy duty.

Secondly, thy obligation and present duty cease not because of former
refusals: It was thy duty to have received Christ at the first, and to this
very day does that duty lie upon thee: former miscarriages should cause our
humblings, but they never disannul our duties: Why; the Gospel is yet in its
revelation of Christ, and yet in its tenoer of Christ unto thee, and yet in
commanding of thee to refuse him no more, but to hearken and to believe, (that
is) to accept of Christ to be thy Lord and Savior.

Obj. Oh why, what should I do faith a soul that has stood out?

Sol. I answer, thou should look back on thy withstandings with hearty
grievings, and should press on toward thy duty with fervent requestings;
now lay down thy weapons, and strive to give up thy self to Christ, not to
harden thy heart any longer, but beg of God day and night to forgive thy
refusals, and to give thee now a heart to believe and to yield.

5. Christ will accept of any man who is willing to lay down his weapons.

Object. It Is true that Christ says, These mine enemies who will not have me
to reign over them, bring them forth and slay them before me; If a man will be
still an enemy, if he will not accept of Christ to be his Lord, to govern him,
then Christ w^ll be a Judge and enemy to that man, he shall perish.

Sol. But it is as true, that if we accept of reconciliation, if we would lay
aside former enmity, if we come unto Christ and cast our selves down at his
feet, and give up the sword which fought against him; if we confess our
rebellions, and beseech him to accept of us into his service, and into mercy;
If we heartily desire now to be the servants of righteousness, to take Christ
to be our Lord, and to serve him alone, assuredly he will not refuse us.
Therefore, if any here this day have their spirits entangled with this scruple,
that they now have refused Christ, and are past their day, but withal they
find their hearts bleeding for this, and they do now judge of Christ as the
chiefest of ten thousands, and it is the desire of their souls to be
reconciled, and to put themselves under the government of the Lord Jesus, I say
unto such, fear not, come and accept of Christ, he will be reconciliation to
thee; Though thou have been an enemy, yet if now thou will accept of the terms
of peace, the Son of peace will certainly accept of thee.

7. Obj. Yet the sensible sinner is not satisfied for all this, I am afraid,
Why? because I find not only former guilts in a manifold number, but present
corruptions in exceeding strength, no man living has an abominable heart as I,
surely the Lord Jesus will loath me and depart from me, a sinful wretch, I
cannot think otherwise, how then should I believe?

Sol. For some resolution of this scruple, observe a few particulars.

First, the sense of the strength of sin is no unhopeful symptom, nor
prejudice to faith. Of all tempers, the hardened is most dangerous, and sin
has the greatest strength, where there is the least sense: A man seems to be
nothing else but a lump of sin, when he is so wholly leavened and sowred,
that not a part in him can reflect upon it self, and feel its filthiness;
where the guilt of sin is no burden, and the nature of sin is no trouble,
that soul is in an ill case.

But the sense of the strength of sin imports something else in the soul
besides sin: When the patient is deadly sick, he says he is well and feels no
pain, but when a patient is recovering, he is full of sense, and complains his
head is weak, his stomach sick, his bones lame, all is amiss. There is more
hope of one sensible sinner, then of a thousand presumptuous and hardened
wretches; And God seldom or never gives a man a sense of Christ, who has not
had first a sense of his sinfulness.

There is a double sense of sin.

1. One is merely judicial, which is the feeling of the guilt of sin when God
awakens the conscience to apprehend its former sinnings, and imprints some
degrees of wrath upon it as the fruits of guilt; and now the sinner is broken
and crushed, for he feels a kind of hell in himself for his former sinnings.

2. Another is more then judicial; It is something more grievous, and that is,
when a man does not only feel the guilt of sin as pressing, but the nature
of sin as an oppressing burden; He sees and feels the inclinations and
motions of his heart as most repungnant to the will and glory of God, and
therefore is exceedingly afflicted and disquieted: This now is an admirably
hopeful Symptom.

Secondly, Unbelief is no our to the strength of sin: whether thou
conjecture the strength of sin to consist in hardness of heart, Why,
unbelief will never soften thee; or whether thou conjecture the strength of it,
to consist in the approbation of sin; Why, unbelief will never condemn and
disapprove it; or whether thou conjecture (though not rightly) its strength to
consist in mere inclinations; why? why unbelief will never alter them; or
whether thou think its strength consists in frequency of actions or motions;
why, unbelief will never remove or lessen them; or whether thou think its
strength consists in commands and power, why, unbelief will never conquer them.

Unbelief is a sin it self, and therefore can be no cure of sin, (for nothing
cures the sinner, but that which is contrary unto sin:) Nay, unbelief keeps off
the soul from its cures, from its helps; the help of a sinful soul is in
heaven, but unbelief knows not the way upward, the heart of unbelief will
depart from the living God.

Thirdly, Christ is a Physician for a sick sinner, and he has said, that the
whole need not the Physician, but the sick. Why? The sick person is no
unsuitable object or present for a Physician, his calling is to heal distempers
and sicknesses; and thou may confidently go to Christ to have thy sick soul
healed. We cannot brethren, we cannot, and Christ knows it well enough, we
cannot come to Christ, but we must be beholding to him for two things, One, his
merit to get our sins pardoned; Another is his Spirit, to get our sinful
natures changed. And therefore Christ is appointed of God, not only to be
Redemption, but also to be Sanctification; as he is the Author of salvation to
us, so he is the Author of Sanctification in us; We cannot come to him and
bring good natures, O no, the grace which we want, is in Christ, in our Head,
as water in the Spring, and from his fullness must we receive grace for grace.
None can change that vile heart of thine but Christ; His wings are healing, and
to him art thou appointed to come as the sick person to the Priest in the
Levitical Law.

The Covenant of grace (you know) is an undertaking, not only for pardon, but
for changing, and all the Covenant is made good in Christ: As if God should say
unto a sinner, I know thou art a guilty person ful-well, and besides that, thou
have a filthy and abominable nature, but go to my Son, accept of him, there is
thy pardon in him, and there is thy change in him, he shall justify thee from
thy guilt, and he shall sanctify thy nature from its vile corruption.

Fourthly, Jesus will not loath thee because of thy sinful nature, but will
help thee because thou art a sick person. Remember it for ever, the more vile
thou art in thine own eyes, the more precious thou art in Christ's opinion; I
never read of any person who came to Christ, thou Lord heal me, but he was
sent away cured.

Fifthly, What do thou think of believing? what is thy opinion of faith?
what? as if faith were an enemy or hinderance to holiness? That it will either
increase, or suffer lewdness in the heart? far be it from thee so to think; O
no, Faith is the singular way of increasing and getting all grace to thy soul,
it deals altogether with holy principles, God, Christ, the Spirit, and with
holy ways, the Word, the Sacraments; Faith engages all the goodness and
strength of heaven for thy change, and for the renewing and subduing of thy
sinful heart. Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, says the
Apostle, and why? for ye are under grace: Mark it, under grace (that is) under
a gracious Covenant, wherein God and Christ have engaged themselves to their
aid and strength; yea, but what makes us to be under this grace? Verily it is
faith in Christ, in whom all grace is ensured to the soul.

Nay, if thou could by faith accept of Christ to be thy Lord and Savior,
now might thou confidently go unto him to express the virtues of his
Sovereignty and goodness to thee; Now might thou plead with him for the
excellencies of his Spirit; Lord Jesus, I have bestowed my self on thee, and
thou did invite and assure me, that thou would be, not only
righteousness, but sanctification also unto me, I beseech thee, send forth the
rod of thy Scepter, the virtues of thy grace, and change by thy holy Spirit
this unholy heart of mine, subdue mine iniquities, cast down every imagination
exalting it self against thee, bring into captivity (O my soul desires to be
captivated to thee, yea, by the) every thought, etc.

There is a pregnant difference 'twixt presumption and faith, presumption is
but the birth of an idle fancy, like a dream of great matters, which yet has
no real bottom, but only flies out of a multiplying imagination which is full
of deluding acts.

But faith conjoynes the soul with a lively principle, with a true fountain of
grace with a root of holiness, even with Jesus Christ himself, without whom
we can never be made holy, and by whom (being ingraffed into him by faith) we
shall be sanctified throughout.

Look as the defiling qualities of our nature are first in Adam, and then in us
his posterity, so changing and sanctifying qualities are first in Christ, the
second Adam, and from him derived to us his members.

And then know that there is not such a Ligament to tie us in Union with
Christ, as Faith, nor is there any such instrument to draw out the virtues of
Christ into the soul as faith.

You read of those in the Gospel who brought diseased body: to Christ, and yet
when they believed, they went away with cured and healed tempers; what does
this intimate unto us, but that the sensible sinner weary of his sinful nature,
should make his address unto the Lord Jesus for cure, and health, and that he
should by faith accept of him, and trust upon him for the healing of his soul,
and the subduing of his sins, and then verily you shall find virtue to come
from Christ, raising a greater hatred of sin, war with it in the very
fountain, watching and praying against it, and the power of the ordinance
successively weakening and crucifying the power of sin.

Lastly, know this that the time of contrariety is the time for faith to work.
When a man sees death, then is it the time for faith to believe life? When he
sees the grave, then is it the time for faith to believe a resurrection; when
he sees guilt, then is it the time for faith to believe pardoning mercy; when
he sees himself a sinner then is it the time for faith to believe a Sa^iour;
when he sees strong corruptions, then is it the time for faith to believe great
grace; when he sees great discomforts, then is it the time for faith to believe
strong consolations; the exigences of sense, and the reliefes of the promises
are quite contrary; what I feel is one thing, what God does promise is another
thing. That which the patient observes in himself, is sickness; and that which
he hopes for in the medicine is health. Has God made thee sensible of thy
sins, do thou find thus much, that all that thou can do will not become a
rebuke of corruption, thou art able now to see the strength of thy sinful
nature, but to remove it thou art utterly unable? Why, what is now to be done?
truly, as in the sense of the guilt of sin, we must then fly by faith to God,
and put our souls upon his free mercy for pardon, so in the sense of the
filthy strength of sin, we must to heaven by faith, and put our souls on Gods
faithful promises in Christ, for the healing and subduing of it. This is the
way, and therefore strive to walk in it, you may try other waters, but they
shall not help you, and perplex your own thoughts, but they shall not avail
you, the cure of the sinful soul is only in heaven, and it is faith only which
can lift up a soul to God and Christ, which puts it into the Pool. When sin is
felt, then let faith work; If thou can find any one promise which God has
made of sanctifying and healing, and subduing; Why, here is ground for faith;
yea, for thy says, for in these promises are the cures of thy sinful nature,
and faith it is which will apply the healing medicines to thee.

8. Obj. Yet I am not satisfied, says the sensible sinner and fearful soul;
Why, Because, First, I cannot find an heart to duty, to pray and seek of God,
and surely if God did purpose and mean any good to me, he would in some measure
frame, and incline, and excite my heart toward him. Secondly, yea, and again,
though I do sometimes seek and entreat, yet I observe that what I was, that I
am, nothing comes of it, how then can I, may I, should I be enduced to believe?

Sol. Here are two sore and real scruples which do indeed vehemently beat upon
a sensible sinner, I shall endeavor to assoyle them successively.

1. I cannot find an heart to any duty, to pray for faith, etc.

I Answer.

1. As the inability to holy duties depends on natural corruption, so the
indisposition toward them depends exceedingly upon unbelief: There is nothing
disheartens a man more toward God then it: For besides this, that unbelief in
its own nature is a departure from God, (it is a bias drawing the soul
downwards.) This also is true of it, that it represents God to the soul in all
the appearances and methods of discouragements. It makes the soul to see
nothing in God, or from God, which might incline it to him: O, says unbelief,
there is such holiness and purity in him, that he will never endure thee,
there is such truth and justice in him, that he will surely be avenged of thee.

There is such strength and power in him, that he will certainly meet with
thee, and lay load on thee: There is, I confess, a mercifulness in him, but
alas his tender bowels of compassion, his ready forgiveness extends not to
thee; there are many sweet intimations in his promises, but they concern not
thee; there is a mighty salvation in Christ, and powerful intercession to
ingratiate some persons and their services, but what of this to thee! He is a
God hearing prayer; yea, but he will not regard the cries nor tears of some,
but their Sacrifices are an abomination unto him: And thus does unbelief set up
God utterly against the soul, so that the poor soul conceiving of God as an
enemy, dares not come near it, flies off it, is even afraid to speak to him; It
is persuaded by unbelief, that God will frown upon all that is done,
whereupon the spirit sinks, the affection^ are flatted; I have no mind, nor
heart, am like a lump, a stock, a stone.

Secondly, it is faith which will fetch up the soul, Psalm. 27. 13. I had
fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, etc. As if he
should say, my spirits were even breathing themselves out, I was even sinking
down, giving up all, unless I had believed, but that confidence of Gods
goodness toward me, that did put life into me, that did fetch me again, that
did put heart into me.

You see now the spring is coming on, that those (seemingly) dead branches of
the trees, they begin to thrust out some hopeful sproutings, and put on another
color of freshness, why? because the root is now more fed* and warmed. It is
faith which will put color into our faces, and spirit into our hearts, and
life into our duties.

For,

1. Faith sets open the mercy-seat: It represents God to the Two reasons of it.
soul in all his attributes of graciousnesse, not as an hard tyrant, but as a
good God, willing to give audience to the What is thy request, said Ahashuerus
to Queen Ester, it shall be granted thee, etc? So says the Lord, What would
thou have of me? Is it mercy? I do promise it unto thee; Is it grace? I promise
that unto thee; Is it strength? is it comfort? is it deliverance? whatsoever it
be, if thou believe on me, I will not fail to give to thee. Nay, I will do it
freely, nay, cheerfully, with all my heart, and with all my soul, Jer. 32.

Yea, this makes the soul to come unto God, as the ship into the haven with
full speed, and stretched sails: O the soul bends the knee with cheerfulness,
when it sees it shall be raised up with kindness; a man may have some heart to
pray, when he knows, My God will hear me, that God has a readiness to answer.

2. Faith sets the soul in the prevailing ways: it puts the soul to seek and
pray with such motives, as it is most sure shall make it to speed.

There are many motives which men take to prevail with God; O, they can do
nothing, God regards them not, the strength of a man's excellencies, of his own
worthiness, of his own abilities and frame alas, these are not the prevailing
and binding motives, all these import that thou would speed for their own
sake. But faith lays these asi^e, it has motives from Gods own heart and
mouth, with which it teaches the soul to urge God, the Name of Christ, the
gracious goodness of God himself, the fidelity of his promises, his own word;
Now God has said, that these shall prevail with him, and faith knows it to be
infallibly so, and hereupon draws on the soul with mavelous cheerfulness
to seek the Lord.

3. Know this, that no man shall in good earnest set upon God for faith, and
other grace, but Satan will set upon his heart, and his heart will set against
his ways in this. This were a wonder indeed, if a man could get into Christ's
arms without any more ado: That he should instantly have an heart (in all
imaginable respects) sweetly and totally framed with the strength, and
un-interrupted gales of heavenly inclinations and performances. Alas! poor
soul, thou must by weak faith fight hard to get strong faith, and thou must by
any duty make way for clearer duty: well is it with thee, if instead of words,
thou can sometimes seek God with sighs, and when sighs fail, if yet with
groans and desires. When thou would do good, thou shall find evil present
with thee; when thou feel an heart to pray, perhaps even that motion is
almost struck out by another heart in thee, which is most unwilling to pray;
when thou feel any climbings of thy soul by faith in thy heart, even these
will be opposed by strong doubtings and suspicions by another heart of unbelief
within thee. Nevertheless remember this, that this particular opposition being
resisted, disliked, bewailed, does only declare that there is in thee, that
which is contrary to thee, and that Satan dislikes thy way, it does not
testify that God dislikes it, or will not accept of thee.

If God has given unto thee any desires toward him, O cherish them as one
would a spark; The beginnings of a Christian are in much weakness, and
manifold distractions and oppositions, but there is a God who gave unto thee
those breathings, and can understand secret groans; and there is a Christ, who
can and will make weak services acceptable, and in time will give the victory
after the combat.

Secondly, Many seekings, but nothing comes of them.

This does exceedingly distract the soul, the unsensible alteration of the
soul after many seekings, usually raise a prejudice against God and our
selves, but for this observe some particulars.

1. The efficacy of seekings, consists not in the quantity or number, but in
the quality and manner. Have you offered unto me Sacrifices and offerings in
the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? Amos 5. 25. So I say, have
thou offered prayers unto God in these many days of thy distresses? nay, thou
have come before him with words, but not with prayers.

What? think thou that the Lord is pleased with all thy tears, and with all
the humblings of thy Spirit, and with all the importunities of thy requests,
whiles under them all, thou do not stick to tell God to his face that he is
a dissembler and liar? In all these thy sacrifices and approaches unto the
great and high God, thou did not believe any one promise which he has made,
thou have thought that God would not do thee good; and is it likely that thou
should speed well at his hand, who reproachest the true and faithful God?

Obj. I do indeed pray, because I must, I am commanded, but I verily believe it
is in vain; tush, what tell you me of Gods promises, he will never perform
them to me?

Sol. Good God! what, shall the Lord not only command by a righteous word, but
assure and invite by a good and faithful word, a word as true as truth it self,
and is it but a tush with us? is it not of any more account with us? nay, not
of so much account as the word of a poor man? No marvel that nothing comes
after many seekings, such seekings of pride and unbelief, infidelity, for the
pardon of which I advise thee to speed up many more seekings of faith.

2. Right seekings shall always come to something; Though the proud and
impatient persons said, It was in vain to serve God, and what profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the
Lord? Mal. 3. 14. Yet God assures them, that the day should come that they
should return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God, and him that serves him not, Ver. 18. Sweet is that place of
the Prophet I^aiah, Mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands, Isa.
65. 22. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble, Verse 23.
It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer, and whilst they
are yet speaking, I will hear, v. 24.

And the reason is, because God is faithful who has promised, and he will
never suffer his truth to fail. If there be any good thing which he has
commanded thee to pray for, and which he has undertaken for thee in his
promises, and which thou do humbly sue out in the name of Christ by faith; I
say, rest upon it, it shall be given to thee if thou can but wait on God in
the use of the means.

3. There is a double answer to the seeking of the soul, one is real, another
is sensible: As when a request is presented to the King, either for pardon or
settling; if he accepts of the request and puts his seal to the authorizing of
the grant, the request is really done though (perhaps) the petitioner knows it
not: So it is with the Lord many times in his answerings, he does the things
really for us, though we be not presently sensible of it: we beg for mourning
hearts, and for hearts to hate sin, and for hearts to pray unto him, and then
we feel our hearts hard, and our corruptions bursting forth upon us, which
makes our hearts bitterly to grieve, and stirs up extreme loathings of our
vile natures, and causes the soul to lie grovelling with most striving and
servent importunities at heaven gate; Why, here are now the very things that we
would have, yet we are not many times sensible that these things are answers.

4. We must distinguish 'twixt nothing absolutely, and nothing comparatively.
Why, it is true, that the Holy heart has such an extreme abomination of sin,
and such an high thirst of grace, that the present answers from heaven seem as
nothing (that is) there is yet something more and more which I would have, the
present grants are not satisfying of my desires, yet something is got by every
faithful seeking; there is not one faithful prayer, which thou have dispatched
to heaven, but it delivers thy message, and is returned with a blessing.

Either it gets more additions to some grace or other, or more alienation from
some sin or other, or more dispotion to some duty or other, or more
resolution to seek, or more strength to wait. Like the many Bees which go out,
every one comes home with some thing, one with honey, another with wax; so
every faithful prayer flies up to heaven and gathers something or other from
the good promises, and though not so much as thou desire, yet always more
then thou deservest, though not so much as to satisfy, yet as to help.

5. Suppose that yet you are not answered, it is then a sin to murmur and
quarrel, but it is thy duty to wait.

I observe this.

1. That God never gives thee so large an alms, but that thou need the next
hour to become a farther Petitioner.

2. That God is pleased to make the beggar to stay sometimes at door; he does
not always presently give what he intends certainly to bestow, but as his own
free grace is the treasury of our gifts and supplies, so his own wisdom is the
dispensor of the time and season.

Now then, as the goodness of the promise should draw us to believe, so the
fidelity and certainty of it should cause us to wait and expect: God does give
thee leave to urge him, but he likes it ill to hasten him; if God does promise,
then it is thy duty to believe, and if he stays, then it is thy duty to wait,
for God does wait that he may be gracious, and blessed are all they that wait
for him.

CHAP. XVII. Of living by faith.
HAving formerly showed unto you what it is to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and earnestly pressed upon you to get faith in him. I now proceed to
another Use, which (supposing that

Beloved, there be two offices of faith.

One is to breed conjunction and acceptance, and this is done when the heart is
upon good, and choice, and deliberated grounds effectually inclined to content
and take whole Christ upon his own terms.

Another is to breed dependence, and this is done when the believing soul makes
continued use of that fullness and virtue which is in Christ touching the
continued exigencies of its state and condition in this life. As it is with a
woman, she first gives her consent, and becomes a wife, and then being a wife,
she looks upon her husband as the only person to supply her, direct her,
comfort her, provide for her and hers.

So is it with faith, first it does espouse the soul to Christ, it takes him
as Lord and husband, and then it casts all the provisions of the soul upon
him, all the supplies and helps, it trusts on him for righteousness, on him
for pardon of sins, on him for grace, one him for strength, on him for
comfort, on him for eternal life, etc.

Now because this is a point of singular consequence, give me leave therefore
(and it matters not, if now and then I make a little digression) to unfold
these particulars, that you may the better understand and be assisted, how to
use that faith in Christ, which you have to live upon him by it.

1. What it is (in the general) to live by faith.

2. To what states the life of faith may extend.

3. What it is more particularly to live by faith on Christ.

4. What arguments and enducements I have to press, not only the getting of
faith, but also the living by faith on Christ.

5. In what particulars the Believers should live by faith on Christ.

6. What things oppose the life of faith.

7. Trials, if so that we live by faith.

8. What good helps may be found out to assist, and more and more to incline
and enable the believing heart still to live by faith.

If any other profitable and pertinent enquiry may hereafter fall in for the
better information and direction, besides those particular heads which I have
now propounded unto you, you shall have a view of them likewise, but for the
present I can think of no more: Now the God of mercy, and Father of all
consolations, direct and bless their deliveries so unto you, that you may not
only have that precious faith, but live by faith, nay, and die in faith, and so
receive the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

SECT. I.
Quest. 1. What it is (in the general) to live by faith.

Sol. I will not now stand on the several kinds and sorts of life, viz. That
there is a life of vegitation which the trees and plants do live, and a life of
sense, which the beasts and cattle do live; and that there is a life of reason
and knowledge which man does live; and that there is a life of faith which the
Christian either does, or should live.

Neither will I stand upon the opposition 'twixt the living by faith, and
living by works, one being a legal life, and upon our selves; the other being
an evangelical life, and upon Christ.

Nor now of that opposition 'twixt the life of faith and the life of sense, the
one being a life in hand, the other in promises; That depending upon our eye,
this upon our ear, (that is) sense dwelling on what it can see, and faith on
that good word which it does hear.

These things being passed over, I conjecture, that to live by faith may be
thus described.

It is an heavenly and dutiful committing of our whole persons, To live by
faith, what.
and of our whole estates unto God, with a pious depending upon his faithful
and good promises in Christ, for suitable and seasonable supplies in all our
exigences occurrences, and changes whatsoever.

Here are diverse things observable.

First, to live by faith, is to commit all to God: It is as it were to entrust
him with our selves and ours. I know (says Paul) whom I have believed, and I
am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, 2 Timothy 1. 12. As if he should say, I have put my very soul and life into the
hands of Christ, who I know will look to it, take care of it for ever. David
makes this to be the putting of our selves under God, as our Shepherd, Psalm.
23. 1. and as our Keeper, Psalm. 121. 5. Mark this, a man lives not by faith
when he undertakes to be himself, the Lord of himself, or a God to himself,
when he trusts to his own heart, or will subsist by his own arm, or when he
puts his confidence in any arm of flesh. O no, faith gives God the honor of
our beings and safeties, and resignes up all to be, and to be disposed as the
Lord pleases; If he will have me to enjoy, well; if to want, well; if to
abound, well; if to be abased, well; I would be as he would have me to be, and
I would be estated as he would have me to be estated; If he thinks good to
bestow a fair estate upon me, I desire to be humble and thankful; If he thinks
good to limit me to a mean estate, I desire to be humble and contented; If he
keeps me in a free condition, I desire to love him; if in a perplexed
condition, I yet desire to fear and serve him: though I would be careful and
diligent, yet I would not be anxious and vexing; I dare to trust him with my
soul, to preserve, sanctify, uphold, comfort, save it; I trust him with my
body, to preserve, enable, change, and dispose it; I trust him with my whole
estate, to give it, alte^ it, increase it, lessen it, keep it, bless it, as
may make most for his glory and my good.

Secondly, To live by faith, is to depend upon God for all. You all conjecture,
That

First, God is an alsufficient goodness, he is goodness it self; And
whatsoever good the creature is capable of, or does actually participate, he is
the sole cause thereof; means which be next at hand and near our eyes, are
but pipes and stewards, but God he is the fountain and Lord.

Secondly, he has put all Covenant good for his servants into promises. The
promises are nothing else but a deed of gift, sealed with the truth of God:
There has God freely undertaken whatsoever belongs to grace or glory; to this
life, or to that which is to come; do thou want this or that, Why,
whatsoever is fit for thee to have, that I promise in the Name of my Son to
give unto thee, says God.

Now to live by faith, is to cast anchor at heaven gates, it is to cast the
soul upon Gods promises in Christ, to rely on God for any good which God has
promised, and undertaken; this I want, and this God has promised; he has
undertaken the supply, and I will trust upon him for it.

Though I feel no such thing; nay, though I feel the contrary, yet I do not
cast away my confidence: Though figtrees blossom not, though olives fail, and
hindes are gone, yet if my supply appears in any word of promise, I take heart
and say, yet my condition is good, all is well and sure; My God has undertaken
it for me, and in his Word will I trust, which is good and true, he will not
fail me, I shall have whatsoever is good, and that too in a good time: This
only in general.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. Sol. TO what states the life of faith may extend. You know that
there are two eminent states of our life.

1. One is spiritual, which respects all the exigencies, varieties, windings,
turnings, changes, defections, eclipses, trials, and hardships of the soul:
Whatsoever accidents may befall an holy soul about the heavenly condition, that
appertains to the spiritual state; all the supplies of grace, of strength, of
comfort, of assurance, of assistance against temptations, corrections,
troubles, all enlivements and quicknings of the Spirit about all sorts of
duties and services, active or passive.

2. Another is temporal, which is not only the term of our natural
breathings, but also the sundry and manifold occurrences which befall us in the
employments of our life; all the accidents, and interruptions, crossings,
checkings; contrarieties, either in our bodies, or calling, or wealth, or
persons, or children, or servants, or good name.

Briefly, the temporal state comprehends all whatsoever may weaken; or wast, or
distract: All or any of our temporal contentments, delights, desires, ends; as
also all our temporal supplements for the being, or well-being of this poor
and short life of ours, as health, strength, friends, food, liberty, estate,
peace, and quietness, etc.

Now then living by faith extends to both: The just shall live by his faith,
said the Prophet, Hab. 2. 4. of the Jews in the temporal state; and, I live by
the faith of the Son of God, said Paul in Gal. 2. 2. speaking of his
spiritual state.

So that faith bears up soul and body, and is both for heaven and earth: It
serves to fetch in the blood of Christ, the redemption by Christ, pardon of
sin, Gods favor, all grace and comfort to the soul: And it serves to fetch
in also health to the body, riches to the estate, plenty, peace, friends, what
not? When I am sick, I yet trust in God for health, when poor, I yet trust on
God for sufficiency, when under reproach, I yet trust on God to clear my
innocence, when under discomforts and forsakements, I yet trust on God for
favor and countenance: In all my distresses and reproaches, I have yet his Word
for my supplies and helps, upon which I rest, and thus I live by faith: so far
as the promises extend, so far does living by faith extend.

SECT. III.
Quest. 3. NOw more particularly what it is to live by faith on Christ.

Sol. I will tell you what I think of it, It is an holy work and course of a
believing person, wherein he does depend on Christ, and To live by faith in
Christ.
make use of him for all the conditions and exigencies of the soul about its
sp^ritual state.

For the opening of this description, I will touch upon three things.

1. The particular conditions and exigencies of the soul, by reason Three
things.
of which it has need to live by faith.

2. The fullness and fitness and fidelity of Christ, for the supply and help
of a believing soul.

3. The conjunction of both these together, which is the very living by faith
on Christ.

First, the particular conditions and exigencies of the soul: you must know
this, That to live by faith presupposes two things on our part, defect and
insufficiency:

There is something lies upon us which should not, and we cannot help our
selves, and therefore we go abroad by faith; this is to live upon the market.

Now there are many things which ly upon our souls.

1. The sense of guilt; this is a great matter, it makes the very heart
oft-times to tremble; it is an heavy burden when a man sins against an holy
and just God, the least of them provoking and damnable: This is a time of
trouble, for a man sees much in debt, and nothing in stock, he is not able to
pay a^ far^hing, all that he is or can do, can never answer divine Justice.
This is one exigence now which makes a man capable to live by faith, to look
out to Christ, and to try what he will do for him a miserable sinner, as you
shall hear anon.

2. The sense of unrighteousness: Why, God requ^res an holy conformity to his
divine will, in heart, and in life, that our nature should be as he requires,
and our ways as he commands, but when the soul is able actively to reflect on
it self, and look on God, and then to compare what it is and has done, with
what it should be, and should have done; It is amazed at its own
unrighteousness, and this is much increased, for it knows that no unrighteous
person shall go to heaven; It knows that God will not pronounce unrighteous
judgment; He will not acquit a man as righteous who has not righteousness,
nor shall he ever stand in judgment before him. Now this is another exigence
which puts the soul upon the life of faith.

3. The times of desertion, when all the comfortable evidences of the Christian
state are drawn off, as it were, when the Lord confines himself and all to his
promise: The poor soul has no spark of comfort, it has no glimpse of divine
favor, if it can find God to be his God, and Christ to be its Christ in the
promises, well and good, but there is no feeling, nor handling any sensible
tokens. This is another exigence.

4. The times of contrariety: when the Sun seems to be darkened, and when
mercy seems to be angry, and when fidelity seems to cast off, when mindfulnesse
seems forgetful, God seems not to regard us, but to fight against us, and
Christ who did call to us to come unto him, does seem to go away from us: O
this is a strong exigence of the soul, and if ever, now must it live by faith.

5. The time of weakness: when a man sees that his work is great, and his
strength is small duties many, power little, affections dull, not able to do
for Christ, not able to suffer for Christ, cannot pray, hear, receive, obey as
he should, as he would. This is also an exigence of the soul wherein it needs
to live by faith on Christ.

6. The times of corruption: when a man feels sin afresh, he had thought
sin had been dead long ago, and all conflicts had been past, but now he
perceives sin to rise like an armed man, and like a flood, even ready to
bear down the soul with that hideous insolency, and violence of wicked
thoughts and inclinations; yea, so great is this storm, that as they said to
Christ in another case, so here, Master help, or else we perish.

7. The times of temptation, which like a cross wind, bears the ship almost
under water: The gates of hell seems to open themselves against the soul, and
the powers of darkness fall in upon it with all the cunning of unbelief, and
excitation to blasphemy; To deny God, to slight his Word, to let go our
confidence in Christ, so that the poor soul is almost brought to dust and
death by reason of them. This is also another exigence for the soul to make use
of Christ, and to live by faith.

8. The times of contradiction: when the mouths of wicked and foolish men, like
sharp rasors, wound and cut off a man's good Name, when their hands, like claws
of Lions, tear away the prey, they take away the innocence of the upright, and
the estates, liberties, friends, all the earthly encouragements of the
righteous; I say, this may also be an exigence, for the soul to live by faith
in Christ, and to make up all in him alone.

2. Now, as he who lives by faith, is (in the acting of that life) still
sensible of some one of these exigencies or straits of his soul; so in the
second place he must be able to Behold a suitable fullness in Christ; He must
know two things.

First, that Christ has enough in him to answer all these.

Secondly, that Christ is appointed of God, and willing to do it; therefore I
pray you remember.

First, that Christ has enough in him to answer all the exigencies of the
soul: Thy soul cannot be cast on any sea, but he is there as a sure ship and
harbor; It cannot be cast upon any straight or trouble whatsoever, but Christ
is able to relieve it.

1. For the sense of guilt: Why, in this there is that in Christ which can take
it off: His blood is good payment, and it was shed for the remission of sins;
He can make perfect peace, and satisfy to the utmost: As the least sin needs
his me it, so the greatest does not exceed it: If Christ would but offer up his
soul for thine, his merits for thy trespasses, his precious blood for thy
bloody crimes; Why, God will be pacified, for his blood is the blood of
atonement of reconciliation, of blotting out, of peace, etc.

2. So for unrighteousness; Why, there is that in Christ which can present the
righteous unspotted, unblameable; which can present thee glorious without spot
or wrinkle, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 5.

He can find an ample garment without any rent, an obedience which was
perfect, which God will accept, for which he will justify thee; Though thine
own righteousness (for matter of judicial Justification) be as filthy rags.

3. The like may be said in a proportion to all the other exigencies. Though
thou be weak in grace, feeble in duty, yet he can make all grace to abound, and
he can strengthen the feeble knees, and he can comfort the mourning spirit, and
he can open heaven again: He can open thy eyes that thou shall see thy God
again; yea, and as thou have done formerly, as thy God, yea, he can conquer the
busiest corruption, and put by thy strongest temptation, and stand by thee in
the bitterest opposition.

2. Nay, and Christ is both appointed of God to be, and do all this for the
believer, and is very willing. He is made unto us of God, (says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 1. 30.) wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: therefore
is he called the horn of salvation, the Justifier of his people, the Standard
to which we should repair, the strength of them that trust in him, in a word,
he was invested a Mediator with his triple office, of Priest, and Prophet, and
King, to be, and to do all this for such as are believers.

Thou do not mistake thy self, nor misconceive of God or Christ, when thou
go to the Lord Jesus in any of thy streits, then to be a Priest for thee, or
to be a Prophet for thee, or to be a King unto thee. O no, God has appointed
him to be the Savior of his body, to be the head of his Church, and Christ,
who was thus ably invested, is as willing and faithful to discharge and
perform.

3. These things being to be known and granted, there follows in the third
place the conjunction of these two together, which indeed is the very living by
faith upon Christ.

When the soul is in any ex^gence, and comes to Christ, and puts it self upon
him, and trusts to him for help, this is to live by faith on Christ. Suppo^e a
person sensible of much guilt, many sinful commissions, or ^omissions lay heavy
and sore upon him; he is grieved at heart that he has so dishonored God, take
them off he is not able, and therefore he renounceth all in himself, to Christ
he goes and says thus, O blessed Lord Jesus, thou did shed thy precious
blood for the remission of sins, thou have offered me thy self, and all thy
precious purchases and benefits; I have by faith accepted of thee, of thee
alone, with all my soul to be my Lord and Savior; Now none in heaven or earth
can procure me the pardon of these sins, but thy self, and thou can do it; I
beseech thee that thy blood may be mine atonement to thy father; yea, I will,
and do cast my soul upon thee, thee alone, for the pardon, and I will trust
unto thee for the discharge, of my many, of all my transgressions; Thy blood is
the price that I will trust to, and rest upon. This is to l^ve by faith in
Christ in that particular; yea, though the sense of guilt be great, and the
truth of it undeniable, yet to believe the pardon in Christ, and to offer his
satisfactions; yea, to adventure, and to roll the soul upon him for it, for
Christ has called me, and he has said that he will ease me, etc.

So again, suppose that thou feel corruptions strongly working, and
temptations grievously assaulting, now to live by faith on Christ is to come
unto him, (knowing the Kingly power of his grace) and to beseech him to subdue
iniquities for thee; and to send forth the rod of his Scepter, the power of his
gracious Spirit, to mortify thy lusts yet more, and to trust upon him, that he
will do this for thee, and therefore thou will apply thy self, with patience
and confidence to the use of all consecrated ways and means, through which
Christ will manifest that power unto thy soul. I thank God through Jesus
Christ* said Paul, Romans 7. As if he should say, I am not able for my life to
root out, to beat down these vile motions, but I cast my self upon Jesus
Christ, I trust unto him, and verily believe he will deliver me; the like may
be said of all the other exigences, but I cannot repeat all.

Consider that the habit or quality of faith is one thing, and the use or
exercise of faith is another thing; the soul then lives by faith on Christ,
when it improves its interest in Christ, when it can trust to him to supply all
its wants; a man is said to live by bread, not when he has it in his Cupboard,
but when he takes and eats it; and a man is said to live upon his money, not
when he lets it to lie dead in his chest, but when he turns and winds it for
his benefit and support. So here, to live by faith on Christ, is to put faith
to work, my works are in my self, but the supplies of my soul are in Christ; as
I go to divine providence, and put my self on its faithful powerful goodness
for my body, so I must go to the Lord Jesus, and put my self on his gracious
and certain fullness for my soul.

Yet observe a few things, for the clearer opening of 4. Things.
this.

1. To live by faith on Christ, it is more then a mere complaining of our
wants, or an acknowledging of his fullness. To see scarsity in the house, and
plenty in the Market, this may be, and it may be vain, unless we go forth to
fetch in the promises.

Whiles the soul keeps home, it lives not by faith: The life of faith lies
abroad: a man may have grace to see his wants, and yet he lives not by faith,
till he can get out unto Christ. I will go to the Prophet, to the man of God,
said the woman who had a troubled spirit for her dead child: Yea, this
recovered her child again: If I can but touch the them of his garment I shall
be whole, said she in the Gospel; you must bring the pitcher to the well, if
you will have water; and the childs mouth must be applied to the breast, if it
would have milk; and the soul must go unto Christ, it must approach unto him,
or else it is but a fruitless trouble, it is not a living by faith on him.

2. To live by faith on Christ, it is more then a mere going to Christ, though
the motion of the soul out of it self be required, yet that alone is not
sufficient. If I go to a man for to lend me an hundred pound, if either I will
not speak to him, or trust him, this is labor loft; so, though we do address
our selves to Christ for help, but will not trust upon him for supply, this is
not yet to live by faith. For,

The life of faith on Christ is raised by three things.

First, his fullness.

Secondly, his goodness.

Thirdly, his faithfulness, and all these enduce the soul to trust unto him:
he is able enough; Ergo, I will trust him; he is ready enough, therefore I will
trust him; he is faithful, and will certainly do me good, therefore I will
trust him. So that to live by faith, it is to live by trust; one is said to
live by trust, when he has nothing from another, but his word, or his bond, I
think him honest, or I have him fast bound, therefore I will trust him. Thou
have the Word of Christ, and the Promise of Christ, which is a sure truth, to
which, if thou do trust, thou do live by faith. If I feel and do not
complain, if I complain and do not pray, if I pray and do not trust, this is
not yet to live by faith; so far as I can trust upon Christ, that he will
supply and help my soul, so far I do live by faith.

3. Nay, Thirdly, to live by faith, is not only to trust upon Christ for
supply, but it is to expect the performance.

There is a great difference 'twixt the life of sense, and the life of faith:
Sense is opposite to expectation; it is only for the present, what it has,
that makes it up, it lives upon no stock but that in hand, but faith reckons
its estate more from what lies in bonds, then what the person finds in the
purse: It finds the greatest part of the souls estate, yet in the promises,
and yet in Christ, and in both graciously, and assuredly undertaken; whereupon
it does make the soul not only to go to Christ, but to trust him, and not only
so, but to expect and wait patiently; he does hear me, he will do me good, he
will not suffer sin to have dominion, he will send forth the rod of his power,
he will make all grace to abound, he will not leave nor forsake me, he will
satisfy for me, his intercession shall be effectual, I shall yet feel the
power of his death, the virtue of his resurrection.

As to pray and not to trust, so to trust and not to expect, to trust and then
to murmur, to trust and to untrust, whiles we are speaking, to get the soul to
put it self upon Christ, and before we have done speaking, to pluck of the
soul again, to deface our own fealing, to cast away our confidence, this is
ill, very ill.

It is true that the acts of faith are capable of weakness, and also of
opposition, one man may more confidently trust and expect, and another less;
sometimes the same man is more pure and high in the act of trusting, and
sometimes he has much ado with his heart, to get it to roll it self on Christ;
but yet he does do it against many fears, and against many corrupt reasonings;
now he lives by faith, but then know it is an ill business instantly to
reverse the acts of faith, faint in it, or but to suspect Jesus Christ himself,
either in his power, or goodness, or truth.

Fourthly, to live by faith on Christ, it is an extensive work, it is to trust
on him, not for one thing only, but for every thing, which concerns the state
of the soul. The soul is a needy thing, naturally it is so, and so it is
spiritually; either it needs grace, or more grace, or strength, or comfort, or
peace, or mercy, and pardon, something or other it wants; now Christ is an
adequate supply to the soul, he has grace enough, and righteousness enough,
and power enough, and peace, and plenteous redemption: Now then as our wants
appear, or as they multiply, so must faith appear and abound in its acts, if we
will be said to live by faith.

I will be righteousness to thee says Christ, and I will trust upon thee for
it says faith; I will be sanctification to thee says Christ, and I will trust
upon thee for it says faith; I will be redemption to thee says Christ, and I
will trust unto thee for that too, says faith; yea, I will trust upon thee to
be my continual propitiation, continual intercession, to be my continual
sufficiency and strength, for more grace, for quickening, for comfort, for
salvation, for all.

Does corruption work again? and I will to Christ again to subdue it, he will
do it for me; does Satan renew his temptations? and I will renew my addresses
to Christ, who will again (I trust) bruise him under my feet; my comforts are
gone, but I will to Christ, I will live upon him, he will come again and then
my joy shall be full.

And indeed the life of faith, as it is a multiplied work, (for it makes the
soul to live upon Christ for its manifold grace,) so it is a repeated work, it
leads on the soul often and often even for the same kinds of supplies.

Obj. O says the soul, I did go to Christ, and did beseech him to rebuke
Satan, and I trusted on him, and followed my suit, and found it so; but now
Satan tempts again, now sin works again, now my heart is down again, dull, and
dead, and feeble again.

Ans. I say to such an one, to live by faith, is to keep house with Christ, it
is to be a daily guest; it is to rely upon him, it is so often to come as we
have need, it is to draw water often from the same fountain: As if Christ did
say to a person, whatsoever thy soul needs, come to me for it, and whenever,
yet come I will do it for thee, and the heart goes confidently to the Lord of
its life, and hope of its salvation.

SECT. IV.
Quest. 4. WHat Arguments to move us, not only to get faith in Christ, but
also to live by it?

Sol. They are so many, that I know not well where to begin.

First, If we consider our own condition, this might put us upon the life of
faith.

First, the life of faith is congruous to our condition: for what is our
condition, but a depending being, such a being as subsists upon, and by another?

Take us as creatures, and so we are but beams of light, which the sun lets
forth, supports, contracts, draws in; We are like a glass which God does
frame, and hold in his own hand, or else we cannot stand; or like the flowers,
they must be set in the ground, and then watered, and fenced, or else they live
not: our whole being, and working, and maintenance is from him that made us; In
him we live, and move, and have our being.

And, take us as new creatures, so shall we find that not only our natural
breath, but our spiritual being, not only life, but grace too, depends not on
him who has it, but on God who gave it; Grace is a sweet stream, but that
flows and runs still, because still fed by a living spring. It is a fruitful
branch, but that branch does stand and bear, because upheld and supplied by a
more fruitful root: Hence is it that Christ is called the head, and we the
members; he is called the root, and we the branches; he the foundation-stone,
we the build^^^* he is called the rock, we the house built on that rock; h^
(...) husband, we the wife and spouse; he the Lord, and we the s^r^ants; he the
Shepherd, and we the sheep; he the nurse, and we the babes; All which do
evidence this much, that our life is in him, upon him, for we are dependants,
from him we live, therefore upon him we should live.

Secondly, the necessity of our condition: our condition here below does so
shift, and vary, and fail, go and come, that if we do not live by faith, we
cannot (honestly) live at all: Help failed me on every side said David, all
men forsook me, said Paul: We know not what to do said Jehosaphat: God is
pleased to call off all our comforts, to gather up into his own hands of
promises all our supports. It is with us many times as with a Ship laden, but
on a sudden broken to pieces, now the persons of necessity must swim toward
the shore, and to the rocks: So God does dash in pieces our lower confidences:
he cracks a full estate, he separates very friends; he gives not a heart to
people to show us compassions: and sorrows on all sides pour in themselves, a
man has nothing in all the world left him, but Gods bond, is word of promise.

So for the estate of the soul, it is frequently so clouded, so darkened, so
checked, so distressed, so assaulted, that all the means under heaven do not
relieve it, if the Lord does not help, if Christ be not the rock, it cannot be
delivered or supported.

Now in such cases, where the condition is wholly reduced to the promises, or
unto Christ, there can be no living but by faith: The heart of a man is either
broken with despair and grief, or will break into the ways of wickedness,
if it lives not by faith in the cases of all sensibe sequestrations: For,

1. It is only faith which can espy something for the soul now: Who is he that
sits in darkness and sees no light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and
stay upon his God? Isa. 50. 10. Faith can see the stars in the thickest night
of darkness; there is nothing but faith, which can tell the soul of rich mercy
in the times of greatest sense of exceeding guilt; and there is nothing but
faith which can find out fullness of grace in Christ for a soul which is
bitterly sensible of its wonderful and continual emptiness. Till the Angel
came and opened Hagars eyes to see the fountain, she gave up her child for
dead, so unless we have faith to open our eyes to see the fountain of grace
and mercy in God and Christ, I tell you that in many of our exigencies we shall
throw away all, all as dead, and lost, and hopeless.

2. Again, It is nothing but faith which gives spirit unto us from a bare
promise: one word of God is security enough to faith. If a Mariner can get to
the top of the Mast, and descry but a point of land, he is now glad, all is
well; faith is said to see the promises afar of, Heb. 11. well says faith to
the soul now, as Paul to them which sailed with him, be of good cheer, thou
shall yet do well, grace, and mercy, and help will come, God has promised it,
and Christ will make all the promises, Yea and Amen; and now the soul lives
because of that good and faithful word, etc.

Secondly, If we consider God himself, there is sufficient reason why we should
live by faith.

There be six arguments which we may behold in God, to envite 6. Things.
and persuade us to live by faith.

First, his Alsufficiency, I am God alsufficient, said he to Abraham, What Is
that? That is, I am an absolute and independent essence in respect of my self,
infinitely perfect and enough, and have enough and enough to satisfy all the
world. Take all the particular creatures in the world and view into their
natures and conditions, you shall find every one of them to be imperfect, to
be depending, to be replenished with wants: even one man for his own particular
is covered over with innumerable wants, the wants of his soul are many, so of
his body, so of his estate, what then, and how many are the necessities of
every man? But now God is alsufficient (that is) he has enough to supply every
man; He can open his hand, fill every living thing. Thou openest thy hand (said
David, Ps. 145. 15.) and satisfiest the desire of every living thing, and he is
able to make all grace abound, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9. 8. He is rich to
all that call upon, Romans 10. 12. He is able to do (Ephesians. 3. 20.) exceeding
abundantly above all we can ask or think. My God shall supply all your need
according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ, Phil. 4. 19. The Sun you
see has light enough for a whole world, and a fountain has water enough for
a whole country; Why, all good is in God, both originally, and eminently, and
causally, (that is) he is goodness it self, and all goodness, fullness,
without want, strength, without weakness, holiness, without blemish, yea, and
the universal cause of goodness, and therefore infinitely able to supply, and
help, and do good: there is no one necessity, but he is able infinitely to
succor it, and many, yea, all necessities are not to be compared to the
unfathomed greatness, and exceedingnesse of his fullness and alsufficiency.

2. His Command: As God is an absolute and full good, (all our helps do center
in him as in their complete cause) so he has commanded us to live upon his
alsufficiency by faith. How often do you read those charges, Trust upon the
Lord, commit thy way to the Lord, rest upon him, stay upon the God of Jacob,
cast thy care on him. As if God should say unto the sons of men, I am he, and
there is none else besides me who can do you good; there is not any good in all
the world which you want but I am able to supply it, I am alsufficient for
wisdom, for holiness, for mercy, for power, for grace, for comfort, for peace.
If you want water, you would go to the Spring, and if you want light, you would
look up to the Sun, and if you want any good, why will you not look up to me
who am goodness it self? I tell you, that I am a God, and have the greatness
and the fullness of a God; Nay, and I charge and require you, when you need any
thing, come to me for it: I am the Master of all the families of the earth, and
the Lord of all good; It is my express will, that you come unto me, and that
you put your trust on me, that you believe on my alsufficiency, that you live
upon that stock which is in my fullness: Nay, I shall take it exceeding ill, if
you rest your selves, or live on any other.

3. His Promises: Consider this two ways.

1. Generally, his promises of good, wherein is ground to trust.

2. Particularly, His promises to them that will and do trust, Psalm. 37. 3.
Trust in the Lord, and verily, etc. Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee: So, Isa. 57.
13. This puts life to all the rest, for though God were never so able to do
good, and though his commands were never so urgent to live on him for all our
good; yet if he had not made over this good unto us, we might maintain secret
fears and discouragements. But now God has promised all good unto us, (that
is) he has firmly and graciously made it over; As if he should say, all the
good that I can do, I will do it for thee; all the ample fullness in me, is to
replenish thee, it is to supply thy wants and necessities; and I assure thee in
the Word of a God it is so. Psalm 84. 11. The Lord is a Sun and shield, the
Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing will he withold from them that
walk uprightly. Ver. 12. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in
thee. There is not any one particular want (which is fit to be styled a want,
and fit to be supplied in this life, for soul) but God has by promises
particularly engaged all his sufficiency to help and supply it. Do thou want
an holy heart, a returning heart, an heart to hate sin, to mourn for sin, a
believing heart, an upright heart, a meek and patient heart, a joyful heart?
do thou want any grace, more grace, pardon of sin, assurance of pardon,
strength against sin, strength for any duty, active, or passive? want thou
any convenient and fit good for thy body, for thy name, for thy estate, for thy
children, for thy family? any good for life, at death, after death? Not any one
of these which God has not distinctly promised. If you knew a man to be
sufficient, to have an estate worth ten thousand pounds, and all free, you will
presently trust him for an hundred pounds, or if such an one should command any
in his need to come to him, and borrow, this would draw many to him; but if he
should take a man out particularly, and say to him, Friend, my estate is thus
great, I have a great estate, and I pray thee if thou need any thing at any
time, repair to me, I give thee my word, and if that be not enough, thou shall
have bond and seal that I will help thee; it were enough, he needed not to say
more, he will to him I warrant you. Thus says the Lord to a believer, to one
who has accepted of his Son Jesus Christ, says God to him, I tell thee by
my Word, (which is truth it self and cannot lie, nor deceive) that I am a great
God, alsufficiency, goodness is in me in infinite perfection, and I am able to
do thee any good; now my will is, that thou should come unto me at any time,
in any of thy distresses, and I do promise thee, that I will not withold any
good thing from thee; As true as I am God, I will not leave thee nor forsake
thee; should not this encourage us to live by faith?

4. His power and ability; as we want much good, so God does undertake all
good: And this is another encouragement, that God never over engages himself;
he is able to make good all his understandings: Many a man is undone by
suretiship, he suffers himself to be bound beyond his ability; it is not so
with God.

This is granted, that at the least a proportionable power is necessary to give
being to all promises and undertakings, goodness and kindness are enough to
make a promise but ability is also required to make good that promise. If a
subject promises to release, or pardon a Malefactor, why, this is nothing, he
is not to be trusted; why? because he has not power of life or death; if a
poor man promise to discharge a debt of four hundred thousand pounds; why; no
man will trust to his undertakings: why? because he has no ability, he has
not an estate answerable, he is not able to pay twenty shillings; so that power
gives ground to trusting, because power is a necessary ingredient to all.

Now then, God has ability enough to make good all or any of his promises.

Obj. You will say, his promises are many.

Sol. I answer, as our needs are many, so his promises are many; But then, as
his promises are many, so his goodness is great, and his power infinite; now
an infinite goodness, and an infinite power, are able to make good, not only
many, but infinite promises.

Object. You will say; that the things promised are great.

Sol. I confess they are, God has undertaken great matters to pardon great
sins, to convert great sinners, to conquer great temptations, to convey great
consolations, But is he not a great God? Is any thing too hard for him? nothing
is impossible with God.

Obj. But you will say, that particular wants still increase, and renew
themselves.

Sol. So they do, as the vessels which we fill to day, require a new filling to
morrow, and the stomachs which we seem to satisfy now, within few hours they
are empty and craving: But then, though the vessel may be dry, yet the
fountain is not, though the vessel may be empty, yet the fountain is full and
still streaming. As Gods goodness is a living fountain, so his promises are a
perpetual bond; They are continued undertakings, and depend upon an unexhausted
and infinite depth of goodness, Isa. 46. 3. O house of Jacob, which art borne
by me from the belly, and carried from the womb. Ver. 4. Even to the old age I
am he, and even to hoary hairs, I will carry you.

Obj. But yet you will say, yea, but God is engaged to so many, there is not a
believer, but God has bound himself by many promises to him.

Sol. I confess, with man oftentimes this is something; He has but a
particular ability, and therefore may overshoot himself by general engagements;
But with God it is not so, in whom power and ability to make good what he
undertakes, is not contracted, broken limited, depending, but ample,
illimitted, and alsufficient from himself. Therefore he is said to reserve
mercy for thousands, and his promises run to Abraham and to all his seed.
Why, the power of God, by which he is able to make good all his promises; It is
a creating power, such a power as can (upon the pleasure of his will) command
things into being; and it is an over-topping power, God alone can command our
helps, he needs not the assistance of any to make good his undertakings; and
it is an enduring power, it abides for ever, His hand is never shortened, that
it cannot save. Is the Lords hand waxed short (said God himself to Moses? Numb.
11. 23.) thou shall see now whether my word shall come to pass or not. So
then, as God has engaged himself to do us good, so he is able enough to make
that good.

5. His fidelity and truth: As the promises, so the matter of them are full of
goodness: so for the form of them, they are sealed with truth: God who cannot
lie has promised, said the Apostle, Titus 1. 2. and it is impossible for him
to lie, Heb. 6. 18.

Truth and fidelity may be conjectured to consist in three things, I speak now
of them as applied to promises.

1. In reality of intention: where the declaration is a fair letter, and the
intention is a blur, when that is large and this is nothing; this may be a
complemental lie, but it is not truth; the expression must be but the
intention, clothed in words; It must be the purpose of the heart transcribed,
if we will style it truth and fidelity. Now when God promises any good to a
believer, this is not vex and praeteria nihil: a mere shower of eloquent and
comfortable words; O no, it is his will, and intention, and very purpose made
known: He does indeed intend that good which he undertakes, and speaks of in
his promises.

2. In a constancy of resolution: As falsehood is placed, not only in present
incongruities, (when heart and tongue are at variance) but also in subsequent
inconstancies: As when, though my present intention and expression were
parallel, yet afterward, like a rotten bottom which slips aside from the
house, so my heart breaks away from it self, it becomes an heart, and an heart,
as in Saul's promise to David, which changed presently, etc. On the contrary is
it with truth, and in particular with Gods truth about his promises to
believers; His word of promise does answer his purpose at first (for as he
thought and intended, so did he speak) and that purpose still answers it self,
and therefore he has sworn by himself, that he will not alter the thing that
is gone forth of his lips: My Covenant shall stand fast, Ps. 89. 34 28.

3. In a certainty of execution: As when a person has promised to lend, or
give an hundred pounds, he being free to take his own time; comes and lays it
down, and says, Lo here is the money which I promised to lend or give, take
it; this is fidelity or truth. Such a truth is there in Gods promises: This is
not all the truth of them, that for certain God has spoken such good things,
but further, that he will assuredly perform them: Behold the days come, says
the Lord, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the
house of Israel, and to the house of Jacob, Jer. 33. 14.

6. His performance of them to them that have lived by faith. When persons have
committed themselves and their conditions unto him; when they have trusted upon
his word, he has not failed them, he has made it good. Abraham, he did live
by faith, when God promised him a Son, the text says, that he did believe, he
did not consider his own body, but gave glory to God, n^resting upon the sole
goodness, fidelity, and strength of his promise, and God did indeed perform
the same unto him. Not any of the Kings of Israel and Judah, but expressly
sped well, when in their exigencies they did trust unto God. Our fathers
trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them, they trusted in thee, and were
not confounded. Psalm. 22 4, 5. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart
trusted in him and I was helped, says David. Psalm. 28. 7. The Lord shall help
them, and deliver them, (speaking of the righteous) and save them, because they
trust in him, Psalm. 37. 40. Now put all together, should we not live by faith,
trust upon God in Christ (and through, and for Christ) for all our helps of
soul, who is, 1. An alsufficient fountain. 2. Who commands us in unto himself
for our helps. 3. Who has promised all good unto us if we will but trust him.
4. Who is able enough to make good whatsoever he promises. 5. Who cannot, and
will not lie, deceive or fail us* 6. Who has given testimony of his truth in
all ages, Who has performed his oath to Jacob, and remembered his mercy to
Abraham, who has been ever in all ages mindful of his Covenant to such as
durst by says live upon him and trust in him.

Thirdly, consider the qualities of this life of faith, and these may much
prevail with us to labor to live upon God in Christ by faith.

There be four ingredients in this kind of life, all which are admirable, and
indeed they are peculiar privileges of it.

1. It is the only Christian life. 2. It is the only comfortable life. 3. It is
the only getting and thriving life. Four excellencies of this life.
4. It is the only certain and steadfast life.
1. The life of faith, it is the only Christian life. The Christian has a life
common with many creatures, his life of eating and drinking, of nourishing and
growth; it is such a life, as the beasts live as well as he: his life of reason
and labor, that also is such a life which all men live as well as he; but thee
life of faith, that is singular and proper to the believer; for no man has
that faith which the true believer has; and no man has his estate so in
heaven, so in Gods hands, so enclosed and treasured in the Covenant of
promises, as he. What Christ spoke to his Disciples about this very matter,
Mat. 6. 31. Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink?
or wherewith shall we be clothed? Ver. 32. For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek: As if he should say, it is enough for mere sinners, for such as
have not God to be their God, who cannot in Christ call him Father, it is
enough for them to lead such a vexing and distrustful life. That I say here,
Why, it is enough for men of this life, the men of this world, for them who
have their only portion here, to live the life of sense, to be scraping, to be
plodding, to be vexing their thoughts and hearts, how to compass, how to fetch
in, how to lengthen an estate; To have a God, and yet to live without him, a
Christ, and not to live upon him, as if either were nothing in this Christian;
But for the believer, who has a God, and a Christ, and all good undertaken for
him by a full and faithful Covenant; It is his life now to trust upon his God,
to rely upon his Savior, to quiet himself in Gods Word of promise. As Christ
spoke in another case, If you love them that love you, and if ye do good to
them that do good unto you, what singular thing do you? do not even the
Publicans and sinners the same? That I say in this case, if ye will make up
your own estate, if ye will live upon what you see, and what you taste, and
what you handle, and go not above, and beyond these and your selves; do not
sinners, do not the worst of sinners do the same? If the vilest person can
rejoice when his table is full, and hang down his head when sensibles go off;
wherein does the believer exceed him, who is merry and cheerful only in a
sensible plenty, and his heart is ready to break in the ebb and substraction
of that, by the days or years of scarsity and sensible distress? If thou
did look upon God as thy Father, and Christ as thy plentiful redemption, and
the promises as a goodly portion, and thine inheritance; then the days of
tears to others, would be hours of thankfulness unto thee; and the nights of
fears to others, would be times of sweet repose and contentment unto thee: When
the spiders web was swept away, yet thou could see the house standing and
sure; even in all sensible abstractions of the olive, and vine, and stalles,
thou could yet rejoice in the God of thy salvation. For the place of thy
defense is the munition of rocks, bread shall be given unto thee, and thy
waters shall be sure, Isaiah 33 16.

I observe a threefold difference 'twixt an unbeleever and a believer.

One is in the very estate: for the believer has a far better portion then the
unbeleever; he has a portion set out for this life, and a portion also for a
better, he has food for his body and grace for his soul.

Another is in the manner of settling the estate: for general providence
relieves the one, and special affections provides for the other.

The one is helped by common goodness of universal kindness, and the other is
undertaken for, and secured by a singular bond of Covenant. God has made over
himself and all his goodness unto him in his Son Jesus Christ: He has taken
upon himself all the care, and all the good, and only wills the believer to be
upright, and diligent, and so to trust upon him; he has settled all his grace,
and strength, and comfort in Christ, etc.

A third is in the manner of managing: The unbeleever, he will, like the
prodigal, have all the estate into his own hands, he will trust upon himself,
he dares not settle on God, for he fears him, he suspects him, he thinks
verily God will not do him good, but he will fail: But the believer knows whom
he has trusted, God is his God; and has undertaken for him, and he who has
promised is faithful who will also do it: Now Paul.
though I have not in hand* yet I have in promise, though I have not in the
coffer, yet I have in the bonds; my estate is even all that is good for me, and
it lies in a sure hand, in the hand of my good God who will not fail; Hereupon
I live, to this I trust, though others vex, and fret, and curse, yet I sit down
quietly; Why? because faith goes about what we see, and it is able to see the
estate large enough, though lying in divine promises; and this is to live like
a Christian, for this is to acknowledge a God, and a Christ to some purpose.

2. The life of faith, it is the only comfortable life.

It is with our life, as it is with fire, which if it burns fair and clear,
then is it pleasant and delightful, but if it be dull and smoking, it makes us
weary both of it, and the room. Whiles faith does guide our lives, (by
settling our thoughts and desires on God and Christ) then the lamp is clear,
life feels like life, we can pray with joy, and hear with delight, and follow
our callings with cheerfulness, and lie down in peace; But if you sever faith
from the life, that we dare not to trust on God, nor rest on Christ; we must
possess, or else we cannot trust nor live; Now the chimney smoaks, the soul
becomes displeasing to it self; the soul craves help from the body, and the
body from the soul, but neither is able to help either, and therefore that is
wanting, and this is vexing. The waves now get over the ship, and sinks it with
a load and deluge of worldly, endless, fruitless, anxious, vexing cares, and
fears; And in sober-sadnesse tell me, what you think of such a life, wherein
the head is disturbed and curiously tortured with variety of manifold, and
exquisite suspicions, and thoughts, and the heart is deeply racked with the
continual breakings of trembling sighs and griefs? That a man is not able to
get, nor yet patient to want, he can neither give himself help, nor will he
trust him who can; That his estate is burdened, with many wants, and all this
is made unspeakably grievous by another worse burden of unbeleeving thoughts;
that a man sees he cannot bear, and yet will not ease his shoulder by
trusting. That a man cannot begin to think, but his thoughts throw him into a
way of what ifs? What if the Lord will not do me good? what if I cannot have
that? what if such an one fail? or, what if it comes not on such a day? etc.
So that he cannot think without tumults; nor speak without discontents, nor eat
without dislike, nor walk without slavishnesse, nor work without
distrust^ulnesse, nor sleep without terrors, nor awake without bitterness,
nor rise without carfulness; and amidst all this, he has no heart to duty,
nor no God, nor to heaven, nor earth, nor to Christ, nor to himself, nor his;
for either he has no faith, or else will not live by it: He dares not trust
God, or Christ.

There be three things which concur to make the life uncomfortable;

1. One is a sense of want: A man has an extreme feeling of need, no s^n^e,
or slight sense, avail not to break our spirits.

2. Another is a strong desire, the heart pants and reaches after the supply,
and this multiplies thoughts and cares.

3. A third is palpable insufficiency; that a man cannot for his life compass
his desires and supplies, and therefore like Ahab, who was impeached for
Naboths vineya^d, he is dejected and grieved; all which fall ordinarily into
the life of unbelief.

But now to wheel about on the contray, the life of faith is sweet and
comfortable.

Four things would make a man's life very comfortable. 4. Things.


1. One is if he were eased of all burdens.

2. Another: If he were secured from all prejudices.

3. A third: If what he had were very good and enough.

4. A fourth: If he were assured that whatsoever good he should need, of that
he should be without fail supplied in a fit time.

Now then the life of faith produces all these.

1. It eases a man of all burdens: There be but two burdens which we can well
think of, 1. One is the sinful burden. 2. The other is the earthly burden: The
burden of guilt, and the burden of cares: But says (if a man could live by it)
takes them both off: It lives upon Christ for the one, and upon Gods providence
for the other: It sees a sufficiency and an accepted price in his blood to
remit our guilt, and it sees an alsufficient, careful, faithful providence to
remove our care: And I tell you, that the soul comes to great ease which is
released of both these: Son, be of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee.
Sin shall be discharged, therefore I am comfortable; cares are gone,
therefore I am cheerful.

2. It secures against all prejudices, and why? because it states the person in
goodness it self, in him who is nothing but goodness, (that is) who is in
respect of himself good, and who will order all things for good to the
Believer, nay, and in his hands who is an absolute Lord.

It Is true, that one change in our estate may be contrary to another, and
because we esteem one of them to be good, therefore we judge the other to be
evil: but then, though changes be opposite in sense, yet they are concordant in
issue, in the event all falls out for good: As sickness, though opposite to
health, yet it may fall out for the further preservation of life; sometimes the
Christian is high, sometimes low, sometimes he is in a freed state, sometimes
in a clouded state; sometimes he is in conquest, sometimes he is in conflict;
sometimes he is oyled in the mouths of men, and sometimes traduced and torn in
pieces, as if the tongues of Christians were the teeth of Lions: (Paul gives a
Catalogue of his changes in these and the like cases;) yet in all and after
all, the Christians condition is not prejudiced, God still owns the person,
watching over his safeties; Keeps all poison from the heart, and like a ship
(sometimes by a fair wind, sometime by a rough storm) he still brings him safe
to harbor. As Paul spoke even of his bonds, that they fell out to the
furtherance of the Gospel; So I say of the calamitous occurrences, the sense
sees nothing but misery, yet faith can see the good end which God made with
Job, and therefore to rejoice in troubles.

3. It makes the present condition good, and enough. I will tell you one reason
why the life of sense is uncomfortable; namely, because it is grounded on a
short and empty good; that which a man can see with his eye, and hold in his
hand, is not half of that which he can desire with his heart, no worldly thing
can ever be enough to an unbelieving heart. But faith makes the soul well
pleased, because it presents the soul with such a good, as cannot only
satisfy, but also exceed it. God is an infinite goodness; he, who can
satisfy more then a world, may well content one man's heart; and Gods favor is
a satisfying good, (I shall be satisfied with thy favor, said David;) and to
this does faith entitle, yea, this it does reveal to the soul; And I will tell
you one thing, that he who cannot be contented with a God, and his favor; with
a Christ, and his blood; with a Covenant, and its fullness; he will never be
content with any thing: if alsufficiency be not enough to thee, when can
emptiness and vanity please and satisfy thee. What if a man has but a little
Garden, yet if he has a large Park, and ten thousand Acres of Arables, and
the Kings royal favor to grace all this? I tell you this would sparkle his
spirit, it would breath a well-pleasednesse in him. Thou complainest that thou
have but little of earthly things, I grant it, and a little may be enough:
(enough depends more on quality, then quantity) but then, though the Garden be
but small, yet the Park is large; though thy portion in externals be not so
great, yet this with a great and all sufficient God, and a blessed Savior, and
a heaven to boot, is enough, and enough. If the wife says she has but a small
jointure, yet if she has a rich and tender husband, she is to be blamed if she
says she has not enough: Faith viewes the Christians estate, not as it is in
its hand, but as in her husbands hand, in Christ's, and then all is well enough.

4. It assures of universal and reasonable supplies: The Lord is my Shepherd,
I shall not want, so David Psalm. 23. 1. follow him a little in that Psalm, and
you shall see what God has done Time past.
for him; he made his pastures green, and his waters still, verse. 2. O, what a
freshness, and what a calmnesse does faith make in the state! His soul is
taken care for, and at the worst; when he was in the valley of the shadow of
death, yet he was quieted from fear, because his faith saw God there; yea, and
found him there to uphold and comfort: That for what was past; Then for his
present condition* See ver. 5. His table is prepared for him, as if he took no
care (no anxious care) he needed not to trouble himself, Present.
(thou preparest a table for me) and not a mean table neither (my cup runs
over) nor yet a dull and uncheerful table, (thou anointest my head with oil;)
so that faith for the present finds food, and cheer enough too; But then for
the future condition, will this hold out? See what faith finds in reversion,
ver. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of Future.
my life; (Goodness!) perhaps that respected his temporal estate, (Mercy!)
perhaps that respected his spiritual, 1. One his body. 2. Another his soul, and
both these (shall follow him) as the shadow that follows the body, they should
be still at hand; but how long? not for a day only, but (all his days) not all
the days of his dignities, abilities, health, but all the days of his life.

Nay, yet again, (surely) they shall follow me: It was not a speech of fancy,
but of certainty, it was out of all doubt, and peradventure, surely mercy and
goodness shall, etc. So Psalm 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun, and a shield; the
sun is the parent of light, so is God of all good; The Sun is the cause of all
fruitfulness and cheerfulness, so is God of all blessings: and he is a shield
to a Sun for the doing of good, and a shield to secure and protect from evil.
The Lord will give grace and glory: Grace is the best thing which a man can
nave on earth, and Glory is the highest thing which a man can have in heaven:
But these he will give, they shall not be bought, but freely bestowed. No good
thing will he withhold, etc. As it he should say, if grace be not enough for
earth, if glory be not enough for heaven; think then of any other good thing,
there is not any other good thing, which shall be withheld (that is) which
shall not, like the rain, (which cease to be withheld) pour down upon you.

Will you hear the Prophet say a word to this* to this future supplies for
them who live by faith: then read Jer. 17. 7. Blessed is the man that trusts
in the Lord, whose hope the Lord is: Here we find the believer at his work of
trusting, or living by faith, and at his wages too: Blessed is the man that
trusts, etc. Indeed the Prophet speaks a great word, he is blessed; more
cannot be said; but let us see how he proves that? ver. 8. For he shall be as a
tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her roots by the river; and
shall not see when heat comes, but his lease shall be green, and shall not be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. If
faith plants the tree in a springing soil, if it beholds the tree to spread,
and grow, and bear in all weathers, though heat comes in all times, though
drought comes, yet the leaf is green and fruitful and cease not to yield;
does it not then assure us of supply for the fu^ure? has it not a good
Storehouse, an ample treasury for the believer?

What should I say more! may not faith say that to the soul, which God has
said to faith? if so, then we may well rejoice for the present, and be void of
care for the future; for God has said I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee, H^b. 13. 5. Thou have mercy, and shall still have mercy; Thou have grace,
and shall still have grace; Thy part in Christ, and still shall have it,
supplies of all good, and still shall have them.

3. The life of faith is the only getting and thriving life. What the Apostle
sp^ke of godliness, that we may say of Faith; It is great gain, for it has
the promises of this life; and of the life which is to come.

Profit is that which most men look upon, it is the cry of most, who will show
us any good? and faith has a singular art of getting. I observe that the g^od
of a Christian, in some respect, hangs in the promises, as water does in the
clouds; and look as the boisterous winds rather drive away the clouds and
rain, (though a few drops may sl^p down) but it is the sweet heat of the Sun
which makes the clouds to open themselves, and give out their store.

So the only way to drive away the promises, (as it were) to remove them with
their blessings, is not to believe, not to trust, and the only way to make them
to yield out their precious treasures, is to believe, to live by faith: Take a
place for either, Ier. 17. 5. Thus says the Lord, cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord. As the Lord of Samaria. ver. 6. For he shall be like the heath in the
desert, and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched
places, in the wilderness, in a salt land, and not inhabited. Psalm. 37. 39.
The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in the time
of trouble. ver. 40. And the Lord shall keep them and deliver them, etc. and
save them because they trust in him.

The soul oft-times bitterly complains, that as yet it has not that good
thing, it sticks yet in the hands of God, Christ can do it if he will. Why; but
if ever thou would speed, thou must trust; I dare not trust though, says
the soul, how then can thou speed? Why then do thou complain; God and
Christ undertakes thy good; but then he requires this of thee, do but trust me
for it and thou shall speed, I will not fail thee, I have sworn by my self
that I will not alter, nor repent. The poor man comes to Christ and cries out
for help, Mark 9. O Lord, says he, if thou can do any thing, etc. Why; says
Christ, I can do any thing, I am able enough, and willing enough, that is not
the thing, this is it which will make thee to speed; can thou believe, dare
thou to trust upon me? he answered Lord I believe, I do trust, and you know
that his son was presently healed. The child comes to the father, father
supply me, I will says the father; but I will have it instantly; if he had
asked and trusted his father, he might have sped, but because he does ask and
murmur with his father, he is therefore justly denied.

There are two things which mightily oblige a person to the doing of a
kindness; one is his own promise, another is his friends confidence, who has
upon the security of his word adventured; so here, besides the very inclination
of the divine goodness to make good its own undertakings, this also adds not a
little to our speed, and furtherance, that we rely only on God. It is a common
complaint, that we cannot be answered: I reply, it is a common fault, that God
nor Christ can be trusted. It is not how many wants thou feel, nor how many
promises thou read, nor how many prayers thou make; If with all this thou
do not ask in faith, think not (O man) to receive any thing from the Lord.

I will give you three reasons why the life of faith is the only way to thrive.

First, because it puts a man upon the only way of blessings. As none can
bless but God, and he can bless; so the blessings of God are to be expected
only in the ways of God, and nothing so skilful in Gods ways as faith.

Secondly, it makes all the promises to yield: It is true, as God is infinitely
above all, and his power is great; so faith (in a qualified sense) is above God
himself; he is not able to stand against it: Be it to thee as thou will, said
Christ to the believing woman: Thou shall have the desires of thine heart, said
David, Psalm. 37. 3. 4.

Thirdly, God himself, and Christ, and all, become ours, If we dare to trust
and live by faith: Thou wants outward supplies, I require no more of thee says
God, but to walk uprightly and diligently, and to trust on me, and thou shall
have it: Thou wants spiritual supplies for thy soul; I require no more of thee
but to come to me, to trust to me, and go to my Ordinances; stand in my ways
and thou shall have them.

Fourthly, it is the only steadfast and abiding life; when other lives are
broken and crushed, they are gone down, yet this life by faith (like the
Stars which shine in the night) remains firm, I will clear it by Argument;
The stability of all sorts of lives is according to their principles and
motives. The life which depends upon a failing cause, it is a fadeing life, and
the life which depends upon a constant cause, is a constant life.

Now the life of faith is bred by a living principle, and is fed by constant
and abiding motives; you know that the grounds of this life of faith, are in
God and Christ, and the promise; now all changes reach not to them, our changes
are below in other things, but they are not in the promises, nor in God above;
as changes are not in the heavens, but in the air. Look upon things at hand,
and so they appear with variety, and with much unlikenesse, but eye them in
the Covenant, in the Promises, there you have the same faithful God still,
tender father still, all sufficient Savior still, the Promises are yea and
Amen, Christ is the everlasting father, the Covenant of God, an everlasting
Covenant, Gods love and immutable love, he is as able still, as willing still,
his how abides in strength, and underneath are his everlasting arms.

Though David's father and mother forsake him, yet the Lord will take him up;
and though all forsook Paul, yet God stood by him: so true is it that faith can
cast a sure Anchor in all states and in all changes, it can look upon the same
God, and the same Christ, and the same promises, Though the Mariners, when
they put to sea, quickly lose sight of Land, yet they never loose sight of
heaven; how far soever they sail, and in what tempest soever, yet still they
may look upon the heaven, the same heaven.

Faith never loses sight of its rock, of its salvation, of its helps; that
which it eyes, it may eye for ever; and that upon which it trusts, it may trust
upon for ever; thou have friends, and this springs up thy spirit; thy friends
dye, and now thy spirits sink; thou have parents; and children; in these thou
rejoycest, and settlest thy confidence: both the one and the other embrace the
dust, and thy heart is utterly broken for help and comfort, O Lord what have I
more. E contra, thou have a God, and he is the same for ever, a Christ, and he
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: Promises, and they are a word settled
forever in heaven; But when all sensibles fly off, yet if we live by faith we
are at no degree of loss; what can he lack; who has him, who is all in all,
and what can he lose, who has him that knows no change at all?

Fourthly, let us consider Jesus Christ himself; There are diverse things which
should persuade us to live by faith upon him.

There are nine things in him which may move us.

1. The exceeding plentifulnesse of our supplies in him: Thou art not
approaching to a dry Cisterne, but to a full fountain; what may do thee good,
he has, and he has that in a most eminent fullness.

Is it the good and virtue of his redemption, which thou need. Why; in him
is plenteous redemption, and in him is st^ong salvation, and therefore his
blood is called a precious blood, Pet. 1. 19. His blood had not been able to
have discharged the least sin, unless it had exceeded the merit of the
greatest; yea, it is as able to cross many debts, as any; sins may be
distinguished into great, and little; into many, and few; but the blood of
Christ, the virtue of that is singular and infinite in the price and value of
it.

Is it the good and virtue of his holiness which thou need? Sanctification.
Why; Joh. 1. 16. There is a fullness of grace in him. 3. 34. He has the
Spirit without measure. Therefore the holy virtues of Christ are styled
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. You cannot comprehend the depth of them; when
you can easily come to the bottom of a thing, then it is not unsearchable; but
where you sound and fatham, and yet can feel no bottom; so here, etc. yea, and
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. The Col. 2. 3. Intercession.
Heb. 7. 25.
Apostle has said all that need to be said, Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save
them to the utmost which come unto God by him, (that is) if you need his
intercession to implead acceptance of your persons, or of your requests; Why;
there is none like him, come unto God by him, he is able to dispatch the
greatest request.

Or is it sufficiency for duty which thou need? Why; herein Obedience.
is Christ most able to supply thee. If the duty be active he can enable thee
to abundant fruitfulness, Ioh. 15. 5. He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit. If the duty be Passive, I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me, said Paul, Phil. 4. 13. Be it that thou
of thy self art weak, yet Christ is strong, and he has said my Grace is
sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

2. The ordination of Christ to this very thing, viz. to supply the state of a
believer.

God did purpose him, and intend him, and sent him, and he came for this very
end to do us good, and to help us in time of need, Ephesians. 1. 22. He gave him to
be the head over all things to the Church. ver. 2. Which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all

The Head (you know) is a thing for office, and the offices of it is both
dominion and influence; for these was Christ given to the Church to rule the
Church, and to supply the Church. 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made unto us of God,
wisdom, and righteousness, and Sanctification, and redemption. Heb. 7. 22. He
was made a surety of a better testament. Joh. 6. 27. Him has God the father
sealed. Isai. 61. 1. The Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek. He has sent me to bind up the broken hearted to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, etc.
Christ, you will grant that he is an able Priest, and an able Prophet, and an
able King, he is sufficient enough to pacify by his Blood, to purify by his
Spirit, to conquer by his Word; yea, but then consider yet further, that he is
ordained of God to be this, and to do this for the believer. If the King
commits a mighty stock to a man's hands, and sets him in the place of a
treasurer, and confirms him by seal, and all for this very end, that he should
supply such and such persons, would they not come unto him for their supplies?

Thou art never able to be righteousness to thy self, thou art never able to
give grace unto thy self, thou art never able to give strength to thy self; but
Christ is, and God is, even that God to whom thou do so earnestly cry, he
has ordained his own Son for thy help, even for thy help. As if the King
should say to a poor man petitioning; Why; Go to my Treasurer, I have given him
order for thee; so the Lord to the believer, Go to my son, I have ordained
him to give thee grace, I have ordained him to plead thy suits, to rule thy
heart, to conquer thy sins; and thy temptations, I sent him into the world
for that very end and purpose, that he might be all in all unto thee, I
purposed his blood for thee, and his righteousness, and his fullness, and his
intercession, all for thee.

3. His services, what he has done in the behalf of a believer.

Give me leave in this a little, and you shall see what reason we have then to
trust upon Christ.

First, though he was equal with God, yet made he himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant and was made in the likeness of men,
Phil 2. 6, 7. he laid aside his glory as it were, and stooped down infinitely
below himself into our nature, to do service for us.

Secondly, he was made under the Law, (obedient thereto in fulfilling all
righteousness,) to redeem them that were under the Law, that they might receive
the adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 4* 6. he did in our stead, and as our surety,
perfectly satisfy the whole Law in all its commands for us.

Thirdly, he did lay down his life for us, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2. 8. he did shed his
heart blood to make our peace, and to reconcile us unto his Father; and have we
not then reason to trust him, and to believe that he will do us good? Why;
single out a person who professes sincerity unto us, that he would lay out
half his estate to do us good, we would repose some confidence on him; but if
we knew that he did so heartily affect us, that he would die for our good, O
say we, you may trust on him, you need not fear to go to him, to request him
for this or that courtesy. Now then, Christ has not nakedly professed, but
has really a^^ed this; he entered into bond, as it were, to satisfy for us; he
did shed his very blood, and offered up his very life and soul for the
believer, and yet wilt not thou, (for whom he has done and endured all this)
yet will thou not trust in him for merit, for righteousness, for grace, for
strength, etc?

4. His disposition. Though a person were very able to do us good, yet if he
hated us, we should (I confess) have small encouragement to build our hopes
upon him; for two persons are not to be trusted, viz. the professed enemy, and
the false friend. But far be the thought of these things in us, touching Jesus
Christ; He is graciously and lovingly affected toward believers. Ephesians. 5. 2.
Walk in love as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us an
offering, and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 3. 19. To
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with
all the fullness of God. Yea, Paul himself does suggest unto us this love of
Christ unto him, as the singular ground, why he did by faith live upon him,
Gal. 2. 20. The life which ^now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God,
who loved me and gave himself for me.

Though I dare not trust an enemy, yet I dare to trust my friend; though I will
not depend on him for help, yet on my friend I will: Why, a friend loves at all
times, and love is the principle of bounty and of kindness: He that loves much
will do much, beneficence and readiness to help, they grow in love as the
branches in the root, and therefore Christ is ready to help, because exceeding
in love to his members. Observe the Apostle to this very thing in another
place. Heb. 4. 16. Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

There is need in us of mercy, (for we sin daily) and need in us of grace,
(for we are still weak) but in heaven there is a throne of grace, there is
mercy enough, and grace enough to help.

Obj. I confess there is so, says the believing person; but I am afraid to
approach thereunto.

Sol. No, be not afraid, but come boldly unto the throne of grace, says the
Apostle. There is a twofold boldness; There is a boldness of ignorance, of
this the Apostle speaks not: There is a boldness of holy affiance, of this he
speaks: Thus he comes boldly, who presents all his needs and requests in the
Name of Jesus Christ, and confidently relies upon him for supply and acceptance.

Obj. But, may the soul reply, what encouragement have I to raise this
confident affiance?

Sol. See the Apostle, ver. 15. For we have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities: As if he should say, I beseech you
but to remember what your Christ is, and then you may boldly come; you are
sensible; why; he is much more sensible of your infirmities, he knows your
wants, yea, he feels them; feels them, how? there is a feeling by way of
passion and change, so indeed he does not feel them; and there is a feeling by
way of compassion, so he feels them (that is) he is tenderly sensible of them,
he is very compassionately ready to help them: As a mother, she feels the want
of bread, of heat, of clothes, of liberty, in her child, she is infinitely
ready to relieve him; such a kind of feeling is there in Christ to his members
in their need; Ergo, come boldly to him, crave of him, trust and rely on him
for help.

Why else is he called a merciful High Priest? What is mercifulness? If you
look upon it in man, it is the sounding of his bowels, it is a compassionate
sympathy joined with a singular readiness to releeve. And if you look upon it
in God or Christ, it is a most tender sense of man's infirmities and
necessities, accompanied with an exceeding propension or readiness to forgive
the repenting soul, and to help and succor and comfort the Believer.

Obj. Thou art truly grieved and humbled for thy sins, and yet dare not to
live by faith upon Christ, that he will get thee the pardon.

Sol. Why O man; Christ is a merciful high Priest, Here am I says Christ, I am
very ready to offer up the virtue of my blood for thee.

So, thou art much distressed about the want of grace, and the insolency of sin
and Satan; why, says Christ, lo here I am, I am very willing, very ready to
do thee good, to give thee more grace to conquer thy sins for thee, and Satan
for thee, I am a merciful high Priest, my bowels are troubled for thee, I love
thee earnestly, I remember thee still.

5. His conjunction and relation. I pray you consider of this, How stands it
'twixt Christ and a believer? what union is there? what relation? has Christ
no reference unto him? or has he none unto Christ, that he afraid to live upon
him? To trust, to depend on him for his supplies,

Two things I will briefly touch, 1. The neernesse of their relations. Two
things I will briefly touch, 2. The ground from them to live by faith.

First, there is a near relation, 'twixt Christ and a believer, see Cantiles 6.
3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Why; this is a near relation
indeed, a relation of mutual propriety that Christ does say of a Believer, Thou
art mine, and the believer can reciprocally affirm of Christ, thou art mine; As
Adam said of his wife, Genesis 2. 23. Thou art bone of my bone, and flesh of
flesh, that same does the Apostle apply back from the Church to Christ, Ephesians. 5.
30. we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Of all rational
relations, none so near, so dear, so tender as that of a man and his wife, yet
in such a relation does Christ and a believer stand.

Again, he is the head of his body the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. the whole Church
is his body; every Believer a member, Christ the Head. I spare the citation of
more, as of the tree and the branches, the foundation and the building.

Secondly, Now this relation is the ground of affiance, a direct reason why we
should live upon Christ by faith, For,

First, does not special relation give special title: If a man becomes an
husband, has not the wife hereupon a title to the benefits and comforts of his
estate? his riches are for her good, and his houses are for her good, and his
land for her good; It holds just so here; faith espouseth a man to Christ, now
Christ is mine, and I am his, and then the Apostle infers the title presently,
1 Cor. 3. 21. All things are yours. Ver. 22. Whither Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours. Ver. 23. For ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Secondly, has not special relation a special obligation? Why, though a man be
not bound but in a bond of charity to relieve and help a woman before he is
married; yet when once he is married, then by virtue of that relation, there
lies upon him the bond of plain and particular duty; he is bond to love his
wife as himself, Ephesians. 5. 28. and to nourish and cherish her, v. 29. Ma^k now
how the Apostle states our matter, even here too; (Even as the Lord the Church)
as if Christ were the very pattern of this love, of this cherishing, and of
this nourishing, of th^s supplying and helping.

Thirdly, has not special relation a special affection? I will do much for my
servant; I will do more for my child, but I will do most of all for my wife:
Why? because she is nearer then all, she is my very self: Christ does much for
professed enemies; he leaves not himself without some testimonies of much
kindness even to them; What; will he do much for strangers, much for enemies,
and nothing for believers, for his own members, for his own spouse? Will he
heal the ear of one who came to take away his life, and will he not (think
you) heal the heart of him who has accepted of him unto life? would he pray
for them that nailed his hands, and pierced his heart, (Father forgive them)
and will he not do much more for thee, who grievest for thy sins, prizest him
in thy judgment, embracest him with all thy heart, would serve him with all
thy might? For thee, who art bone of his bone, will he not pray for thee?
Father forgive him, Father supply him, Father comfort him, Father sanctify
him, Father strengthen and preserve him.

6. His invitation. This adds to all the rest: Behold he calls thee, Rev. 3.
18. Buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white
raiment, that thou may be clothed; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve,
that thou may see. Rev. 22. 17. Let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever
will, let him take the waters of life freely. Heb. 10. 22. Draw near in full
assurance of faith.

But this I have touched heretofore, therefore I spare to insist, proposing
only one thing; that the invitation of Christ is not only to faith, but to
the life of faith; not only to acceptance, but to dependence also: not only to
take his person, but to trust, and rest upon his merit, and to serve our selves
of his fullness. As if Christ should say unto a believer, I am thine, and all
that I have is thine; now I pray thee in all thy necessities, come unto me,
live upon my stock, draw from my fountain; when guilt is upon thee, make use
of my blood; when wants are upon thee, make use of my treasure; when
temptations are upon thee, make use of my power: when infirmities are upon
thee, make use of my intercession, etc.

7. His assurances. What is that will you say? Why; this it is, he does assure
the believer, thar if he will make use of him, he will not fail him, but will
be effectual unto him.

See a place or two for this. Mark 11. 24. What things soever ye desire when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Joh 14. 13.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that your Father may be
glorified in the same.

There be four things by which we may be persuaded that Christ will do us
good, if that we will live upon him by faith.

First his express promise, which you see in that place alleged, John 14. 13.
Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, that I will do: Observe it well, he says not,
ask one particular only, but whats^ever ye ask in my Name, be it mercy, or be
it justification, or be it holiness, etc. again, I will do it, as if he should
say, ye shall not need to trouble your selves; and do not you fear, by reason
of your unworthiness; I will take the matter upon my self, I will see it done;
now brethren, when he that can help says, I will help; when he that can do all
things, promises us that he will do any thing for us, have we not cause to
trust?

Secondly, his sealing of the promises: The promises (you know) do plentifully
undertake all the latitude of the souls estate, and of the bodies too: There
is mercy for transgressions, grace for sinfulness, comfort for tears: peace
for trouble, streng^h for weakness, victory for assault, etc. All which
promises Christ has sealed and ratified by his blood, and therefore his blood
is styled the blood of the Covenant. See Heb. 9. 15, 17. 13. 20. The principal
reason whereof is, to settle the hearts of believers, and to encourage their
souls to live upon him for the performances of them, they being all in him. Yea
and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

3. His actual impetration of all that good which now we do enjoy. Why O
Christian, art thou afraid to live upon thy Savior for more good? who was it
that procured unto thee that same heavenly condition which now thou do
enjoy? have thou any relation to God as thy God? Christ did procure it: Is any
one sin subdued? Christ has done it: Is any one sin got off and pardoned?
Christ did procure it: Is there any melting in thy breast, any hatred of
corruption, any desires of grace, any endeavor, any strength? Christ wrought
them, Thou do seek them, but Christ did work them.

Now this is to be learned, that what special thing Christ has done, that is a
pledge and an assurance that Christ is willing to do more: Every gracious fruit
and work points us to him the fountain and cause upon whom we are to trust,
not only for the entrance, but also for the progress and compleatment of our
spiritual estate.

4. His personal donation: He has given himself unto thee, and will he not do
other things for thee which is greater.

5. His offices: All of them call upon us to live upon Christ by faith. To what
end was he Priest? was it to satisfy for himself? He needed not to satisfy
for his own sins who was without all sin: Nor does he make his own peace,
whom the father did, and does ever love: Verily his satisfactions were for
transgressors, and if there be any scope and intention of the virtues of that
satisfaction, assuredly they look directly upon penitential believers: so
likewise his intercession (which is another part of that office;) why? is it,
think you, for himself? nay, in that he is a Mediator, and a Mediator is an
Agent 'twixt two persons, he has no wants to be supplied, he needs not to
ingratiate himself, assuredly brethren, he ever lives to make intercession for
us, for us, says the Scripture, and He ever lives to do that work; He is
continually offering and presenting the efficacy of his merit, which, as a
sweet incense perfumes our continual Sacrifices, so making them acceptable, etc.

The like may be said of his Prophetical and Kingly offices: he was invested
with them as our Mediator, and therefore for our good.

Now say, what a blasphemous absurdity were it to conceive of Jesus Christ as
of an Idol, which has eyes, but sees not; which has ears, but hears not;
which has hands, but handles not; which has feet, but walks not. That he
should he a Priest to offer for sin, and yet we will not trust upon him for
the pardon of the least; that he should live to make intercession, and yet we
will not deliver any one request into his hands, or rely on him to obtain us
any one good thing which we need or crave: That he is a King, able to subdue
all his enemies; a Prophet, and able to teach any man's heart; but we will not
credit our souls upon him, we will not repose the victories of our corruptions
upon his mighty arm, nor the reforming and beautifying of our spirits upon his
singular wisdom and holiness. Why? what did thou think or mean, when thou
did accept of him to be thy Mediator? did thou conjecture that if once thou
gave thy consent to take him, that never after thou should need him? or if
so, would never make use of him? Well, no more; what the Apostle said in
another case, that I say in this, if we will not live by faith upon Christ, we
do what in us lies make void the Redemption of Christ, the intercession of
Christ, the holiness of Christ, the glory and power of all the offices of
Christ.

9. If all this will not move us to live by faith in Christ, (that is) to trust
upon him for the help and supply of our spiritual estate; then take one thing
more, there is an impossibility of supplies for thy soul any other way; go and
think, and act any other course to do thy soul good, besides this, and it shall
be fruitless, after many years industry; as thou art, so still shall thou be.

Obj. Thou will say, I will never leave complaining of this nature till it be
bettered.

Sol. Thy nature is not bettered by complaint, but by grace, and that is in
Christ, and never had, till we can trust.

Object. Thou will say, I will never leave grieving, nor praying, nor hearing,
nor reading, nor fasting, nor conferring, till, etc.

Sol. It Is true, these are means, but where is the cause? What if a man should
say, I will stay here all my life at these conduit pipes, but I will have
water, whiles in the mean time the fountain yields not forth. I confess the
Christian must apply himself to the Ordinances, but then it is Christ who sends
forth the help, and then do the Ordinances deliver us our helps from Christ,
not presently when one hears, but when effectually they have enabled us to
believe. If thou can hear and believe, pray and believe, mourn and believe,
fast and believe, etc. Then good shall come unto thy soul.

Draw a thousand bonds, yet if they be none of them sealed, nothing is yet
legally and forcibly made over and conveyed: many prayers avail little or
nothing till they are sealed with faith, and now God will acknowledge our
demands as authentic, and Christ will deliver unto us our hearts desire.

I had thought to have handled the opposites of the life of faith, with the
evidence of a true living by faith, and also the means which might assist us
to the life of faith: But I recall my self, I may not expatiate so far,
sufficient has been touched for this Use, perhaps the subject may be more
amply treatised, if ever I should come to set down before that theme directly
and intentionally: I therefore proceed to another Use.

CHAP. XVIII. The improvement of faith to a full assurance.
I Will yet advance on to one Use more; Since faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is
the only way to be saved; therefore not only to labor for that faith, but to
exalt that faith, my meaning is to improve this faith also, yet further ^o
strength and comfort.

Divines observe a double act of faith.

One of adherence, by which it cleaves unto Christ, and relies upon him alone
for righteousness, pardon of sin, grace and salvation.

Another is of evidence, by which it cleares unto the soul its interest in
Christ, and his righteousness and merits.

In the former, the soul renounceth all other corner stones, all other rocks of
salvation, and trusts only upon the Name of Jesus Christ, accepts of him as the
only Lord, and relies on him as the only Savior, casting or rolling its
heavenly and eternal safeties into his blessed arms.

In the latter, the soul feels it self reciprocally embraced by Christ; I have
accepted of him to be my Lord, and he says, I am thy King.

I have relied on him to be my Savior, and he says, I am thy salvation; For
pardon of sins, and he says unto me, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee.

Now to this part of faith do I desire to mount the soul of a true believer,
viz. not only to apprehend Christ, but to know himself to be apprehended by
him; not only to believe, but to know him whom he has believed. To rise thus
far by faith to an assurance, that Christ is my Christ; my Redeemer lives, who
gave himself for me; My Lord, and my God, that he is my righteousness, my
redemption, my propitiation.

For the better settling and exciting of you in this particular, I will briefly
touch at these things.

1. What the assurance of faith is. 2. It may be had. 3. It should be had. 4.
The Arguments to stir us up to labor for it (that is) to know our riches, and
to know our possessions. 5. The means to get it.
SECT. I.
Quest. 1. WHat the assurance of faith is.

Sol. It is a victorious conclusion against the strength of doubts, whereby the
mind of a believing person is ascertained and persuaded, and upon good ground
settled, concerning his personal interest in Christ and his benefits.

For the better opening of this description, be pleased to observe these
subsequent propositions.

1. That the assurance of faith, it is the conclusion of an evangelical
syllogism: The syllogism is this, Whosoever repents and believes in Christ,
Christ with his benefits are his, and he is Christ's; but I do truly repent and
believe in Christ, therefore Christ and his benefits are mine, and I am his.

In this Syllogism there are three propositions.

The first is, a Proposition of most infallible certainty, it being expressly
the voice of Jesus Christ himself, and of it the mind has no doubt, but fully
assents unto it as a principle of Divine truth, viz. That he who repents and
believes in Christ, is his, and he is Christ's. And of this the mind of a
believer may be abundantly persuaded without quest^onings, and doubts, for as
much as it is a part of the Word of God, to whose absolute truth it does
plentifully subscribe.

The second is a proposition, carrying with it the direct act of faith, in
which the believing soul does accept of Christ, or receive him, and trust upon
him, by virtue of which there arises a most real and true union 'twixt Christ
and the believer.

The third and the last, which is the conclusion or inference drawn from both
the former, comprehends in it the formal assurance of a believing heart, that
therefore Christ is mine and I am his.

That he who believes in Christ, has Christ, and shall be saved; this is not
yet that subjective assurance of justifying faith, for as much as many an
hypocrite may believe that truth, and yet have no personal interest in Christ.

Again, that I do believe in Christ, neither is this essentially assurance,
for as much as to believe is one thing, and to be assured is another thing;
many a good heart may accept of Christ upon all his terms, and articles of
peace and life, and may cast and repose it self on him as the only rock and
hope of the soul, and yet it may be so far from assurance, (even at that time
when it does so earnestly cleave unto Christ) that instead of assurance, it may
be both tossed and prevailed upon by doubtings, suspicions, and fears,
concerning its particular and personal propriety in Christ and in his merits.

But the last of the propositions, I am Christ's, and Christ is mine, this is
formal assurance: for this concludes the dispute of the heart, and has in it
particular and personal evidence.

2. It is a victorious conclusion against the strength of doubting: you know
that in the mind of man, there are three kinds of working about an object
comprehending goodness and truth.

One they call peremptory assenting, and peremptory dissentings, in which the
mind does yield plainly, or else refuses to subscribe, and grant the matter
proposed to be true and good.

Another they call doubtings, which are the wavering acts of of the mind,
wherein it does not absolutely grant or deny, it does not absolutely conclude,
that so it is, nor absolutely, that so it is not; yet rather enclines (for want
of further evidence in the soul) that it is not so, then that it is so.

The third they call evidence or assurance, which is such a work of the mind,
wherein, against all doubtings and suspicions, the mind sees clearly the thing
to be so, or not to be so: And thus is it here in the assurance of faith, it
has such a light, the mind has that it is able to rise beyond, and against
doubtings, and to convince the soul against all suspicions, that Christ indeed
is mine, and I am his.

Where, by the way observe thus much; that assurance does presuppose some
doubtings, for if the mind of a believer had not doubtings about its personal
interest, it could not well be said to be now assured. Doubtings did verily,
and do, and may work in a believing soul; yea, but am I sure that Christ is
mine, is it certain that my sins are pardoned? I trust they are, but I fear
they are not.

Now assurance comes and conquers these workings, and clears all the doubting
arguments, and convinces the mind, that of a truth Christ is mine, and my
sins are pardoned.

There are two degrees of doubtings.

One consists in the questioning of our believing proprieties, is Christ mine,
is his righteousness mine, etc?

Another exceeds this, and consists in dominion, when the soul is suppressed by
the strength of these doubtings, to side with it, and still to hang in suspense.

Now this latter degree (especially) is assurance opposite unto; namely, it
conquers our doubtings, answers our arguments, cleares it unto the soul against
the many suspicions which did arise, that Christ does indeed own it, that he
is the Savior thereof, and therefore I call it a victorious conclusion.

3. Assurance of faith, it is an ascertaining or persuading act, and that is
proper and inseparable from assurance; therefore is it so expressed in Romans 8.
38. I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, ver. 39.
Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yea, and it is expressed by
a word of personal certainty, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed: In
knowledge there is always a certainty, for that is one of the maine
differences 'twixt it and opinion, that the one leaves the mind uncertain and
wavering, and the other determinates the mind with certainty, and
infallibility.

Whiles the mind remains like a pair of indifferent scales, which bend this
way and that way; or like a boat in the river, now floating up, and then
sinking down; now reeling to this side, by and by to that side; it cannot be
said to be assured, perhaps Christ is mine, perhaps I am his; this is a plain
uncertainty, for the mind is not persuaded. But in the assurance of faith, the
mind is like a scale that weighs down, it is persuaded, and ascertained, there
is a prevalent evidence of the thing. Not only in absolute terms, that Christ
belongs to a believer, but in reflexive terms, that Christ belongs to me, he
gave himself for me, and he is my redeemer, and this particular, or personal
persuasion is assurance.

4. Assurance is not all kinds of persuasion or ascertaining, there are two
kinds of assurance or persuasion of the mind touching a man's personal
interest in Christ.

One is Imaginary and deluding: for as the heart of a man may deceive it self
about the habit of faith (or any other grace) so it may delude him about the
acts, and degrees of the same: does the true believer believe in Christ? so
thinks the Hypocrite, that he does too: Has the true believer a persuasion of
his personal propriety in Christ, which cleares the mind of doubting? so has
the Hypocrite too, a most exalted confidence an iron faith that would never
bend, nor bow by doubtings. It may be with him as with a poor man in a dream;
what the rich man has by propriety, and in possession, even that same thing
may the poorest man have in a dreaming fancy, and imagination.

But then ask the Hypocrite; by what grounds art thou thus confidently
persuaded; what did incline thy mind hereto, what promise have thou found that
Christ is, and will be his, whose heart was never humbled for sin, whose heart
still retains the love of sin? Now, as the man who being demanded how he came
without his wedding garment, he is speechless.

The fool (says Solomon Prove. 14. 16.) rages and is confident, and so the
presumptuous person, He sins, and yet is persuaded he walks in his sins,
and yet is assured.

I pray you remember that the assurance of faith is no such absolute and
boystrous settling of the mind, that Christ is mine however, though I be never
so ignorant and wicked, and though I live never so wretchedly and profanely;
yet Christ is mine, and God is my merciful Father, and my sins are pardoned:
O no, this is a Diabolical assurance, it is no Evangelical assurance.

Another is grounded, and divinely rational, and it always follows sound
repentance and faith: That assurance which goes before these, is false;
absolutely I am bound to repent and to believe, but I cannot be assured, but in
a conditional order: If I should be assured that Christ were mine before,
before I did believe, this were a lie: forasmuch as Christ is not mine, until
I do by faith accept of him, and if I should be assured that my sins were
pardoned before I did repent, I did in this delude mine own heart, forasmuch as
sin is not pardoned, unless it be repented of. No, but I must repent of my
sins, I must accept of Jesus Christ offered unto me in the Gospel, to be my
Lord and Savior, and now I labor to be assured, now I come to be persuaded,
having subscribed to all the propositions, and articles of the Gospel, that now
Christ is mine, and I do by the Word convince my soul that so it must be. For
thus I argue with my soul, whosoever repents, and believes, and endeavors to
walk in Christ, assuredly Christ is his, and he is Christ's; but I do this,
Ergo, Christ is mine.

I cannot make so short a cut as the presumptuous person does, Christ died for
sinners, therefore for me; God is merciful, therefore my sins are pardoned
without any more ado. O no, there is an orderly progress in true assurance. It
does not (saltum facere) stride over to extremes; As if a man should see a
Lease drawn, and presently concludes the houses are mine, the lands are mine;
No, but he must hear, and understand, and weigh things, and subscribe, and seal
to the conditions, and then he may safely and boldly say that they are his. So
must the soul hearken to the tenor of the Gospel, understand both the precious
offer, and the peculiar conditions of Christ; then he must consent unto them,
and accept of Christ to be Lord and Savior, and resolve to forsake every sin,
and to yield up his heart and life to the obedience of Christ* and earnestly
seek the Lord by his Spirit, to persuade him of his particular interest in
Christ, and look up steadfastly, and wait upon the Lord in the use of the
ordinances, and other consecrated means; Thus is the assurance of faith
wrought in the soul, and upon these grounds does it settle the mind.

5. Lastly, Assurance of faith (concerning which we speak) directs man, even
to a personal evidence of his particular interests in Christ and his benefits.

There is you know a double evidence.

One is real, and respects the thing, or object to be believed;

Another is personal, and respects the state of him who does believe;

Now assurance of faith, consists in the determining of the mind, about the
particular goodness of that thing, which it assents unto in the general as
most true, viz. That Jesus Christ is my Lord, and my God, that he is salvation
for me; it opens the eyes as it were to see, what Christ is to me, and what he
has done for me, and what he will do to me.

And thus briefly have you had a short expl^cation of the nature of this
assurance: a most heavenly thing it is, and only believers have it, though all
reach not yet unto it; I now proceed to another enquiry.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. Whether such an assurance of faith may be had?

Sol. The Papists will not hear of it by any means, (some of them) unless in
an extraordinary way: They conceive that faith is notable to raise the mind
beyond a moral hope, and conjecture, and many lewd and lazy Protestants shake
hands with them in that opinion. But I will clear it unto you, that every
believer may come to this assurance: It is a possible thing, I dare not say
that every believer de facto is assured, yet he may be assured of his
particular interest, and this I will evidence easily.

1. The believing soul is not incapable of persuasion: They say that faith does
not destroy, but elevate the understanding; and that same is a truth, for it
does new temper the understanding, and the will, but not overthrow their
substantial natures and abilities. Now this is undeniable, that the power of
reflection is natural to the understanding: It is such a faculty which is able
to look upon its own actings, and its own state; yea, and persuasion by way of
certainty, the understanding is capable of it; forasmuch as it is by knowledge,
and sense, and experience made most assuredly certain, about many objects and
conclusions;

Now because faith does not destory, but elevate the mind, it may by faith
come to a persuasion and reflection.

2. Again, to urge things (as yet) in a rational way; Faith can see as strong
reason, and argument to persuade and settle the mind, and assure it, as the
Philosopher can to raise the mind to a certainty of his conclusions; The
minds persuasion depending naturally upon strong evidence and the power of
argument;

Now faith can bring as strong arguments to convince and persuade the mind:
for its arguments depend upon two strong testimonies, One of the infallible
Word of God, the other on the voice of a renewed conscience; Ergo,

3. God would not promise that to a believer in this life, which is impossible
for the believer to rise unto: Forasmuch as promises are of things as future,
they are the undertaking of good things, which shall come to pass, and be
performed, now every future thing is a possible thing, that which shall be, we
may co^fidently affirm of it that it may be; But this personal evidence or
assurance, it is a thing which God has promised, Ezekiel. 34. 30. They shall know
that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel
are my people, Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will,
etc. Verse 23. I will say unto them, thou art my people, and they shall say,
thou art our God.

4. I spare to add the strength of the divine Spirit in its reflections on the
soul, as also that persuasive virtue in a renewed conscience; and the many
experiences in many Christians who have attained un^^ ^his assurance; all which
does clearly evidence that it is a thing possible: That which the Spirit is
able to force in a believing soul; that which many a believing soul has
attained unto; that same is a possible thing, but, etc. Ergo.

SECT. III.
Quest. 3. VVHither every Believer should strive to the assurance of faith?

Sol. I will premise only a thing or two.

One is, that some duties concern all men at all times, and immediately, as to
repent and to believe.

Other duties concern some men, and those in an order and mediately: As to be
assured of a man's particular interest in Christ, it is not an immediate duty,
it does not concern a man merely, as an absolute sinner: for a man who is
unconverted and yet unbeleeving is not bound to be persuaded that he is
Christ's, and Christ is his, unless we will say, that he is bound to be
persuaded of a lie; no, but he must first be a believer, he must accept of
Jesus Christ upon his own terms, and being a believer, I say, he is bound to
labor for particular assurance: Not to let the real interest of Christ in him,
and of his soul in Christ, to hang hovering and in dispute, but to determine
them by particular and personal evidence.

Again, premise this, it is one thing to speed de facto what every believer
has, and it is another thing to speak de jure, what every believer should
have: It is true, that every one who has Christ, cannot be yet assured, and
say, that Christ is mine, but then, as Christ is really his (as certainly he is
thine, as thy husband is thy husband) so the Christian is obliged to assure his
heart thereof.

Which I shall easily clear by Argument.

1. We are bound to draw near unto God in the full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.
22. Which is, (...) conceive, in a clear persuasion that we shall not fail,
but enjoy the good which he promises; now this cannot be, unless a man be
assured and persuaded that God is his God, and Christ is his Christ: for as
much as persuasion of audience does always arise from a presupposed pers^asion
of personal and mutual interest; I cannot by faith be persuaded that God will
give such a good thing, or such, unless I am first persuaded, that he is my
God, that God is my God, or Christ is my Christ; It is a fundamental
persuasion, upon which all others are built; for this gives life and settlement
to my doubting soul; I many times doubt, but shall I have this thing which I
ask? yes, says the believing heart? but how are you assured of it? I reply,
because God is my God, he has given himself unto me, Ergo he will give this,
but how know you that God is your God? Upon good ground; why; says the
believing soul, of that I am abundantly persuaded, I doubt it not, hereupon the
soul raises it self to that other assurance, of acceptance and audience, why;
then I will nor doubt of this, I will be confident that then the Lord will
hear, for he is my God; and David goes this way very often.

2. We are bound (all our days) to give God thanks for his greatest mercies,
now I think that the bestowing of Christ upon the soul is as great a mercy as
ever poor sinners had.

Obj. It is so, but what of this?

Sol. But we cannot give God hearty thanks whiles we are doubtful of our
particular interest in Christ: Can thou go unto the Lord, and say? O Lord, I
bless thee from my soul for all the mercies which thou have conferred on me;
health I have, and I know it, for which I do thank thee; riches I have, and
friends, and this I know too, and for them I thank thee too; I thank thee also
exceedingly from the bottom of my soul, for that thou have given thy own Son
to me, Jesus Christ, but truly, I know not whether thou have given him to me,
or no: I thank thee exceedingly for the pardon of my vile sins in this blood,
but verily I am not sure of this, I rather think they are not pardoned. Nay,
this will not run smooth, and the reason is, because so much particular
evidence as God gives a man of his personal interest in himself, or Christ, or
his merits, so much (and no greater) thankfulness will the soul be brought
unto.

SECT. IV.
Quest. 4. WHat Arguments to move believers to labor for the assurance of
faith?

Sol. There are many.

1. As he said to Job, Do the consolations of God seem small unto thee? That I
say here, does assurance seem a small thing unto thee?

Consider (seriously) the matters and things about which this assurance is
conversant, and thou shall find them of the greatest consequence in the world.

What do thou think of Jesus Christ for a sinner? Can there be a more
excellent good then Christ? I count all things but dross and dung for the
excellency of Christ, said Paul, Phil. 3. or can there be a more necessary good
for thee then Christ? Tell me in sad thoughts, that if thou had all the
pleasures of the world, and all the honors ours of the world, and all the
riches of the world, and yet wast Christ^esse, that is, thou had no portion
in Christ; why; what avails all this as long as thou art Christless? as Abraham
said, seeing I am childlesse? In whom is God reconciled unto thee, but in
Christ? and how will thou stand before God, if thou have not Christ? by whom
can thou get salvation, but by Christ? and why then wilt not thou force thy
soul to give all diligence to make thy part in Christ sure to thy soul, that
thou may come in all cases to that of Job, I know that my Redeemer lives,
and with Paul, He loved me and gave himself for me.

Again, what do thou think of the pardon of sins? verily the time was
once, even then when thy spirit did roar all the night, and thou foundest no
quiet in the day, when thy moisture was turned into the drought of Summer, and
thy soul was disquieted within thee; I say in that time thou could with many
tears break out, and say, with David, Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Psalm 32. 1, 2.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. O what would
thou have given to have believed, that thy sins should be pardoned? thou
could then discover death in so unpardoned a state and life, then in a
discharged and absolved condition. Why I pray you, is pardon of sin so
precious a thing? and is the assured knowledge thereof a small thing? Is it not
enough to have the pardon pass, not only the seal of the King, but the eye
also of the malefactor?

Yea, yet further, what think you of eternal life? what is it? O, I cannot
reach it by thoughts, much less by words; Life! no such thing on the earth as
it; eternal life, what thing in heaven more then it? To see my God, my Christ,
to be gloriously united to them, to be filled with the perfections of
holiness, brightness of glory, to know him as we are known, to love him in
the transcendency of love; I know not what I say; for I speak of eternal life:
O! if the the glimpse of divine favor here be the admiration of our souls,
the perfection of our joys, the heaven on earth! tell me, what is the fullness
of his favor? what is the full evidence of his favor? what is the everlasting
evidence of his favor? Now, eternal life is all this, all this; alas I have
said nothing of it yet; Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man what God has, etc.

And is not this a matter to be determined and ascertained to our souls? what,
to let eternal life hang in suspense; verily, though until we do mount and rise
to the assurance of faith, we leave (for our part, though the thing may be sure
in it self) even this also, our eternal life as a thing doubtful. Thou wile
not hold the least quillet of thy land, upon unevident and unsure term, yet
will thou? etc.

2. Assurance will marvellously settle and quiet the soul. David expresses so
much, Psalm. 4. 6. Lord, life thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Ver.
7. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn
and wine increased. Ver. 8. I will lay me down and sleep. The ship at anchor is
safe, but in a calm it is quiet; faith makes our state sure, and assurance
peaceful.

Two effects he there delivers of this blessed assurance; one is a transcendent
joy, and another is a complete peace: It glads the heart, and it pacifies the
heart: It is most true, that faith in its vital act (of acceptance) intitles
us to both. Every believer has cause of great joy, and sweet peace; but it is
faith in this eminent act (of assurance) which replenisheth the soul with
actual joy, and actual comfort; For now the believer sees and knows his
happiness; He has a Christ and knows it; he has pardon of sin, and knows
it; he stands in favor of God, and knows it: that which held up his soul, is
now opened; all the causes of his comfort shine, as it were, and clearly
discover themselves in a way of well grounded propriety. As David said
concerning his enemies, Psalm 27. 1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation,
whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? So the assured soul in this case can exult, God is my God, Christ is
my Christ, they have pardoned my sins, accepted of my person, what should
trouble me? what should disquiet me? my soul does now rejoice in God my
Savior. Who shall lay any thing to the the charge of Gods Elect? it is God
that justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, Romans 8.
34. Sin, that is pardoned; Justice, that is satisfied; my soul, that is
reconciled; my person, that is justified; my prayers, they are answered; my
heart, that is pacified, for God is mine, and Christ is mine, and I am his.
Before I am assured, I see my sins, look up to Christ, and adventure my soul
on him for pardon, I trust on him, yet I may fear; but when I am assured, I
see my sins look up to Christ, and my soul is quiet and rejoices. As it was
with the Israelites, when they were Near the red sea, they looked back on
their enemies, and looked up to God, but yet they were exceedingly afraid:
Afterward, when they had past through the read sea, and stood upon the shore,
they looked back upon the same enemies, but now as drowned, and then their
sighs were turned into joys, and their fears into peace: They exceedingly
rejoyed. Why; in assurance, though we look upon the same sins, yet not in the
same manner: Now we look upon them as drowned enemies; as iniquities cast into
the depths of the sea, as pardoned iniquities: Now, though sin does grieve the
soul, yet sin pardoned does quiet and rejoice the soul.

3. Assurance does arm the heart against future temptations.

There are two sorts of temptations, against both which the assurance of faith
does arm the believer.

1. To sin: Though assurance be a kind of heaven upon earth, yet in this
does the beatifical vision differ from a believing assurance, that the one
leaves no sin at all, but the other is a day of great comfort to a believing
sinner; yet even an assured person has yet much of a sinning nature remaining
in him.

Nevertheless, though assurance does not wholly cast off fear, yet it does
exceedingly keep off sin: A believing person shall not easily sin whiles he
is reading his pardon, and looking his Christ in the face. How can I do this
great wickedness and sin against God? If the mere respect of a God was so
prevalent with Joseph; O how much more powerful is the propriety in a God? How
can I do this great wickedness and sin against my God? Should such a man as
I flee, said Nehemiah! so the assured Christian, should such a man as I sin!

Nay, remember it: Sin is never more odious to the heart, then when the heart
is most assured: The great and rich mercy of God in Christ, it is the principal
bane of a temptation: The man who formerly would have stepped out against the
threats of justice, having now obtained mercy, trembles at the very thoughts of
sinning.

2 To despair, it is possible for an assured person to sin, and then this is
probable, (and more then ^o) that new sinnings will quickly cloud ol^
assurance: Though a believer loses not his life, yet ^e may loose his health;
and though he has a Father (...), yet by sinning he loses the sight of that
Father; (...) exceedingly humbled and repents, ^^d (...) cannot read his former
Evidences, he (...) cast off for ever, and shall be remembered (...) yet an
ancient assurance well grounded (...), and preserve the soul against despair^
(...); that God will not cast off the soul, Jer. (...) has app^^^^ed of old
unto me, saying, I (...) an everlast^ng love, therefore with lo^^ng (...) thee.
Ver. 4. Again, I will build thee, and thou shall be built. So Psalm. 8^. 30.
(...) his children fors^ke my Law and walk not in my judgments. Ver. 31. If
they break my statute^ and keep not my commandments. Ver. 32. Then will I visit
their transgression with the red, and their iniquities with st^ipes. Ver. 33.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utte^ly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. V^r. 34. My Covenant will I not break, etc. Sure
mercies of David, Isaiah 55. 3. So for Christ, Ioh 13. 1. Having loved his own,
he loved them to the end.

4. Assurance by faith sweetens all other blessing to us: Job speaking of many
outward mercies, in ^^s children, in his plenty, his honors, Job 29. 5. 67.
and ver. 3. he recounts one which shadowed all of them, (his candle shin^d upon
my head.) A^ if the evidence of Gods favou^ were like the light which gives
life, and beau^y to all the colors in the room, and without which all our
blessings lay dead and dark. O what an enlivening matter is this to all that I
enjoy! and God is my God too and Christ is my Christ too, and my sins are
pardoned? too here is a dear and loving husband; yea, and God is my God too;
here are tender and observing children; yea, and Christ is my Christ too; here
is plenty of food, and raiment, and friends; yea, and my sins are pardoned too.
But the want of this may check all our blessings, and is able to mar the very
comfort of our comforts, I am exceeding rich; yea, but I cannot yet say that
God is my God; I am greatly honored by man; yea, but I cannot yet say that
Christ is my Redeemer; I have health and marrow in my bones, and want not for
any outward mercy; yea, but I cannot yet say that my sins are pardoned; for
ought I know that may yet stand upon record, which may lose my soul for ever.

5. Nay, again, it is able to sweeten all our crosses; a cross is more or
less heavy, (to the Christian) by how much the more or the less God appears
to the soul; The Disciples may even in a storm rejoice, if Christ be in the
Ship.

It was an excellent speech, that of Job 29. 3. By his light I walked through
darkness; and David answers him in, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy
rod and thy staff they comfort me; How triumphant is Paul, and beyond both
himself and all crosses, and all because of his assurance, and persuasion? Romans
8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword. Ver.
37? Nay in all these things we are more then conquerers through him that loved
us. Ver. 38. For I am persuaded that neither Life, nor Death, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come. Ver. 39.
Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Can more be said? need we to
add; See him again in Romans 5. 2. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

Objection. Who would not, may some reply? in so great a good.

Sol. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulation also; and who can do this
but he who has some measure of assurance.

Indeed faith can make the soul to submit in a cross but it is assurance which
makes the soul to rejoice and to triumph.

What the Apostle spoke of death, that is true of all afflictions, the sting of
them is finne: where the conscience is wounded, and the sight of heaven is
darkened, there the cross is heavy and bitter; A man has a burden on his
shoulders, and a burden on his conscience, and yet a burden that he cannot see
any to smile on him, and comfort him;

But now when the spirit of a man is sound, and the evidence of faith is
clear, when a man feels all to be right within, all to be peace abroad, that
all stands fair 'twixt him and his God; Nay, and he can see God as his God,
the strength of this assurance, does not only allay a burden, but raises the
heart exceedingly above it: yet God is good to Israel, and though I see the
Olive to fail, and the Fields not to yield, and the flocks to be cut off, yet
I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. The Lord God
is my strength, Hab. 2. 17, 18.

Sixthly, it makes all kinds of duty to flow and to rise, I will instance
briefly in some.

1. In the Active.

2. In the Passive.

1. Active.

1. Praise and thankfulness, Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord, O my soul and all
that is within me bless his holy Name. Ver. 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. Verse 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: Nay,
he is at it again, Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits toward me; I will take up the cup of salvation, etc. O the
evidence and apprehension of so great a mercy and salvation! it fills every
vain of the heart, etc. Music is highest and sweetest in the fairest weather.
He who disputes his mercy can hardly bless for it.

Now I see much forgiven, and therefore I bless much: What! and all this
forgiven to me, and so freely, and so fully also, so many transgressions, yet
to cover all, yet to be reconciled; yet to put down the gracious pardon before
mine eyes.

2. Prayers: There are two properties in these, which will surely arise out of
assurance.

One is confidence and boldness: A man will come boldly to the throne of grace
who is once assured by faith: Now that of John comes in indeed, 1 John 5. 14.
This is the confidence that we have i^ him, that if we ask any thing according
to his Will, he hears us: Christ (I remember) teaches his Disciples, (and in
them all Believers) to pray for many excellent things, both for soul and for
body, but then he preferred, he set this in the front, Our Father, as if he had
clearly suggested this unto us, that the assurance of God as our Father, is
that which gives unto the heart a strong confidence in all petitions; why; who
will not come freely and confidently to a Father, to his Father, to his
reconciled Father?

Another is quickness and life in the affections, Psalm. 63. 1.

O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. Observe it, I will seek thee,
there is now diligence; early will I seek thee, there is quickness of
affection: and why I will seek thee early? because O God, thou art my God.

3. Ordinances: Now a man will fly to them, as the Do^es to the windows (it is
the Prophet Isaiah's expression;) A man has an heart to bow the knee when he
knows that my God will help him: A man has an heart to hear the Word; when he
knows my God will teach him to profit and will speak peace unto him: A man will
with cheerfulness address himself to the Sacrament, when he knows this is
the blood which was shed for the rem^ssion of his sins, and his salvation is
there sealed. The Apostle has an apt passage in 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes
desire the sincere milk of the Word, and surely that is with much delight, and
with much earnestness, (for so do babes desire the milk of the breasts) But
what might stir up this. Ver. 3. If so be that you have tasted that the Lord
is gracious? a taste of God, of God as gracious, yea, this is it which whets
the appetite, this sets on the heart to the ordinances indeed.

4. All obedience, actuating the whole kinds of duty.

Why, assurance in the soul makes all duty both cheerful, and steadfast, Psalm
26. 3. Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes (therefore) have I walked in thy
truth.

Why is duty to good hearts sometimes so weary-some, so slack, so troublesome?
verily, faith is weak, doubts are strong, fears are many; could they once see
God to be their God, Christ to be their Lord and Savior; sins pardoned in
his blood, and all this to them. Now even the lame would walk, and the weary
would run, the heart would set upon obedience with all its strength, and all
its care.

2. The like may be said for passive obedience: assurance enables it
exceedingly: The love of Christ constrains us, said Paul, 2 Corinthians. 5. I
remember the Apostle has a notable passage, Romans 5. 7. For a good man some
will even dare to die: That is for a bountiful man; a man of eminent and
singular good to preserve him, for his sake, a private man would lay down his
life: If the goodness and kindness of a man has sometimes such a force with
us, what influence then has the goodness of a God upon a believing heart: the
kindness, the blood of a Christ upon a believing and an assured heart? Who
would not suffer reproach for Christ, who suffered death for him? who would not
kiss the st^^ke to bring him honor who sh^d his blood to get his pardon, and
to crown him with ete^nal glory? Believe it, assurance will make thy life more
fruitful, and thy heart more suffering. Faith will make holy duties to be no
harden and assurance will make it a delight: Faith will make a man to bear the
C^osse; and assurance will make a man to triumph under it: We are more then
conquerours, said persuaded Paul.

Seventhly, Assurance of faith, it is a bathing spring to all our graces: Shall
I instance in some?

1. The mourning heart does much depend upon the assured mind: No man ever
did, or ever shall take God by the hand, as reconciled to him, or look on
Christ as redeeming him, or read his pardon with assurance, but his heart shall
be full of joy, and his eyes full of tears. They shall look on him whom they
have pierced, and shall mourn as a man mournes for his only child, Zach. 12.
10. There is nothing softens the heart so well as faith, and which melts it so
much as assurance. The powers of the greatest kindness, and most gracious
love, do open the fountain of godly sorrow within the soul.

2. Love kindles in the heart upon assurance. To whom much is forgiven, the
same will love much, said Christ, Luke. 7. 47. We love him because he loved us
first, said John. The love of God to us is the cause of our love to him again,
and again, and the more that love is cleared to us, the more is our love
rekindled to him; goodness is a cause of love, here it is; bountifulness is a
cause of love, here it is; knowledge of both a special provocation of love, in
assurance here it is.

What a thing is this! that God should give his Covenant to me, his Son to
me, his Mercies to me, his loving kindness to me, his glory in heaven unto me!
I love a man who defends my Name, I love a man who gives me a book, I love a
man who gives me my ransom, I love a man who gives me a meals meat; Ah! poor
things in comparison: how do I then infinitely exceed in love to my God, who I
know has pardoned, has justified, has accepted, will save me for ever?

More might be said of all particular graces whatsoever.

8. Assurance by faith does but ease us of the world, and mounts the soul above
it.

1. It eases us of the world: How can he walk with cares, who is indeed
persuaded that God is his Father,; he that gave him Christ will give him all
other things freely: God will not stand for a little earth, who has
bountifully given a whole heaven; and he will surely find me food and raiment
for my body, who found mercy and the blood of his own Son for my soul.

2. Nay it mounts us above the world; they do observe that these lower things
grow little and less, by how much the higher a man is seated: If a man could
be elevated to one of the celstial orbs, the whole world would seem but a
narrow spot of ground unto him. In one point this is most true, the nearer God
draws unto the soul, the more nothing does this world appear.

O the blessed favor of God! the evidences of our union with Christ! This is
like the light of the Sun, which puts out the light of ten thousand candles:
Thou would never complain of too little in the world, if thou had so
much as made up a true assurance of heaven.

9. Lastly, Assurance will breed comfort in life and confidence in death.

Object. Why! are Gods people afraid many times to die? they cannot say with
Christ, I will go to my Father.

They have the bond, but see not the seal: They are not assured of
Reconciliation, of pardon, of salvation.

But if they could with Simeon, Take Christ into their arms; if once they
could be assured, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation.

He who by assurance looks Christ in the face, may with cheerful confidence
look death in the face: I have a desire to depart and to be with Christ, said
Paul, Phil. 1. 23. How so verse 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is
gain: But how knows he that? 2 Timothy 1. 12. For I know whom I have believed,
and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto
him against that day. So, 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if our earthly house of
this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens.

SECT. V.
Quest. 1. NOw I come to the last inquiry, by what means the soul may get up
to this assurance?

Sol. I shall only (...) be such rules as reach a believing person. There^o^e
(...)*

1. If thou be a b^^eever and would be assured, then preserve the sense of
thy own natural wretchedness, and of the darknese of thy souls state without
assurance. Christ came to Mary when she was weeping; and the Great God looks
down upon the broken Spirit. The highest mountain has the first sight of the
Sun, but the lowest Christian has the first sight of God. When the people of
God were mourning, then says God, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, and say
unto them your sins are pardoned.

You shall find this, That the truly sensible heart has Note.
three properties in it, which envite the Lord much to gratify it with
assurance, viz.

One that is very humble.

Another that is much in the prizing of Gods love and mercy.

And a third, that it is exceeding thirsty after a good look from God, after
some taste of Christ, and God will satisfy all these.

2. Be no strangers to the Ordinances: you shall find this, that the ripening
of faith belongs to them as well as the seeds of it.

The word you know is the soul of faith, it was that which did incline the
heart to yield, which did make it to accept of Christ, and it is that also
which can make us to know our possessions: 1 John 15. 13. These things have I
written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know
that ye have eternal life. So 1 John 1. 4 These things we write unto you that
your jo^ may be full. More plainly: In whom, after you heard the Word of truth,
ye believed, in whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians 1. 13.

For, look as the Word has promises which draw the soul to Christ, so it has
promises to clear the soul in its interest in Christ, to answer all doubts and
fears, and to answer the fear about acceptance, so it removes doubts which
strive against evidence and propriety.

The Sacrament, you know, it is the Seal of righteousness which is by faith,
Romans 4. 11. Look, as a Seal does distinguish, and confirm, and settle the
mind, so is the Sacrament ordained to satisfy, and persuade the heart of a
believer. God appointed this Ordinance, as for other ends, so for this, That
the matter might be out of doubt, out of controversy, that Christ is ours, and
sin is pardoned in his blood.

3. Be much in prayer: If a man would gain assurance, he must be much in
prayers, to persuade and assure the heart: David found mavelous loving
kindness, but then he cried in supplications, Psalm 31. 21, 22.

Thou must pray earnestly for mercy, earnestly for pardon, and most earnestly
for Christ.

And thou must use diligence. Remember this, that in all thy endeavors for
assurance, thou must use diligence, a cold hearing, a cold reading, a cold
praying will not bring the soul to it: No, you must be most diligent and
fervent in them, and so, etc.

4 Again, with all these there must be joined strong upright care to please God.

This know, that sin separates, but uprightness gathers God and the soul
together. To him that orders his conversation aright, I will show the
salvation of the Lord, Psalm 50. 23.

Why? Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart, Psalm.
97. 11. See that of the Prophet, Isa. 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices
and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways. Unevenness
of heart or way, it is a flaw, and it is that which cuts us off after many
prayers, it renews our doubtings again, and we are as far to seek as at the
first, but if the heart be plain, if it be sincerely set for God, desirous to
please him in all things, this a compendious way of assurance: the Word falls
in directly to settle and confirm such a soul: The steps of the Words direct
us to the sight of our God.

5. Lastly, you must be much in the exercise of faith. There be two parts of it
which you must improve. One is, you must against all sense and feeling, and
against all the contradict^ons of reason and unbelief, cast the soul on God in
Christ, and rest on him to be your God, and on Christ to be your Lord and
Savior, and that your sins shall be pardoned.

Then you must wait, you must not limit God, but seek still, I will hearken,
said David, what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his
Saints, Psalm 85. 8. See Isa. 64 4. Since the beginning of the world men have
not heard nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God besides
thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for Him. The Lord will wait
that he may be gracious: blessed are they that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18. so
Isa. 25. 9. It shall be said in that day, Lo this is our God, we have waited
for him, etc. This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation. For Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in them
that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy.

So that this is the sum of all, walk with all uprightness, and with an
humble, penitent, and believing soul, cast your sins upon God in Christ,
trusting in him alone for the favor of God, pardon of sins, and eternal
salvation, and wait upon God for all this in the use of the means, and constant
diligency in prayer; you shall at length have your hearts desire, you shall
hear from God thus much, I am thy salvation; and from Christ as much: Be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL Table.
A
Affiance. THe near relation betwixt Christ and a believer is the ground of
Affiance. p. 254

Anointing, vid. Christ. Antecedent. The difference betwixt an Antecedent and a
cause. p. 90 What antecedents go necessarily before faith. p. 91 There is no
concluding the presence of the habit of faith, from the common antecedents of
faith. p. 91

Assent. Assent, how one believer differs from another therein. p. 121, 122

Assisting. Assisting virtue from Christ. p. 143

Assurance. Three things granted about assurance. p. 38, 39 How assurance is an
act of faith. p. 39 Assurance of Christ's willingness an encouraging ground to
believe. p 196 A double assurance of Christ's willingness. p. 196 Assurance, a
fruit of an eminent faith. p. 93 Assurance easily let go, argues a weak faith.
p. 134 The improvement of faith to a full assurance. p. 259 What the assurance
of faith is. p. 260 Assurance is the conclusion of an evangelical sylogisme. p.
260 Assurance is a victorious conclusion against the strength of doubtings. p.
261 Assurance is an asserting or persuading act. p. 262 Two kinds of assurance
touching our personal interest in Christ, and the difference of them. p 263
Assurance of says directs to a personal evidence of particular interest in
Christ and his benefits. p. 265 Every believer may be assured thereof. p. 266
Arguments to evince it. Ibid To be assured how far it is a duty. p 267 A
Christian is obliged to assure his heart that Christ is his. p. 268. Arguments
to evince it. Ibid Want of assurance hinders thankfulness. p. 268 Arguments to
persuade to labor for assurance. p. 269 The things about which assurance is
conversant, are of greatest consequence. p. 269 Assurance will marvellously
quiet and settle the soul. p. 271 Assurance arms the heart against future
temptations. p. 270 Assurance sweetens all other blessings to us. p. 273
Assurance sweetens all our crosses. p. 274 Assurance makes all kind of duty to
flow and to rise. p. 275 Assurance is a bathing spring to all our graces. p.
277 Assurance does ease us of the world, and mounts the soul above it. p. 278,
279 Means by which the soul may get up to this assurance. p. 280

Atheism. Natural Atheism a hindrance to says. p. 168 How to be removed. p.
169 Atheism, what it is. p. 168

B
Believer, Believing. Believing in Christ, what it does import. p. 29 The
general nature of believing in several propositions. p. 30 The difference
betwixt knowledge, opinion and belief. p. 30, 31 Believing, as restrained to a
divine and theological consideration, what it is? p. 31 Vid. Faith. In what
sense believing in Christ is the only way to be saved. p. 54 The difficulty of
believing in Jesus Christ. p. 79 The facility of error and mistake about
believing, and what makes it so. p. 84 Comfort for all true believers. p 109
Believers are in a true and sure way to heaven. p. 110 Every Believer has a
sure interest in Christ. p. 140 Every Believer has a beneficial interest in
Christ. What these benefits are. p. 140, 141 Motives to believing. p. 158 God
deals mightily with the soul to believe in Christ. p. 165 We are no^ losers by
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. p. 166

Boldness. Believers may with boldness approach the throne of grace. p. 116
This boldness cures sinful modesties and unbeleeving fears. p. 116

C
Certainty. The difference betwixt reflexive certainty and real certainty of
interest. p. 140

Change. An inward change an infallible testimony of a living faith. p. 98
There is a change produced by faith. p. 99 How faith produces a change of the
condition, and how of the person. p. 99 Every believer has a changed and h^ly
heart. p. 99 Wherein this change lies. ib. No man has a changed nature but a
believer. p. 100 Enquire after this change in thy self. p. 100 Change of
condition easily complied with, an evidence of strong faith. p. 128

Christ. What it signifies. p. 18 Christ's anointing does import his assured
ordination, abundant qualification, sweet and pleasant acceptance both with
God and man. p. 19, 20 Unto what Christ was anointed. p. 20 Vid. Priest,
Prophet, King. Christ's and his Churches enemies, who they are, and how
conquered by him. p. 28 Whole Christ the adaequate object of faith. p. 41 Whole
Christ taken and received by faith. p. 42 How Christ is taken by faith as a
Savior and Priest. p. 43 How Christ is taken by faith, as a Savior, and King,
and Prophet. p. 45 Taking and receiving Christ as Lord and Savior, has many
things in it. p. 46 Vid. Taking. All that can save and justify a man, is only
to be found in Christ as the meritorious* cause. p. 62 Christ should be the
main scope of our preaching and studying. p. 67 Christ may be preached two
ways. p. 67. Plentifulnesse of our supplies in Christ encourages to live by
faith on him. p. 248 The ordination of Christ to supply believers, encourages
trust. p. 249 Christ's services done in behalf of believers encourages trust.
p. 250 Christ is given out of rich grace, mercy and love. p. 190 Christ is
worth your taking, though we be unworthy of receiving. p. 191 Christ's
disposition encourages trust. p. 251 Christ's conjunction and relation
encourages trust. p. 253 Christ's invitation encourages trust. p. 255 Christ's
assurances that he will not fail him that lives by faith on him. p. 255 Four
things by which we may be persuaded that Christ will do us good, if we live by
faith on him. p. 255 Christ's offices, encouragements to live faith on him. p.
256, 257 Impossible to have supplies for the soul any other way, then by faith
in Christ. p. 258

Comfort. Comfort, not sure, but by believing. p 64 Distinguish betwixt the
ground of our comfort, and the testimonies of our interest in them. p. 64

Communion. No prison can boult out communion with God. p. 3 Communion with God
in Ordinances and duties, not so sweet in a weak believer, as in a strong. p.
149 Reasons of it. p. 150

Confidence. Confidence of easy answers for great matters, an argument of
strong faith. p. 125

Covenant. A double Covenant, and for two ways of life. p. 56 Impossible to be
saved by the legal Covenant, whence it is so. p. 56 Vid. Holiness. Unbelief
makes void the Covenant of grace. p. 89 A true believer is in singular Covenant
with God. p. 114 Covenant of grace, what it is in the offer and revelation of
it, and what in respect of our entrance and admission into it. p. 114, 115
Happiness of being in Covenant with God. p. 115 Every believer in the same
fundamental Covenant with God. p. 145

Crucifying. Crucifying virtue from Christ. p. 143

D
Day. Day of grace, fear of having outstood it, diverse considerations about it.
p. 203

Debts. Christ takes our debts upon himself, the comfort of it. p. 112

Degrees. Degrees of faith, what they are, and how believers differ in them. p.
122, 123 Reasons of the diversity of degrees of faith. p. 124

Delay, vid. Hasty. Desertions. In times of desertions to live upon Christ and
the promises, an argument of a great faith. p. 130

Discouragement. Steadfast following Christ notwithstanding discouragements
argues a strong faith. p. 125

Distrust. Arguments of distrust, when they grow weak, faith gets strength. p.
128

Doubtings. Doubtings argue weakness of faith. p. 131 Doubtings prejudice our
suits. p. 150 Doubts of the weak believer about his title, and mistakes in
passages betwixt God and the soul. p. 155

Duty. Want of a heart to duty, should not discourage from believing. p. 210
Faith puts life into our duties, the Reasons of it. p. 211

E
Exchange. A real exchange betwixt Christ and believers, and wherein it is. p.
111

F
Faith. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ the only way to salvation. p. 13 Faith
in Christ described. p. 32 The spring and fountain of justifying faith. p. 32
The subject of faith. p. 34 The s^at of faith. p. 35 Three kinds of faith
distinguished, viz. Credere Deum, Deo, in Deum. p. 36 How faith is seated in
the will, how in the understanding. p. 36, 37 The proper act of faith as
justifying. p. 37 The object of justifying faith. p. 40 The immediate object of
justifying faith. p. 4. 1

Vid. Christ. The consequent object of faith. p. 48 Faith may be considered,
Absolutely, Actually. Correlatively, Instrumentally, how to be understood. p.
52 53 How faith justifies, p. 71, 72 Whether faith deal with the person of
Christ, or the benefits of Christ first. p. 73 Diverse kinds of faith. p. 84
Historical faith, what it is. p. 84 Faith of miracles, what it is. p. 85
Temporary faith, what it is. Ib. How temporary faith differs from justifying
faith. Ibid The consimilitude betwixt faith and presumption. p. 86 The
easiness of faith, short of justifying, and of presumption, and our aptness
to rest in that. Ibid Rules for the discovery of faith. p. 90 Some things faith
does produce, not as essential properties, but as magnificent testimonies, and
how we must distinguish betwixt them. p. 91, 93. Some things faith does
produce, yet not always, therefore we may not conclude a wait of faith from
the absence of these. p. 91, 92 Many inward contrarieties to the intrinsecal
acts and fruits of faith. p. 94 Evidences of faith cannot be given by way of
abstraction, but by way of existence, how to be undersstood. p. 95 A double
contrariety to faith. Ib. Faith endeavors after increase, and wherein. p. 107
Wherein true faith in one differs from faith in another. p. 120, 121 Signs of
a great and strong faith. p. 125 Signs of a weak faith. p. 131

Vid. Weak. The vital act of faith is not reflexive, but direct. p. 136 Motives
to greaten our faith. p. 156 Exhortations to labor for faith p. 157
Impediments and hindrances to faith. p. 168 Means whereby God works faith. p.
176 The proper rise and ground of faith is without our selves. p. 189 To
receive Christ by faith, is not a matter of merit, but a point of duty. p. 190
Faith no hindrance to holiness. p. 208. The time of contrariety is the time
for faith to work. p. 209 Two offices of faith. p. 216 Vid. living by faith.
Faith of adherence, and faith of evidence, the difference betwixt them. p. 259
The frequent exercise of faith improves it to assurance. p. 282

Fruitful. True faith is fruitful. The more fruitful, the stronger faith. p.
130

G
Glory, vid. Salvation. The inheritance of glory, all believers have a like
interest in it. p. 142 How many ways God has glory from us. p. 153

God. The actions of God of several sorts. p. 72 How many things in God
encourage to live by faith, as Gods alsufficiency. p. 231 Gods command. p. 232
Gods promises. p. 233 Gods power. p. 234 Gods truth and fidelity. p. 236 Gods
performance to them that have lived by faith. p. 237

Goodness. Hatred of goodness precipitates evil men to acts of injustice. p. 2

Gospel. The preaching of the Gospel is of necessary and singular consequence.
p. 65

Ghost. Holy Ghost, how he may be said to justify. p. 71

Grace. Salvation is only by grace. p. 63 The best graces are but imperfect
excellencies. p. 113

H
Habits. Two sorts of habits acquired and infused. p. 33

Hasty. A soul hasty to be answered, is weak in faith. p. 132

Heart. Heart or will the seat of faith. p. 35

Hearing. Mere hearing of Christ and his Doctrine will not save. p. 66 Diverse
sorts of hearing. Ib.

Historical, vid. Faith. Holiness. Inherent holiness cannot justify and
save. p. 56 Inherent holiness is defective and imperfect. p. 57 The conscience
dares not rest upon it. p. 58 Actual holiness, no meritorious efficacy in it.
p. 58

Humble, humbled. Faith makes the heart humble. p. 103 A soul that thinks
himself not humbled enough, answered. p. 197 A twofold humbling according to a
double cause of it, and the workings of each. p. 197, 198 Fitness for Christ
not to be judged by the measure and strength of legal humblings: the reasons of
it. p. 198 Some things, which if they follow upon legal humblings, may be
subordinate encouragements to the heart to put it self upon Christ. p. 199
Humblings and meltings of soul not hindered by faith. Ibid But furthered by it.
p. 200

I
James. James, what kind of faith he speaks of. p. 104, 105

Ignorance. Gross ignorance an impediment to getting faith. p. 169, 170
Ignorance of our sinful condition, of Gods justice, and of the excellency of
Christ, impediments to getting faith. p. 170 Imputed, vid. Righteousness.

Infidelity. The dangerous state of positive infidelity. p. 158 The degrees of
positive infidelity. p. 159

Intercession, vid. Priest. A twofold intercession. p. 24, 25 Christ's
intercession, what is meant by it. p. 25.

Inherent. Inherent qualities and abilities insisted on as means of persuasion,
argues weakness of faith. p. 134

Joy. Spiritual joy the sole fruit of faith. p. 92 Several sorts of joy, whence
they spring. p. 92 Joy an inseparable fruit of faith. p. 92 Joy three ways
considered. p. 146, 147

Justify, Justification. There is not a cooperation of faith and other graces
to justify, yet there is a co-existence of them in the person justified. p. 55
Justification only in Jesus Christ. p. 68 Justification, the word opened. p. 69
The nature of it designed. p. 70 Justification an action in God. p. 71 The
kind of this action. p. 72 The meritorious cause of it. p. 71 The applying
cause of it. p. 71 Whether Justification be before faith. p. 73 Justification
not a divided act. p. 75 Whether it be one transient act, or one continued act.
p. 75 Justification of a sinner a gracious and just action. p. 78 Justification
by imputed righteousness, all believers have an equal interest in it. p. 142

Justice. Gods Justice should constrain us to believe. p. 187

K
King. Christ ancinted to be a King. p. 27 His Kingly office, what it imports.
Ib.

Knowledge. Knowledge, how one believer differs from another therein. p. 121

L
Law. No ability to keep the whole Law wholly; Reasons of it. p. 60

Life, Living. A heart inclined to the life of sense is weak in faith. p. 133
Of living by faith. p. 216 What it is in general to live by faith. p. 218 To
live by faith, is to commit all to God Ibid To live by faith is to depend upon
God for all. p. 219 Living by faith extends to two sorts of life. p. 220 To
live by faith on Christ described. p. 221 The several exigencies and conditions
of soul, in which we had need to live by faith. p. 221, 222 Encouragements
from Christ's fullness to live by faith in those exigencies. p. 223, 224 The
conjunction of our own exigencies and Christ's fullness, is the very living by
faith upon Christ. p. 225 To live by faith on Christ, is more then a mere
complaining of our wants, or an acknowledging of his fullness. p. 226 To live
by faith on Christ, is more then a mere going to Christ. p. 227 To live by
faith on Christ, is not only to trust on Christ for supply, but to expect
performance. p. 227 To live by faith on Christ is an extensive work. p. 228
Arguments to persuade to live by faith. p. 229 The life of faith is congruous
to our condition. p. 229 The necessity of living by faith in all sensible
sequestrations. p. 231 Six arguments from God himself to persuade to live by
faith. p. 231 The life of faith is the only Christian life. p. 238 The life of
faith is the only comfortable life. p. 240 What things make the life
uncomfortable, and what makes it comfortable. p. 241 The life of faith eases
of all burdens, and secures against all prejudices. p. 240 The life of faith
makes the present condition good enough, and assures of universal and
reasonable supplies. p. 244 The life of faith is the only getting and thriving
life. p. 245 The Reasons of it. p. 247 Diverse arguments from Jesus Christ
himself to persuade us to live by faith on him. p. 248

Vid. Christ. Lord. True faith takes Christ only to be its Lord. p. 101 No
unbeleever can accept of Christ to be his Lord only, Reasons of it. p. 191
Every believer admits of Christ to be his Lord, Reasons of it. p. 102 How to
know whether Christ or sin be our Lord. p. 103 Weak faith will honor Christ as
a Lord, though it be not sure that he is its Savior, p. 136

Love. True love of Christ an infallible evidence of true faith. p. 96 Love is
not separated from faith. p. 96 Reasons of it. p. 97 True love to Christ, three
trials of it. p. 98 Every believer has an equal interest in Gods special love.
p. 145 The love of God in giving Christ, and the love of Christ in giving of
himself. p. 161

M
Ministers, Ministry. The best Ministers do most good, and find most
affliction. p. 1 Good Ministers and covetous hearts cannot agree. p. 2
Ministers better esteemed when the heart is changed. p. 5 Ministers must forget
personal injuries when they deal with sensible sinners. p. 10 How Ministers
must deal with stout and resolute, and how with bleeding and afflicted sinners.
p. 11 How preciously dear the Ministry of the Gospel should be unto us. p. 68
Miracles, vid. Faith.

N
Natural. No natural principle of justifying faith now in a man. p. 79, 80 A
natural principle of unbelief and infidelity in every man's heart. p. 80 There
is a natural opposition in the heart against Christ. p. 81 Natural condition
thoroughly studied, a way to get a believing heart. p. 178 Our natural
condition, what to be convinced of about it. p. 179

Need. We have extreme need of a Lord Jesus Christ. p. 163 Christ is every way
fitted to our need. p. 164

O
Offended. A heart apt to be offended at the estate of Christ, shows faith is
weak. p. 135

Opposition. A manifold opposition against Christ, his person, condition,
Scepter and government, and his righteousness. p. 8. 82, 83

Ordinances. Ordinances are means to grow up unto assurance. p. 280

P
Peace. Peace in the conscience, what it is. p. 148 Peace of a Christian must
be ratified in a double Court. p. 148 The difference betwixt the peace of a
strong and weak believer. p. 148

Power. No natural power in man to produce faith. p. 176

Persevering. Persevering virtue from Christ. p. 144

Preaching. Preaching the Word the ordinary means by which God works faith. p.
177

Prayer. Prayer a means of assurance. p. 281

Priest. Christ anointed to be a Priest. p. 21 A satisfactory Priest. p. 21 An
expiatory Priest. p. 21, 22 Christ, how the Priest and Altar. p. 23 The
efficacy of his Priestly sacrifice. p. 24 Christ a Priest, by way of
intercession, vid. Intercession.

Prophet. Christ anointed to be a Prophet. p. 26 What it implies. p. 27

Presumption, vid. Faith. Presumption a most confident work, but a very loose
quality. p. 100, 101 A pregnant difference betwixt Presumption and faith. p.
208, 209

Promise. A Divine promise entirely rested on, an Argument of strong faith. p.
126 Many promises believed at once, the stronger is our faith. p. 130
Discouraging objections about the promises answered. p. 235 Vid. Truth.

R.
Receive. It is very unequal and unreasonable not to receive Christ, so
offered. p. 166

Redemption. Redemption, all believers have a share in it. p. 140, 141

Refusal. Former refusals of Christ should not keep us off from present
accepting of him. p. 20 The sinfulness and danger of such refusals, yet even
such have encouragement to believe. p. 201, 202 Such have the more reason to
come in, and not to refuse any longer. p. 204

Relation. A near relation betwixt Christ and a believer. p. 253 A special
Relation gives special title, and a special obligation, and has a special
affection. p. 254

Remission. Remission of sins, what it is. p. 48, 74 The soul sensible of
sin, puts it self on Jesus Christ for remission of sin. p. 49 Remission of
sins belongs to justification. p. 74 How far remission of sins extends in
Justification. p. 75 Remission of sins, every believer has an interest in
it. p. 141

Righteousness. A twofold Righteousness, inherent and imputed. p. 51 Faith
rests only on imputed Righteousness for justification. p. 51 The
Righteousness of Jesus Christ is that by which only we are justified. p. 76
What is meant by the righteousness of Christ. p. 76 Several objections against
the imputation of righteousness, answered. p. 76, 77 Whether this
righteousness, imputed be the passive, or active and passive reasons of the
latter. p. 78 Christ bestows his righteousness upon us, the comfort of it. p.
113 Confidence in natural righteousness an impediment to faith. p. 171

S
Sacrifice, vid. Priest. Sacraments. Sacraments means of assurance. p. 281

Salvation. Salvation, some things have reference to it by way of proper
causality, and some things by way of order. p. 54

Vid. Grace. Salvation is conferred in such a way whereby God only may have the
glory of it. p. 63 Salvation is not sure, but by believing. p. 64

Sanctity, vid. Change. Satisfaction. Satisfaction of soul in Christ alone, an
Argument of a strong faith. p. 129

Savior. Christ is a singular Savior, how. p. 14 Difference betwixt him and
other Saviors. p. 14 A General Savior, in what sense. p. 15 A mighty Savior,
how this appears. p. 16 A perfect Savior, in what this consists. p. 16 The
alonenesse, fullness, and efficacy of his Salvation. p. 16

Scorners. Scorners will become troublers. p. 3

Seeking. Many seekings, and yet nothing comes of them, should not discourage
from believing. p. 213 Efficacy of seeking, wherein it consists. p. 213 Right
seekings shall always come to something. p. 214 A double answer to the seeking
of the soul. p. 214 Something may come in upon every faithful seeking. p. 215

Self-denial. Self-denial in near and great occurrances, an argument of strong
faith. p. 127 A threefold self to be denied. p. 127

Sense, Sensible. A double sense of sin. p. 206 Sensible sinners are
inquisitive. p. 5 Reasons of it. p. 6 Sinners, some hardened, some made
sensible. p. 5 Sensible sinners are resolved for the means, as well as for the
end. p. 9 Two sorts of sinners generally corrupted, and sensibly experienced.
p. 34 Several degrees of sensiblenesse in sinners. p. 35 Some sensiblenesse of
our sinful condition must go before faith, taking Christ as a Lord and Savior.
p. 91 What is a sweet and a safe course for a sensible sinner. p. 183 The truly
sensible heart has three properties in it that do invite the Lord to gratify
it with assurance. p. 280

Sick. Christ is a Physician to a sick sinner. p. 207 Christ will not loath
thee because of thy sinful nature, but will help thee because thou art a sick
person. p. 208

Sin, Sinning. When sin decays in strength, faith is strong. p. 129 The league
of the heart with sin, an impediment to believing. p. 153 Greatness of sinning
a strong reason to compel the soul to Christ. p. 184

Sorrow. Sorrow for sin, and faith in Christ go together. p. 108

Soul. None have right to thy soul but God and Christ. p. 166 Christ out-bids
all Merchants for thy soul. p. 166 How shameful and unreasonable it is to keep
the soul from Christ. p. 167

Spirit. Spirit of God, the immediate and sole cause of faith. p. 176, 177

Studied. What things to be principally studied by him that would get a
believing heart. p. 178, 179

Strength. Present corruptions in exceeding strength, no prejudice to faith. p.
205, 206

Suspect. To suspect Gods favor, and Christ's love, a sign of weak faith. p.
132

T
Taking. Taking of Christ, is of all Christ. p. 46 It is only of Christ. p. 46
This taking is freed from mistaking. p. 46 Upon what grounds the soul takes
Christ. p. 47 This taking is resolved against untaking. p. 47 Two grounds of
taking Christ to be a Lord, compulsory and ingenuous. p. 47, 48

Thanks. What is a weakening of faith, is a lessening of thanks. p. 153

Temptations. Two sorts of temptations, against which assurance does arm a
believer. p. 272

Temporary, vid. Faith. Tenderness. Gods tenderness most toward weak
believers. p. 146

Troubled. A troubled soul looks mainly how to save it self. p. 6 Reasons of
it. p. 7 They are not troubled for sin who do not strive to be saved. p. 8
Troubled souls must be directed to Christ. p. 12 Reasons of it. Ibid

Truth. Truth and fidelity, as applied to promises, consists in three things.
p. 236

V
Virtue, Vertual. A vertual interest in Christ every Believer partakes of. p.
142 Every Believer partakes of Christ's crucifying virtue p. 143 Every believer
partakes of preserving virtue from Christ. p. 144 Every believer partakes of
Christ's assisting virtue. p. 143

Uncheerfulnesse. Uncheerfulnesse of heart shows faith to be weak. p. 135

Unbelief. Dangerous misery of unbelief. p. 87 Unbelief leaves all our sins
upon record. p. 87 The unbeliever must alone answer for his sins p. 87 The
unbeleever judged as an unrighteous person. p. 88 The greatness of the sin
of unbelief proved. p. 88 A sin against greatest love. Ibid Against the only
remedy. p. 89 Makes void all the Covenant of grace. p. 89 Directly murders the
soul. p. 89 Unbelieving state dangerous. p. 160 Unbelief binds all our sins
upon the soul. p. 160 Unbelief grieves the heart of Christ. p. 166 The cunnings
of natural unbelief hindrances to faith. p. 175. What those cunnings are. p.
175, 176 Unbelief is the worst of sins. p. 185. Unbelief is no cure to the
strength of sin. p. 206, 207 Unbelief breeds an indisposition toward holy
duties. p. 210 A threefold difference betwixt an unbeleever and a believer, p.
210

Unholy. An unholy believer is as proper a phrase as a holy Devil. p. 100

Upright. An upright care to please God, a means of assurance. p. 28^

Unworthiness. Unworthiness should not keep us off from Christ. p. 188
Personal unworthiness is no prejudice but a furtherance. p. 188 A twofold
unworthiness. p. 192

Unity. Habitual unity of all true faith in four particulars. p. 119. 120

W
Waiting. A waiting faith is a strong faith. p. 130

Way. Way of believers is not a By way, nor an uncertain way p. 110

Weak. An anxious and careful soul is weak in faith. p. 135 A weak faith,
though not sure that Christ is its Savior, yet will honor Christ as its Lord.
p. 136 A weak faith, what it wants in breadth of persuasion, makes up in depth
of humility. p. 137 A weak faith, though it have but tender confidences of its
interest in Christ, yet it has strong dislikes and combats with unbelief.
page 137 A weak faith will not rest in weakness, if truth be in it. p. 138 A
weak faith ventures its soul on Christ, though it cannot clear its title, nor
answer its fears. p. 139 A weak believer falls short in joy. p. 146 A weak
Believer has not that sweet peace a strong believer has. p. 147 A weak
Believer has not that sweetness in communion with God. page 149 A weak
Believer has not that successefulnesse in communion with God. page 150 A weak
believer is more under the power of the creature then the strong. page 151 A
weak believer cannot bring God so much glory as a strong. p. 153 A weak
believer will be more puzzled to die. p. 154 A weak believer has not such
cheerful expectations, nor quiet submissions, p. 155 A weak believer is more
entangled with efficacy of temptations. p. 155

Will. The Will cannot of it self enliven it self to that great part of life
believing. p. 33, 34 Christ is willing to accept sinners proved. p. 193 Christ's
Will to save sinners, manifested three ways. p. 195, 196

Vid. Assurance Word. The Word and Prayer, the great power of God to change the
heart and conquer Satan. p. 1 What word a sinner has to induce the soul to
believe. p. 165 The word is the Ministerial instrument to beget says. p. 177
The word a means to make us know our interest in Christ. p. 280

World. The world an impediment to believing. p. 174

Works. In what the perfection of good works does consist. p. 58, 59 No
proportion betwixt our works and our pardon. p. 59, 60 What relation there is
betwixt good works and salvation. p. 60 Works justify our faith. p. 105 How
works can evidence faith, since evil men may perform them, and some believers
have not wherewithal to do them. p. 106

Worthiness. There is a double worthiness. p. 192 Vid. Unworthiness.

The Contents of the Chapters and Sections.
CHap. 1. The dependence of the words. p. 1 Chap. 2. The words opened with the
several doctrines. p. 4.. 1. Change of heart breeds change of estimation
toward the Ministers of the Gospel. p. 5. 2. Sensible sinners are ever
inquisitive. p. 5. 3. The main and choice thing the troubled soul looks after,
is how to save it self. p. 6. 4. Persons rightly sensible are as thoroughly
resolved for the means and ways, as for the end and scope. p. 9. 5. When God
does thoroughly work upon men's consciences, personal injuriousness must be
forgotten by them who are to deal with them. p. 10. 6. Troubled souls must be
directed to Christ. p. 12
Chap. 3. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ the only way to salvation. p. 13. 1.
What Jesus signifies, and what kind of Savior Christ is. p. 14. 2. What
Christ signifies, and of his anointing. p. 18. 3. Unto what Christ was
anointed, and of his office of a Priest. p. 20. 4. Christ anointed to be a
Prophet. p. 26. 5. Christ anointed to be a King. p. 27
Chap. 4. What believing in the Lord Jesus Christ does import. p. 29 Chap. 5.
Faith in Christ described. p. 32. 1. The spring or fountain of faith. p. 32.
2. The Subject of faith. p. 34. 3. The seat or habitation of faith. p. 35. 4.
The proper and genuine act of faith. p. 37
Chap. 6. The object of justifying faith. p. 40. 1. The immediate object of
faith. p. 41. 2. The adequate and proper object of faith. p. 41. 3. How faith
does exercise it self about whole Christ. p. 43. 4. What is the exercise of
faith in Christ as a Savior, King, Prophet, Lord. p. 45. 5. Five particulars
about taking and receiving Christ as a Lord and Savior. p. 46. 6. The
consequent object of faith, remission of sins and righteousness, and how faith
is conversant about remission of sins. p. 48. 7. How faith looks on Christ for
righteousness. p. 50
Chap. 7. How it may appear, that to believe in Christ is the only way to be
saved. Where are some particulars premised. p. 52. 1. The Argument for the
confirmation of the Doctrine. p. 55. 2. The second Argument. p. 62. 3. The
third Argument. p. 63. 4. The fourth Argument. p. 63. 5. The fifth Argument. p.
64
Chap. 8. Consectaries from this doctrine, setting out the singular use of
preaching and hearing of the Gospel. p. 65 Chap. 9. Our Justification to be
found only in Jesus Christ. p. 68. 1. The word Justification explained. p. 69.
2. Justification defined and opened. p. 70. 3. The person justified is a
believing sinner. p. 73. 4. The Remission of sins belong to Justification. p.
74. 5. The righteousness of Christ is that by which we are Justified. p. 76.
6. The Justification of a sinner is a gracious and just action. p. 78
Chap. 10. The difficulty of believing. p. 79 Chap. 11. The facility of error
and mistake about believing. p. 84 Chap. 12. The sure and dangerous misery of
unbelief. p. 87 Chap. 13. Rules for the discovery of faith. p. 90. 1. Four
things premised for the manner of evidencing of faith. p. 90. 2. A true love of
Christ an infallible and essential evidence of true faith in Christ. p. 96. 3.
Inward change and sanctity of the heart an infallible testimony of a living
faith. p. 98. 4. True faith takes Christ and him only to be its Lord, p. 101.
5. Faith makes the heart humble and lowly. p. 103. 6. True faith is fruitful.
p. 104. 7. True faith desires and endeavors after increase. p. 107. 8. Faith
in Christ and a mournful heart for sin go together. p. 108
Chap. 14. Singular comfort for all true heleevers. p. 109. 1. They are in the
way to heaven. p. 110. 2. There is a real and blessed exchange betwixt them and
Christ. p. 111. 3. They are in singular Covenant with God. p. 114. 4. They may
now with boldness approach the throne of grace. p. 116
Chap. 15. The Agreement and difference of a strong and weak faith. p. 117. 1.
The habitual unity of true faith, and wherein expressed in four particulars. p.
119. 2. The intensive diversities of faith, wherein there is a difference. p.
120. 3. Signs of a great and strong faith. p. 125. 4. Signs of a weak faith.
p. 131. 5. Demonstrations of the truth of faith though weak. p. 136. 6. The
concordance of all faith which is true, whether strong or weak in fundamental
comforts. p. 139. 7. The inequality of strong and weak faith, in respect of
circumstantial comforts, and some other consequences. p. 146. 8. Motives to
greaten our faith. p. 156
Chap. 16. Exhortations to labor for saving faith. p. 157. 1. Motives to get
saving faith. p. 158. 2. Impediments and hindrances to the geting of saving
faith. p. 168. 3. Means by which God works saving faith. p. 176. 4. Objections
that hinder from believing. p. 184
Chap. 17. Of living by faith. p. 216. 1 What it is in the general to live by
faith. p. 218. 2. To what states of life faith may extend. p. 220. 3. What it
is to live by faith on Christ. p. 221. 4. Arguments to move us to live by
faith. p. 229
Chap. 18. The improvement of faith to a full assurance. p. 259. 1. What the
Assurance of faith is. p. 260. 2. Whether such an assurance may be had. p. 265.
3. Whether every believer should strive to the assurance of faith. p. 267. 4.
Arguments to move believers to labor for assurance of faith. p. 269. 5. By
what means the soul may get up to this assurance. p. 280

Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.
Febr. 27. 1655.
BOOKS Printed, and are to be sold by Adoniram Byfield, at the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbard-street
A Comentary upon the three first Chapers of Genesis, by that Reverend Divine
Mr. John White, late Preacher of Gods Word at Dorchester, in the County of
Dorset, in sol.

All the Works of Mr. Stephen Marshal collected into one Volume, in 4o.

The Reasons presented by the dissenting Brethren, against certain propositions
concerning Presbyterial Government, together with the answer of the Assembly of
Divines to those reas^ns of Dissent; As also the Papers and Answers of the
Dissenting Brethren; and the Committee of the Assembly put into the Committee
of Lords and Commons, and Assembly of Divines for accommodation, in 4o.

The humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines concerning a larger and the
lesser Catechism, presented by them to both Houses of Parliament, with the
proofs thereof out of the Scriptures in the Margin, in 4o.

The tenth Muse, several Poems, compiled with great variety of wit and learning
full of delight; wherein especially is contained, a complete Discourse and
description of the four Elements, Constitutions, Ages of man, Seasons of the
year; together with an exact Epitomie of the four Monarchies; Also a Dialogue
between Old England and New, concerning the late troubles; with diverse other
pleasant and serious Poems, by Mrs. Anne Bradstreet, in 8o.

Hidden Manna, or the mystery of saving Grace, wherein the peculiarity of Gods
especial grace to the Elect, is asserted and proved, and diverse Objections of
Pelagians and Arminians about the power of the will of man to supernatural
good, are fully answered and confuted by the Reverend Mr. William Fenner, in
12o.

A short Chatechisme, being a brief Instruction of the most ignorant, before
the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick.

Safe Conduct, or the Saints Guidance to Glory, opened in a Sermon preached at
Dunstans in the East, at the Funeral of the virtuous and Religious Gentlewoman
Mrs. Thomasin Barnard-Iston, late wife of Mr. Samuel Barnard-Iston. Merchant,
by Ralph Robinson Pastor of Mary Wolnoth, Lumbardstreet.

The Saints longings after their Heavenly Country, A Sermon preached at St.
Paul's Church at a Solemn Aniversary meeting of the Cheshire Gentlemen, by that
faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr, Ralph Robinson, late Minister of Mary
Wolnoth Land.

A Sermon preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at their late
monthly Fast, by Nathaniel Ward Minister of Gods Word.

Short Writing Shortened, or the Art of short Writing reduced to a method more
speedy, plain, exact, and easy then has been heretofore published, in which
the principal difficulties and discouragements, that have been found in
Short-writing particularly the burthening of memory with, and inconvenient
joining of many Characters, are removed, and the whole art so disposed, that
all usual words may be written with aptness and brevity, by John Farthing
Author and Teacher thereof, who wrote Mr. Love's Trial, and has practiced
Short-writing this twenty six years, attested by the hands of diverse eminent
Ministers in, and about London, in 8o.

FINIS.

