Haman's Vanity, OR, A SERMON Displaying the birthlesse Issues of
Church-destroying Adversaries.

Preached to The Honorable House of COMMONS At their late solemn
Thanksgiving, being on June 15. 1643.

BY OBADIAH SEDGWICK, Bachelor in Divinity, and Pastor of Coggeshall in Essex.

Published by Order of that House.

PSALM. 2. 1. Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

London, printed by R. Bishop, for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND at the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
SIRS,
He trembling period of time (wherein we now breath) is very like that Day
spoken of by the Prophet Zachary in cap. 14. v. 6. and 7. In that Day the light
shall not be clear nor dark, but it shall be one Day known to the Lord, Not
Day, Nor Night.

With such a strange mysteriousnesse does Divine Providence balance the Scales
of the Church and her Adversaries attempts, that oftentimes the most critical
Believers stand amazed and unresolved: For the light is not so clear that we
can infallibly foresee what God will presently do; Nor yet is it so dark that
we can peremptorily conclude, God will do no more; Such a mixture, such a
variation there is in Gods present dispensations, that we are like a Ship which
is no sooner freed of one wave but is as immediately lifted up by another: This
one Day (as that Scripture speaks,) Is Not a Day (i) Not such a time o^
perfect success as that we can long rejoice, and say, Now there is an end of
all our Fears; Nor yet is it Night; (i) such a time of palpable loss, as that
we need to despair and cry out, Now there is an end of all our Hopes.

And verily through such Dubious Methods does that deep and unsearchable
providence wheel and drive on his own great counsels and designs (perhaps) for
these Reasons, That his minutes of vengeance might glide unexpectedly on his
Adversaries, And the seasons of deliverances might be most welcome to his
Servanrs, And the decisive events be most properly glorious to himself; There
being no other Hand of good men's preservation and of wicked men's confusion,
then that, which to our shallow sense, seems to neglect both.

In such wavering and likely-unlikely times, two duties do chiefly concern
us; One is a constant respect to divine commands: The other is a fixed resting
on divine promises: Whatsoever the Temporary events may be, we must be
careful to do our work, and then be confident that God (in due time) will
finish his: Perhaps the Churches of Christ may suffer yet longer, but they
shall not thus suffer for ever; For that mighty Angel which came down from
Heaven in Revel. 10. 1. though He was clothed with a cloud, yet He was
clothed with a Rainbow too, which ye know was Nuncius faederis and
Serenitatis.

And (Right Honorable) if you will once more cast your eyes on that place in
Zachary, peradventure you may find as strange an Evening-time, as just now you
did a Daytime; (It shall come pass, says the Prophet there, That at
Evening-time, it shall be light;) O the wonderfully superlative thoughts and
acts of God! How high and contrary are his times of working to weak man's times
of expecting? When we are most confident of good, then behold evil is upon us!
And when we are expecting nothing but darkness; (for what is the evening but a
Sepulcher prepared for the light?) Then behold at the evening time it shall be
light: So wisely does the great Sovereign of the world reserve himself, and
times; that yet he can and will create the light of clearest mercies, even then
when his Church is setting into the evening of darkest miseries.

All this is truth, and your selves have lived to handle much of it by
experience: which therefore should oblige and excite every Member of your House
to be more thankful, and more faithful, and more seriously Active for the
lamentably Massacred Churches of England and Ireland; Be confident of it, that
whosoever may be the enemies, and whatsoever may be the hazards; yet Christ and
his Church will be the Conquerours: Him and his Church and his cause I still
commend to the utmost of your cares and service; How much and how far you are
for these, so much and so long God will be for you. Whose eternal wings for
ever shadow your persons, and prosper all your pious endeavors, So prays

Yours and the Churches, Servant, OBADIAH SEDGWICK.

A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS On the fifteenth of
June 1643, being the day of their public Thanksgiving.
ESTHER 9. VER. 1. Now in the twelfth month (that is the month Adar) on the
thirteenth day of the same, When the Kings commandment drew near to be put in
execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over
them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them
that hated them.)


OF all people the true Church of God has the best friends, and the most
enemies: In the Revelation it is said to be clothed with the Sun, and to walk
in white robes. It carries in one hand the lamp of Truth, and in the other hand
the beauties of Holiness; against both which there is in wicked men a
malignant and an active contrariety.

Which vein of opposition has run down from the days of Cain to this very
hour, and has erected its rigor in all the methods of Serpentine designs
and in all the furies of Dragon-like rage and cruelties.

But still the great God (who is the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in
the day of trouble) has stepped I^r. 20. 8.
down in the nick of time, either to crush that insolent fury, or to defeat
those artificial plots of his and his Churches adversaries.

Amongst the many instances which may be given, this (here in the Text) is as
Remarkable as Any, and as suitable to this days occasion.

If you please to look back to the third Chapter, Chap. 3.
you shall light upon one Haman (an Agagite) a person of ignoble originalls,
and of an accursed race, and of as wicked a Nature: He being hoised up (like
some excrementitious vapor) into the place of great dignity and power, by the
sole beams and warmth of his Princes favor, improves this sudden greatness
and affection, not as a cloud to refresh, but only as a thunderbolt to ruin
and destroy the Church of God: For he falls into serious consultation, how and
when to put them all to the sword: he is almost a whole year in ripening of
this bloody; and abhorred design.

And now (all things being ready for the birth) he presumes to play the game
above board, yet politiquely; for considering that his own name and strength
were insufficient axes to bear and wheel on so grand a mischife: he
therefore cunningly insinuates the work into the King Ahasuerus, and easily
interesseth him therein; whereby the mischievous devise gained countenance and
authority.

But mark how he gained both these: not by an ingenuous relation, but only by a
forged calumny, and by a taking-accusation of the Jews: four things he
surmiseth against them.

First, that they were an infamous people (There is, A charges against the Jews
says he in chap. 3. 8. a certain scattered and dispersed people) as if they
had been a company only of poor, wandering, shifting, and shuffling vagabonds.

Secondly, that they were an humorous people [their Laws are diverse from all
people] an odd people, and such who loved to be singular.

Thirdly, that they were a factious and rebellious people [Neither keep they
the Kings Lawes] They must see Scripture or Law, or else no obedience from them.

Fourthly, they were a dangerous people: [It is not for the Kings profit to
suffer them] as long as these live, you must not think to tax and get what you
please.

And hereupon his modest request is, That therefore they might be all
destroyed, no more then that, and no less.

Ahasuerus (without any judicial enquiry and hearing the parties thus accused)
suddenly credits this Courtiers report, and gratifies him in his suit: For the
effectual dispatch whereof there issues forth a Commission under his Seal
(being first drawn by one or both his Secretaries) and directed to the
Lievtenants, and Governors, and Rulers of every Province, to destroy, to kill,
and to cause to perish all the Jews, young and old, little children and women
in one day, and to take the spoil of them for a prey: as C^ap. 3. ^er. 12. 13.
you may expressly read in the third Chapter, the twelfth and thirteenth verses.

How Haman and his complotters bless themselves and rejoice, that their
design got on thus prosperously, and even long for the day when all must be
put in execution, you may easily imagine.

And indeed the day drew very near: But then, (O take notice of the wheel
which turns every wheel, of the first mover that disposes of every motion!)
the never-failing God interposeth himself, discovers, disturbs, disappoints
all this destructive plot formed against the Jews, in the City Shushan, and
other Provinces.

The Sum of all is this: contemned Mordecai is advanced, Esthers request for
her self and people is accepted, the plotting enemy is discountenanced and
hanged, and the whole design is quite altered: For in the twelfth month, on
the thirteenth day of the same, when the Kings command, and his decree drew
near to be put in execution; in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to
have power over them, it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule
over them that hated them.

Which words contain in them three passages.

First, the maturity of a bloody design: [The day for the decree to be put in
execution drew neare]

Secondly, the confidence of blood-sucking adversaries [In the day that the
enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them.]

Thirdly, the contradiction of all this by a good God: [Though it was turned to
the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them.]

I could out of all these parts take occasion to discourse of many excellent
points: as first, the depth of that implacable enmity which lies and swells in
the hearts of wicked men against the Church of God. Secondly, the studious
activity of that malice and hatred, as not to be satisfied and extinguished
without the blood and ruin of Gods people. Thirdly, the several ways and
degrees of divine permission, in giving scope to the wickedly active and acting
principles in the adversaries of his Church, with the true reason thereof, and
how much divine wisdom, unspottednesse, justice, and Sovereignty appears in
such a permission. Fourthly, the three fatal plague-tokens (if I may so call
them) of unsuccessefulnesse, and imminent ruin to the Adversaries of Gods
people: namely first, Bloudinesse of intention: secondly, Nearness of
execution: thirdly, Boldness of expectation.

But I must have respect to you, and the work of this day; and therefore I
shall only touch at two other propositions, which are these.

First, That God can and will make unsuccessefull the bloodiest contrivances,
and the hopefullest confidence of his Church-destroying adversaries.

Secondly, That he can and will make them, As successelesse in respect of his
Church; So reflexively pernicious in respect of its adversaries.

I begin with the first of these. Namely, That God can and will make
unsuccessefull the bloudiest contrivances, and the hopefullest confidences of
his Church-destroying adversaries You may in the text read a decree for the
killing of the Jews, and the nearness of time for the executing of it, and
the enemies confident hopes; and yet Gods Sovereign defeating and frustrating
of all. Three t^^ngs premised


Before I confirm this truth, give me leave to premise three particulars.

First, That there is a difference to be made twixt the Molestation of a
Chuuch, and the Desolation of a Church: The adversaries may be winds to toss
this Arc, but they shall never be Rocks to split it.

What Luther confidently spoke of himself, Impellere (...). 118.
possunt, sed in totum prosternere non possunt: Crudeliter me tractare possunt,
sed non extirpare: Dentes nudare, sed non devorare; Occidere me possunt, sed in
totum me perdere non possunt.

Or what we maintain against the Papists and Arminians concerning Habitual
Faith; that same may as truly be affirmed of the Church Militant (the proper
subject of faith) Premi potest, suppremi non potest; she may be oppressed, but
she shall never be suppressed: concutipotest, excuti non potest: she may be
shaken, but she cannot be shivered.

We are troubled (says the Apostle) on every side, yet 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
not distressed: we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed: As St. Hierom once spoke to his
friend, Scias hominem Christo deditum mori posse, vinci non posse: a Christian
may die, but he cannot be overcome; So the Church may often be disturbed, but
it shall never be destroyed.

Secondly, You must distinguish twixt probability, and twixt infallibility of
destruction: the Church of God may fall into such an eclipse, into such an hour
of temptation, that not only in the insulting fancies of the enemies, but also
in all the commentaries of humane Reason, it may not only seem, but really be
in the very way, nay, upon the very brink of destruction it may (as David once
did) walk in the shadow of death; destruction may be as near to it as the
shadow is to the body; so near, that with Peter she may cry out, Master! Save
us, or else we perish.

But yet eventuall and infallible destruction shall not befall it; God will
step in and prevent that. You may read in one of the Psalms, that the Church
was as near to destruction as a lamb sticking between the Psalm. 124. 6, 7.
teeth of a lion was near to be devoured; and yet God took the prey out of the
teeth: and as near to destruction as the bird is to catching, which is fallen
into the net, and entangled; and yet God brake the net, and the bird escaped;
again, as near to destruction as the brand is to burning which is thrown into
the fire; and yet God has snatched his Church out, even as a firebrand Amos. 4.
11. 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27, 28.
is snatched out of the fire: When David was hemmed in with Saul's army, yet God
made a way for him to escape: When Peter was fettered in prison, and the next
morning to be executed; yet God by an Angel Acts 12. 7.
delivered him: When the three Children were cast to the fiery furnace, yet
God preserved them: W^h^ Dan. 3. 24, 25. Chap. 6. 22 Genesis 22.
Daniel was thrown to the lions, yet God kept him: When Abraham was lifting up
the knife to kill Isaac, yet God stayed his hand.

When the City of Leyden was so long, and so strictly besiedged (as I think) by
the Duke of Alva, that they were forced for their sustenance to search and
scrape the dunghills, and boil old leather, etc. And the Duke in the language
of Blasphemy threatened the defendants: Why That very night the winds turned,
and the tide swelled, and the waters came in, and forced him to raise the
siedge.

Thirdly, You must distinguish twixt a particular person, and twixt a Church;
It may oftimes so fall out, that the cruel designs of wicked adversaries may
prevail to the destruction of this or that individual person (If that may be
styled a destruction, which yet eventually redounds to the enlarging of the
Church: for seed when it is sown multiplies the more; and sanguis Martyrum is
semen Ecclesiae: Faecundi sunt Martyrum Cyprian.
cineres) but they shall never prevail to the ruin of the Church.

Herod, in Acts 12 2. kills James with the sword: and Acts 12. 2, 24.
yet in v, 24. for all that the word of God grew and multiplied. It is one
thing to take a rafter out of the house, and another to demolish the house it
self; to loose a S^mile.
board in the ship, and another thing to loose the ship it self. It is with the
Church in persecuting times, as it is with wheat in the sifting; perhaps some
grains may slip through, and yet the bulk may and does remain behind: the
Adversaries must first learn the art to kill God, as they have already the
malice to fight against God, before they shall be able utterly to destroy the
Church of God, For God (when they come to destroying work, to root out his
Church) will certainly infatuate and prevent them.

And this I shall assay to confirm partly by Scriptures, Three Demonstrations
of the point.
partly by Instances, and partly by Reasons.

First, By Scriptures: which give no hopes of good speed to any destructive
designs: the phrases with which such wicked intentions are set forth, and by
which God expresses himself against them, do abundantly manifest it:

The Sciptures style these wicked ruinous designs, sometimes dreams; and
dreams are but pleasant follies and delusions, the empty bubbles of the mind,
children and Tales of fancy, idle and fruitless notions; mear bables.

Sometimes fits of madness: Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a
vain thing? Mad men Psalm. 2. 1.
are persons of strange conceits and adventures, yet foolish, impossible,
inconsistent, vain: They will pull the Sun out of Heaven, and remove
mountains, but they cannot; such irrational and furious heats are there in
wicked men against Christ, and against his Church, and just to as much purpose.

Sometimes abortive or untimely fruits, which hasten out before their just
time, live not, but die; let that of David (speaking of the adversaries of Gods
Church) serve in stead of all: Behold! He travelleth with iniquity, and has
conceived mischief, and brought Ps. 7. 13, 14.
forth falsehood: Here is a womb to breed a wicked plot, and a time of travel
and birth, but all that it comes unto is a lie or falsehood; no such child of
destruction as was imagined.

Again, let us peruse those phrases by which God expresses himself against
these destructive plots of his Churches adversaries; sometimes he is said to
despise their image: O Lord! When thou awakest thou shall Ps. 73. 20.
despise their Image: wicked men are in most respects but images; rather the
images of men, then men; rather the images of Christians, then Christians; That
Religion unto which they do pretend is but an image or form of godliness; And
so, their destructions of the Church are but images; they are the draughts, the
portraitures or colors of a destruction, but shall be noe real destruction;
for God despises, contemns, slighteth, or makes void that image.

And sometimes God is said to laugh at them, and have them in derision; to see
how sillily furious and busy Ps. ^. ^.
they are in building of a Babel, in stopping the course of the Sea, in
assaying vanities and impossibilities to undermine Christ and his Church. Now
after all, What have they got? etc. And sometimes he is said to blow upon them,
and blast them, and bridle them, and disappoint them, and to bring all their
counsels and confederacies to naught, as you may read in Esaias 37. 27, 29. and
in Psalm. 17. 13. All which expressions do manifestly demonstrate this truth,
that God can and will make all their designs, attempts, and hopes
unsuccessefull.

Secondly, By instances: And here the field of testimony is very large; you
cannot dip into any one age of the world, there is no Chronology either Sacred
or Ecclesiastical wherein you can read or find that in such a year, or at such
a time God suffered his enemies utterly to destroy his Church.

It Is granted, you may light on several ages wherein the Church has sailed on
the waves, and perhaps swam in rivers of blood: but when the enemies attempted
the utter subversion of it, still God has stepped in, and defeated the
adversaries, and rescued his own people: I will give you a taste of some places.

When Pharaoh (that Egyptian adversary) from oppression, advanced to the
destruction of the Israelites; then God looks down, pitties his people,
delivers them with an outstretched arm, and not only defeats but destroys
their adversaries.

Sennacharib (that Assyrian adversary) no less will serve his turn, then
blasphemy against God, and a full ruin of Hezekiah and Jerusalem; and for this
he prepares a mighty host: But then God puts his bridle into the mouth of this
wild horse, smites his camp, turns back himself, and which is more, suffered
him to be slain too.

The like may be instanced in Antiochus Epiphanes, and in the Pagan
persecutions of the Church, which when they were cast out like a flood to
drown the Rev 12.
Church. Constantine the Great was then raised up to stave off that destructive
fury, and so he did by his conquests over Maxentius and Maximinus: Yea, that
infamous Apostate Julian after all his successelesse plots and actings, at his
death, blaspheamingly confessed, Vicisti Galilaee! that Christ was too hard for
him.

What should I speak of the defeatings and boundings of the Antichristian plots
and furies, which have been acting above these thousand years; and
notwithstanding all their lyings, decrees, devices, attempts, burnings,
murtherings, resolves, confederacies, assistances with the power of Emperors,
Kings, Rulers, they hitherto cannot, nor ever shall be able to destroy the
Church of Christ: the Church yet lives, and shall spread more and more.

Thirdly, By reasons; the reasons to convince men of this truth shall be taken,
First, from God. Secondly, from Christ and his Church. Thirdly, from the
enemies themselves.

First, from God.

I do confess, that, were the Church left hand to hand with her enemies, and
had not a God to side with it, she were no more able to sustain her self
against the policy of her enemies, then the lamb against the foxes; Nor against
the fury of them, then the sheep against the lions; or as a little spark of
fire, against an ocean of water: Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus est, alioqui
totus desperassem, writes Myconius to Calvin, upon the view of the Churches
enemies.

But there is a God, and that God is on the Churches side: and this, some of
the enemies of God have confessed; let us flee (said the Egyptians, Ex. 14.
25.) from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them, against the
(...). 14 25.
Egyptians.

Beloved, I beseech you to observe, that there is on the Churches side,

First, The Covenant of God: in which he does engage all his Glorious
Attributes to be not only a reward, but also a shield unto his people: as you
may expressly read in Genesis 15, 1. So that if omniscience be able to see, and
omnipotence be able to hinder; assuredly Genesis 15. 1.
none of the adversaries plots and attempts shall ever succeed to the
destruction of his Church, though they may be fair for it, and very near.

Secondly, The affections of God: and we all know that the affection of love is
of all other the most tender, and the most active; now if either Relations, or
Donations, or Estimations can discover, and entitle to Affections, then is the
Church sure of Gods Affections: For

The Relations twixt God and his people, are that of a father to his child
(Israel is my son, my first borne:) and Ex 4. 22.
that of an husband to a wife (Thy maker is thy husband, Isay. 54. 5.
the Lord of Hosts is his name:) and that of a King to his Subjects (whose
affections to his people one shadows out by the pelican) Now can you imagine
that a tender father, a loving husband, a just King will (if they can help it)
suffer children, wife, subjects, to be wholly destroyed.

The Donations of God to his people are wonderful: If greatest bounties be the
Charecters of dearest love, surely then God wants not of love to them, for he
has given his Christ to them, his Spirit to them, Himself to them, and will
give eternal glory to them: And after all this, will he (think you) suffer his
contemptible and conquered enemies, and vassalls to conquer and destroy them.

The Estimations of God touching his people are singular, his thoughts of them
are precious, and high, and honorable; and therefore he styles them his
friends, his House, his Temple, his Garden, his Vineyard, his Jewels, his
Delight, his Kings and Priests, nay the apple of his own Eye. Now is it
possible to fancy, that God will suffer his wretched and despised adversaries
to destroy his anointed, to plunder him of his Jewels, nay to tear out from
him the very apple of his eye.

Thirdly, the Providence of God: This Providence which our late Complotters
were pleased so to scoff at, this is on the Churches side.

And what is this Providence of God? surely it is the right hand of his
Covenant, the actual vigor of his infinite Attributes: It runs to and fro
through all the world, and orders all the motions of Heaven and Earth.

Four things are very considerable in it.

First, it is an Universally intimate eye, diving into all the faculties, and
risings, and framings, and actings of all and every creature: I know thy abode,
and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me, says God of
Sennacherib, Esaias 37. 28.

So that there is no one nature, no one faculty, considerable in the natural
or moral frame of it; no kindling of one thought, no grudging of one desire,
no hatching of any one imagination, no whispering of one word; but all lies as
naked to Divine Providence, as the eminentest mountain lies obvious to the
brightest noonday of the Sun.

The Masks of actions, and Curtains veil only toward the eyes of men, but
there is no darkness toward him who is light it self.

Secondly, it is an Universally Sovereign wheel; upon the pleasure of which
all actions and issues are commanded: as the motion and stay of the wheels
Ezekiel 1, 21.
which Ezekiel saw were according to those of the living creatures. There is no
creature a maker of it self, or that can be a Lord over his own heart and
works, and events: All these fall under the ordering of God, the supreme
Agent, and that with an unavoydable subjection and determination, My counsel
shall stand Isay 46, 10.
and I will do all my pleasure, Esaias 46. 10.

Thirdly, it is an infinite dispensation: there is nothing requisite, either to
the impedition of the Churches enemies, or to the conservation of the Church it
self, but is to be found in Divine Providence: And therefore in Zachary it is
set out by seven Zach. 4.
eyes and by seven lamps: and in Ezekiel it is set out by faces and wings, and
hands, to express that sufficiency Ezekiel. 1. 8.
of Gods Providence, for all means of helps to his endangered Churches.

Fourthly, it is a Watchful Sentinel: He that keeps Israel, does neither
slumber nor sleep. Excellent is that Ps. 121. 4. Isay 27. 3.
place in Esaias 27. 3. speaking of a Vineyard (which you know does represent the
Church for her own weakness, for choicenesse, for delight, and for
fruitfulness) he adds, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment:
lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

Now sum up all this, there is a special Providence of God which clasps the
Church, as the feathers of the hen does the chicken: And it consists of
Activity, and of perfect Knowledge, and of Sovereign Authority, and of
Al-helping sufficiency, and of most tender vigilance for his people, and
against their enemies. Must you not then grant me my position, that he will
frustrate all destructive plots and attempts, though never so hopeful and
near?

Secondly, From Christ and his Church.

Here I might show you (but time will cut me off that I may not spread it)
four things in him, which assure us that his Churches adversaries shall not
prevail to ruin it.

As first the ancient conquests of all the Churches adversaries, amongst which
the world is one: All Christ's conquests are for his Church; and shall conquered
enemies now conquer?

Secondly, the dearest purchase of Christ: for so the Church is, which he
ransomed by his heart blood, and will he now suffer them to be destroyed?

Thirdly, the foundation to his Church: the Scriptures style him the corner
stone, and that Rock upon which the house was built, which no waves nor storms
could wash or drive down.

Fourthly, the Head of his Church: will he be, an head without a body? Read at
your leisure in what a benign aspect he stands toward his members, in Rev.
10. 1. and in what a severe posture he draws out himself, and all the armies
of heaven against his enemies, in Revel. 19. from verse 11. to the end.

Thirdly, from the enemies themselves.

Who though they swell much in their own eyes, and seem to be the disposers
of all men, and presume they can do what they list; and like some of the
persecuting Emperors will think themselves to be a kind of Gods: yet

First they are but men at the most, and men at the best: And what is man? that
which is no more than man is no less then vanity; mere man is but the dream
of a dream; but the generation of a fancy, but a vanity, but the curious
picture of nothing; a poor, feeble, unable, dying flash.

Secondly, they are but Naked men: they have no God with them, or for them; did
God ever command them to destroy his Church? Did he ever promise unto them in
that service either Assistance or Reward? Assuredly wicked adversaries have
nothing but what hell and wicked men can help them with.

Thirdly, they are but Wicked men: hearken how the Scripture styles them,
Haters of God; Enemies to God; Fighters against God: the very reason why they
contend against the people of God is, because they see any thing of God in
them: and shall wicked men be stronger then God?

Fourthly, they are the only persons Cursed of God, and fully threatened, even
in this, that they attempt the destruction of the people of God: Take that one
place for all in Zach. 12. 2, 3, 4. Behold! I Will make Jerusalem a cup of
trembling unto all people round about, when they shall be in the siege both
against Judah, and against Jerusalem.

3. And in that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people:
All that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces: though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it.

4. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, I will smite every horse with
astonishment, and his rider with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the
house of Judah, and I will smite every horse of the people with blindness:

Are blind horses and mad riders likely to prevail?

6. And I will make the Governors of Judah like an harth of fire among the
wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheafe, and they shall devour all the
people round about on the right hand and on the left, etc. Shall the wood
prevail against the fire?

Besides all this, the Lord does deliberately (as I may so speak) set himself
against them: he directs his arrows at them, and does so earnestly pursue
them, that he not only makes their designs unprosperous, but likewise (in the
event) to themselves pernicious, which is the second point, and comes now
briefly to be handled.

That God can make the bloudiest contrivances, and hopefullest confidences of
his Church-destroying adversaries not only Unprosperous, but also Pernicious or
Hurtful to themselves [The design in the text is turned quite contrary, and
the Jews have rule over them who presumed to have destroyed and ruined them.]
Thus Saepe in magistros scelera redier unt suos.

There are three things which I have observed concerning Note
the Churches distresses and deliverances.

First, the deliverances of it have been (usually) at the times of eminent
extremities: The wicked are not always high enough to be destroyed, and the
people of God are not always low enough to be delivered: but eminent
Extremities have ordinarily been Gods Opportunities.

That eminent deliverance out of Egypt, was, when their burdens were doubled,
and Pharaoh would not hearken to them.

That singular deliverance out of Chaldea, was at such a time when their
condition was as the dry bones of which God said to the Prophet, Can these
bones live?

That deliverance also out of the Antichristian and last troubles shall be,
when the two witnesses are slain, and the enemies make merry: Rev. 11. 7, 8,
10, 11.

Secondly, the deliverance of the distressed and endangered Church has been
(usually) crowned with the addition of some new and singular mercy: As

When the Church was delivered out of the Egyptian bondage, they were then led
away to Canaan.

When they were delivered out of the Caldean captivity, the Temple thereupon
was rebuilt, and filled with the glorious presence of Christ. When the
Churches shall be delivered from the great Antichristian plots and cruelties,
there is promised unto them a New Jerusalem, a new heaven and a new earth.

Thirdly, the Eminent rescues of the Church, have been, and shall be conjoined
with the eminent destruction of its adversaries: When the Israelites were
delivered out of Egypt, their deliverance was accompanied with the destruction
of Pharaoh and of all his host.

When the Jews were delivered out of Babylon, it was with the destruction of
the Caldean Monarchy, by the Persians: And when the Church shall be delivered
from the Antichristian Cruelties, it shall be with the utter fall of Babylon,
which shall be thrown like a millstone into the Sea, and never rise any more.

But I cannot prosecute this notable Subject according to the dignity of it, I
will rather leave it, then mangle it; the time is almost fled, I will do what
I can to post after it: give me leave to make some useful applications of all
this to ourselves, and then I will commit the work, and our selves to Gods
blessing.

The uses which I shall make of all which has at this time been spoken by me,
and of late has been observed by your selves, I shall reduce unto three heads.

First, Of exhortation to a seasonable duty, the duty Thankfulness: O that
men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to
the children Psa. 107. 8.
of men: Surely this is a singular work, and yet men are heavy to it, or else
David would never have pressed it so affectionately: in another place he brings
three arguments at once to move us to praise God: Praise Ps. 147. 1.
ye the Lord, for it is good to sing praises unto our God, it is pleasant, and
praise is comely: Two of these arguments respect us: It is our emolument and
good: we get more mercies by being thankful for our mercies; and it is our
graceful, as well as gracious Ornament: An unthankful man is an ugly and
ill-favored man; but thankfulness is a most becoming garment to a Christian;
And it is Gods contentment; of most music he delights in this: there are four
things which are very Note
pleasant to God. First, An upright heart. Secondly, An humble spirit. Thirdly,
A believing soul. And Fourthly, A thankful breast.

That this sweet note of Thankfulness may be the better raised, give me leave
to descant a little upon that miserable and unfortunate design against your
selves and the City, lately contrived, and intended to have been put in
execution.

There are at the least ten remarkable dashes in it.

First, the Horror of it: and less I cannot style it; Livy reports of a
design to dispatch the whole Senate of Rome in one hour; and at Carthage there
was a project to cut off at once the noblest and truest family to the state:

But this unhappy plot (had it taken effect) might have proved the Funeral of
all our Sanctuaries; the Grave of all our Religion; the Doomsday of all our
Liberties; the Ruin of Country, of City, of Parliament, of All.

Secondly, the Vnnaturallnesse of it: For Nero (that monster of mankind) to
wish that Rome had but one head, which he might take off with one blow; for him
to set Rome on fire, and solace himself in beholding the flames and ashes of
it; this was but like himself; Such barbarous acts were no way strange for his
monsterous disposition: For Papists to contrive the blowing up of a Parliament,
this agrees fulwell with the modest principles of their bloodthirsty and
cruel Religion.

But for men who profess the Protestant Religion, yet to contrive the ruin of
it: for Members of a Parliament to devise the ruin of a Parliament: for them
who so seriously have protested (and not without some execrations) the defense
and preservation of all, thus maliciously to entrap and hazard the safety and
subsistence of all; What is this, but viper-like to gnaw out the bowels of that
Country which bred them, and of that Parliament which all this while has
defended and preserved them?

Thirdly, the Cruelty of it: What could have been expected less, then that of
Simeon and Levi (brethren in iniquity) who (after a pretense of favor) came
boldly Gen 34. 25.
upon the City of Shechem, and slew all the males with the sword? Nay, I fear
the tumult might have ended like that of Shalman who spoiled Beth-arbel in the
day of Hos. 10. 14.
battle, and the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.

Here might you have heard the confused noise of the Warriors, there might you
have seen garments rolled in blood; one street flaming with fire, another
street groaning under the wounds of death: some crying out, kill and murder
them; others crying out, O pity and spare us. In one house perhaps the
Parishioner hunting after his Minister to brain him; in another house the son
laying hold on his father to pistol him: some hiding themselves, and then
burnt; others hasting to fly, and running only upon the point of the sword and
spear before hand disposed to every corner to slay them. One calls out, O spare
the Parliament, another, O spare the City: another, O spare my father, spare my
mother, spare my tender children. But in this rage nature would have been
forgotten, law would have been forgotten, religion would have been forgotten,
relation would have been forgotten; because before this, the fear of God would
have been forgotten.

Fourthly, the madness of it: every sinner is a fool, and Solomon says, a
mad man too. Did ever any wise man think to repair his house by subverting the
foundations of it? or to preserve himself by splitting his ship? or imagine to
stand if a Parliament should fall? Good Lord! that any should so forfeit
themselves in devising, or rather in believing, that these men who would have
ruined one world, could make another; or that they would prove restorers of our
liberties, who contrived the lawless and merciless ruins of all our safeties!

Fifthly, the injustice of it: What is my trespass, what is my sin, that thou
have so hotly pursued after me, said Jacob Ge. 31. 36.
to Laban. May not this Parliament say as much to all them who so bloodily act
against them?

You know well enough that familiar story of Aristides, whom a person desired
to write his name in the shell to be banished, and only for this reason,
because all said that he was a just man.

O how unjust it is, and I fear will stand upon infamous record to our
posterity, that many of their Ancestors sought to destroy their own refuges
against destruction: struck at them who (to avoid the stroke of justice) are
risen up to strike all; as if thieves and robbers should arm themselves to
judge the Judge who durst to question and judge them.

Sixthly, the ingratitude of it: By thy Providence worthy deeds are done to
this Nation, said Tertullus unto Foelix. Within these few years, O how we
groand under the burdens of conscience by an high Commission? and under the
burdens upon our liberties by heavy taxations: the learned speeches of some of
the Complotters are palpable witnesses to what I now speak; and through Gods
blessing on the Parliaments care and pains we are eased of both.

And now after all, to be like the unthankful Romans, to condemn that African
Scipio who had saved all their State. Or to be like that monster (of whom I
have read) who that night that his Prince pardoned and released him, got out
and slew him. To burn Michael Balbus to the Emperor Leo Armenius. Vide
Zouaram in Annal.
that ship which brought us to shore: to wound that Physician who healed our
wounds; the Lion did not thus to the poor man who eased him of a thorn in his
foot. It is the very dregs of basest ingratitude to return the sowrest of
mischiefs for the sweetest of kindnesses.

Seventhly, the hypocrisy of it: under the pretense and affectation of peace,
to intend the most dismal and abhorred of cruelties.

I have read of Garnet the Jesuit, who upon a treatise of Equivocation,
plasters on this title, A Treatise against lying and fraudulent dissimulation:
And truly this plot fell nothing short of that artifice; for under the name of
peace, a more savage destruction is intended; only Amasa is the more
complementally saluted, that he might not see the sword of Ioab.

For my part, if yet Truth might have the Vantguard, and Justice might have the
Body; I should rejoice that Peace might bring up the Reere: Nay, if that place
seems too low, let them all stand in rank, so that Truth may still have the
right hand.

But this is no new plot to whet swords, and yet talk of peace: there was an
overture of peace from Spain with England, when at the same time the Armado
was to set sail. And that for ever odious massacre in France was gilded over
with the solemnity of Nuptials: Heathens have been more candid this way, then
the Papists by far.

Eighthly, the impiety of it: with what a contempt of Fasting, and scorn at
our depending on Gods Providence, was the time for the execution of this plot
designed: what religion are these men made of, who after so sacred and solemn a
Protestation, could yet studiously contrive the perfidious breach of the same?
what a mocking of God is this? what a mocking of men? what a mocking of their
own consciences?

I fear that some of them took the Protestation much like as Arrius (that
infamous Heretic) took his, who having been condemned in a General Council
(as Socrates relates) and by the commandment of Constantine exiled; and by the
violent mediation of some recalled, so that he would conform to the Nicene
Faith; he having writ down his own private Creed, and thrust it into his bosom,
when he came into the presence of the Emperor, and had the Nicene Faith
propounded to him, being demanded whether he really did, and constantly would
hold that Faith? he (clapping his hand upon his bosom whereinto his own written
Creed had been formerly committed) answered and vowed, that he did, and would
constantly hold and profess that Faith, meaning not that Nicene Faith, but
that contained in his bosom.

Ninthly, the Policy of it: and I assure you, the more secret our dangers are,
the more dangerous they are: the poison destroys more surely then the drawn
sword: And therefore the Jesuits (it has been their trick of old) do seal up
all their intended mischief with an oath of Secrecy. You know well the oath of
Secrecy which Gerard the Jesuit gave to Catesby and Piercy etc. when the
Parliament was to be blown up. And in this plot, to hand it on from any
discovery, at least something near an oath for secrecy is contrived: But that
was not all the policy, for the very manner of conveyance and drawing others
in, also was exquisitely subtle: This seal was always ready to be clapped on any
tempered wax, and in truth it found many a discontented, and self-seeking, and
malignant spirit easily to take the impression.

Nor was this all, but just like the Papists in the Powder Treason, who before
the execution of it, varnished it with the title of some famous exploit for the
deliverance of the persecuted Catholics: and had it succeeded, then they had
provided their Proclamations also in a readiness to be dispersed and so to
beguile the people. I wonder that our present Complotters should thus hit on
the Jesuits moulds, unless there be some Jesuits wits in this design.

Lastly, the Nearness of it: the work was ripe, and the day to act their
infamy, and our ruin was very near: Thus were we sold, thus were we in the
valley of the shadow of death, and knew it not.

But notwithstanding all this, and more then this (for more there was then
this, which I forbear to mention, for that I like his art well, who drew one
weeping behind a cu^taine.) The design is abortive, Mordecai is yet alive, and
so is the City Snushan, and so is the Parliament; God has defeated all, and
turned it to the contrary, as my Text does speak.

O that for all this wonderful mercy of God we could now learn to bless him
and thank him: it is He, he alone who has made our enemies liars unto us, and
has hitherto been the God of our mercies, and of our safeties.

The soul of man may be compared to a clock, and the faculties of that soul
to wheels, and the mercies of God to plummets, which should make every wheel
to move with thankfulness: And so let it be with us this day.

Let our judgments move with a thankful admiration of Gods goodness, and
wisdom, and care, and watchfulness over us.

Let our Memories move with thankful recordings, and laying up, and giving out
these and other of Gods works of Gods Providence over us: God would have some
of the Manna laid up in a golden pot: he is willing to give, but not to lose
his mercies: mercies must not be written in water, but in brass. It is
reported of Trapezuntius (a great Scholar) that fell into so great a
sickness, that he lost all his learning, and he forgate his own name: It would
be more then a sickness in us, to forget God in his wonders of mercies toward
us.

O Sirs! In one mercy there may be many things worthy of our best remembrance:
there may be many wonders in one mercy, and there may be many mercies in one
mercy; and there may be many lessons in one mercy; and there may be many future
supports in one mercy: therefore forget not to get a thankful memory.

Let our Affections move with thankfulness. The heart of man is like an
instrument, and every affection is like a string, and every mercy should be
like a curious Singer to make the music of thankfulness. O that we could love
such a God more, fear such a God more, delight and rejoice in such a God more.

Let our Tongues move with thankfulness: As in a Lottery at every prize the
trumpet does sound, so upon the receipt of every mercy, our lips should sound
out the praises of the God of our mercies.

And let our Lives move with thankfulness too: mercies should be an Anchor to
hold us fast to God, not a Tide to carry us away from him: They should be as a
shower of rain to the rose, which thereby proves more fresh and sweet: He is
the thankful Christian, who becomes a better Christian; A good life is the
best transcript of any mercy.

The second Use shall be of Caution and Advise, and Items are not superfluous
in this busy and dangerous age: My advice is threefold.

First, if any plotter, or intended acter for this late design be here
present, my earnest council unto him is only this, Repent: Even Judas, who
betrayed his Master, when he saw what was done, Repented: and will thou be
worse then Judas? Tell not me that thou have vowed our destruction, or art
bound up by an oath of secrecy. The Casuists all of them will fully resolve
thee, In malis it is not only lawful but necessary, mutare propositum, and
rescindere votum; wicked vows bind us to repentance, but not to performance:
to confession, not to commission; to detect, not to effect.

And verily this is the way to find mercy with God and man: both of them as yet
throw out unto you this plank: they offer mercy to you, though you intended
none to them; Joseph was able to weep, and to forgive, and to nourish those his
brethren who once would have killed him, and did sell him for a slave.

Secondly, if any of you touch this golden scepter of mercy which is held out
unto you, then in the next place take heed and abhor for ever any such like
future intangling.

I will but tell you a tale which I find in Sir Edward Cook, it is somewhat
homely, but you may make a good use of it: The fable is of the Cat, and the
Mice: The Cat having a long time preyed upon the Mice, the poor creatures at
the last for their safety contained themselves within their holes; but the Cat
finding his prey to cease (as being sufficiently proved to be their enemy)
devised this course: He changes his hue, gets on a Religious habit, shaveth
his crown, and walks gravely by the holes of the Mice.

And yet perceiving that they kept their distance, and only peeped out, as
suspecting the worst, he gravely bespeaks them thus, Quod fueram non sum, caput
aspice tonsum: Hereupon some of them being more credulous then wise, came
forth, but were quickly snatched up.

The Cat finding this colorable design to Take, after a while comes again,
thinking to draw them out again with the same garb of gravity, and sweetness
of Rhetoric; but now the formerly beguild Mice grew wiser, and would come
forth no more, only they gave him this short answer, Cor tibi restat idem, vix
tibi praesto fidem; we know you too well to trust you any more: make the
application of it to your selves.

Thirdly, to all of you, who are as yet Innocent; the Lord keep you faithful
and steadfast, and never suffer you to stain your consciences with Treachery:
There are three which an Honest English heart will never be brought to betray:
His God, His Sovereign, The Parliament: For besides the Irreligiousnesse of
such perfidiousnesse, two other snuffes ever follow it.

One is a perpetual infamy: For this Epitaph only will be set upon the Tomb
of such a treacherous person, Here lies the grave of England, The Sepulcher of
a Parliament, and the murderer of his own City.

Another is a sure unsuccessefulnesse: I never read of any yet who finally
prospered against God, against Truth, or against our English Senate: When you
have done all you can, This you shall find to be the sum of all treacherous
plots, viz. A Deep malice, a Proud contrivance, a Subtle inveagling, a Large
expense, a Vain confidence, a Near acting, an Unexpected discovery, a Just
punishment, and a Perpetual shame.

The last use shall be of Instruction, principally to you

First, To Circumspection: Christ bad his own Disciples to beware of men; and
foretold that a man's enemies should be those of his own house.

It is a sad time, when we may justly cry out as He once did (...): o my
friends, I have no friends: Treachery (I fear) is more at work this day then
open hostility.

Some have said that Bohemia, and the Palatine were put off by treachery: Some
say that Ireland, I mean the Protestants there, are rather betrayed then
conquered; and I pray God this be not Englands condition this day. Sure we are,
that all over this poor Nation, either a devouring sword, or a falls spirit does
too much prevail; in Country it works, in the City it works, in the Army it
works, in the Church it works, yea in the Parliament it self it works: O Lord!
that ever any should form a sword to destroy us, who yet can gloze over a
speech as if he were ashield to defend us.

There was one (once) who wished that all his body were made of Crystal, that
so his inward sincerity might be transparant to all eyes: And another I have
read of, who, might he have had the moulding of himself, Light should have been
his Body, and Truth should have been his Soul.

Such windows as these are but notions: do you rather study and peruse men at
the doors of their actions, and then my humble council will not be
unseasonable, to Watch your selves, to watch your enemies, and most of all to
watch your friends

Secondly, to Resolution: Be not dismayed by any of these renewed plottings and
attempts against you: As the designs against you are many; so the discoveries
of them from God have been constant and seasonable; and those should not so
much flatt you, as these should raise and quicken you.

It may fall out (and I pray God it may) that as King Ahasverus here in the
history of my text; though he was deceived by Haman, and by him incensed
against the Jews even to Decree and Seal their destruction, yet God did turn
about his heart, and turned all to the contrary.

So He may also persuade the heart of our King to apprehend and to abhor the
subtle and bloody intentions of our adversaries, and to return amongst you
with his presence and countenance, which would be his Eternal honor, your
sweetest comfort, and all our much desired blessing.

Thirdly, to Exectnesse of pious action: you see what great things God has
done for you; O Repent in good earnest, Humble your selves in your fasts in
good earnest. Pray and seek to God in good earnest, Do and work for God in
good earnest, and for the safety of us all in good earnest: Do not Ficta
loqui, nor Ficta agere: This is no time for fencing sport.

Remember still that your worst enemies lie in your own breasts: and your
surest friend lives in heaven; get conquest over sins, and that will be the
compendious way to get victory over sinners, and to assure God unto you; And
pray much; O said a great person, I fear the prayers of Knox: prayer is none
of your weakest weapons to prevail with God, and to prevail against all
plotting and attempting enemies.

Fourthly, to Constancy of dependence on God alone: It is better (says David
Psalm. 118. 8.) to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in man.

Luther on that place calls it Artem Artium, and mirificam ac suam artem non
fidere hominibus, and sacrificium omnium gratissimum and suavissimum, and
cultum omnium pulcherrimum, To trust in God is the art of arts, the wonderful
and great art, etc.

I beseech you when you hear of policies, use means, but still trust on Gods
wisdom; when of powers, use means, but still trust on Gods omnipotency; when
of contrary events, use means, but still trust on Gods fidelity: Though men may
fail you, though friend may fail you, though strength may fail you, though
expectations may fail you, though reason, though council, though your own
hearts may fail you; yet, yet still depend on God; He never yet has failed,
He never, never will fail nor forsake the righteous who dare trust upon him.

FINIS.

