Englands Famous Discoverers

Sr. Walter Ra^leigh.
depiction of Sir Walter Raleigh

Sr. Hugh Willoughby.
depiction of Sir Hugh Willoughby

Sr. Fran: Drake
depiction of Sir Francis Drake

(...) Candes^
depiction of explorer

ATLAS MARITIMUS or A Book of CHARTS Describeing the SEA Coasts Capes Headlands
Sands Shoals Rocks and Dangers the Bays Roads Harbors Rivers and Ports. in
most of the known parts of the WORLD.

With the true Courses and distances, from one place to another Gathered from
the latest and best Discoveryes, that have bin made by diverse Able and
Experienced Navigators of our English Nation. Accomodated with an
Hydrographicall Description of the whole WORLD.

By John Seller. Hidrographer to ye Kings most Excellent Majesty.

And are to be Sold by him at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping, and at his Shop
in Exchange Alley Near the Royal Exchange. in London.

Cum Privilegio.

engraved title page

THE SEA-ATLAS: CONTAINING An Hydrographical Description of the SEACOASTS of
most of the known Parts of the WORLD.
THat whole Mass of Waters which makes up one part of this Terrestrial Globe,
and is sometimes, as it were, environed with the Earth, as in Rivers,
Streights, and smaller Seas; sometimes dilating it self into larger Floods,
does encompass the Earth, as in the Ocean or greater Seas, may be conveniently
divided, somewhat according to the four general Regions or Divisions of the
Earth, into four parts: The North Sea, or Mar del Noort, comprehends all
those Waters which, from the Pole-Artick even unto the Equator, do wash the
Shores of Europe, Africa, and America: The Ethiopian Sea, or Mar d' Ethiopia,
which from the Equinoctial Line northerly, the Shores of Ethiopia on the East,
and the Coasts of America on the West part, runs with unknown bounds toward
the Antartick Pole. The Indian Sea, or Mar d' India, bounded on the West with
the Oriental Parts of Africa; on the North, by the South Coasts of Asia; and
circumvironing all the Islands of the East India, as far as Islas de Ladronas,
and Nova Guinea, has its South parts tending toward the Antartick Pole, not
yet discovered. The South Sea, called also Mar del Zur, or Mare Pacificum,
runs all along the Western Shores of America on the one side; is contiguate
with the Indian Sea on the other, but has yet found no limits toward the
Artick or Antartick Poles. Which general division of the Ocean, so far as
convenience may admit in the succeeding breviary Description of the Seacoasts,
shall be observed.

The Coasts of those two famous Islands of Great Britain and Ireland, Britain.
are the first that discover themselves to us, out of this Northern Division of
the Ocean: The first whereof is not without cause esteemed the Metropolitan
Island of Europe, I will say (taken in all respects) of the World; It is
attended by many lesser Islands, the chief whereof are Thanet, Wight, Silly,
Anglesey, Man, Lewis, the Hebrides, Orknay, Shotland, and Far: Stored with
plenty of Ports, Bays, Rivers, Roads, and Harbors, capable to receive Ships of
great Burden; amongst which London accounted the Mart of Christendom, the
Metropolis of Great Britain, conveniently seated on the River of Thames, has
the chiefest note.

Next unto which, on the East side northerly, by the German Ocean, are Harwich,
Yarmouth, Lin, Kingston upon Hull, New Castle, a gallant Haven, famous for its
inexhaustable Cole-Mines, and Edinburgh and Dundee in Scotland, etc.

On the South side, between the Coasts of England and France, called the
Channel, are Dover, Chichester, Portsmouth, Weymouth, Plymouth, and Dartmouth.

On the West side, over against the Coasts of Ireland, in that violent and
turbulent Sea, called St. George his Channel, are Bristol, Pembrook, or
Milford-Haven, Chester, Leverpool, Carlisle, etc.

The Island (especially England) yielding abundant plenty of Corn and Cattle,
besides other Commodities, as Lead, Tin, Iron, Sea-cole, Saffron, Wool, Cloth,
Licorish, Millstones, and other rich Merchandise; multitude of Ships being
continually in the Ports, serving either to export her own, or to import other
Commodities from most places of the World in lieu thereof.

On the Coasts of Ireland, are Knock-fargus, Dublin, Ireland.
Waterford, King-sale, Limrick, Galloway, etc. Principally abounding in Cattle,
from whence great numbers are yearly exported into other Countries.

Passing on northerly, just under the Artich-Circle, lies environed, by the
Northern Ocean, Iseland.
or Mare Glaciale, Iseland, or rather Iceland, first discovered by one Naddoc a
Pyrat, who by a Tempest was driven to the Shores of this Country; which
afterward, from the coldness and store of Ice there continually found, was so
named, and first inhabited by the Norvegians, now under the power of the King
of Denmark; a place frequented by Danes, English, High and Low Dutch, and
Biscainers, where in exchange of Biscuit, Beer, Iron, Copper, Cloth, and some
other Wares they bring from thence, Stock Fish, and other sorts of Fish,
Train-Oyl, Skins of Foxes and other Beasts, Sulphur, and a sort of course
Cloth, and Stockings, called Wadmoll.

The Ports most frequented, are Strom, Warloswick, Kebbelwick, Busland,
Orbaack, Hola, and Haffenford; near unto which stands Bellestede, the
Residence of the Governor, a Dwelling suitable enough to the manner and fashion
of this Country.

North-east from hence, in the Latitude of 76 and 80, lies Greenland, or King
James his New Land; Greenland.
first found out by Sir Hugh Willowby, in the year 1553. (though the Dutch men
affirm it to be discovered first by Jacob Hemskerk, William Barrentson, and
John Cornelius Rip, Anno 1596.) which whether it by an Island or contiguate
with the main Continent of Groenland, or some other Northern Region, none have
hitherto known.

The Inland parts are stored with great numbers of Bears, Deer, Foxes, and such
like Creatures; and the Sea-shores with multitude of Morses and Whales of
incredible magnitude; for the catching whereof, the Inhabitants of most
Seaports in the Northern Ocean do usually make their yearly Voyages.

Not far from hence lies Bear Island, or rather Cherry Island, Cherry Island.
so named from Sir Francis Cherry Merchant, who was at the charge of the
discovery thereof; whither resort great number of Sea-Horses or Morses, and
Whales; the Moscovy Company once making great profit of the trade therein.

Thirty degrees to the South-eastward hereof, is the Island of Nova Zemla, Nova
Zemla.
separated from the North Continent of Russia, by the Streights of Vaigats,
alias Fretum Borough, through which so many brave and worthy Navigators have
attempted to find a passage into Scythia and China; N. E. Passage.
but being obstructed by the abundance of Ice met with in those Seas, could yet
discover no farther eastwards than the great River Oby, the North-west confine
of the Kingdom of Tartaria, Tartarian Sea.
though it has been often reported by the Samoed Tartars, Russes, and others
that have traveled those Countries by Land, that the Tartarian Seas do at
certain seasons of the year lie open, and free from such encumbrance.

To return therefore by the known Parts of Russia, Russia.
the Ports and Places whereof, worthy observation, and most frequented, are,
first Petzora Reca, the Isle of Colgoyn, situate at the mouth of a great Bay,
whence compassing Cape Candences, there is the entrance into the White-Sea,
White-Sea.
or Bay of St. Nicholas, which Master Richard Chanceller, in the
Richard-Bonaventure, first discovered, and settled a Trade with the Moscovites,
or Russes, at the Town of St. Nicholas, a well known Port, situate at the
influx of the River Dutna, into the Bay. But St. Michaels, on the Seaside,
commonly called Archangel, is the Town of greatest Trade, especially by the
English, who have of late there fixed their Staple.

The principal Commodities they send abroad, are Rich Furs, Hemp, Flax, Fish,
Train Oil, Honey, Wax, Pitch, Rosin, and the like; receiving in return, Cloth,
Silk, Tapstery, and some other Merchandise.

Without this Bay, Lapland.
on the Coast of Lapland, Finmark, and Norway, are Kola, Kegor, (near unto
which Sir Hugh Willoughby, with his Company, in the Bon Esperanza, attempting
first the discovery of unknown Places in this Icy Sea, were frozen to death)
next are Wardhouse, and the North-Cape, so called, because it is the out-most
Northern Bound of the Continent of Europe.

Dronten, Norway
in the Latin Nidrosia, so called, from the River Nider, on which it is seated;
anciently the Metropolis of Norway, but since the subjection of this Country
to the Danes, reduced to a Borough. Bergen the principal Town of this
Country, the ordinary Residence of the Governor for the Kings of Denmark;
strongly situate amongst high Mountains, at the bottom of a deep Creek or Arm
of the German Ocean, called Carmfunt, a safe and noted Port, much resorted to
by Merchants of most European Nations, bringing thither Corn, Bread, Beer,
Wine, and Brandy, to supply the natural wants and defects hereof; and in
exchange transporting Fish, Furrs, Boards, Cordage, Masts, and other Materials
for Shipping. Then Longsound, Ansloo, Maelstrand, and Gottenburgh, noted for
the multitude of Herrings thereabout.

Not far from hence is the entrance into the Baltick-Sea, which begins at
the narrow Passage called the Sound, Sound.
and interlacing the Countries of Denmark, Swedland, Poland, and Germany,
extending even to Livonia and Lithuania. The Islands whereof are many in
number, the chief are, Zealand, Funen, Langeland, Laland, Baltick-Sea.
Falstre, Alsen, Meun, Rugen, Bornholm, Oeland, Gothland, Osel, Dageroort,
Runen, and Hoogeland.

The chief Ports and Places of note bordering on the Sea, are Elsenore,
strongly seated on that narrow Straight, or Fretum, not above a Dutch mile in
breadth, commonly called by the name of the Sound; Over against which, on the
other side, is Elsengburgh, a straight through which all Ships that have any
trading to or from the Baltick-Sea, must of necessity take their course, all
other Passages being either barred up with impassable Rocks, or otherwise
prohibited by the Kings of Denmark, upon forfeiture of all their Goods.
Copenbagen, or Haven of Merchants, placed by the Sea in the same Island of
Zealand, being a convenient Port; This and the magnificent Castle of
Cronenburgh near Elsenore, being the constant Residence of the Kings of Denmark.

The next are Slesbourgh, Elholm, Calmar, Swedland.
Zuiddercoppen, Nordcoppen, Nycoppen, Stockholm, the Metropolis and chief
trading Port of Swedland, and a place worthy observation for Merchandise;
exceeding strong, both by Art and Nature, being situate in the Marshes, like
Venice at the Mouth of the Lake, or River Meler; the passage to it out of the
Bay being very narrow, and yet so deep withal, that the greatest Ships of
burden may sail up to the City; the Port within the Sreight being so safe and
capacious, that it is able at one time to receive 300 Sail, which usually ride
there without Anchor.

Next, upsal, an Archbishops Sea and University, placed not far from the Bay
of Bodnar, called also Sinus Bodicus, or the North Bottom, North-Bottom.
a long and not much frequented Sea, which from the Latitude of 60, extends it
self even to the Corsts of Lapland and Finmark.

Places of note are few worthy observation, the chief Birkara in West Bodden,
betwixt the Bay and a great navigable Lake: Toronia the best place of Trade,
seated at the very bottom of the Bay in North Bodden: Helsingeliac more North
than that, toward the Borders of Lapland: Kerlabi in East Bodden, on the Bank
of the Gulf, conveniently seated for a Town of Trade. The Country is but
barely stored with Grain and Fruits, but full of great variety of Wild Beasts,
whose Rich Furrs yield great profit to the Inhabitants; and by reason of the
commodious situation on all sides of the Bay, well stored with Fish.

At the South-east part of this Bay is the Island Erk, near to the Town Aboo,
from whence all along the Shores Eastward, on the South side of Finland, the
Coast is exceeding dangerous, and for the most part innavigable, because of the
innumerable multitude of Islands, Shoals, and Rocks, the greatest of which is
called the Pelting, even as far as Wyborg, a Town conveniently seated at the
bottom of the Bay or Gulf of Finland, called Sinus Finnicus. Over against which
is Narva, on the North Bank of Duina, where it falls into the Bay of Finland,
the only place of Trade, Liesland
into Moscovia or Russia, through the Baltic.

Revel a well traded Port, situate in the same Bay, which together with Wyborg
and the Narve, are now in the possession of the King of Swedland.

The next Port of note is Riga, a famous Empory, Poland.
of great resort for Foreign Merchants; who carry hence Pitch, Wax, Hemp,
Flax, and such other Commodities.

Dantzick, seated on the Weyssel, second of the Hanse-Towns, of so great Trade,
such a noted Granary for all sorts of Corn, issued from thence to supply the
want of other Countries, that 1000 measures of Wheat (besides all other
Commodities proportionable) are here daily sold.

Stetin once a poor Fisher-Town, now the Metropolis of Pomeren. Pomeren


Straelsond a Town of much Trading, and great resort, situate on the Baltic,
opposite to the Isle of Rugen.

Rostock next in reputation of all the Hanse-Towns, to Lubeck and Dantzick,
large, rich, and much frequented by all sorts of Merchants.

Wismar and Lubeck, seated on the confluence of the Trave and Billow, near the
fall thereof into the Baltic, a River capable of Ships of 1000 tuns, which
commonly they unlade at Travemond, the Port Town of the City, a little lower
nearer the Sea, an enfranchized Town being the principal among the Hanse-Towns.

On the Coasts of Jutland, Jutland.
being a Peninsula, between the Baltic Sea and German Ocean on the east parts,
whereof there is another passage into the Baltic Sea, called the Belt, Belt.
but not so much frequented as the Sound, formerly spoken of.

The chief Towns and Places are Flenborg, having a Port so deep, so safe, and
so commodious, that they may lade and unlade their great Ships in a manner
close by their Houses.

The other are Hadersleve, Sternbergh, Sleswick, Wyborg, and Odensee in Funen,
Arhusen, and Schagen, the most northerly point of Jutland.

On the Coast of Germany, contiguate with the Ocean, Hamburgh.
are first Hamburgh, on the Bill, where it falls into the Elve, one of the
Hanse-Towns also; having by report, as many great Ships as sail upon the Ocean,
which bring great profit, besides the resort of Merchants from most places. It
was sometimes the Staple Town for the Cloth of England; on some discontent
removed from thence to Stadt, a little nearer the Sea, on the same River; from
thence afterward to Holland.

Next Bremen, seated on the broad and navigable River Weser, whence comes store
of Linen Cloth, called from a Town not far thence Osenbridge.

Then Emden, a good Haven, and well traded Town, which yearly sends out 700
Busses for the Herring-fishing on the Coasts of England.

Along the Shores, for the most part, belonging to the States of Holland,
Holland.
lie several Islands, the chief whereof are Ameland, Schelling, Holland,
Fly-land, Texel, Weringen, Voorn, Yselmond, Overflaccee, Schowen, Duveland,
Tertolen, North-Beverland, South-Beverland, and Walcheren.

The chief Ports and Places, are Amsterdam, a very fair Haven, situate on the
Gulf, called the Tie, and the Channel, or Dike Amstel, whence Amsterdam, built
on Piles like Venice, and much resembling it both in Trade and other Things; a
place stored with multitude of shipping, inhabited by Men of all Nations, and
of all Religions: Grown Famous, and exceeding Wealthy, since the diverting of
the Trade from Antwerp hither.

Horn, Enchuisen, on the very Point of the Gulf of Zuider-Zee, opposite to
Friezeland, Medemblick, Scheidam, Delf-haven, Rotterdam, on a Channel named the
Rotter, not far from which the Leck, one of the three main Branches of the
Rhine, falls into the Maes, a strong, fair, and well-traded Port.

The Brill in the Island Voorn, once Cautionary to the English, with the Town
of Flushing. Bergen ap Zome, so called from the River Zome, on which it is
situate, about half a league from the influx of it into the Scheld, and not far
from the Sea, which gives it a reasonable good Haven.

Antwerp situate on the Scheld, seventeen leagues from the Sea, of so great
Trade in former times, that it was held to be the richest Empory of the
Christian World; the Commodities here Bought and Sold amounting to more in one
month, than those of Venice in two years; the cause whereof was, that the
Portugals diverting the Alexandrian and Venetian Trade to Lisbon, kept here
their Factories, and sent hither their Spices, and Indian Commodities, now
almost removed by the Hellander to Amsterdam; Middleburg, Flushing, Flanders.
the Key of the Netherlands; Ostend, Newport, Dunkirck, Graveling, the last of
Flanders.

On the Coast of France, France.
along the English Channel, are first Callice at the very entrance; Deep a
Town of Trade especially for the New Foundland, Newhaven, or Haverdegrace, on
the Mouth of the River Sein, betwixt which, and St. Maloes, close by the
Hag-point, over against the Isle of Wight in England, lies the Islands
Aldernay, (or as the French, Aurney) Jersey, Guernsey, belong to the Crown of
England, and several other smaller Islands, stoared with plenty of Syder, and
fine Wool, whereof they knit store of Stockings and Wastcoates.

St. Maloes, Morlais, ushant, Breast, seated on a spacious Bay of the Western
Ocean, the Key and Bulwark of Bretaign, and the goodliest Harbor of all France.

Croisse, a little Haven at the Mouth of the Loir, not far below Nants, whence
store of the best and most noted Brandy.

Rochel a Town seated in the inner part of a fair and capacious Bay, assured by
two strong Forts, betwixt which there is scarce more space than for a Ship to
come in at once; Over against which lies Oleron, an Island yielding great
quantity of Salt, in special fame for that the Maritine Laws, which for near
500 years, have generally been received by all the States of the Christian
World which frequent the Ocean, for regulating Sea Affairs, and deciding of
Maritine Controversies, were declared and established here. The Island being
then in possession of the English, from thence named the Laws of Oleron: So
powerful were the Kings of England in former times to give Laws to all that
traded on the Ocean.

Bordeaux seated on the Garond, not far from the Sea, much frequented by
English and Dutch for Gascoign Wines; Bayon the last of France on this part of
the Ocean.

On the Coast of Spain, St. Sebastian, Spain.
a noted and well-traded Port, at the Mouth of the River Gurvineo; beautified
with a fair and capacious Haven, defended with two strong Castles founded on
two opposite Rocks.

Bilbao situate some two leagues from the Sea, on a fair and deep Creek
thereof; Biscay.
this (and indeed all the Coast of Biscay) stored with such infinite quantities
of Iron and Steel, that no Country yields better, or in greater plenty,
called for this cause the Armory of Spain; exceedingly enriched by making of
Armor, and all sorts of Weapons, their chief Manufacture, the Bilbao Blades,
in such request, being brought from thence, besides great quantities of Wool
hence transported.

Corunna, by us called the Groin, often mentioned in our story of the Wars with
the Spaniard, in Queen Elizabeth's time taken by the English, not far from the
Promontorie or Cape, called Finis Terrae, Cape Finis Terrae.
or Cape de Finis Terre, being the most western end of the then known World.

Bayon, not far from the Mouth of the River Minio, full of Red Lead; (from
hence called by the Latins Minium) navigable with small Vessels 100 miles.

Porto Duero, or Porto Port, Portugal
at the Mouth of the River Duero in the Kingdom of Portugal.

Lisbon, upon the great River Tagus, a famous City for Traffic; the Portugals
in all their Navigations setting sail from hence. It Is conveniently seated for
Shipping, and (excepting the Court which is here kept) inhabited chiefly by
Mariners and Merchants, which of their own Country growth, trade in Honey,
Wine, Oil, Alum, Fruits, Salt, etc. and from Brazil in America, with great
quantities of best and finest Sugar, and many sorts of Drugs.

Setubal or St. Uves, South of Lisbon, situate on a Gulf of twenty miles in
length, and three in breadth, a place of principal importance next to Lisbon.

Not far to the North-west of Cape Vincent, there are certain Islands called
the Azores, in the Atlantic Ocean, subject to the Crown of Portugal, and
opposite to the City of Lisbon; from which distant 250 leagues, situate between
38 and 40 degrees of North Latitude, and one of them in the first longitude,
which is commonly reckoned from these Islands, as being the most western part
of the World, before the discovery of America: Azores.
They were so called from Azor in the Spanish Tongue, signifying a Goshauk,
because multitudes were there at first found; The names are these, Tercera, St.
Michaels, Fyal, Gratiosa, St. George, Pice, Corvo, Flores, Spain.
and St. Mary's; most of them stored with Flesh, Fish, and a sort of Wine not
very good, nor durable. But the chief Commodity they send out, is Woad for the
use of Dyers.

St. Lucar the Port Town of Sevil, at the Mouth of the River Betis, or
Guadalquiver, where the West India Ships many times ride.

Cadiz or Gades, situate on a large Bay, and serving as a Road for the Indian
Fleet; by reason whereof, and the great resort of Foreign Merchants, it is
much enriched: It Is the chief Port and Magazine of Spain, taken notwithstanding
in one day by the English, under the command of the Lord Effingham, the Earl of
Essex, and Sir Walter Raleigh; the Town, Ships, and all becoming a prey to the
English.

Near to this place is that so celebrated Straight, called Fretum Herculeum, or
Gaditanum, now the Streights of Gibralter, Gibralter
from a place so called on the brink hereof, being in length fifteen miles, and
in breadth seven, where it is narrowest, being the Inlet or Passage from the
Atlantick-Ocean, into the Mediterranean Sea.

The Mediterranean Sea, within which the places most observable are, Malaga, a
strong place, and an Armory for the King of Spain; exceeding great in Traffic,
and of much resort, especially for Wines, Rasins, Almonds, etc.

Almeria, Carthagena, situate in a demi Island in the very jaws of the
Mediterranean, having a good and capacious Haven.

Alicant a noted Port and much used, whence our true Alicant Wines, made of the
Juice of Mulberries.

Valencia, a fair, pleasant, and well-traded City. Tarragona, Barcellona.

The Goods and Merchandise on this side of Spain being generally Corn, Wine,
Oil; all sorts of Fruit, Salt, Corral; several sorts of Drugs and Stones, etc.

Over against Valencia lie several Islands, the biggest whereof are Majorca,
Majorca.
the chief Town whereof is so named of the Island, yielding sufficient quantity
of Corn, Oil, Wine, and Fruits.

Minorca having three fair Harbors, Minorca.
Maon, Ternessus, and Minorcas a fruitful Island, breeding great Herds of
Cattle, and Mules of the largest size in Spain.

Yvica, Yvica.
the Inhabitants whereof make great store of Salt, wherewith they furnish, in
part, not only Spain, but Italy also.

Next, France.
on the Coast of France, are Narbon, Arles, Marcelles, and Tholoun.

The Commodities sent from the Coasts of France, on the Meditterranean, are
Corn, Wine, Oil, Salt, Woad, Alkermes, or Grain d'Escarlate, Saffron, Rasins,
Figs, Olives, Almonds, Prunes, Capers, etc.

Villa Frank, and Savona, belonging to the State of Genoa.

Genoa the principal Empory, Genoa.
next Venice, of all Italy, having a safe and commodious Haven: The Country
Commodities are (besides their Fruits which here are excellent) Oil, Paper,
Wines, and such abundance of Silk, that it is the opinion there are 18000
persons in that only City employed in ordering and working thereof.

Livorno, or Legorn, Italy.
seated on the influx of the River Arno, so well fortified, that it is thought
to be one of the strongest Cities in Christendom. To the South-West whereof, in
the Ligurian Sea, Corsica. Sardinia.
lie the Islands Corsica and Sardinia; the first subject to the State of Genoa,
the latter to the Kingdom of Spain; abounding in pleasant Wines, Oil, Olive,
Mastick, Sulphur, Allom, Wax, and Honey.

Elba an Island between Corsica and the Main, producing Load-stones of a gray
color, but none of the best.

Civita Vechia the only useful Haven that belongs to Rome.

Tarracina, or the Bay of Mola, and Port Ostia at the Mouth of Tyber, scarce
making up one good Haven.

Naples the Metropolis of the Kingdom; Naples.
a beautiful City seated on the Sea-shoar, and fortified with four strong
Castles. This, and indeed all the Parts of Italy generally, abounding with all
sorts of Silk, Cloth of Gold and Silver, made by the People without fraud,
because of a strict prohibition for the Adulteration of the Threads; Tapestry,
Skins bravely gilded; Earthen Vessels most curiously wrought with Images and
Coats of Arms; Oil Olive of the best sort; Saffron, Alchermes, Allom, Sulphur,
Vitriol, Alabaster, Rice, Marble, Wines, and Fruits of all sorts.

Regium, or Rezo, on the Seashore, opposite to Messina in Sicilia, which is
supposed to have been broken off from the Coast of Italy, a place heretofore
very well traded, but since fired by the Turks, left almost desolate.

Sicilia an Island separated from the Main Land of Italy, Sicilia.
by the Strait or Fare of Messina, where the Passage is so narrow, that it
exceeds not in breadth a mile and a half, and found, by diligent sounding, not
above eight fathom deep; full of dangerous Rocks and Whirlepools: as namely
Caribdis, a Gulf on Sicilia side, violently attracting all Vessels coming nigh
to it, and devours them; opposite whereunto stands that dangerous Rock Scylla,
at the foot of which many little Rocks shoot out, these two being the occasion
of many fabulous Stories. In the other parts where the Sea opens, it is 300
miles over, supposed to have been once a Peninsula, afterward separated from
Italy by the fury of the Waves, or violence of some Earthquakes, which are
there frequent. The Island is so plentifully stored with Corn, that it
heretofore obtained the name of the Granary or storehouse of Rome, and does
still furnish, not only many parts of Italy, but Spain, Barbary, Malta, and the
adjacent Isles; the other Commodities are much like those of Italy, in great
plenty.

In this Country is the Hill Hybla, so famous for Bees and Honey; the
Mountains Aetna, now Montgibel, which continually sends forth smoke and flames
of fire, to the aftonishment of beholders.

The chief places are Syracuse, or Saragusa, once the Metropolis of the Island;
very strong both by Sea and Land, with a beautiful and commodious Port, of
greatest Trade, next to Carthage in ancient times, now both destroyed.

Noto, Augusta, Gergento, Palermo, Trapani, and Messina, a Port and City of
great strength and beauty; peopled by the wealthiest sort of Merchants and
Gentlemen; having a strong and high Citadel, well garrisoned, and a Lanthorn
with lights kept burning for direction of Mariners.

Sixty miles to the southward of Sicilia, toward the African Shores, lies
Malta, Malta.
an Island famous for the shipwreck of Paul; defended by the Knights of
Jerusalem removed hither; it is wholly situate on a Rock, having not above
three foot depth of Earth, and consequently of no great fertility, the want of
which is supplied by the plenty of Sicilia.

To return therefore to the Coast of Italy, by the Capes Spartiventi, Colonne,
and St. Mary's, near unto which is Gallipoli, noted for the excellent Oil
coming from thence.

Not far from whence is Cape Otranto, The Gulf of Venice
the entrance into the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice, and the first Town of
note therein is Brindisi, or Brundusium, once glorying in the most capacious
Haven of the World. Whence Pompey and Caesar took shiping with their Fleets,
the one to fly, the other to pursue; at this time a mean Town, the Haven being
so choked up, that a Galley can hardly enter.

Next Bara, Ort^na, Ancona, having a fair Haven, not so capacious, as exceeding
pleasant and beautiful.

Pesara, Ravenna, and in the top of the Adriatic, Venice, Venice.
standing upon seventy two little Islets, but joined together by many Bridges,
which are said to be 4000 at the least, besides 10000 Boats for passage from
Isle to Isle; a strong, beautiful, and famous City, once the most illustrious
Empory of the World, but much decayed in its Trade since the Passage by Sea was
found to Persia and India by Cape bon Esprance.

On the Histrian and Dalmatian side of the Adriatic, Dalmatia.
are these places and Seaports observable, Triest, or Tergestum, whence the
Bay adjoining is so called; Zara in Dalmatia, enjoying a safe and large Port
belonging to the State of Venice. Sebenico, Spalato, Narento, Cattaro, at the
bottom of the Gulf so called.

On the Coast of Greece, Grecia.
over against Otranto in Italy, lies Vellona, a Port Town, fortified with a
strong Castle.

Farther into the Jonian Sea lie several Islands, first Corfu, sufficiently
fruitful, but of Wine especially.

Caphalonia and Zant, Cephalon. Zant.
Islands abounding in Oil and Wine, but especially in Currants, which is the
greatest trade of these Islands.

Larta, on the Grecian Shore, in a Gulf, so called, near the ancient Ambracia,
the Regal Seat of King Pyrrbus; near unto which is the Isle of St. Maure,
inhabited chiefly by Jews; a little lower than which is the Gulf of Corinth,
called Lepanto, from two Castles built on each side the entrance thereof,
called Castelli de Lepanto, made famous by the memorable Sea Fight of the Turks
and Christians.

Peleponesus, Morea.
now Morea, a Peninsula joined to the Continent by a little neck of Land or
Istmus, at Corinth, six miles over in breadth; the pleasantest Country of all
Greece, abounding with all things necessary for life, now in possession of the
Turks; and though no place has suffered more ruin than this, yet it is still
the most populous of all Greece. The chief places are, Modon, or Methone,
seated on the most southern part of the Peninsula; a strong, safe, and
convenient Harbor.

Coron the chief Town on the Bay of Messina.

Malvasia, anciently Epidaurus, noted for the abundance of delicate Wines,
called Malvesy, or Malmsey, sent hence into all parts. Nauplia, now Napoli,
giving name to the Bay so called.

To the South-east hereof lies that famous Island of Creet, Candia.
now Candia, from the chief Town so called; abounding heretofore much more than
now, in Muscadel Wines, Oil, Sugar, Gums, Honey, and Fruits: The People
formerly good Seafaring Men, subject to the Venetians, till much rent from them
by the Turk, especially of late, by the strong Town of Candia, situate on the
North Coast.

The next places of note, whereof are Retimo and Canea, commodious by its
Haven, called Porto del Suda.

In and about the Aegean Sea, lie many Istands, the most of note are,
Samothrace, now Samandrachi; Thassus, or Tasso; Imbrus, now Lembro, Lemnos; the
Merchandise whereof is that Mineral Earth called Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata,
from the Seal or Character imprinted on it.

Eubaea, now Negropont, Archipe. lago.
full of Harbors and capacious Bays.

Salaminis, Egina, or Engia, the Cyclades so called, because placed in a
Circle; called also the Arches, the chief whereof are, Delos, Tenos, Andros,
Naxos, Gyares, Paros, Scyros, Melos, Seriphus, Chia, and several others, in
number fifty three. The Sporades, because scattered up and down the
Archipelago, in number twelve. Lastly, Cythera, now Cerigo.

On the other side next Asia, lie Tenedos, Lesbos or Mitilene, Chios, Samos,
Coos, Icaria, Patmos now Palmosa, Clares now Calamo, Carpathes, Rhodes,
memorable in the hard and long Siege of the Turks before it was taken.

In this mentioned Sea, on the Continent Shores of Greece and Thrace, are
observable first Athens, now called Setines; so famously heretofore memorable,
now an ordinary Borough.

Next Thessalonica, now Salonichi, at the bottom of a great Bay so called, a
beautiful wealthy City, inhabited by rich Merchants of most Nations and
Religions, who drive here a great Trade.

Abdera, Aenos, Lysimachia, and Philippopolis, on the River Hebrus.

Selimbria, Sestos, a Peninsula in the Thracian Chersonese, having a strong
Castle; opposite to which there is another on the Asian Shore, called Abidos,
both of them having the name of the Dardanelli, the Key and Blockhouses of
Constantinople, commanding the Passage so strongly, that none may go out or in
without their license.

But the chief glory of this Country and of all Europe, is Constantinople,
Constantinople.
seated in so commodious a place for Empire, that it overlooks both Europe and
Asia; commands not only the Propontis and Bosphorus, but the Euxine Sea; first
called Bizantium, now fince the possession of it by the Turks, Stamboldi,
having a most curious Haven or Port so conveniently profound, that Ships of
greatest burden may lie at the sides thereof for receipt and discharge of their
Lading; so conveniently seated, that there is no Wind whatsoever but brings in
some shipping; which affords a vast trade of Merchandise from all parts, and of
all sorts.

Beyond this is the Propontis and the Euxine, Euxine. Sea.
or Black Sea, or Pontus, now Maggiore, a very dangerous Sea, full of Rocks and
Sands, guarded at the entrance by the Bosphorus with two strong Castles, called
the Black Towers.

But to return again to the Aegean Sea, by the Coasts of Asia, the places most
worthy of notice for Trade are but few, the chief Smyrna, a fair and ancient
City, Smyrna.
on a large Bay so named, much traded and frequented at this day, especially
for Chamlets, Grograms, and such like Commodities, where the English have a
Consul resident.

Ephesus, Halicarnassus, Matari, Antioch, of no great Trade.

And at the end of the Mediterranian Sea, Alexandretta or Scandarone, pretty
commodious for Trade, being the nearest Haven to Aleppo, heretofore the choice
Staple for all the Eastern Commodities brought to Euphrates, before the
Portugals discovery of the Southern Passage to India and Persia.

Tire a City in ancient time of great Trade and Wealth, seated on a Rocky
Island, the People whereof were supposed to be the first that invented
shipping, now nothing but a heap of rubbish.

Tripolis, Cyprus.
over against which is the Island Cyprus, in the Syrian and Cilician Sea,
abounding in Wine, Oil, Corn, Sugar, Cotton, Honey, Wool, Turpentine, Allom,
Verdegreece, Salt, Grograms, and other Commodities.

On the Coasts of Egypt and Barbary, Egypt.
are first Alexandria, situate westward of Delta, over against the Ifle Pharos,
at the Mouth of the River Nile; exceeding strong, inhabited by men of diverse
Nations, as Moors, Jews, Turks, Greeks, and almost all other Nations, for the
gain they reap by trafficking in Corn, Rice, Estridge-Feathers, Gums, Drugs,
Spices, Cotten-Cloth, and other rich Commodities.

Tripoli in Barbary, an usual retreat for Pirates that infest those Seas.

Next Tunis, whose Commodities are chiefly Oil, some Corn, Figs, Dates,
Almonds, and other Fruits.

Argiers, situate near the Sea, in the form of a Triangle, with an Haven to it,
a City not so large, as strong; and not so strong as famous, for being the
Receptacle of the Turkish Pirates, who domineer so infinitely over the
Mediterranean, to the great damage of Merchants that frequent those Seas.

Tetuan, the last Town within the Straits on the African Shore.

On the African shore without the Straits, Tanger.
lies Tanger, near Cape Spartel, a Town very ancient, thirty miles distant
from the Straits Mouth; belonging heretofore to the Portugals, now to the Crown
of England, where there is lately built a large and convenient Mole for the
reception of Ships; and a strong Garrison for defense of the place, and against
the incursion of the Moors.

Sallee, a Town much traded formerly by Merchants of England, Flanders, Genoa,
and Venice, of late made a nest of Pirates, as dangerous to those that sail in
the Ocean, as Argier to those in the Mediterranean.

South-westwards from hence are the Canaries, or fortunate Islands, in number
seven, so called from Canaria, the principal thereof: The names are these,
Canaria, Palma, Gomero, Ferro, Lancerote, Tenariff, and Forteventura; called
Fortunate, from their fruitfulness and other excellencies, plentiful in Woad
and other Commodities, Canaries
but especially in those rich Wines we call Canaries; a sort of Wine, if not
sophisticated, more pleasing to the Pallat, and a better Remedy for the natural
weakness of the Stomach, (if moderately taken) than any other Wine whatsoever;
brought hither in such abundance to supply our luxury, that much more than
three thousand Tuns hereof are brought yearly into England only.

Next Medera, the greatest Island in the Atlantick-Sea, over against Cape
Cantin in Morocco, wonderfully fruitful; abounding in Madder, Sugar, Fruits,
Wines, etc.

Not far from thence is the Isle Porto Sancto, very fruitful also, but much
annoyed by the innumerable multitude of Conies that breed there.

About Cape Blanco generally the Seaports and Places, even to the farthermost
parts of Guinea, yea even of all Africa, were belonging to the Portugals, who
fortified and placed Colonies in each as their trading increased; as Porto de
Dio, Del Rosato, Arquin, Rio de Portuguez, or Senega, betwixt which and the
River Gambo, is the great westward Cape of Africa, called Cape Verde, then Rio
de Sancto Domingo, and Rio Grand, etc.

Now several of them are much used and frequented by Dutch, English, and
French. The Commodities are chiefly Gold, Ivory, and a sort of Pepper which we
call Guinea Pepper, of double efficacy to the Indian.

To the Westwards of Cape Verde, The Isles of Cape Verde.
lie the Islands, so called, being ten in number, St. Antonio, St. Vincent,
Bona-Vist, St. Lucys, the Isle of Salt, Del Fogo, St. Nicholas, Mayo, St. Jago,
and Brava.

Here the continuance of this Discourse should have been broken off to have
took in the Northern Tract of America, as far as the Equinoctial, so to have
completed this Hydrographical Description, according to the first division of
the Ocean; but I thought it more convenient to go forward through the remaining
part of the Ethiopian and all the Indian Seas, along the Shores of Africa and
Asia, and having briefly spoken thereof, to comprehend all the West India or
America in one Treatise.

To proceed then on the Coast of Africa: from the River Gambo, to the Cape of
Good Hope, are the Coasts of Malegette, the Grain Coast, Cape de Palmas, Quaqua
Coast, the Gold Coast, Cape de trees Puntas, the Coast of Benin, called also
the Byte or Gulf of St. Thomas, Cape Formosa; all this whole Country abounding
in Corn, Rice, Millet, excellent Fruits; also in Gold both in Sand and Ingots,
Ivory, Wax, Hides, Cotton, Ambergreece, Brasil-Wood, Pearls; which they truck
for Cloth, Woollen and Linen, Red-Caps, Guiny.
Frize-Mantles, Guns, Swords, Daggers, Belts, Knives, Copper-Bars, Hammers,
Ax-heads, Salt, Pins, Kettles, Basins, Looking-Glasses, Beads, Tinn-Rings, and
certain Shells called Gories, which passes there instead of Money. They drive
a great trade for these said Commodities with their own people, whom they sell
for Slaves, the Kings selling their Subjects, Parents their Children, and
indeed all whom they can take or surprise, which are sent generally to the
West India Plantations.

To the southward hereof the Ports are diverse, but little frequented by the
English. The Portugals conquering and possessing several places from the weak
Native Inhabitants, all along those Shores. Much thereof being since gotten by
the Dutch, some by us and others; all which do generally abound with the usual
Merchandise of the other western parts of Africa.

Here also must not be omitted the mention of such Isles as lie in this part of
the Ethiopian Sea, namely, St. Thoma, just under the Equator, inhabited now by
the Dutch, Ferdinand de Poo, Princes Island, Annibon, St. Hellena, the usual
place of Watering in the return of East India Voyages, being in possession of
the English East India Company; Ascension, a barren Island, whereunto sometimes
Ships go a tortling.

Cape de bon Espranza, or the Cape of Good Hope, Cape of Good Hope.
was first discovered by Vasques de Gama a Portugal, Anno 1597. by which
Discovery, monopolizing to themselves the wealthy Trade of India for a great
while, till by one means or another communicated to others. The Cape consists
of three Points or Head-lands, whereof that which is nearest is called as
before; the middlemost, Cabofalso, because mistaken for the other by some of
the Portugals in their return homwards; the other the Cape of Needles, or Cape
das Agullas, by reason of the sharp Points it shoots out into the Sea. On the
top of this Cape is a large and pleasant plain, called the Table of the Cape,
yielding a large prospect over the Sea on all sides.

Beyond which, the first Port of observable note, is Sofala, on a little Island
near the great River Cuama, next Mozambique, conveniently seated on a large and
capacious Haven; strongly fortified, in the hands of the Portugals, who in
their going to the Indies, and returning back, used to call here, and to fit
themselves with all things necessary to pursue their Voyages: A Town of so
great Trade and Wealth, that the Captain of the Castle, in the time of his
Government, being but three years, is said to have laid up 300000 Ducats for
his lawful gains, out of the Gold, etc. there, and coming from Sofala.

Over against this Port eastward, lies the great Island Madagascar, St.
Laurence.
or St. Laurence, being the greatest yet known in the World; plentiful in all
things for the life of man, particularly of Mill, Rice, Sugar, Honey, Wax,
Cotton-Wooll, Coco-Nuts, Dates, Goats, Deer, Oxen, Sheep, Fruits, Ginger,
Cloves, Sanders, Saffron, Amber, Gold, Silver, Ivory, and Ebony; which they
exchange for Toys and small Trifles. The Inhabitants inhospitable and
treacherous. Harbors it has many, and often frequented by Portugals, Dutch,
and English.

Up higher toward the Arabick-Gulf, are Melinde, Mombaza, Quiloa, Magadoza,
etc.

At the most eastern part of Africa, called Cape Gardefu, lies the Island
Zocotora, abounding in Cinnabar, Dragons-Blood, and Alloes, hence called Aloes
Socotrina.

Here is the entrance into the Arabian-Gulf, or Red Sea, Red Sea.
rightly so called from bordering on the Land of Edom. The chief Ports whereof
are Zeila, Mazzua, on the Coast of Ethiopia. And at the very top thereof Sues,
or Arsinoe, the station of the Turkish Galleys that command the Gulf, they
being first framed at Cair, then taken in pieces, brought hither, and here
rebuilt and joined together.

Eziongeber, the Haven of Solomon's Ships, that fetched his Gold from Ophir.

Others in this Gulf, on the Coast of Arabia, are few, or no places worthy of
mention, as far as Babel Mandel, where it opens into the Southern Ocean; most
part of the Persian and Indian Merchandise coming formerly this way, and so
transported by Land to Cair, then to Alexandria, but now little or nothing used.

A little without the Gulf stands Aden, a gallant Haven, well traded, and
seldom without store of Shipping, carrying from thence Gums, Drugs, and other
Merchandise.

Next Oran, the Lock and Key of the Southern Ocean, on the Point or Promontory,
at the entering into the Persian-Gulf, Persian-Gulf.
or Gulf de Elcatiffe, a turbulent and unruly Sea, the Southern Ocean breaking
in at one end, and the River Euphrates at the other, the continual combating
and clashing of which two, makes it so unquiet.

Places and Ports of note on the Arabian Shore, are Muscabat, Sabta, Balsara,
Rhegium.

But none so famous as the City of Ormus, on the Persian Shore; not so
memorable for the greatness, as the wealth and convenience of the situation
thereof; built in an Island, so called, a famous Empory for Persian and Indian
Commodities; being hence transported and conveyed to Badgat, or Babylon,
Aleppo, and Tripoli, not yet wholly decayed; besides plenty of other
Merchandise, here are found the best and fairest Oriental Pearls, which are
caught in this Gulf between Basara and Ormus.

The first Port on the Coast of India, India.
is accounted Diu, looking toward Persia; but on the East side thereof, near
the Mouth of the River Indus, a Town of great Trade, possessed by the Portugals.

Tutta on the Banks of Indus, of no less trade to the Portugals, who here
receive such Indian Commodities as come down the Water from Lahore, returning
Pepper in exchange, which they bring up the River from their other Factories.

Madabat the chief Town of Guzarat, affirmed to be near as big as London;
seldom without Merchants of all parts.

Cambaia, 3 miles from Indus, and as many in compass, so populous, that it is
accounted the Cair of the Indies; exceeding fruitful, abounding in Rice, Wheat,
Sugar; all sorts of Spices and Fruits, Silk, Cottons; and in the Mountains
thereabouts they find Diamonds, Calcedonies, and a kind of Onyx, called
Corneline, corruptly Cornelian.

Swaley, in a large Bay so called, the Haven Town for Surat, about ten miles
from the Road, Surat.
from whence the River is Navigable only by Boats and Shallops; made of late
years a Factory for the English Merchants, who have here their President, and a
Magnificent House for their Reception, and Staple of their Commodities, which
are chiefly Spices, Calicoes, Indico, Sarcinets, Pantadoes, etc.

Bombay is a great Factory for the English East India Company.

Goa a Sea-Town, situate in a little, Goa.
but most pleasant Island, called Ticuarinum, fifteen miles in compass,
opposite to the Outlet of the River Mindano, a noted Empory, and one of the
chief Keys that unlock the Indies; inhabited, besides the Portugals, by
Indians, Moors, Jews, Armenians, Guzarats, Banians, Bramaa's, and many others,
who for the cause of Trade and Gain, dwell here, without molestation for their
Religion.

Curwar Batticale, on the Coast of Malabar, first Cononor; well built and
beautified, with a very fair Haven, belonging to the Portugals, and well traded
by Merchants.

Then Calicut, the chief of these parts, Calicut.
three miles in length upon the Sea, of exceeding Trade, especially in fine
Calicoes, thence so called, Ginger, Cinnamon, Pepper, and Cassia.

Cochin, a Sea-Town likewise, of little less Trade than Calicut.

To the southward hereof is Cape Comarin, Cape Comerin.
or Cormandel; and a little from thence the Island Zeylan, large, and almost
round, affirmed to be plentiful in Cinnamon, Ginger, Gold of the best sort,
Silver, and all sorts of Metals, Pretious-Stones, and store of the largest
Elephants; the chief Towns are Trinquelimale and Batticalo, Jaffanapatan,
Colmuch now Columbo, having a fair Haven, the Royal Seat of the Kings, whence
many Ships laden with Cinnamon, Gems, Elephants, and other Commodities go
yearly to other places.

Within the Gulf of Bengala, in the Kingdom of Golkondo, are Negapatan, Madras,
St. Georges Fort, Gulf of Bengala.
Masulapatan, Orissa, Bellesor, Angeli, etc. From all which they usually send
plenty of Rice, Cotten-Cloth, a fine Stuff like Silk, made of a Grass, called
there Yerva; Long-Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolans, and other Merchandise.

Ougely and Bengala, giving name to the great Bay, situate on a Branch of the
River Ganges, a place endowed with plenty of all things fit for life, rich in
Merchandise, especially Rice, Gold, Precious Stones, Pearls, a curious sort of
painted Cotton Cloth thence sent to all parts of the World.

Aracan and Pegu, the glory of these parts, great; strong, and Beautiful, Rich
in Gold, Gems of diverse sorts, Red-Wax, etc.

Lugor, on the Seaside, near that little Istmos that joyneth the Chersonese to
the main Land.

Martaban, Sornaw, Queda, renowned for the best Pepper, and in most plenty, for
that cause much frequented by Merchants.

And in the Kingdom of Siam, Siam.
in the narrow Strait between the Isle of Sumatra and the Peninsula, called the
Golden Chersonese, stands Malacca, for Spices, Unguents, Gold, Silver, Pearls,
and Pretious-Stones, the most noted Empory of the East, once possessed and
strongly fortified by the Portugals, but taken from them by the King of Achem.

Next Jor, at the very Point or Promontory. Patane, where the English and
Hollanders have their Factories.

Siam, at the bottom of a great Bay, a goodly City, and conveniently seated on
the River Menam, for Trade and Merchandise, which is Precious-Stones, much
Spices, etc.

Champa and Cochinchina in Camboya, Cochinchina.
having store of Gold, and Lignum Aloes, valued at it is weight in Silver; Silk
in abundance, Purselan Earth for the making Cups, Dishes, and other Utensils,
Saltpeter, etc.

To the northward whereof lies the Isle of Aynan, a place of the greatest note
for the Pearl-fishing.

Hereabout begins the Kingdom of China, China.
which as it is the largest, richest, and best inhabited throughout the whole
World, would require a Treatise correspondent; but because they are a People
forbidding Foreigners to trade amongst them, unless in some sew places, the
knowledge of others coming only by particular report, I shall only give a touch
at two or three places which are most considerable for Trade; as

First, Nanquin, of incredible greatness, situate in a great Gulf, so called,
nine leagues from the Sea, on the great River Kiang, wherein, by report, ride
for the most part no less than 10000 of the Kings Ships, besides such as belong
to private Merchants.

Cantan, on the Navigable River Macas, where the Portugals had once a great
Factory.

Fucheau, not far from the Sea, well-traded, and conveniently seated for
conveyance of Merchandise throughout the whole Kingdom.

Scianhay a Town frequented by much Shipping, not above twenty four hours sail
from Japan; the Trade whereof is chiefly Cottons.

Numerous are the Ports of China besides these, which for the cause aforesaid
are omitted: The general Trade whereof consists chiefly in Gold, Silver,
Copper, China-Silks in abundance; fine Purselans, Rhubarb, Musk, Civet, Amber,
Camphire, Spices, Pearls, much China-Wood, and almost all sorts of Merchandise.

The Islands scattered up and down the Indian Seas, are very many, and rich in
Merchandise, viz.

Japan the most northern Island of all, Japan.
having several fair Ports, Meaco being the chief, at this time the Empory and
Staple of China, whither they bring their Commodities for foreign Trade.

The Philippines, Philippines.
so called, in honor of Philip the Second, King of Spain, in whose time
discovered, many whereof have been, or now are, under that Crown.

Manillas Mattan, unfortunately remarkable for the death of Magellan, there
slain in a Battle with the Natives.

Lequio Major, Lequio Minor, Formosa, Reix Magos, the Isles of Bandan,
Moluccoes.
Moluccoes, Ternate, Tidor, Machir, Rachian, Machian, Botone, Celibes, Gilolo,
Macassar, and Amboina, where that inhumane Butchery was by the Hollanders
committed upon the English, Anno 1618. Unto all which respectively, not only
the Merchants of China and India, but the Portugals, Spanish, Dutch, and
English, have continual recourse by Shipping, bringing from thence Gold,
Silver, and other Metals; Gems, Pearls, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Aloes, Sugar, Canes, Pepper, Drugs, Sanders white, red, and yellow, etc.

Borneo, Borneo.
an Island of more note, and greater than any other spoken of in the Indian
Seas, just under the Equator; the greatest riches whereof are, Camphire,
Agarick, and Diamonds.

Places of note therein are, Borneo, Sambas, Succadana, Benjarmassin, etc.

Sumatra, Sumatra.
under the Line also, whence to the Coast of Malacca the Strait is very narrow,
not above a Musket Shot in breadth; it affords great plenty of Wax, Silk,
Cottons, Ginger, Pepper, Camphire, Agarick, and Cassia; rich in Mines, not
only of Tin, Iron, Sulphur, and other Minerals, but of Gold such plenty, that
it is credibly believed this was the Ophir of Solomon. The Inhabitants are
either good Artificers, cunning Merchants, or expert Mariners. The chief
Sea-Towns, Achem, the Royal-Seat; Peder, Cambar, Menencabo, and Passaman.

Java Major, rich in Corn, Metals, Gems, Silks in abundance; Pepper, Ginger,
Cinnamon, and some other Spices. The chief Towns, Palambua, Sarabaya, Tuban,
Dama, Charabon, Batavia, and Bantam near the Straits of Sunda, which separate
Sumatra from this Island.

This place, amongst many others, being the principal Factory of the English in
all that part of the Indies.

The King of Bantam having great correspondence with, and great affection for,
his Majesty of England; whereby it is hoped our Factory will be better settled,
and our Traffic increased in those parts, to the great advantage and profit of
our English Merchants.

Java-Minor, the South Coast whereof is not fully discovered, and the Places
and Commodities only by conjecture, so also are many other Islands and Places
thereabouts, as Nova Hollandia, Nova Guinea, Islas de Ladronas, etc.

In the Indian Sea, and Mare Pacificum, which with the Coasts of America,
remains only to be spoken of. That great Sea or Ocean, was first so named by
Magellan, who passing through those troublesome and tempestuous Straits, that
bear his name, found such a change upon his coming into this main Ocean, that
he gave it the name of Mar del Zur, from the calm and peaceable temper thereof.

California is the most Western part of America, America.
which is washed by this Sea, once supposed to be a part of the Continent, but
since discovered to be a large Island separated from the Main by a narrow Sea
called Mer Vermiglio, by some, the Gulf of California.

Towns of trading here are few or none, at leastwise to us known; the Capes
only observable, once coasted by Sir Francis Drake, as Cape Blanco and
Mendocino in the North, and St. Lucas on the South, remarkable for the great
Prize taken there from the Spaniards by Capt. Cavendish, in his
Circum-navigation of the World.

On the South-east hereof are the Navigable Rivers of St. Sebastian's, Rio de
Spirito Sancto, Cape Corientes; the Towns of Nativitad, New Spain.
pillaged and burnt by Capt. Cavendish; St. Jago, a little South of Nativitad,
the Shores whereof are said to be full of Pearls.

Acapulco the best Haven on the South Sea, in a safe and capacious Bay, with
convenient Stations and Docks for shipping.

Aguatulco a noted Port, and rich, much used in the Spanish Voyages from Mexico
southward, plundered by Sir Francis Drake and Mr. Cavendish.

Tacoante peque, Guatamalo, and St. Jago, Salvador, St. Michaels, Carlos,
Philippina, St. Foy, where the Spaniards melt and cast their Gold into Ingots.

These, and indeed all the Western Shores of America, subject to the Spaniards,
they being very cautious and jealous of any other Country to trade there; many
of these Countries, especially the Valeys, exceeding fruitful in Fruits and
other necessaries for life, the mountainous parts being barren, but plentifully
supplied with never-perishing Mines of Silver and Gold; the other Merchandise
being Cottens, Sugars, Indigo, Cochineel, Liquid-Amber, Mastick, Tobacco,
Sulphur, Sarsaperilla, several sorts of Gums, and other Apothecaries Drugs.

A little beyond Cape Sancta Maria, in Verugua, lies Panama, over against
Porto Bell, being the narrowest part of that long and narrow Istmos, or Strait
of Land that parts the two Peninsula's of America, Mexicana and Peruana,
called the Straits of Darien, from a Town and River of the same name; in some
places not twelve miles from Sea to Sea, in many not above seventeen; a small
Ligament for so great a Body, observable by that notable but succesless attempt
of John Oxenham, an adventurous Englishman, one of Sir Francis Drak's
Followers, who arriving with seventy of his Companions in a small Bark, a
little above Nombre de Dios, the chief Town of the Istmos, or Mar del Nort
side, drew his Ship on Land, covered it with Boughs, and guided by some
Negroes, marched over-land with his Company, till he came to a River; there cut
down Wood, made him a Pinnace, entered the South Sea, went to the Isle of
Pearls, took from the Spaniards 60000 pound weight of Gold, and 200000 pound
weight of Silver, returned to Land; but through the mutiny of some of his own
Company, was intercepted, and never returned to his Ship or Country: This
Recorded by the Spanish Writers with great admiration.

The Towns and Places on the Shores of Peru, are first Bonaventura, on a Bay so
called; Cape de Francisco.

Puerto Vego, not far from the Sea, the first Town of these Parts possessed by
the Spaniard, from whence the Trade is driven betwixt Panama and Peru, where
are found very rich Emeralds. Peru.


Guyaquill, in a deep Bay, a noted and much frequented Empory of the Spaniards.

Payta, a small Town, but has the safest and most frequented Harbor in all
this Country: burnt by Captain Cavendish.

Lima, by the Spaniard called Cividad de los Reques, the most fruitful of all
Peru, in the Latitude of 12 degrees. and a half; a Town of greater wealth than
bigness, the Riches of Peru passing yearly through it: sacked by Sir Francis
Drake.

Porto Quemado, Castro Vereyna, whence comes that Tobacco called Right
Vereynas.

Ariquipa, where the Silver of Placa and Potosi are shipped for Panama.

Next in Cbili are Copayago, Serena, Port val Paraiso; out of which the English
under Drake took a Ship, and therein 25000 Pezoes of the purest Gold of
Baldavia.

Conception, Auraca, Imperial, Baldavia, Osorno, Castro, the most southern Town
of all Peru.

To this Southern part of Chili, there is great expectation of an English
Traffic with the Inhabitants, by reason of a disgust taken by the Natives
against the Spaniards for their cruelty and infidelity.

And, in order thereunto, his Majesty and Royal Highness the Duke of York, and
several others of the Nobility, designed a farther discovery of those parts for
procuring a Trade and Commerce with the People of that Country; and in the
year 1669, there were two Ships sent upon the same Discovery, the one called
the Sweep-stakes, under the conduct of that ingenious and venturous Commander,
Capt. John Norborough; and the other the Batchelour, Capt. Humphrey Flemming
Commander: Both which Ships proceeded on their Voyage til they came near the
Straits of Magellan, not far from Rio St. Julian, which was the appointed place
of wintering, until an opportunity presented to pass the said Straits; near
which place they lost one another: whereupon the Batchelour returned home, with
a strong apprehension that his Consort was lost: But on the contrary, the
Sweepstakes very honorable proceeded on her Voyage, and passed through the
Straits into Mar-del-zur, alias, Mare Pacificum, and sailed along the Coast
of Chili, unto a place called Baldavia, in the latitude of 39 degrees. 30 min. or
thereabouts, under the power and jurisdiction of the Spaniards, who have the
command thereof as far as the reach of their Guns; who at first pretended a
friendship with our Men, but at last betrayed and detained four of them, which
Captain Norborough very diligently endeavored to release, but proving
ineffectual, was constrained to leave them behind, and so returned back through
the Straits, and in June 1671 came home, to the great satisfaction of the whole
Court, giving great hopes of procuring a Trade in those Parts, that may
possibly prove very advantageous to the whole Kingdom, by reason of the
abundance of Gold and Silver in that Country.

From Baldavia to the Straits of Magellan there are no Towns; the Capes of note
are, Cabo de las Islas, Punta del Gado; and at the very entrance of the Strait,
Cape de la Victoria, so called from Magellans Ship first passing this way.

The West-Entrance of the Straits of Magellan, Straits of Magellan.
is in 53 degrees of South Latitude; and the East-Entrance lies in 52 degrees. 20
m. the length 110 leagues, and the breadth in some places two leagues over, in
others not fully two miles. This place was first discovered and passed through
by Ferdinando Magellan a Portugal; followed by Sir Francis Drake; afterward it
grew familiar to many Seamen.

There is another Passage betwixt the South Sea and Atlantick-Ocean, to the
southward hereof, Fretum le Maire.
called Fretum le Maire, found out, Anno 1615, by Jacob le Maire, and William
Cornelison Schouten, much more convenient than the former; betwixt both which
the Land is called Terra del Fugo, the South Point whereof is Cape Horn; the
two Lands betwixt which they sailed when first discovered, they called
States-land on the East, and on the West Mauritius-land.

The next places of note on the main Continent, beginning at Cape Virgins,
lying at the very eastermost part of the Strait Magellan, are Rio de la Cruz,
where Magellan stayed two months.

Rio St. Julian, Port Desire, Rio de las Comarones, Cape Rotundo, Cape St.
Antonio, at the Mouth of Rio de la Plata, a large River, and of so violent a
stream, that the Sea, for many leagues together, alters not its taste.

On the North hereof is Brasil, Brasil.
possessed chiefly by the Portugals; a Country abounding with exceeding plenty
of the best Sugars; that and the great quantity of Red-Wood used for the dying
of Cloth, being the chief Commodities hereof.

The places of note, are Santos, St. Vincents, Saint Sebastian, at the Mouth of
Rio Janeiro, Spirito Sancto, Porto Seguro, To dos los Santos, Salvador, Olinda
on the River Meragnon, Cape Blanco, Pernambuco, and Augustine the eastermost
part of America.

Paraiba, on the River so called; Rio de Grand, Para, Rio de Amazones, a River
full of Islands at the entrance, broad and of a long course, the discoveries
whereof are not fully made.

Places to the northward are Caripo, memorable for a Colony of the English
there planted by Captain Robert Harcourt, 1608. on the Bank of Wiapoco.

The River Oronoque, and Sorenam, on a River so called, in the Country of
Guiana, Guiana.
not long since a thriving Plantation of the English, lately delivered into the
hands of the Dutch, yielding Sugars, Cottons, Tobacco, Wood for Dyers, and some
other Commodities.

St. Thoma, the only Town of Guiana inhabited by the Spaniard.

Porto de Guero, Puerto la Cabelo, St. Martha, on the Shores of the Ocean,
neighboured by a safe and convenient Haven: spoiled by Sir Francis Drake.

Rio de La Hacha, New Salamanca, Sancta Cruz de Mopes, near the confluence of
the Rivers St. Martha and Magdalena.

Cathargena, situate in a Peninsula, well sortified since the taking thereof by
Sir Francis Drake, who anno 1585, took it by assault, and carried from thence,
besides inestimable sums of money, 240 Brass Pieces of Ordnance.

Next Darien, near the Strait of Land so called, on the Bank of the River Uraba.

Nombre de Dios, Nombre de Dios.
conveniently seated on the upper Sea for a Town of Trade, whither the
Spaniards brought their Goods from Spain for Panama, and from Panama for Spain;
taken also by Sir Francis Drake.

St. Philips, situate on a safe and strong Haven called Porto Bell, built in
this place by the command of King Philip the Second, to be the Staple of Trade
betwixt Spain and Panama, instead of Nombre de Dios, where it was before;
removed partly because of the unwholesome Air of Nombre de Dios, but chiefly
because that Town lay too open to the English Invasions; fortified with two
strong Castles on each side of the Haven, yet for all that, Surprised and
Pillaged by Captain Parker, Anno 1601.

Baya de Cartago, Cape de Honduras, Porto de Sal, Porto de Cavallos the most
noted Haven in the Gulf of Honduras; whence compassing the Peninsula of Yucatan
by Cape de Cotoche, Gulf of Mexico.
the great Bay or Gulf of Mexico opens it self; the Ports and Places of the
Shores whereof were heretofore little frequented, unless by the Spaniard: in
these later times, and since the Plantation of Jamaica by the English,
something better, though yet not much known.

The chief, and almost the only place, is Lavera Cruz, the next Port Town to
the great City of Mexico, from which it is distant about sixty leagues.

The Traffic and Commodities of these Eastern parts of America being the same
with those on the Shores and Coasts of Mar del Zur, spoken of before.

North-eastward hereof lies the Coast of Florida; betwixt which, and the
Coasts of Guiana, before treated of, lie scattered up and down the Sea a great
number of Islands, some greater, some lesser, viz.

Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Porto Rico, the Caribes, and Lucayos.

Cuba a large Island, Cuba.
in length from Cape Magesi near Hispaniola, to Cape St. Antonio, 230 leagues;
a fertile Soil, liberally stored with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Aloes, Sugar,
etc.

Ports of most note, St. Jago, Salvador, Sancta Cruz, Sancto Spirito, Trinidad,
Port del Principe, Baracoa, Matanca, and the Havana, a noted and well-traded
Port, so strongly situate and fortified, both by Nature and Art, that it seems
impregnable.

Hispaniola, Hispaniola.
a large Island also, but not so big as Cuba, a plentiful and pleasant
Country, once abounding in Gold, but long since exhausted; it affords Ginger
and Sugar in abundance.

The Ports worthy observation, St. Domingo, the Residence of the Governor, not
yet recovered of the Damage done by Sir. Francis Drake, St. Salvador, Inguana,
or Sancta Maria del Porto, Porto de la Plata, Azua or Compostella, etc.

Jamaica, Jamaica.
on the South of Cuba, from whence distant twenty leagues or thereabouts, and
not much more from Hispaniola; formerly possessed by the Spaniard, not many
years ago taken by the English, who therein have began a gallant Plantation;
the wholesomness of the Air, and fertility of the Soil, giving great hopes (if
not assurance) of a continued increase and improvement thereof, to the
encouragement of such as are already there, or others that shall hereafter
transport themselves thither. Merchandise of their own growth, are Tobacco,
Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, Indigo, and several sorts of Woods serviceable for Dyers
and others. Places of note are Sevilla, Melilla, Oristan, Punta Nigrilla, Port
Royal, Port Moranto, Aguia, etc.

Porto Rico, Porto Rico.
something Mountainous, but indifferent fruitful, exposed sometimes to those
sudden and troublesome Tempests, called Hurricanes, as are the rest of these
places hereabout. The Commodities, Ginger, Sugar, Cassia, and Hydes; the
European Cattle so increasing in most of these Islands, that they have grown
wild by reason of their multitude; the inhabitants of many of the places
killing thousands for their Skins only, leaving their flesh as a prey to
ravenous Creatures. Places of note are, Porto Rico, Arezibo, Luysa, etc.

The Caribes, or Cannibal Islands, so called in general, because at first
discovery inhabited by Cannibals, or Man-eating people, as the word imports;
extended in the Sea like a Bow, of different temper and quality; the principal
are these, Margerita, Trinidada, Caribbe Islands.
Granada, Granadilla, St. Lucies, St. Vincent, Barbados, a flourishing Colonie
and Plantation of the English, well peopled; the Soil in show like England but
more fruitful; furnished on the South side with a large and commodious Haven,
driving a great Trade in Tobacco, Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, Indigo, and Logwood,
etc.

Next Martinico, Dominico, Mary-gallant, Dissedea, Guardalupe, Antego, Barbada,
Mount-serat, St. Christophers, Nevis, St. Martins, St. Bartholomew, Anguilla,
Sancta Cruz, and many others of less note.

The Lucaios are Mayaguana, Sumana, Yumeta, Yuma, Lucaioes
Guanabani, Cygnateo, Lucanceque and Bahama, memorable for giving name to the
violent Current interposing betwixt it and the demi Island of Florida, of so
forcible a course, that no strength of Wind or Oars can prevail against it, (as
is commonly reported).

Florida was first discovered by the English, Florida.
under the command of Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1497. so called by John de Ponte,
afterward from the fresh verdure and flourishing estate in which he found it:
The Ports are Sancta Lucia, St. Augustine, St. Matthews, Port Royal, Cape
Fear, Port Charles, and St. Hellens, which three lie near the borders of
Virginia.

Virginia, a gallant Plantation of the English, Virginia
having many excellent properties above other Nations, as the temperature of
the Air, fruitfulness of the Soil, commodiousness of situation; many great and
navigable Rivers, and safe and spacious Harbors. The first discovery hereof by
the two Cabots, Father and Son, Anno 1497. did first entitle the Crown of
England to this Country, who still possess it, having there a large and
flourishing Plantation. The chief Trade, besides other Commodities, is Tobacco,
where there is such abundance, that no place affords more, or of better
quality. The Rivers are, James River, York River, Potomac, Rapabanock,
Elizabeth River, Wicomococo, and many others, all falling into the great Bay
called CHESAPEACH.

The two Capes, at the entrance whereof are Cape Henry, and Cape Charles. Towns
of most note are, James-Town, the Seat of the Governor, and many others.

Eastward of Virginia lies the Isles of Burmudes, so called from John Bermudes
a Spaniard, by whom it was first discovered: Also called the Summer Islands,
from Sir George Summer, who there suffered shipwreck; there are several of
them, altogether making a body in form of a Cressant, and enclose very good
Ports, as those of Southampton, Harrington, and Pagets. The Air is almost
always serene, very healthful, agreeing well with English bodies, who have
here at diverse times settled and established a fair and powerful Colonie. The
healthfulness of the place inviting that famous Mathematitian Mr. Richard
Norwood, once Reader of Gresham College in London, to make his abode here.
Cochaneil and Tobacco, with some Pearls, Amber, and fair Oranges being their
principal Riches, for which they have a good Trade.

To the North-east of Virginia lies Maryland, Maryland.
and New England, a Country bravely situate, and very agreeable to English
bodies. The Soil exceeding fruitful of Natures necessities, even to excess;
supplied also with many large and capacious Bays and Rivers. The Commodities,
besides store of Flesh and Corn sent abroad, are Furs, Amber, Flax, Hemp,
Cedar, Pitch, Tar, New England
Masts, Cables, and Timber for Shipping and other uses; in a word, whatsoever
comes to England from the Sound, might be as well supplied from hence.

The chiefest Places are New York, seated on the great River Manhattans, or
Hudsons River, near its fall into the Ocean, and not far from the Isle
Mattowacks, or Long Island, over against the East end whereof the River
Connecticot falls into the Sea.

The next Boston, Barnstaple, New Plymouth, near unto which is that observable
hooked Point of Land named Cape Cod, with several others: And St. Georges Fort,
built by the English, at the Mouth of the River Sagahadar.

Adjoining hereunto lies Nova Scotia, Nova Scotia.
Nova Francia, or Canadie, and the small Peninsula, called Accadia, betwixt the
Bay of St. Lawrence; where the great River Canada falls into the Gulf and the
main Sea. The noted places are Port Royal, St. Lukes, Port au Montou, Gasp,
Gachepe, St. Croiz, Franco Roy, and St. Lewis. The Commodities are chiefly
Furs, etc.

Not far to the eastward hereof, lies the Isle of Sables.

At the most Eastern part of America Septentrionalis, lies New Foundland,
New Foundland.
an Island separated from the Main, or Terra Corterialis, by a Frith or Strait,
called Gulf de Casteaux, furnished on the Seacoast with abundance of Cod-fish,
and other Fish; for the catching of which, Ships of many Countries frequent
that place; having also many large and convenient Havens, as Rennosa,
Fair-Haven, Thorn-Bay, Trinity-Bay, Bonavist, White-Bay, Port Trespass, St.
Georges Bay, St. Jones, etc. The Air of this Country never very extreme, more
temperate in the depth of Winter than with us in England, the Brooks being
never so frozen over that the Ice is able to bear a Dog; and those little
Frosts but seldom holding three nights together.

Before the Island lies that long Bank, extending in length some hundred of
leagues; near to which are many little Islands, called by John Cabot, Bacalos,
peculiar now to one only, from the numerous multitude of Cod-fish which
swarmed hereabout. Betwixt Cape de Gumay in Terra Corterialis, and the Capes
Farewell and Desolation, near Groenland, lies the two Sraits, named Fretum
Davis, Fretum Davis. Fretum Hudson.
and Fretum Hudson, so called from the first Discoverers; a Sea dilating it
self much both toward the North, South, and West, giving great Hopes thereby
of a Passage to China, and the East Indies: And therefore notwithstanding the
Ice, Fogs, and other Encumbrances searched into by many English Worthies, as
Frobrsher, Davis, Weymouth, Hudson, Button, Baffin, Smith, James, Gillam, and
others, who have sailed therein, some one way, and some another, and given
names to many places, viz. King James his Cape, Queen-Ann's Cape, Prince
Henry's Foreland, Saddel Island, Barren Island, Redgoose Island, Digs his
Island, Hackluits Headland, Smiths Bay, Prince Ruperts River, Maudlin Sound,
Fair-haven, and many others, even from James his Bay on the South, at the
bottom whereof Hudson wintered in the latitude of 51 degrees, to Baffins Bay on
the North, lying in the latitude of 79 degrees; and to the westward, as far as
Port Nelson, where Sir Thomas Button wintered, being more westerly than Mr.
Hudsons Bay by 190 leagues; and near as far toward the West as Cape California
in Mar del Zur, where finding the Tide continually to rise every twelve hours
fifteen foot or more, and that a West Wind did make the Neap Tides equal to the
Spring Tides; finding also the Tides to set sometimes eastwards, sometimes
westwards, gave good hope to Mr. Hubard (who made the Plat thereof) of a
through Passage, called therefore Hubards Hope.

And in the year 1667, a very honorable and worthy Design was renewed, and
undertaken for the discovery of this North-West Passage, and settling a Trade
with the Indians in those Parts, by several of the Nobility of England, and
diverse Merchants of note belonging to the City of London, who fitted out two
small Vessels for that purpose, the one called the Nonsuch Ketch, Captain
Zachariah Gillam Commander, the other the Eaglet Ketch, Captain Staniard
Commander; the latter whereof being by stormy Weather beaten back, returned
home without success; but the other proceeding on her Voyage, in her way made
the Land of Buss, lying betwixt Iseland and Groenland; passed through Hudsons
Straits, then into Baffins Bay; from thence southerly into the Great Bay, where
in the latitude of fifty one degrees, or thereabouts, in a River now called
Ruperts River, he wintered, found a friendly correspondence and civil
entertainment with the Natives, traded with them in exchange of Bever-Skins,
etc. for Knives, Beads, Looking-Glasses, Hatchets, and other trivial
Commodities, and the next year returned with good success, and future hopes of
an excellent Trade in those parts, giving invitation thereby to the aforesaid
Noblemen and Merchants to adventure again, Anno 1669. Which Voyage being not
yet performed, leaves us ignorant both of the Places and Trade thereof (save
what is already known) undiscovered, till the conclusion of the Voyage.

Groenland, called by the Natives Secanunga, Groenland.
is that last part of America, which remains only to be spoken of; a Country,
as is supposed, but thinly inhabited, and by reason of the abundance of Ice,
and inhospitableness of the People, little frequented, and consequently not so
well known, as to give a perfect description thereof; for notwithstanding
several Voyages have been made thither on purpose, many Ships have accidentally
touched upon the Coasts thereof in pursuance of the N. W. Discoveries; yet for
the causes aforesaid, the Country lies still obscured in a Northern Mist,
being to us almost altogether unknown, unless the names of certain Bays;
Capes, and such like, as Whale-sound, Horn-sound, Rombels-ford, Conningham,
Gilberts-sound, Cocking-ford, Cape Comfort, Cape Desolation, all within the
Straight; Cape Farewell, Cape Discord, Leister-point, Warwick-Foreland,
Hernolds-Ness, Bereford, not far from the West part of Iseland, and several
others.

South-westward from Iseland, about 140 leagues, lies an Island called Buss,
Buss.
in the latitude of 57 degrees 35 minutes, not yet fully discovered, but only
as it has been accidentally seen by some, who upon other Discoveries have
occasionally passed those Seas, as Captain Gillam in his first Voyage to the
North-West Passage had Soundings near unto it.

From Iseland, about 135 leagues North-eastwards, in the latitude of seventy
one degrees, lies an Island called Trinity Island, Trinity Island.
the North-East Point whereof is named Youngs-Foreland, a place formerly much
frequented by the Dutch for their Whale-fishing; the Land is very high, full of
Rocks and Mountains, one especially much higher than the rest, called Bears
Mountain.

Thus briefly have I touched at, and as it were, only named the Seacoasts of
most of the known Parts of the World, which may serve as an entrance to the
succeeding Sea-Atlas, commending the Discovery of such parts as are yet unknown
to the search of Posterity.

The Discoveries that have been made within this two hundred years, by the
Worthies of our own Nation, as well as Strangers.
CHristopher Columbus the Genoes, first determinately attempted to seek after,
and in the year 1492 prosperously discovered the great Cominent of America.

John Cabot a Venetian, and his Son Sir Sebastian, born in England, succeeded
Columbus in that famous Attempt, and discovered all the North Coasts thereof,
from Cape Florida to New Foundland.

But Americus Vesputius, in discovering some of the South Parts thereof,
obtained the honor of having the whole Continent called by his Name America.

Ferdinando Magellan, Anno 1519. was the first that found out that Strait
toward the Antartick Pole, which gives a Passage between Mar del Zur and the
Atlantic Ocean, called by his Name, Fretum Magellanicum.

Mr. Richard Chancellor first found out the Passage by Sea to Russia, Anno 1550.

Sir Hugh Willoughby first discovered Greenland, or King James his New-Land;
attempted to find the North-East Passage to Cathay and China, Anno 1553, but in
his return was frozen to death.

Mr. Stephen Buroughs attempted the like Passage, anno 1556. discovered
several places in Russia, Nova Zembla, and thereabout, to his lasting memory.

Sir Francis Drake, that adventurous and valiant English Worthy, after a Voyage
first made to Nombre de Dios, and other parts of the West Indies, in the years
1572, and 1573, having then only a sight of the South Sea, renewed in himself a
noble desire of sailing therein; and after some hindrances at home, in Service
of his Prince and Country, anno 1577, by gracious Commission from his
Sovereign, and the help of diverse Friends, Adventurers, fitted himself with
five Ships for his intended design, and passing through the Straits of
Magellan, made many rare Discoveries there, and on the West of America; sailed
thence through the South Sea to the East Indies, and steering homeward by the
Cape of Good Hope, after two years and ten months spent in that
Circum-navigation of the World, and many excellents Achievements and
Discoveries there performed, that worthy Knight, and most noble Neptune,
happily returned to Plymouth whence he first set forth. Other Voyages be made
sometime afterward to the main Continent of America, and the Islands thereof,
wherein were taken by that English Hero, the City of St. Jago, Sancto Domingo,
Cartagena, with the Fort and Town of St. Augustine in Florida.

Mr. Tho. Cavendish not long after followed the trace of Sir Francis through
the Straits of Magellan, encompassed the whole circumference of the Terrestrial
Globe, in the year 1587, and prosperously returned (laden with honor and
applause) into his Native Country.

Several famous Men among the Netherlanders have also, to their lasting
creadit, encompassed this Globe of Earth and Sea, as Olivier van de Nort, Isaac
le Maire, and William Cornelison Schouten, who according to their several
Courses and Voyages, made discoveries not to be forgotten by Posterity.

Sir Martin Frobisher, Anno 1576, attempted the North-West Passage, sailed to
the latitude of 62 degrees, found that great Inlet, since known by his Name,
Forbishers Straits.

Mr. Arthur Pett, and Mr. Charles Jackman, Anno 1580, went out in two Ships for
the discovery of the River Ob, and a Passage to China, arrived at Vaigats,
passed the Straits, took particular observation along the East Part of Nova
Zembla, the North of Russia and Samoeds Country, so far as the Ice would give
him leave.

Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Anno 1583, going for Discovery of the North of America,
came into the great River St. Lawrence in Canada, settled the Government of the
Fishing there.

Master John Davis attempted the discovery of the North-West Passage, anno
1585; came into the latitude of 66 degrees, plied along the Coast, observed
the probability of a Passage there, and in the end of the year returned.

The next year went again for a further Discovery, found a great Inlet betwixt
the latitude of 55 and 56 degrees; Traded with the People of the Place, and so
returned.

In the year 1587, he took a third Voyage for discovery of those Parts,
followed his course to the North and North-West, as far as the latitude of 76
degrees, having the Continent on the West, and Groenland (which he named
Desolation) on the East; and passing on to the latitude of 86 degrees, the
Passage enlarged it self so, that he could not see the Western Shore; then he
altered his course southerly to the latitude of 73 degrees, in a great Sea free
from Ice, of an unreasonable depth; and by reason of the departure of two Ships
which he left a Fishing, he returned home. This Passage (as he was the first
Discoverer) he called by his own name, Fretum Davis.

The Discovery of these Lands, Coasts, Islands, Straits, Havens, Bays, Rivers,
etc. with the Commodities and Advantages arising from the same, in a Treatise
of his own, called the Worlds Hydrographical Description, with his yearly
Reporteries and Journals, may more largely appear.

Mr. Stephen Bennet first discovered Cherry Island, Anno 1603. at the Charge of
Sir Francis Cherry, and therefore bears his name.

Mr. Henry Hudson, Anno 1608, was sent to discover toward the North Pole, came
to the latitude of 81 degrees, attempted the North-East Passage in two Voyages;
performed one worthy discovery to the North-West into a great Bay called by his
own name Hudsons Bay.

Jonas Pool and Thomas Edge, made a Voyage Northerly toward the Pole, first
began the Whale killing in Greenland; to the eastward whereof Mr. Edge found
another Island, called by his own name, Edges Island.

FINIS.
NOVISSIMA TOTIUS TERRARUM ORBIS TABULA
Auctore Joh: Seller Hydrographo Reg^
(...) LUNAE A^^^^^CIALIS.

map of the world

DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

VICTORIA^ ^^PULO ^^O DEUS German blazon

A Chart of the NORTH SEA By John Seller Hydrographer to the King. And are to
be sold at his shop at the Hermitage in Wapping
chart of the North Sea

A Draught of the SANDS, CHANNELS, BUOYES BEACONS AND SEA-MARKS upon the Coast
of ENGLAND: From the Southforeland to Orfordness Discovered by Capt. Gilbert
Crave, and Capt. Tho: Brown. Elder Brethren of ye Trinity House. The Sea
Coast Surveighed by Jonas Moor. Esquire. and Published by the Special License
and Aprobation of his Royal Highness the DUKE OF YORK.
Made and Sold by John Seller. Hidrographer to the Kings most Exellent Majesty
in Wapping. London

TRINITAS IN UNITATE blazon or coat of arms

The Names of the Sands and Shoals marked with their respective Letters
a Blyth Sand b Holehaven Scarrs c Chapman d Middle ground e Nower and buoy f
The Warp g Middle Middle gro^ h Heaps i Altar k Ridge l A Shoale m Andrews n
Cutler o Middle ground p Onion q Whiteing r Kettle bottom s Quernes t White
Dike u Colburn w Searn x Woolpack y Spell z Hook A Middle ground B Horse C
Gilman D Girdler E Pan Sands F Cullumbine


F Lamb Sclup
chart of England

A Chart of the North Coast of England. (...) ^^^mouth to Cocket Island, (...)
all the Roads Havens and Harbors Depthes and Soundings, the Coarses and
distances of one Place from Another. Newly Corrected and Published by John
Seller. And are to be Sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Mariners Compass,
at the Hermitage staire in Wapping.

chart of England A Description of the East Coast of Scotland, Showing all the
Bayas Roads havens Harbors depths and Soundings, Courses and distances of
places one the said Coasts, Ne^by, Corrected and Published by John Seller.

chart of Scotland

THE River of Humber Described by John Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most
excellent Majesty

THE RIVER OF TYNE Described by John Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. Cum privilegio

The names of the sands in the River of Tyne
A To^n Shore B Riddalls Shore C Bill Shore D Ballast shore E Pace sand F South
road sand G Iarro sand H Iarro middle ground I North road sand K Dirtwick sand
L Coble deane M Hird sand N Bill sand O Muscle scalp


I^ Clarke sculpsit
chart of rivers Humber and Tyne

A Chart of the Seacoasts of ENGLAND FLANDERS and HOLLAND Showing all the Sands
Shoals Rocks and Dangers The Bays Roads Harbors Buoyes Beacons and Seamarks
on the said coasts. By John Seller Hydrographer in Ordinary to the King And are
to be sold at his Shop in Excharge Ally in Cornhill and at the Hermitage in
Wapping: London.

Ornat mo Consult moq Viro D. JOS. WILLIAMSON Equiti Aurate, Jn Reqni Comitijs
Senatori. Regia Majestati ab Archivis status, Et Sanctiori Concilio a Secretis.
Tabulam hanc qualem qualem L.M.D.C.Q Jon Sellerus.

chart of England, Flanders and Holland

A Chart of FLANDERS Between C^^e and Walcheren with all ye sands and shoals
upon that coast by John Seller

chart of Flanders

A Chart of the MAES and Wielingon, Showing the Channel of Brewers haven,
Zierick and Viergat (...)

chart of Maes and Wielingon

The Coast of HOLLAND Between the Maes and the Texel by John Seller Regis
Hydrog:

chart of Holland

The Names of places in the Fly
a the Letting b (...) Sloot c y^ Robbe^^^ d North Letting e Kersho^^k f
Dominicus of Meinsen plaet


A Chart of the SOUTH SEA Texel and Fly stream with all ye Sands Depths and
Sounding by John Seller

chart of the South Sea

A Chart of the EEMES as the Easter and Wester Eemes Scholbalgh and the Lauwers
by John Seller

chart of the Friesland

A Chart of the FLY and AMELANDER gat by John Seller

chart of Friesland

A Chart of the EEMES ELVE Amelander gat. Lauwers Scholbalgh weser Eyder and
Hever and how the (...) same does bare from Hoby land by John Seller

The Names of places upon the Weser marked with the^e letters
a Buoy before New ^ie^ b Buoy in the Vlack c The Solthorn d ^ Buoy on the
Vlack e Buoy before Bolleney^ f White Buoy g Buoy before Smits street^ h Buoy
upon the Coes i Alell^m Buoy k Buoy on the Doll^^-^o^ck l ^ Buoy on the Dolle^
ho^ck m ^ Buoy ^egen't Roodesand n White Buoy o Beeh^ Buoy p White Buoy q ^
Buoy before the Balg r ^ Buoy before the Blag upon the clue a Schor Buoy b Cool
Buoy c White Buoy on the ground d Hoeck Buoy ^ Ros Buoy f White Buoy on street^
^ Room^^rder sand gh^ Buoys on the Pelgrams sand upon the Eyder k Uyterste
Eyder (...) l Buoy on the Dog m Bra^^ on the Dog n Iron Hendrick oo B^^ken on
the Iron Hend^^ck p Pipe beyond the clue q Hoedemer sand r Beaken on the small
bull head s Hulck Isands on the bull head


The Names of places in the Eemes with their respective letters
a G^^s^^ks place b the New-s^^^rt c ^ Wolden d The New (...) up' Borckum e
Borck^^er ref f ^uy^orts place g Br^^^wers place h B^^^k^ upon the hoge Horn i
Coopers sand k Kings place l Do^^ke gat m (...) riff n the Dog o the Paap p
^^s^rland q Render land r Pissu mer (...)


The Names of places (...) Schol^algh (...)
^ (...) ^ (...) ^ (...) d the Peer^ e the (...) ^ S^m^n^ (...) g Bosc^ za^ ^
Legers (...) i S^^^^ of Legers gat


chart of Friesland

A Chart of the Coast of IUTLAND with the Adjacent Islands shoals and depthes
from the Hever to the Schaw by John Seller

chart of Jutland

A Chart of the BALTIC Sea With the North Bodom and Lading Described by John
Seller

Cum Privilegio

chart of the Baltic Sea

A Chart of the Coast of Russia Lapland Finmarke Nova Zemla and Greenland
Described by John Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty

Steph Board sculp:
chart of Russia

A Large Description of the two Chanells in the River Dwina goeing up to the
City of ARCHANGEL, by John Seller

chart of Dvina River

A CHART of ye NARROW SEA Newly Corrected by John Seller Hydrographer to the
Kings ^ost Excellent Majesti^

chart of the Irish Sea

A Chart of the BRITTISHCHANEL By JOHN SELLER Hydrographer to the Kings-Most
Excellent Majesty's LONDON

chart of the English Channel

A Chart Of the BAY of BISCAIA By John Seller Hydrographer to the King

chart of the Bay of Biscay

A Chart Of the SPAIN Perticulerly Discribing the Coasts of Biscaia Gallissia
Portugal Andaluzia Granada Bco by Ioh: Seller Hidrograe to ye Kings most
Excelent Majesty

chart of Spain

A Chart of the Westermost Part of the MEDITERRANEAN SEA By JOHN SELLER
Hydrographer to the King.

The Names of the Islands Capes Havens etc. lying in the Westernmost part of
the Mediterranean sea
1 Arboran 2 Formentera 3 Beleran 4 Comiger 5 P. Magno 6 Tagomago 7 S Hilaire 8
Porto Y^ica 9 Cabrera 10 I Dragoner 11 M. Colibre 12 C Formentell 13 Gd' Mcudia
14 C Lapedra 15 P. Colombi 16 Porto Pedro 17 C de Salines 18 Porto M^on 19 P.
Foncelle 20 C de Baiolis 21 C. Tolon 22 I. Ribadin 23 Polcairola 24 Porto Croso
25 Bovena 26 C Vesperis 27 Malora 28 Gorgona 29 Capraia 30 Elba 31 Plariosa 32
Formiges 33 Monte Christi 34 Gigio 35 Ianuti 36 C Rivela 37 I Asinara 38 I
Tolam 39 Serpentera 40 Cortelaso 41 Palma de Sol 42 S. Pedro 43 Vacca 44 Toro
45 Galita 46 Chirbial Quel 47 Zombino 48 Pantalaria 49 Lampidosa 50 Limosa 51
Goza 52 Favagnano 53 Maritimo 54 Le^enizo 55 ^stica 56 Palmerolo 57 Pontio 58
Venti^^eue 59 Is^^ia 60 Capri 61 Alicur 62 Felicur 63 Salini 64 Vulcano 65
Lipari 66 Panaci 67 Stromboli 68 Merlere 69 F^nu 70 Soaseno 71 I^e. Melanto 72
Crommo 73 Meleda 74 S. Augustino 75 Cor^iola 76 Agosta 77 Pelagosa 78 Gimnasi
79 S Mariade^ri 80 Caetze 81 Catzola 82 Torkela 83 P Les^a 84 Pto. Palermo 85
Lisa 86 S. Andrea 87 Melisello 88 Porno 89 La. Coronat^ 90 I Longa 91 S Pedro:
M^^ 92 Sampontella 93 I Seerdo 94 S. Pedrode N^ 95 Permo la 96 Sansigo 97
Promo^lores 98 I Malom^^o


chart of the Mediterranean Sea

A Chart (...) the (...) Eastern (...) of the MEDITERRANEAN SEA BY JOHN SELLER
Hydrographer to the King London

A Elba ^ Planosa a Formiges b Monte Christi c Gigio d Sanuti e Palmerola f
Pontio g Ventitocue h Ischia i Capri k Stromboli l Panaci m Lipari n Vulcano o
Salini p Felicur q Alicur r Vstica s Lerenzo s Maritimo t Favagnano u
Cherbial^^^ v Zombino w Pantalarie x Lampidosa y Limosa z Gozo 1 L Malomocco 2
Pro^^^t^res 3 Sansigo 4 Permola 5 S. P^dro Nin^ 6 I Serd^ 7 Sa^pontella 8 S.
Pedr^d Mo^ 9 I. Longo 10 La Coronata 11 Pom^ 12 Melisell^ 13 S. Andre^ 14 Lisa
15 Porto Palermo 16 P. Lesina 17 Torkela 18 Catzola 19 Ca^tz^ 20 Pelagosa 21 S.
Mar^de^^ 22 Ginnasi 23 Agos^a 24 S. Augus^^ 25 Corsiol 26 Melea^ 27 C^ommo 28
I Would Melanto 29 Soaseno 30 ^anu 31 Merlere 32 Pachsu 33 Antipachsu 34 C. Ducado
35 Si^alonia Pi^^ 36 Stroffadia 37 Prodono 38 Sapienza 39 Cavrera 40 Venetiea
41 Servy 42 L. Ovo 43 Serigotto 44 Gozo 45 Calderoni 46 Christiana 47 Caxi 48
Stallida 49 Standia 50 Manfia 51 Sentorini 52 Christian^ 53 Nio 54 Maixa 55
Nixia 56 Paris 57 Mil^ 58 Annan^^ 59 Caravi 60 Falconera 61 Bella P^^^ 62
Antimilo 63 Argente^s 64 Sifanto 65 Serfou 66 Sidra 67 S. Iorge d. ^^ 68
Fermino 69 L^lacronis. 70 Zea 71 Sira 72 Iura 73 S Delles 74 Micono 75 Tine 76
Andri^ 77 Calojera 78 Schio 79 Scoppelo 80 Siatta 81 Lanco 82 Piper 83 Monte
Santo 84 Samand^achi 85 E^^bro 86 T^^do^ 87 C. Si^^^^ 88 P (...) 89 (...) 90
(...) 91 (...) 92 San^ 93 N^^ona 94 Stenosa 95 ^aimossa 96 Sta^^palia 97 Lango
98 S. Selz^ 99 Cophanu 100 Vizar 101 Piscopia 102 Carari 103 C. Traquilo 104
Lendige 105 Porto Rhodi 106 Polseli 107 I Cast Ros^^ 108 S^rongilo 109 Le
Corenti 110 Simia 111 S. Brusia


chart of the Mediterranean Sea

A Chart of the Coast of BARBARY Gualata Arguyn and Genehoa from C Vincent to
C Verd^ Described by John Seller Regis Hydrographer

chart of Barbary Coast

A Chart of the GVINEA Describeing the Seacoast from Cape de Verde to Cape Bona
Esperanca

by John Seller
chart of Guinea

A Draught of Cape-BONA ESPERANCA By John Seller Hydrographer to the King

view and chart of Cape Bona Esperanca

To the Honorable the Governer, Deputy and Commit of the EAST INDIA COMPANY.
John Seller. Humbly Dedicates this Chart of the East Indies.

A Chart of the WESTERN part of the EAST INDIES. With all the Adjacent Islands.
from Cape Bona Esperanca to Cape Comorin By John Seller Hidrographer to the
KING and are to be Sold at the Hermitage in Wapping

F. Lamb sculp
chart of the East Indies

A Chart of the EASTERMOST part of the EAST INDIES With all the Adjacent
Islands from Cape Comorin to Iapan^ By John Seller. Hydrographer to the King.
and are to be Sold at the Hermitage in Wapping.

Nobilissimo Pru^mo q Dou^ Georgia Domino Berkley de Berkley Castro (...)

seal

^ Lamb Sculp
chart of the East Indies

A Chart of the TARTARIAN SEA from NOVAZEMLA to IAPAN By John Seller
Hydrographer to the King At theHermitage Stairs in Wapping in Exchange Ally in
Cornhill. London

chart of the Tartarian Sea

A GENERAL CHART of the NORTHERN NAVIGATION Discribed by John Seller.
Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Cum Privilegio

chart of Northern Europe Francis Lamb sculp


A Chart of the North Part of AMERICA. Describing the sea Coast of Groenland
Dauies Streights Baffins Bay Hudsons Streights Buttons Bay And James Bay. by
John Seller. Hydrographer to the King at the Hermitage in Wapping London.

chart of Northern America

A Chart of The WEST INDIES From Cape Cod. to the River Oronoque. By John
Seller. Hydrographer to the King. at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping. London.

chart of the West Indies

A Chart of the CARIBE ISLANDS By John Seller Hydrographer to the King at the
Hermitage stares in Wapping and in Exchange alley in Cornhill London

chart of the Carribean

A Mapp of New JARSEY by John Seller

A The Fort B the Church C the Windmill D a Flagg hoised up for Ships to come
in to the Harbor E the Prison or Tolbooth F the Generals house G the Gallows H
the Packhouse or Storehouse

view of New York

Ja Clerk sculp
map of New Jersey

A Chart of the Coast of AMERICA from New found Lmd to Cap^ Cod by John Seller
Hyrographer the King.

chart of America

A Chart of the WESTERN OCEAN. By John Seller Hydrographer to the King.

HONI SOIT (...) MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

chart of Western Ocean

The Windward pasage from JAMAICA. between the East end of CUBA, and the West
end of HISPANIOLA. Made and Sold by John Seller. at his Shop at the Sign of
the Mariners Compass. at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping.

chart of Jamaica, Cuba and Hispaniola

INSULAE INSIGNIA

INDUS UTER^^^ SERVIET UNI coat of arms of Jamaica

Leit: Gen: Doyley for his Majesty first Governor Sr Charles (...) third
GovernourTho Lord of (...) Second Governor S Tho: Modiford B^^ Fourth Governor
Knight present Sr Thomas Lynch Governor

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Novissima et Accuratissima INSULAE JAMAICAE DESCRIPTIO per JOHANNEM SELLERUM.
Hydrographum Regium. Londini

Ornat ^^o Consult ^^^ Vir^ D. JOS. WILLIAMSON Equiti Aurato. In Regni Comitijs
Senatori. Regice Majestati ab Archivis status Et Sanctiori Concilio a Secretis.
Tabulam hanc D D. Joh Sellerus.

Precincts Cocoa Sugar Cotton 1 The Castle 2 The Town 3 The Forte St.
Katherines 1 Sr Tho. Muddiford 2 ^ 2 Sr Jam M^ddiford 1 3 Maj. Gen Muddiford 1
4 Coll Tho Ballard 1 1 5 Judge Molens 2 6 Royal Company ^ 7 Cap Moseley 1 1 8
Judge Molens 1 9 Justice Freman 1 10 Cap Noy 2 11 White Chapel 12 Justice
Freeman 2 13 Coll Bindles Farm 14 Maj F^ller 2 15 Cap W^lrood ^ ^ 16 L^rete^
Hebb 2 17 Cap Freeman 1 18 Parson Webb 1 19 Cap Burden 1 20 Geo Needham Esquire ^
21 Coll Tho Ballard 2 22 Coll Fitz 1 23 Livett Verey 1 24 Ensi Hunt 1 25 Ald
Ric Be^ford 1 26 Salt Pan Hill 27 Coll Burnets Gulley 28 Bo^ers Gulley St.
John's 2 Coll John Cope 2 2 2 Maj Auscough 2 2 3 Cap Aylmar 2 2 4 Cap Gay 2 2 5
Cap Tailor 2 6 M Ty^^ D^d 2 7 Livet Price 2 1 8 M Coniers 2 2 9 Cap Gaywood 2
10 Cap Langher 2 11 Cap Oldfeild 2 2 12 M Brag 2 13 Cap Nelson 2 2 14 Cap
^olsworth 2 15 Fran I^ians 2 16 Livet Whites Farm 17 M Holmes 2 18 M Styles
farm 19 Livet Charnock 1 20 Livett Gilbert Cope 2 21 Livett Anderson 1 22 M.
Trigg 1 23 Liveton Gregory 1 24 Livett. Baerfield 1 25 The Beacon 26 The Church
27 Mrs. Read 1 St. Andrews 1 Coll Archbull 2 2 Livet Coll Hope ^ 3 Maj.
Whitfield 1 4 Livet Brain 2 5 M Sh^is^ 2 6 Rainsford Waterhouse 2 7 Judge.
Vallet 8 Maj. S^ellet 2 9 Th^^es store house 10 M Howel 2 11 Cap. Keen ^ 12 M.
Coniers 2 13 Cap. Archbole ^ 14 M. Barry ^ 15 ^^k. Lewis Esquire ^ 16 Lt. Dela Acre
2 17 his Farm 18 M. Long 1 St. David's 1 Livet Coll. Freeman 1 1 2 M. R^ves 1 3
M. Stokes 1 4 M. Richardson 1 5 M Hobby 1 6 M. Alexander 1 7 M. Lloyd 1 8 M.
Burton 1 9 Smithbys hill 10 M Fox 1 11 Coll. Freemans stores 12 The Church St.
Thomas 1 Cap Linch 1 2 Cap Atkins 2 3 Cap Cox 1 1 4 Cap Brown 1 5 Earl
Carlille 1 6 M. L^nas Farm Clarendon 1 S^ The Muddiford Cap Kendal 2 Cap
Colbeck 1 3 Maj A^scough 1 1 4 M Beckford 1 5 M Brain 1 6 Cap Long 2 1 7 Maj
Collier 2 1 8 M Mas^^^ 2 1 9 Coll Bin^^os ^ 10 Livet M^^incle 11 Coll I^y 1 12
Earl of Clarendon 13 Cap Booth ^ 14 M Spirru ^ 15 M. Halliard ^ 16 Cap Horner
1 17 M. Petteson 1 18 M Gardner 1 19 Justice Philps 2 20 Justice Varne 2 21
C^^p hill 22 Maj. Fuller 1 23 M. Masters 2 St. Elizabeth 1 Cap. Parkers Farm 2
Nic. Stevens Farm 3 Mount Le^a^^es 4 Chr. Pinder Esquire Fa^ 5 Rich. Riggins Farm
6 M. Patt^^ors Farm 7 Chr. Pinder Esquire. Far 8 W. Sincl^^^ Farm 9 Cap.
Breningham 1 10 Livet. Cox Farm 11 Maj. Perkinson 1 12 Parson Barrows Farm 13
Robert Sh^rton 1 1 14 Capt. James 1 1 St. James 1 Cap. ^incks 2 2 St. Annes 1
The Church Rob. Bagnalls Farm 3 Edw. ^a^lo^s Farm 4 ^uar. ^e Bola Ialink 5
E^^ Mnt. at L^^des 6 ^^^des Pasture St. Mary's 1 Capt. Cooper 2 2 Andrew ^^gill
^ 1 St. Georges 1 Cap. Prices Farm 2 M. Vincents Farm 3 Livet. Newmans Farm
4 M. Squire 2 5 M. Ash Farm 6 M Thomas Farm

Made and Sold by John Seller at his shops: At the Hermitage in Wapping: And in
Exchange-Alley near the Royall-Exchange in London

map of Jamaica

To that Valient and Worthy Co^mander, Cap.t John Narborough, who Passed and
Repased the Streights, of Magellan, in the year 1670

John Seller, in Testimony of the Respect he bears to him, Humbly dedicates
this Chart.

A Chart of the Sea Coast of BRAZIL. From Cape St. Augustine to the Straights
of Magellan, and in the South Sea, from the Lattitud of Eight degrees, to the
said Straights

Made and Sold by John Seller Hydrographer to the King at the Hermitage in
Wapping.

chart of Brazil

A Chart of the SOUTH SEA By John Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty

chart of the South Sea


