An Arc against a Deluge: OR Safety in Dangerous Times. Discovered in A SERMON
Before the Honorable House of Commons, At their late Extraordinary Fast,
October 22. 1644.

By Obadiah Sedgwicke, Batchelour in Divinity, and Pastor of Coggeshall in
Essex.

Published by Order of the said House.

PROVE. 28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always, but he that hardneth his
Heart, shall fall into mischief.

LONDON, Printed by J. Raworth, for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Brazen Serpent, in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO The Honorable House of Commons, Assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
YOu were pleased to appoint a Solemn and Extraordinary Fast, for your united
Armies: and since that you have twice desired the Assembly of Divines to
Importune God for them: How acceptable all this has been unto Him, you have
experimentally found by the news of our Brethren surprising of Newcastle (the
last week) and the Castle it self (since that) and also by the news of happy
success upon your Armies (near to Newbery) this week: It is not in vain, Nay
it is very good to draw near to God: No one prayer that gets to heaven is lost:
Sometimes divine Wisdom does take respite, but at this time divine goodness
made have: you had scarce begun your prayers, but God prevented you with
Answers: Our work on earth is done best, when our work in heaven is done first;
you plainly see that God can (and which way he can) provide for his own glory,
his peoples safety, and his enemies shame; It is a superlative wisdom to
interest our persons in God, and God in our actions: when we have once gained
and engaged him, we are then above all the world.

All that I would humbly press upon you is this: Follow God, what you see him
doing, do you the like: his special care is for his Church, let yours be so:
For my part, my great design shall be, my own Salvation, and the Church and
Kingdoms safety: For these we Preach, for these we Pray, for these we Lend,
for these we Live, for these we Dye: the God of all mercies Heal these, and
Settle these, and ever guide and bless you for the good of these. This shall
be the constant prayer of him, who desires to live no longer then he is a
servant to Truth, and both these,

OBADIAH SEDGWICKE.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their
Extraordinary day of Humiliation. October 22. 1644.
HEBREWS 11. 7. By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet,
moved with Fear, prepared an Arc to the saving of his house.
THese words contain in them 4. parts.

1. An Alarm given: wherein observe, 1. The party giving it, God: [Being
warned of God] whether in a dream, as to Abimeleck, Jacob, others, or by voice
extraordinary, or by some Angel, or by some singular impression, The Scripture
is silent, and I dare not be so curious as to determine it.

2. The matter of it, [Things not yet seen] He means the deluge, or drowning of
the whole world; Great Judgments may be preparing by God, though for the
present no effects of them appear to man.

2. The Alarm Taken: where again observe.

1. The Person Taking it, [Noah] called in Genesis 6. 9. A just man and perfect in
his generations: Godly men are first acquainted with Gods intentions; His
secrets (in this sense also) are with them that fear him;

2. The manner how he took it: the Text says,

1. By faith: Faith is the first hand to take a mercy, and the first eye to
discover a Judgment: Sense may apprehend Dangers, when Acting upon the visible
Stage, but faith only espies them, when contriving upon the private anvile.

2. By Fear: when faith sees a good God, then it causes joy: when it sees an
Angry God, then it raises fear: it proportions out all our affections, as God
is pleased to proportion out himself: I see an inundation threatened, and it
will certainly come, says Faith: O I tremble at it, says Fear, and how shall
we do to escape it?

3. The Alarm Improved: and that is by prudence: A wise man sees the evil and
hides, or secures, himself: Faith is not opposite to Fear, nor is either of
them opposite to care and wisdom: Noah's wisdom appeared in 2. Things.

1. He sets upon the proper Remedy [He built an Ark] there was a deluge
coming, and nothing was so proper a safety against a deluge of waters, as a
Ship or Arc.

2. He does this in Time: the Text says [He prepared an Arke] his action was
suitable, and it was seasonable too: A right season, seasons all our works:
purposes ill-timed, commonly prove ill or useless: Noah's Ark was not to make
when the waters came, but it was prepared, and he in it, before they came.

4. The success of all [To the saving of his house] I shall not finger all the
particulars above mentioned, Two only of them I intend to prosecute at this
time, viz.

1. That when Dangers Threaten us, we should be moved with Fear. 2. That
against a destroying flood, it is duty and wisdom to prepare a saving Arc.
That when Dangers threaten us, we should be moved 1. Prop
with fear: Thus the Text, Noah being warned of God, etc. was moved with fear.

When Jacob heard that Esau his brother was coming with 400. men, to meet
him, He greatly feared, Genesis 32. 6. 7.

When Jehoshaphat heard that the Moabites and Ammonites, with those of Mount
Seir, were ready to invade him, He also feared, 2 Chronicles. 20. 1. 3.

When Micab the Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah, saying, Zion
shall be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, Jer. 26. 18.
Then Hezekiah feared the Lord, verse. 19.

When the King of Syria, and the King of Israel confederated against Judah, the
Prophet says, They were moved as the trees of the wood are moved with wind,
(i.) They exceedingly feared, Esaias 7. 2. compared with, verse 4.

Bernard has long since well taken notice of four Ser. in Psa. Qui habitat.
sorts of men.

1. Some who Neither Hope, Nor Fear: such are Atheistical sinners, to whom
Gods mercy seems no Harbor, and Gods wrath seems no Terror.

2. Some who Fear but hope not: such are despairing sinners, who look only
upon mount Sinai, full of thunder and lightning, but never look upon mount
Sion, which is as full of Grace and Mercy.

3. Some who Hope but fear not: Such are presumptuous sinners, who like the
Heathens of old that made their gods suitable patrons to all their lusts; so
these fancy a God only of mercy and Indulgence, without any Justice to account
with them for their sins, and therefore fear not.

4. Some who both hope and fear: Such are all truly pious people, who hope in
a good God, and yet do fear a just God: rejoice in his favor, but tremble at
his displeasure: when he smiles they bless him, and when he frowns they fear
him.

Now fear (which is the shrinking, the recoyling, the crouching, the flight of
the soul in the apprehension of an absent, imminent, prevalent, and approaching
evil,) the Schoolmen and others distinguish thus: There is a threefold fear.

1. Timor poenae: A fear of punishment (which some call Timorem Gehernalem and
Servilem) this is raised by the justice of God, threatening by no means to
clear the guilty.

2. Timor offensae* a fear of sinning, and this is raised by the kindness of
God, whose presence and bounty causes an exceeding fear to offend him.

3. Timor Reverentiae, A Reverentiall fear, and this is raised by the
Greatness, and Majesty, and Ability of God, and it is like that of a child to
his Father, or of a wife to her Husband: some use I shall make of this
distinction anon, but for the present take me thus.

There is a double Fear. G. Paris. Pusillanimitutis.


1. One of Distraction, or amazement, which routs the soul, and crusheth all
its faculties, disabling their command and use in matters either spiritual or
civil, take heed of this fear; fear such a fear as this, which is too hard for
Reason and Religion too.

2. Another of Discretion, and Judgment, flowing Cantae Declinationis.
from faith: Timor debitus, as Aquinas styles it: a fear when a man should
fear, and as a Christian should fear: to this shall I apply my discourse: such
a fear as this should be in us, when God threatens dangers: And it comprehends
4. things in it.

1. An awaking of the Souls of men: a rouzing of 4. Things in duc Fear.
them out of a Lethargy, a shaking off, of the Spirit of slumber, and deep
sleep: Fear speaks to the soul as the Mariners to Jonah, when the ship was
endangered, Awake thou sluggard, why sleep thou? It opens those careless
and secure eyes, to see the Lord displeased indeed, and now upon the way
marching toward the destruction of a Nation or person. We can see wrath and
fury in men, and be moved: but right fear sees wrath in God, it sees the King
of heaven and earth displeased, and all the arrows of vengeance (which fly up
and down) all of them taken out of his Quiver, and cast abroad and shot by his
just and mighty hand: That the controversy with the land, is his controversy;
and the sword which is bathed in blood is his sword, and that it shall
accomplish his pleasure to the full, till he be pacified with us.

2. A Concussion of the Soul under this Apprehension: the Text does not say,
only, that Noah feared, but it says, that he was moved with fear: the meaning
is this, That God thus apprehended in the Greatness of his wrath and power,
should exceedingly affect us: the Indignation of the Almighty should make a
dint Heb. 12. 19 21.
and strong Impression upon our hearts: As Moses when he was upon the mount,
and heard the sound of the Trumpet, and the voice of words, and saw also the
burnings with fire, he did exceedingly Fear and Quake: So when we hear either
by the voice of Gods Ministers, or by the Trumpet of Gods real warnings, or by
the devouring flames of his acting wrath, that God is provoked by us, and
incensed against us; this must make us, like David, to fall flat down upon our
faces, or like Moses to quake, or like Habakkuk to quiver with fear: Who should
not fear thee O King of Nations.

There are three sorts of behavior under Gods anger 3. Sorts of men.
and Judgments. 1. Some utterly careless, disrespective, and deaf, though God
cries aloud in the ways of vengeance: these men are like foolish children,
running out to play in the midst of thunder and lightning: or rather like Zimri
and Cozbi, then impudently sinning, when God was judicially destroying the
Camp for sinning. Secondly, some are only amazed and astonished at the first
blow: perhaps at the beginning of a judgment, a little hushed and stirred, and
wrought on; but perceiving the danger to keep a distance, they grow bold to sin
still: like the Frogs we read of, all silenced on a sudden, when Jupiter threw
down the great beams among them, but observing their immunity, they put on
their confidence and old note again. Thirdly, others are thoroughly affected and
stirred in the apprehension of Gods displeasure: As seeing more than heaven in
his favor and more then hell in his wrath: our protection, safety, happiness
in that; and our loss, desolation, and complete misery in this: These are
persons who will Fear the Lord, and His displeasure, For who can stand before
his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? Nahum. 1* 6.

3. A solemn consideration upon both the former. The Schoolmen say, that Timor
facit consiliativos. And the Philosopher says, that Fear makes men wise, for
it makes them flee to counsel. There is nothing more suspicious and more
inquisitive then Fear: for as in Love, all the soul is called in to obtain or
rejoice; so in Fear, all the soul is called in to consider and advise how
either to prevent or to sustain the approaching evil. Now there are two grand
enquiries which Fear makes, upon the apprehension of Gods displeasure: one is,
What have we done thus to provoke God? Two enquiries of Fear.
another is, What may we do to pacify this provoked God?

As when Joshua's heart melted with Fear, because God went out against his own
people before Ai: why? What is the matter Lord (says Joshua) that Israel turn
their backs upon their enemies? Israel has sinned (says God) And now Joshua
makes a narrow search to find out the sinner, he searches from Tribe to
Tribe, from family to family, from man to man, till Achan was found out: And
when Achan (who was the cause of Gods displeasure) was found out, Joshua stones
him to death, and then all was well again.

4. A quick care to use all proper means by which God may be pacified, and
judgments removed: You never knew a man full of Fears, who was not also a man
full of Cares: Give me a Christian who fears about his eternal salvation, this
man will take care and give all diligence to work out his salvation, and to
make his calling sure: Give me a person who fears his corporal safety; this
person cannot sleep for care, how he shall preserve and secure himself. Grief
makes men heavy, and Pleasure makes men careless, and Despair makes men
useless, and Fear makes men careful and diligent. The Lord threatens Nineveh
with destruction; the Ninevites believe this, and fear: this fear commands
Jonah 3.
an immediate Fasting, and humbling, and crying unto God, and repenting.

Jehoshaphat apprehends the danger of Invasion, and 2 Chronicles. 20. 3.
the Text says, He feared; but then it immediately subjoyns, And set himself
to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast.

Jacob he feared his brother Esau; I fear him (says Jacob) lest he will come
and smite me, and the mother with the children. But this Fear sets on Prayer,
and wrestling Genesis 32.
with God; and one while he presses God with his Command, another while with
his Promise, and at length so closes with God, that he is resolved God shall
not get free of him, unless he bless him.

I should now give you the Reasons, why we should Three Reasons.
fear when God threatens dangers: as 1. Because our own sins endanger us with
all dangers threatened. 2. Because God has brought the dangers to people which
he has threatened, witness the old world, and the Flood; witness Israel, and
the Captivity; witness Jerusalem, and her desolation; witness England, and
the Sword this day. 3. Because the dangers will be the sooner, and the greater,
and the surer, if we fear not. But I shall not need to demonstrate the truth of
the Proposition; it rather calls for Application.

First then, If Fear be requisite and necessary in Times of danger, certainly
Security (which is opposite thereto) is a most evil Quality in evil Times. No
Judge so unjust as he, who said, I fear neither God nor man: nor is any sinner
more fearful, then he who fears not. Nazianzene spoke the truth; This (...).
is fearful indeed, when a sinner is not fearful: So did Augustine; This
should make thee to tremble, because thou have not an heart to fear. And yet
(the Lord be merciful to us) we have multitudes in this Land, yea, I fear that
the greatest part of the Land, and of our selves too, are without Noah's Fear,
in this time, not of threatened, but inflicted Judgment. There are three Things
which show that a Person or a Nation are a Three evidences of Security.
Fearlesse and secure people in time of misery.

1. A sensual and voluptuous course of life. You read in Amos 6. 1, of a
secure company of sinners: What was their Posture? see verse. 4, 5, 6. They lie
upon beds of Ivory, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and chaunt to the sound
of the Viol, and drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments; and they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. The like you
may read in Isai. 56. 12. We will fetcb wine (say they) and we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant. O that I could not apply these passages of old to our present times!
Good Lord! what amazing times are our times? some Christians starving, and
crying out for a bit of bread, others in gluttony, and throwing to the dogs:
some bitterly lamenting, others cheerfully spoiling: some tumbling in blood,
others tumbling in vomit: some feeding on ashes, and drinking of tears, others
faring deliciously, like Dives, and drinking themselves drunk, like Elah. It is
with us, as it is spoken of in Esther 3. 15. The King and Haman sat down to
drink, but the City Shushan was perplexed. Is this to fear an angry God?

2. A strange stupidity, benummednesse, I know not what to style it, an
unmovednesse, a dull inconsideration, a drowsy imperception of our own sins,
and Gods hand upon us. It is generally with us, as with Ephraim, that had a
silly heart; though gray hairs were here and there upon him, yet he perceived
it not: or as with Israel, though set on fire round about, and burning in the
fire, yet they laid nothing to heart. Though all the Churches of Christ
(almost) are crying out, The Sword, the Sword; though the pangs of death be
upon our selves; though Gods (usually) last Judgment be upon us (the Sword)
and in the quickest way of destruction (an Intestine War) and helped on by
infinite Divisions: yet men generally intend their own Gain, their own ways,
their own ends; as if an angry God were not risen up to be avenged of a sinful
Nation.

3. A general neglect to make peace with God. If we did fear his wrath, would
we not seek his friendship? Because I will do this unto thee, therefore prepare
to meet thy God, O Israel. God is actually doing, doing his Am. 4. 12.
strange work amongst us, and yet we prepare not to meet him: You read that
those of Tire and Sidon, when Herod was highly displeased with them, they with
one accord use the best means to make their peace with him, because that
Country was nourished by Act. 12. 20
his Country: These will rise in judgment against us: they tremble at man, we
tremble not at a God; they hasten to pacify an angry man, and we all this
while come not in to make peace with an angry God: they seek for peace, because
their Country depended on Herod; and we sue not for peace, though our eternity
depend upon God: we stand out against a threatening God, and against a
destroying God. We may well take up that of the Prophet; The way of peace they
know not, and there is no judgment in their doings. Beloved, Isa. 59. ^.
there are two ways wherein perhaps the Lord may yet meet us with mercy: one
is, Serious Humiliation; the other is, Real Reformation. Believe me, Prayings
will not do it, Fastings will not do it, Declarations and Professions will not
do it, Covenantings will not do it, Councels, Armies, Assemblies, nothing will
do it, God will never be pacified, till we become an humbled and reformed
People.

But then as in Jeremiah, so may God now say of this Land, I hearkened and
heard, but they spoke not aright; Jer. 8* 6.
no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one
turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the Battle: Fearlesse, and
venturous in sin still. What one person (almost) in this great Congregation,
has (since all our calamities) left one sin? yet this is the fear of the Lord
(this is a true character of it) To depart from evil. A man durst not continue
in a course which provokes God, if he did truly fear God.

Now what shall I say of this common security amongst us? I would say of it as
Daniel did of Nebuchadnezzars Dream, Dan. 4. 19. The dream be to them that hate
thee, and the Interpretation thereof to thine enemies. O that we our selves,
and the people of this Land, would remember two things:

1. That Security (in times of judgment) is one of the greatest sins. There
are three provoking hearts in such times: 1. An hard heart. 2. An unbelieving
heart. 3. A secure heart. A secure sinner keeps up all his sins, he slights all
Repentance (of which you heard much in the former Sermon) and he slights and
contemns an angry God; he still provokes a provoked God.

2. It is the sin which immedately goes before destruction; as a great Calm
(usually) goes before a great Earthquake. If Security be within the door,
Judgment is at the threshold: It is the flash of Lightning before the crack of
Thunder: or much like that Silence spoken of in Revel. 8. 1. after which the
seven Angels sounded their Wo-Trumpets. In Amos 6. 1. you read of some who
were Secure in Sion: and verse. 3. did put far away the evil day. But then read
verse. 7. These God resolves shall go captive; nay, They shall go captive with
the first. In their own opinion they were the farthest from misery; but in Gods
determination they are the very next, the first men for it. So in Isa. 47. 8.
you find Babylon drowned in proud Security, following her pleasures, dwelling
carelessly, lifting up her self, (I am, and none else besides me) promising
safety to her self, (I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss
of children) But then read the very next verse, v. 9. These two things shall
come to thee in a moment, in one day, The loss of children, and widowhood;
They shall come upon thee in their perfection: exact ruin and sudden ruin
upon secure Babylon.

I think you cannot in all the Bible pitch upon any secure sinners, but
presently you may find a stroke of judgment upon them.

The old world were in eating, and drinking, and marrying, and knew not (says
Christ) till the flood came Mat. 14. 38, 39.
and took them all away: they were drowned in security, and then presently
drowned in a flood.

Sodom and Gomorrah were a people whose sins did cry to heaven: they were
high in sin, and deep in security: sinned in the night, shined upon by the Sun
in the morning, and all of them consumed to ashes before noon, Genesis 19. 23. 24.

The people of Laish were careless, quiet, and secure, and now the Danites
suddenly come upon them, and smite them with the edge of the sword, and burn
their City with fire, Judge. 18. 27.

Agag comes forth delicately (as the Scripture styles it) and confidently too;
Surely (says he) the bitterness of death is past: and presently he is hewed
in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 15. 32, 33.

The Amalekites are drinking, and dancing, and revelling, because of the great
spoil they had taken, but are immediately assaulted, and routed, and killed by
David, from the twilight until the evening of the next day, 1 Samuel 30. 16, 17.

Nebuchadnezzar is proudly vaunting in his palace, Is not this great Babylon
which I have built, for the honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4. 30. But (verse. 31.)
while the word was in the Kings mouth, (the very next word is) There fell a
voice from heaven, O King! To thee (thus proudly secure) it is spoken, The
kingdom is departed from thee.

When Belshazzar was feasting, and carousing, and quaffing, (inter pocula) Then
the handwriting appeared, and notwithstanding all his confidence on the great
River, it was drawn aside, and the Persians entered the City, and slew him that
very night, Dan. 4. 5. 30. So true is that of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. When
men shall say, peace and safety, Then sudden destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. O, said one of
security, Thou art my first enemy, and my chiefest enemy: thou killest fear G.
Paris.
which is my Guardian, and art the enemy which disarmes me in the midst of all
my enemies, the soft pillow which betrays me, the kiss of Joab which murders
me: I can neither provide for my Salvation when God is displeased, nor for my
safety when man is displeased, because of thee.

If fear should be stirred, when God threatens dangers: (Right honorable and
the rest) let us all this day hear and fear: O that there were in us such an
heart as to fear! the Scriptures tell us, that fear is our treasure, and our
strength, and our wisdom, and our blessedness: Bernard says, it is Vigil
Animae, the Captain of the Watch, and Custos animae, the Captain of the Guard:
Nay, says one, Custodit ipsos custodes, Fear does guard all our guards; all
our graces are preserved by fear; it is their Sentinel, and in some sense
their security, their shield and buckler: O that we did Repent and fear,
believe and fear, pray and fear; do every fit work, and still fear. There are
four portions of fear which I would earnestly commend unto you.

1. Timorem Displicentiae, a fear to anger God, and a fear of God when he is
angered: O be afraid of an angry God! It is a fearful thing (says the Apostle)
to fall into the hands of the living God: Gods anger is (usually) in Scripture
set out by fire, and by consuming fire: Let us fear lest we fall into a
consuming fire. When Jehu sent to the Elders of Jezreel to come out and fight
for their masters sons, they were afraid; Two Kings (say they) could not stand
before him, and how shall we? Why? Beloved, two of our Kingdoms cannot stand
before an Angry God! Nay a whole world could not stand before an angry God, and
how can we? He is above all the wisdom of men, and above all their dignities
and powers: He can lift up the mighty mountains by his voice, and tread under
his feet all the Scepters on earth at his pleasure: he can thresh the Nations
to dust, and dissolve the Potentates into nothing: O fear him who can do all
that he speaks; as easily make the work as say the word: fear him who can
accomplish all his will, and none can rise up to stay or hinder him: Fear him
who can destroy bodies and souls too: fear him whose displeased looks have made
the best and strongest of his servants to cry out and roar, whose little finger
made Balshazzars joints to unlose and tremble, whose anger made his best child
to sweat drops of blood, and to cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

2. Timorem paenitentiae: a fear of continuing in sin, and of committing any
more sin: Stand in awe and sin not, said David: O that we could be afraid to
let so many sins (of which we are guilty) to stand uncancelled before the eyes
of an angry God, and lie so close to our hearts, as yet not penitentially
broken for them: O that we could fear all sin for time to come: not only not
commit sin, but fear (as Joseph did) to commit it: Non sustinere, as well as
abstinere: Fear an Oath, as well as not swear, etc.

3. Timorem Reverentiae, A fear of Reverence: fear to omit, or neglect, or
delay to do what God would have you to do, in these evil and dangerous times:
when you have Gods work, and Gods warrant. Now fear the Lord, and none but him:
Be not afraid of men, be not afraid of events, But sanctify the Lord himself
and let him be your dread and fear: The time was when I pressed you not to be
afraid of your enemies and evil men; At this time I press you also Not to be
afraid of your friends, and good men: I beseech you do the work which God looks
for, and fear not that a party will fail you, or will not be pleased with you,
or will not hearken unto you, or will thwart you: O that in the work of
Reformation (so much desired, and so long expected) you would not know Father
nor Mother, nor Friend, nor Enemy, nor Minister, nor any but God alone. We had
returned ere this, said Jacobs sons unto him, had thou let Benjamin go: I am
persuaded the land had been well nigh settled by this, had we let go the fear of
our enemies, and the fear of our friends, and exalted the fear of God above all
other fear.

I have read lately a Passage in Luther, Timor est idem quod Deus. Fear is (in
some respect) God himself; this though I may safely say, That Fear does (as
another has it) deificare Deum. It is that which does set up, and exalt the
True God; Yea (but take me heartily) it makes men somewhat like God, especially
if that be true which one speaks, Qui Deum Timet, eum omnia timent, All things
stand in awe of him, who stands in awe of his God; Assuredly you shall find an
awefull fear falling upon them who are under you, if your Superlative Fear be
of him who is above you;

4. Timorem Providentiae: A provident Fear: Beloved! as Faith makes us to
depend upon Gods Promise, so Fear makes us to serve Gods Providence: That Fear
which makes us over-feare, or over-negligent, which shrivells up all endeavor,
or all care; I cannot think but it is either despair, or folly, or Treachery:
Give me that Fear which is a servant to Faith, a Gale to Prayer, a Spur to
Repentance, and an edge to Prudence: which can judge of evils, and hasten
Remedies; which can fore-see-Dangers, and be prepared with Antidotes: which
makes the Eye open, the Head Serious, the Heart faithful, the hand quick, and
the work seasonable: which cries out about a Soul, O Hearken, Repent,
Believe, whiles it is called to day, for heaven may be lost, and it too in an
hour! which cries out about a Kingdom, It may be lost or saved, in less then
in one day, and therefore let us not trifle, let us Act for it with all our
strength: In a word, Give me such a fear like this in Noah, which found him
Righteous, and made him Industrious to prepare an Arc to the saving of
himself, and of his House: This is the second part, and follows orderly and
seasonably to be handled: [prepared an Arc to the saving of his House] whence
learn,

That against a destroying flood, it is duty and wisdom 2 Proposition.
to prepare a saving Arc.

An Arc (in the Scripture) is taken two ways.

1. Literally, So it is either the Arc of the Covenant which Moses made, or
the ship of safety, which Noah made.

2. Analogically: so it notes something, which in the use and virtue of it,
does Answer unto that Arc which Noah made. viz. Some Qualities, or Actions
that will keep us safe, though judgments, destroying judgments break down
into the world.

But here is the Question; what Arc of Safety may Question.
that be?

To this demand, I answer. Solution.


1. In the General.

1. That Arc which saved Noah, was such a Fabric, as God himself commanded:
see Genesis 6. 14. Go (said God) and make thee an Arc; Many men are apt to make
an Arc, but few are making such an Arc as God commands; The Jews made an
Arc of their own Righteousness, but this could not save their souls; and
sometimes they made an Arc of the Assyrians and Egyptians, but this could not
save their lives: The Papists also do make an Arc of their own Merits (which
Bellarmine dares not think safe and sure) and of the Intercessions of Saints
departed; Nay, they make an Arc of water (their Holy Water) and a wooden Arc
too of Images and Crosses, Arkes in the Air, vain Arkes, which can neither
save themselves, nor them that make them: And ignorant people make an Arc of
their Good meanings, and devout Service-Booke: Thousands in the Land, place all
Religion in it, it is their God, and if you take away that, what have they
more: And profane Persons make an Arc of Presumtion upon Gods Mercy: yea,
every Sectary makes an Arc of his own fancy: but when a deluge breaks
forth, men's souls will be drowned for all these: No Arc is safe, which is not
built upon God's Word.

2. That Arc which saved Noah, he himself made it: Genesis 6. 22. Other men's
Arks will never be safety to us: we cannot live by another man's foul, nor be
nourished by the bread which another man eats, nor be saved by the faith which
another man has. The just shall live by his own Faith, Haback. 2. 4. And those
three Righteous men could deliver but their own souls, Ezekiel. 14. 14 The wise
Virgins had no oil to spare, they had no more then would serve for themselves.

3. That Arc which saved Noah, was made by faith; so the Text, By faith Noah
prepared an Arc; Nothing will be safety without Faith; Prayer (I confess) may
save, but then it must be the Prayer of Faith, Jam. 5. 15. Tears may save, but
they must then be tears in the eye of Faith: and Repentance may save, but then
it must be raised by faith: nothing will save us without Faith, even our
Savior will not save us without faith.

4. The Arc which saved Noah, was made of Gopher wood: Interpreters cannot
tell where to match or find the like in all the Scripture: It was a rare kind
of wood, solid, choice, most apt to keep above water: It must be some rare
thing, which is a sinners safety: That which every man can have, will save
none: every man's portion, will be no man's security.

5. The Arc which saved Noah, cost him a great deal of pains to make. The
saving Arc, is a costly Arc; O it will cost us many Heart-searchings, and
humblings, and Prayers, etc. to save our souls: A working out, as Paul
speaks, and All diligence, as Peter speaks; it is not an easy work to be
holy here, or happy hereafter.

6. Noah made the Arc, though he met with much opposition, and many a scoff:
They who intend to be safe, must hold to their saving work, against all the
jeares and reproaches of men who are lost.

7. Lastly, the Ark which saved Noah, was that which God shut him in, when he
entered into it. All means must be used, but none can be safety, unless God
himself make us safe.

Secondly in particular.

And now I beseech you heed me: There are five things which will (certainly) be
an Arc of Safety to a Person or Nation, whenever dangers break out like a
deluge.

1. A God reconciled: Happy is that people, and that man, who has the Lord to
be his God: let all the floods in the world burst forth, and rage, and swell,
and threaten, yet if God be our God, If we lie in the Arms of his favor, If
he has pardoned our sins, If enmity be slain; If his good will be toward
us, if he says, I am your God, fear not, I will uphold you, I have blotted
out your iniquities, you and I are friends, I will cover you with the shadow
of my hand: O this is an arc indeed, This is a shield indeed, A strong Tower,
a Refuge from the storm, an All-sufficient Banner of Safety.

But if God be not Reconciled to us, what can be safety to us? the waters now
will rise in strength, and cover all the mountains: A very sad condition, when
man is mine enemy about me, and Conscience is mine enemy within me, and God
also is mine enemy above me.

2. A Christ possessed: when Christ came into the ship, the storm ceased
presently: now all was calm and safe, though the Disciples were in danger
before: how much more is it our safety, when Christ not only is in our ship,
but is our very ship; when a Person is in Christ, and Christ is in him: All the
houses of the Israelites were safe from the destroying Angel, which had the
blood sprinkled upon them: Christ's blood is a securing blood, his blood covers
us from the wrath of God, and his Blood makes our peace with him, who can make
peace on all the earth, Yea, our very enemies to be at peace with us. A Person,
who has Christ, may be upon many waters, but he shall never be under the
waters; His Arc may be tossed, but it shall never be drowned: it may be
troubled, but still it is safe: Christ is an Arc, that can save at a pinch, and
that can save to the uttermost.

3. A Conscience purged: purged of dead works, and purged of deadly works:
All the Ocean cannot drown a ship, whiles without it; but if they get into the
ship, then is the fear of drowning; If Conscience be purged from the love of
sin, and from the service of sin, if it be kept sound, and hail, why! this
will be as the Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Like Noah's Arc, it will be
confidence to us, and safety to us: O friends! we have no Enemy like sin:
All our dangers lie in our own sins: The drowning deluge breaks out of a
damning deluge, I mean, out of our own fountain of sin: Therefore, if you
love your safeties, if you love your lives, if you love your souls, if you
love your selves, if you love the Land, Away with sin: If thou let this man
go, thou art not Caesar's friend, said they of Christ; but I say, If you let
your sins go uncrucified, you are not Gods Friend, nor your own friend, Nor
the Kingdoms friend.

4. Sincerity maintained; you may read in Esai. 33. 16. that the upright person
dwells on high (above the regions of danger, above the reach of a deluge) And
his defense is the munitions of Rocks: If he should be where dangers are, yet
he still is where defenses are; and no defenses are like the munitions of
Rocks, which none can well assail, or undermine; In common dangers, if the
Lord takes care for any person in the world, it is for the upright person: Noah
was an upright person, and here is an Arc for him; Abraham was an upright
person, and God was a shield to him; Lot was an upright person, and Zoar is
reserved as a security for him; David was an upright person, and he had an Arc
which preserved him safe from first to last, through all troubles and dangers.

5. Truths obeyed, and defended. Truth says to a Nation, as he to his
Buckler, (Epaminondas it was) Defend me, and I will defend thee: Keep that
safe, and that will keep you safe: Because thou have kept the word of my
patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come
upon all the world, said Christ to the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 10.
the like you read in Esa. 26. 1. We have a strong City, salvation will God
appoint for walls and Bulwarks, open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation,
which keeps the Truth, may enter in: These are saving Arkes indeed, none like
them to save our selves, and the whole Kingdom.

And now (Right Honorable!) Give me favor to Noah's of our Age, and I look
upon the condition of our times, as very much resembling that state wherein
Noah lived: In his time the sinnings of the world grew common and high; do
they not do so in our time? In his time the spirit of God warned them of an
ensuing destruction; Has not God given us many warnings, vocal and real? In
his time, the Spirit of God did strive with them to draw them from their
sinful courses, and to repent? Has not the same Spirit striven and wrestled
with this Land for that purpose? Toward them God exercised a long patience, or
suffering; He waited upon them an hundred and twenty years; Has not the Lord
borne and forborne us almost as many years? But after all these callings,
warnings, strivings, long-sufferings; God still saw that the wickedness of man
was great upon the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart, was only evil continually, they grew impudent and incorrigible: O that
it could not be so assirmed of this land in general: Hereupon God resolves to
forbear no longer (He will bear long, but not for ever.) A flood of water is
justly determined to be their destruction, whom an Ocean of Divine Mercy and
Patience could not persuade to Repentance and salvation: God grant that we have
not given effectual occasion for an answerable resolution in him concerning
our selves: yet in the midst of this Righteous resolution, he thinks upon his
servant Noah, and instructs him to make an Arc to save himself, and all his
house: I trust, the Lord has instructed you so to do fot your selves, and the
Land, against the deluges which sorely threaten us.

I have but three things to put you in mind of, this solemn day of your
Humiliation, Nay, the God of heaven put you in mind of them, or else it is in
vain for me.

1. You have an House to save: Nay, let me call in that expression, it is too
short, for you have no less then three houses to save.

First, your own House; Every man's soul is an house, (Domus Dei, and
domicilium Christi) The lofty God, dwells in the highest Heavens, and in the
humblest Souls: He is the master of this house, you are but the Tenants, your
Lease will shortly be out: As you expect a blessed eternity, look well to the
saving of this House.

The second is, The Kingdoms House: The House of Parliament, it is the great
House of all the Kingdom, in which are laid up all their Liberties, all their
Safeties, Estates, Refuges, Reliefes and Life's: And truly, if this house be not
kept safe, I know no house in England, that can or shall be safe: If this house
be suffered to fall, we shall all have cause to say, (yea, they too who fight
to pull down this House) as of that House in Matthew. 7. 27. The rain
descended, and the floods came, and the wind blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell, and great was the fall of that house: The fall of a Parliament,
will be the greatest fall that ever Englishmen heard of: I am confident, it
would prove the fall of the Three Kingdoms, and I fear it would endanger the
fall of most of the Churches of Christ.

The third is, Gods House; this is an House to be looked unto before, and above
all other houses: as Aeneas had a care of his household gods, before he took
care of his household goods: Princes of old did strive to join their Palaces
next to the Temples, and set the Temples above their own Palaces: Gods House
must be looked unto, before any of our own houses: They in Haggai found it by
woeful experience, that their neglect of Gods House in the first Haggai. 1. 2.
4, 6. etc.
place, was very distasteful to God, and unprosperous to themselves; and so
shall any Statesmen find it, notwithstanding all their Politic conceits: I
do not know three such Houses in the world again as these, therefore it
behooves you to have a singular care of them.

2. But then in the next place, I must tell you, that there are Deluges, many
Deluges, not only probably, but also actually breaking out to endanger the
drowning of all these: for the first House (our Souls) O how many sensual
lusts break forth, and how many worldly lusts break forth to drown the soul
(as the Apostle speaks) in perdition? And for the second House (the
Parliament) what an inundation of lies and scandalls; what raging waters of
Papists, Delinquents, and other people; what a deluge of blood has been
gushing out to overwhelm and swallow up that House? And for the third House,
what floods are Papists. Arrians. Socinians. Arminians. Anabaptists. Brownists.
Antinomians. Libertines.
cast out of the mouth of the Serpent to bear down the House of God? A deluge
of errors, a deluge of Blasphemies, a deluge of Schisms, a deluge of odd
opinions, a deluge of dissentions, and divisions.

So that all cry out unto you, as the Disciples in the Storm to Christ,
Master, save us or else we perish: your souls cry out, O save us! and the
Kingdom cries out, O save us! and the Church of God cries out, O pity and
save us!

3. The safety of all which consists in making of an Arc both proper and
seasonable: for the contriving whereof if I should a little miss of Art in my
subsequent directions, yet pardon me, for I shall not fail in will and desire
that all may be saved: Thus then,

1. For your Souls (the first House I mentioned) Two things (really got and
exercised) will assuredly save them; Repentance and Faith:

2. For the Kingdoms House (the second that I mentioned) four things will
exceedingly conduce to the saving of it.

1. An effectual care that Justice be executed: why? it is lamentable to
behold how loose the raines of Justice are in the Country? every man (almost)
does what seems good in his own eyes; swear, and cheat, and lie, and
swagger, and slight Sabbath-dayes, and Fasting-dayes, and wallowin
uncleanenesse and drunkenesse, etc. and there is scarce a Justice of Peace to
put them to shame: Good Lord, what will become of us if matters continue thus?
sins of all sorts will become out of measure sinful, and God will be
extremely provoked against us. I beseech you therefore take care not only to
name Justices, but that they be sworn, and execute judgment; The life of all
Laws (you know well) lies in their execution. O that your care would appear
about this, which I speak not only from my self, but from thousands more;
For my part I had rather live where nothing is lawful, then where every thing
is lawful: The Lacedemonian being asked by one, how they came to be so strong
a people, Answered well, The Laws do govern us, and we by them do govern
the people: Believe me, if you do not carefully see Justice done upon sin,
God himself will see Justice done upon you:

2. A mutual complying amongst your selves, in matters which necessarily
refer to the public preservation; how familiar is Machiavils destructive
maxim to your minds and tongues, Divide and impera, rent them and ruin them;
and yet there is not a more sad spectacle to us, who stand below upon the
earth, then to hear of those rents and divisions in that upper Region which is
above us! Divisions in Counsels, divisions in Armies, divisions in all: I
confess that division once made a Tower of Babel, but it never made a saving
Arc: I once wished (when I preached before you) that the Parliament had no
friend (you remember the sense wherein I spoke it) And now I wish that the
Parliament had but one man left in it: Nay, do not wonder at the expression,
there is no hurt at all in it: I say, but one man: Nothing but Unity, no
division at all: that all of you might be as one man, of one heart, of one
mind, of one endeavor to save our divided and perishing Kingdom.

3. Timely Supplies: Beloved! there are three After-games, which every
Judicious man accounts very ill and sad: The first is for a man's Name; The
second is for a man's Soul, And the third is, for a Kingdoms Safety: O how my
heart has aked for the neglecting of our late Army in the West! God knows
where the fault rests: every eye was open to see our opportunity both offered,
and lost: Let me freely tell them (whosoever they were) that were guilty of
delaying their help; That a few more such omissions will shake the Thoughts
and Hearts of the people, if not also the safety of the whole Kingdom: unless
any amongst you can assure to themselves the Power of Christ, to raise Lazarus,
when he is Three or Four days dead; I beseech you, and again I beseech you,
let no more seasons be lost; But what you do, do in time: for ought you know,
the Kingdom might have been settled, if timely succor had been forwarded.

4. Your now prepared Propositions of Peace: The Scriptures tell us, That we
must follow Peace, yea, though it be flying from us: And Peace with all men,
much more amongst our selves; Now then, if your Terms of Peace be such (as I
presume they are) That Peace and Christ do meet together, that Peace and
Holiness do meet together, that Peace and Truth do meet together, That Peace
and Reformation meet together, That Peace and Justice meet together, That Peace
and Safety meet together, I will be bold to say, That such Terms of Peace,
will speak for you before God, and will acquit you before all the World; They
will be our comfort, if obtained, However, they will be our safety, though
denied.

3. Lastly, For Gods House (the other which I mentioned) I humbly conceive,
That the Arc to save it, may be made (as Times are now with us) of two Acts of
yours:

1. One is, your Abhorring of the mentioning, yea, of the very thoughts of
Tollerating all opinions in the Church; This were such a monstrous Prodigy!
such an Intolerable way of Confusion! Such a mocking of the people of God!
Such a mocking of God himself, To whom we have all Solemnly engaged our utmost
for Unity in Doctrine, and Uniformity in Discipline; such a speedy Grave for
the Kingdom and Church, that mischief it self could not easily dig the
like: Such a spirit to revive Arrianisme, Pelagianisme, the Turkish Alcoran,
the Popish Host, etc. And yet I have seen walking Books, and Printed Books
for this purpose: For my part (Right Honorable!) If God thinks fit, I should
rather wish to lie in my Grave, then live to behold such an intolerable
Tolleration.

Most of the Arguments for this wildness of late, I have found heretofore used
by one who styled himself Martinus Bellius, a friend to that monstrous
Heretic Servetus; all which are related and confuted by learned and pious Beza
in his book de Haereticis a civili Magistratu puniendis:

2. The second is, Call upon the Assembly to hasten their work, unto which you
have summoned them; be pleased to command the sight of that Government, which
you desire to have settled in the Church of Christ: If I mistake not, you may
find most of the Principalls agreed upon, as for the fillings up, let them (if
time supply us) be debated at leisure: And that no more rubbs may lie in the
way. If there be any party more considerable then another, use your Authority,
that they may clearly and fully represent the whole platform of their
Government, that we may try it by the Infallible Touchstone of the Scriptures,
where if it can endure the Trial, and find Approbation, we will with all our
hearts embrace it; If not, then neither they should, nor we, nor any else
countenance or submit unto it.

And thus have I (as I trust) faithfully discharged my duty unto you this Day:
If God will be pleased to incline your Hearts to regard what has been said, I
shall not doubt, but that an Arc of Safety will attend you, and all of us,
notwithstanding all the dangerous Deluges which now threaten us.

FINIS.
Die Martis 22. October. 1644.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Mr. Ashurst and Mr.
Gourdon, do from this House give Thanks to Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, for the great
pains he took in the Sermon he Preached this Day at the entreaty of this
House, at St. Margarets Westminster, it being a Day especially set apart for a
Public Humiliation; and to desire him to Print his Sermon: And it is Ordered,
that none shall presume to Print his Sermon without leave under his hand
writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print this SERMON.

OBADIAH SEDGVVICK.




