The Second SVMMONS TO NEWARK SENT From the Committee of both Kingdoms, to the
Governor, Gentry, Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of that Town.

Together with The Governors ANSWER thereunto.

Wherein he desires A short time for the preparing of Articles for the
Surrender of the said Town, and Hostages for the security of his Commissioners.

APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons, to be forthwith printed and published.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
May 4. 1646.

The second Summons to the Governor of Newark.
WE hope you have considered that our Paper (as you term it) contained a
Summons from us: What we received from you, merits no Reply. We were in
earnest, as to give an Account to God and man of our Proceedings, and to show,
that nothing from you can hinder our endeavoring that you may see your
approaching Ruin. And whilst there is time to avoid it, We once more demand
of you in the Name of both Houses of Parliament of England, and for the use of
King and Parliament, That you forthwith deliver up the Town and Garrison of
Newark into their hands; and We shall give you Conditions for the Surrender
thereof, which you must not expect to be such as you might formerly have
obtained. This is the last Summons We shall send you; now accepting of what is
offered, will declare you are sensible of the total loss of your Estates, the
devastation of the County round about you; of the Ruin of the Town, and of the
Blood which may else be spilt. We shall expect your positive Answer by three of
the clock to morrow in the Afternoon at Balderion.

Collingham, April 27. 1646. For the Governor of the Town and Garrison of
Newark, the Gentry there, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of that Town.
Signed in the Name, and by the Committee of both Kingdoms.

The Answer of the Summons to Colonel General Poyntz.
SIR,
I Have received a second Summons from the Committee of both Kingdoms; but by
their own Directions, the business concerns so many, as they cannot expect a
sudden return: However, I desire you would be pleased to let those Lords know,
That on Wednesday I shall send mine Answer, and remain,

Sir, Your humble Servant, John Bellasyse.
Newark, April 27. 1646.
The Governor of Newarks Answer to the Summons of the Committee of both
Kingdoms.
THe consideration of what is required in your Summons of Monday last, being of
so high Concernment to His Majesty, and to the particular Interests of very
many of His faithful Subjects in the Garrison, I conceive a shorter time then
Monday next to prepare Articles of so diverse natures as are necessary to be
Treated on, will not be sufficient. At which time I will not fail to send such
to you; and upon your assent to them, to surrender the Town. In the mean time I
send you here underwritten, the names of such Commissioners for the Nobility,
Gentry, Soldiery, Clergy and Townsmen, as I do entrust for the Treating of
those Articles, with an equal number of yours, whose Names I shall desire by
the next; and that you will appoint such a place as shall be most convenient
for the Treaty. And I further expect, That a safe Conduct be granted, and
Hostages delivered for the security of those Commissioners employed by me,

Newark, April 29. 1646. John Bellasyse. The Lord Lexington. Mr. Bellasyse. Sir
Bryan Palms. Sir Gervas Nevil. Col. Darcy. Major General Air. Sir Simon
Fanshaw. Sir Gamaliel Dudly. Col. Adkins Dr. Marsh Dean of York. Mr. Standish
Alderman. Col. Gilby.


FINIS.

