A Discourse Concerning the SOVEREIGN Internal Balsom: Wherein is Intimated the
Ingredients, and Method of its Preparation; And a Satisfactory Account given of
its great Virtue, Efficacy, and Usefulness.

With the manner of taking it, for the Cure, and Prevention of most Diseases,
incident to Humane Bodies.

By Thomas See, PHYSICIAN.

-- Ignoti Nulla Cupido. With Allowance.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Mabb, for Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in St.
Paul's Church Yard, 1665.

To the Ingenious, Thomas See Physician, upon his Sovereign Internal BALSOME.
YOur Polycreston does its Regency
Maintain in Humane Bodies. Nature does
Freely submit unto its Sovereignty,
And joyneth forces with it, thus they both
Sweetly Combine for to preserve the Throne
Of Life, from the Empire of the (...).
What can one hand contribute to that Cause
In which you are Engaged? being known so good,
That you already have a full applause,
And a vote general, by none withstood;
Experience having gained the Vulgar Tribe,
And your Discourse, the Learned made subscribe.
If ever Modesty did ill become
Its owner; here, it is to be seen, wherefore
Concerning Physic in this Total Sum,
When all was not too much, said you no more?
Though you by this would shun all Eulogies,
Yet shall my Trumpet sound, at such a Prize.
H. Y. M. D.

To the Learned and Industrious, Doctor Thomas See, concerning his Sovereign
Internal BALSOME.
WHilst others Pride themselves in Airy Parts,
Your Acts Proclaim you are Master of Arts;
And which is more, that you have took degree,
Not only in Learning, but Humility.
For me to Celebrate your Balsom's Worth
Is but lost labor, who can set it forth?
Except your self, it is only Light shows Light,
Caesar alone could Cesar's Actions write.
Should I avouch it, merrited to be
More Catholic then is the Roman See:
Or if in the Pagan World, thou had done this,
Thou had not escaped an Apotheosis;
Who'd take a Poets word? but now his Oath
Is superadded, you may credit both.
G. O. M. L.

A Satisfactory Discourse, Concerning the Sovereign Internal BALSOME OF Thomas
See of London, Physician.
Penned by the Author of it.
IT was no difficult Task to presage what entertainment a Matter of this Nature
would meet with, among those to whom only a naked Advertisement concerning it
should be presented; all such pretenses being through the fraudulent Practices
of some Presumptious and unskilful persons brought into almost an universal
Odium and Suspicion of Imposture. That according to the different Tempers,
Complexions, Interests, and Inclinations of People there should be produced as
great a variety of censures is a natural consequence, and accordingly expected.

As for the Opinions of the Vulgar whose Ignorance inspires them with the
greatest presumption, I shall send them to School to learn the meaning of that
familiar saying, Qui pauca novit cito pronunciat. As for those whose Ability
qualifi^s them for competent Judges, with such this enterprise will gain a
favorable construction, except they are over-byassed by interest to a partial
Verdict: Unto these howsoever inclined, I shall suggest that worthy sentence of
the profound Naturalist, Doctor Harvey in his Exercitation of Conception, being
uncertain how his Judgment in that case would be resented; Viri docti and
ingeniosi de ea cogitant, fastosi, per me, rejiciant, and petulanti qui sunt
spleen libere irrideant.

The motives whatsoever they were which induced me at first to have my Balsome
publicly exposed to Sale, (though not possibly without some reflection) and
now to give some satisfaction to all whose concernment it may be to make use
thereof are not pertinent to my present Theme, only I shall not omit that
next to that principal end which is to bear sway in all the undertakings of a
Christian, a design of gratitude to an obliging person had the greatest
prevalency, whose Fidelity, Care, Charge and Industry in the preparation of it,
will not be ever-liberally compensated by its advantage; To which might be
superadded, my frequent Avocations from a constant and uninterupted pursuit of
practice by the importunity of more urgent Affairs, make meless capable of
rendering it so publicly useful as it justly deserves. Hereupon I was the more
easily inclined to attempt its Publication by the Press, that it might thereby
arrive to their knowledge, to whom otherwise distance of place would have made
it incommunicable and unprofitable.

If I am not mistaken, in this single composition I have attained the scope,
which was designed, by the most deservedly Renowned Sennertus in his Elaborate
Treatise; De consensu inter Chymicos and Galenicos, etc.

The Ingredients of my Balsome are vulgarly called, Galenical, (viz.) those
which belong to the Vegetative Kingdom, and are the choicest of those Pectoral,
Cephalical, and Cardiaque Simples which have been successively transmitted by
the Arabique and Grecian Authors to posterity, in the particular Enumerations
of their Virtues, and in their most approved prescriptions with so liberal an
encomium of their Excellency, as can scarcely admit of an hyperbole.

The process, or modus praeparandi, is of a far later date, being wholly
Spagyrical, an Art wherein the Ancients were not very well Versed; neither in
relation to internal uses has a Medicine of this kind been excogitated by any
of our modern, and more sagatious Chemists, whose Discourses and Pharmacopaea I
have perused. And if I assume to my self the sole Invention of it, I shall in
no wise diminish the Reputation of those whose other Essays and Experiments in
this Noble Mystery bring them in a full harvest of applause.

In the culling out such Simples which were appropriate to those Parts whose
Distempers were intended to be extirpated, or alleviated by mine internal
Balsome, I have purposely declined the election of any of those which are
either of a Narcotique or Corrosive Quality, being well aware, that if their
pernicious, and fatal effects should be put into the scale against their
applauded, but accidental, successes which would preponderate, and made
constant observations, and iterated experiments, that basis on which this
Medicine is founded.

If a Medicine, whose matter, and method, are so worthy commendation, may not
be ushered into the World by a small Discourse to intimate its usefulness; to
remove the prejudices to which it may be obnoxious through the ignorance and
diffidence of many, without a severe censure from the Learned, one may easily
augure, how it would put a period to all industrious endeavors after the
improvement of the present state of things to an higher degree of perfection,
and introduce a Supine, and sloathful disposition into many Active and Public
Spirits, did they not slight their Entertainment in the World, and aquiesce in
their being conscious to themselves that their attempts are laudable; If I am
charged as a Criminal, our Patriark Galen shall be my Compurgatour: whose words
in his Tract, De usu Respirationis, are these, (...): But I have expectation of
other Treatment from those who are judicious in this present case, to whose
Reason and Learning upon an impartial surveigh of the ensuing Discourse it will
approve it self, especially considering it is not destitute of the universal
suffrage, and concurrent testimony of the most Credible Writers, both of the
past and present age, whose Ability in Physic has been indisputable, and has
in effect their tacit consent, and commendamus, which few or none of those who
are friends to the Art of Physic, and instructed in its principles will
disallow.

As for those, who are through want of Learning unable to judge of this
Medicine, by those Rules which are proper to Scholars, they may soon satisfy
themselves, not only by a cheap, but advantageous experience of its Worth.

That Books have been written, not only concerning the Virtues of Compositions,
but also that single Simples have been celebrated by select Discourses, is not
strange to them that are but slenderly acquainted with Physical Authors, whose
Examples I have in this present Treatise, I hope inoffensively imitated. And
although by a copious induction of instances I might give to many abundant
satisfaction of its efficacy, in the accomplishing all those ends for which it
propounded to be administered; yet I shall for the present decline that way, not
because of its savouring of Empericisme, and being unsuitable to this occasion
of my writing, but because another opportunity may shortly offer it self, when
among other Experiments they shall be mentioned, and in this paper make use of
that way of arguing which is dependant upon the testimony of Authors which I
prefer to the attestation of any single and private persons, it being no ways
probable that those which have by the experience of many years practice
thoroughly acquainted themselves with the nature of these Simples, should
attribute to them such a degree of efficacy wherewith they are not endowed. I
readily believe that none which have the first fruits of Reason, but will
rather be satisfied with this way of evidence, then the other which I have
omitted to insist on, as being more obnoxious ^o mistakes and fallacies; I am
not at all doubtful, but if Reader it should be your lot to be afflicted with
any of those Distempers, at which this Balsome is levelled, that upon the ^aking
of it according to the directions, you will subscribe ^our probatum est;
provided you take it for such a consider^ble time, and with such circumstances,
as the nature of ^our melady does require; for none can reasonably expect that
their bodies which have been some years decaying, should be immediately
repaired, or those vicious habits of any of the viscera which plead a kind of
prescription should ^e as suddenly exterminated, as encountered; or that the
^nnate heat, when almost suffocated and extinguished, should upon the first
approach of assistance recover its former acti^ity; If any intend to use my
Balsome with such expecta^ions, let them first prepare themselves by a Dose or
two of ^ellebore, and then proceed.

As Nature does not act per saltum, but is gradual in all ^er operations, so
this Balsome intended for her assistance ^n the bodies of Men, is prepared to
such a degree of work^ng, as is agreeable thereto, and may move with it, there
^ing not one Ingredient in the Composition any ways vi^lent or molestful, but
all have such an amicable corres^ondence with it, and easy insinuations to
fortify her against ^he secret invasions of Life, which lodge in the supplies
of ^he radical moisture, that I know no Medicine more justly ^erits the Title
of Universal then this: For though ^ong and violent Catharticks in many cases
prudently ad^inistred, have been seconded with a good Effect; yet I ^ppose that
in most Diseases it is greater security to attempt ^^e Restoration by Cordial,
Pectoral, and Alexipharmacal ^eans, which will gently blow up the sparks of
Life, which ^re left into a (...), then adventure their dissipation or ex^ction
by too strong a blast* That Roman is not to be for^otten, but imitated, Qui
cun^tando r^stituit rem.

I do not pretend to any Catholic Medicine, which upon its first entrance into
the body will compose and silence all the Tumultuous and Impetuous Efferations
of the Humors (if with their leave who boast themselves the Masters of it, I
may so call them) and reduce every extravagant, and disorderly particle to its
proper place. Was I to dispute, not for victory, but the truth upon that
question, an detur panacea vera, I should choose the negative, having as little
credit for him that affirms all Diseases to be cured by the same Medicine, as
for him that should say the same shoe will fit every man's foot; but he that
would loose his labor in the further pursuit of this subject, may repair to
the Rhodomontados of some arrogant Chymiasters, or to the Fanatique Chymaeras
of the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, Dic quibus interris and eris mihi magnus
Apollo.

That a Polychreston may be prepared, whose virtues may extend to at least
those Diseases which have affinity with one another, has been in all Ages
uncontroverted. The diverse operations of some Simples so vulgarly known, must
needs inform us how powerful and comprehensive their efficacy may be, when
Artificially knit together.

I have been very cautious in the Enumeration of the Diseases which are Curable
by my Balsom, that I may not wrong my self in the abusing of others, to a
belief of receiving benefit only by this (when there may be an urgent necessity
of addressing themselves to the use of other Medicines for the promotion of
their health,) and so trappan them with flattering hopes into their
winding-sheets, by the promise of relief in such maladies, to whose extirpation
it is not accommodated.

Most of those Distempers for which this Medicament can be bona fide commended,
are not of a very different nature, but originally the same, though under
various Appellations, and have not that Heterogeneity, which at first view
seems to appertain unto them, there being little, but another name or symptom
on which to ground a distinction, for the Remedy of which, no essential
alteration has been yet made in medicinal prescriptions, which if it had not
been reserved for another Generation, or not at all to be accomplished, would
have hardly escaped the Essays of some late Ingenious and Industrious Artists,
whose Anatomical Inventions and Mechanical Hypotheses have given just occasion
to put a difference between that Sect of Physicians which have hither to been
known by the Title of Dogmatical and Rational, in distinction from those other
two of Empirical and Methodical, and make a fourth entirely Rational, not at
all depending upon those futil and insipid suppositions which hitherto have so
much obtained in Physic through their oscitancy, who had a greater share in
the (...) then (...). If their be any Maladies which have not the same source,
which yet are mentioned, as under the influence of my Balsom, they are subject
to the same method of Cure, so far at least as I have promised help thereby.

The parts unto which my Balsom is Appropriate, and those Distempers, against
which it is Effectual; I shall reduce to six heads, and accordingly give you an
account with as much brevity, and perspicuity, as the nature of the subject
requires.

First I assert it is a Sovereign Medicine for all Distempers incident to the
Lungs, as difficulty of Breathing, Spitting of Blood, Astma's, Vlcerations,
Coughs, Consumptions, Phtisique, Hoarsnesse, Defluxions of Rhumes, and
Obstructions of the Chest. In this part of its virtue which respects all
pectoral Diseases I cannot be too Confident, nor fear the being overlavish in
its Commendation, partly because in the nature of the Ingredients there is a
peculiar tendency to aichieve the forementioned ends, they being such which
open Obstructions, Attenu ate Viscons, and Clammy Phlegm, purify the Lungs,
Heal all inward Excoriations, incrassate thin and acrid Humors, abate the
violence of the Cough, and further expectoration, there being nothing which is
necessary to Complete a pectoral Medicine deficient; but principally, because
of the (...) that singular advantage it has in the present case (being a pure
and sincere Elixir, or Balsom) above all those common Remedies which almost
every Apothecaries File is full of, I mean Lohochs, Electuaries, Pills and
Lozanges, all which are generally so charged with pouders, as render them
altogether inept to be conveyed to the Lungs, the nearest way thither, and if
the Virtue of them do ever Arrive there, it must be, Viribus multum castratis,
Exceedingly Debilitate, it being impossible for these kind of Medicaments to
come to their journies end, without several Concoctions, there being no way for
the immediate passage of any thing to the Lungs except Air, and those subtle
Effluviums of bodies, which are of almost as tenuious and rare a nature; hence
it is, that a gross and foggy Air excites the Lungs to that violent motion,
produces a Cough, because of its unsuitableness to their nature.

And after the Cure of Consumptive Persons has been attempted, by a tedious
and successeless method of Physic, the Asylum, to which at last they are
counseled, to betake themselves, is a clear and sweet Air. In order to the
Cure of Consumptions, and all Pulmoniaque Distempers, my Balsome being
frequently contained in the mouth, Impregnates the Air which is continually
drawn into the cavity of the Chest, with healing and bals^mique Atoms, which
correct those sharp and saline particles, (wherewith the Air about Great Cities
especially is so replete,) that are so fatal and pernicious to humane nature;
and in this particular, it justly challenges the precedence of those Vulgar
Medicines, whose speedy Deglutition makes them unfit for the obtaining this
present end, (viz) the Melioration of the Air. To this I shall add, that next
to the direct and speedy conveiance of its Virtue to the Lungs in a vehicle of
Air, of whose convenience for that purpose I have already given an intimation,
there is another way, (if I may interpose to give in my Judgment among the
Learned) which I cannot baptize with a fitter Name, then Filtration, which
naturally succeeds the gentle and gradual dissolution of this Balsome in those
parts which are adjacent to the Orifice by which the Air passes to the Lungs,
that this may be effectually performed by a Balsome or Essence, not clogged
with Pulps and Pcuders is obvious to a weak apprehension, but how possible to
be effected by Lozanges, Lohochs, etc. whose total Virtue consists in Pouders,
is difficult to imagine, except it be urged, that by commixtion, the pouders
communicate some part of their Virtue to the more liquid matter; but how small
a portion it partakes of, is known by so frequent experience, that to offer any
Arguments for its proof, would be as needless as easy.

In any Vlcerations of the Lungs, and extreme weakness and emaciation of Body,
take it dissolved in any convenient Liquours, the quantity let it be about an
ordinary Nutmeg; thus taken Morning and Night, it does by degrees render the
blood more Balsamique, yea in time, a consolida to it self. In the other
Distempers of the Lungs, let the quantity of a large Pea be once every hour or
two dissolved by degrees in the mouth.

Secondly, It Is an effectual Antidote against the Plague, Small Pox, Measels,
Pestilential Fevers, or any other Infectious Disease, or Unwholesome Airs.
Would I expatiate upon each of those classes of Maladies, to which it is
necessary that a little be spoken, I should exceed the limits by which this
Discourse is to be bounded; therefore I shall but briefly touch them, and pass
them over. No Treacle or Methridate is a greater preservativite then this,
especially if taken in a glass of Sack, it taking as it were, first possession
of the Heart, fortifies it powerfully against the virulency of all manner of
contagion; for such purposes take it only in a Morning, or at such times as
any danger approaches, and be secure.

Thirdly, It quickens the Annimal Spirits, Eases pains of the Head,
strengthens the Memory, helps the Megrim, and all Dizziness and Giddiness, and
does equally extend it self to all Distempers of the Brain, whose Original is
to be assigned to Coldness, Moisture, or Obstruction, it being of a subtle and
penetrating Nature easily pervades the genus nervosum, and accordingly
communicates its Virtues thereunto. Let it be taken every morning in the
quantity of a large Hasel nut, and if you fast after it till Noon, it will
supply the want of a Breakfast, or Mornings draught.

Fourthly, It promotes Digestion, helps disposition to Vomit, expels wind,
takes away fainting fits, corrects the Crudities of the Stomach, and is
beneficial in all its Infirmities; there is nothing in it which exceeds that
degree of warmth, which is necessary to the Stomachical concoction, which
moderate quality of it gives just ground to commend the use of it to all sorts
of Persons without exception of any Age or Sex, or Constitution whatsoever. For
these purposes take the quantity of a small Nut, or more, Morning and Evening,
and before and after each Meal.

Fifthly, It Is of Excellent use in all Surfets, any kind of Fever, or Ague,
Cramps, Aches, Colds, being dissolved in Posset-Ale, to the quantity of a large
Nutmeg, and the party taking it, put into a breathing sweat for three or four
hours: It Is usefulness in these maladies depends upon those Bezoartique and
Alexipharmacal Ingredients, which do powerfully assist Nature to subdue all
that malignity, which has seized upon either blood or spirits, and force it
out by Transpiration; it may be daily repeated where there is occasion, without
fear of any impairings of strength by it.

Sixthly, It tends much to the easing pains of the Stone, difficulty and
sharpness of Urine, the Cholick, and all gripings of the Bowels, and any windy
and flatulent Distemper, it corrects the windiness and rawness of milk in them
which give suck, it is a great restorative of decayed strength, good to prevent
Abortion, to give Children for the Wind and Convulsions; in all these Diseases
let it be used according as necessity requires, and as your own discretion
shall direct you; after this large enumeration of Infirmities and Sicknesses to
be remedied by my Balsome, in lieu of being too extensive, I must end with a
nonnulla desunt.

That all which has hitherto been spoken, may appear not to be gratis dictum;
I shall give a Description of the Thing it self, in a manner not so abstruse,
but those which have Ability, Opportunity, and Curiosity, may by an Industrious
Inquisition into the Authors here after mentioned, which give in their
Suffrage to the Virtues attributed to my Balsom, give a very fair conjecture at
least, at the ingredients of it, or be satisfied with its Usefulness.

Yet I do not value it at so cheap a rate, as to prostitute it to the view of
every careless Reader, (...): must be understood before this can be guessed at.
To avoid the frequent mention of the same Authors, and the repetition of the
Virtues attributed to each Ingredient of my Balsom; I shall sum up the
Contents of what they have at large insisted on, in reference to one Simple
under one Head, and at last once for all, give in a Catalogue of some of their
Names.

The I. and II. Which are Branches of the same Root, receive this Commendation:
They are Enemies to Poison, to the Plague, to all Infectious Airs, and
Malignant Diseases; most noble Bezoartiques, and Vulneraries, attenuate clammy
and tough Phlegm, help the Asthma, ease Coughing, Cure Surfets, and loathing
of Food, strengthen Concoction, dissolve concrete blood, heal internal Ulcers,
and refresh the heart and spirits: The name may be spelt out by this
Periphrasis, (...).

The III, and IV. Because of their Affinity, shall be matched together, and
passed by with this Testimony: They are Alexipharmacal, resist all Malignity,
comfort cold Stomachs, oppose Melancholy, exhilarate the mind, and are
profitable in gripings of the bowels, difficulty of Urine, and the Cholick.

The V, and VI. (being if I may say it without a Solecisme are Synonima in
Virtue) have this Character: They abate Hoarsness and Coughs, are profitable in
inflammations of the Throat, abate the Acrimony of the Humors, help shortness
of Breath, and other Infirmities of the Lungs, and asper arteria, are grateful
both to the Stomach and Liver, and are Principal Ingredients in the most
approved Pectoral Compositions.

The VII. has these Attributions: It consumes Windiness, allays gripings of
the belly, cleanses the breast of phlegm, corrects the coldness of the
Stomach, provokes Urine, is profitable in the Dropsy and Stone, eases pains,
and ingenders milk.

The VIII. Is of an anodine and healing nature, mitigates the sharpness and
heat of the Urine, is effectual against all Pectoral Diseases, cures all inward
Excoriations, is profitably used in the Cramp, Sciatica, Ruptures, Bruises, and
the bloody Flux, and gravel of the kidneys.

The IX. Has ascribed to it these Virtues: It corroborates all the bowels,
principally the Head, dispels flatulency, cleanses the breast of tough
Humors, frees the Liver from Obstruction, helps the Spleen, and cold and moist
Distempers of the Womb, and is sopitam vim excitat.

The X. Has this Character: It is of principal use in the composition of
Antidotes, consumes Wind, provokes Urine, strengthens Digestion, eases the
pains of the Cholick, and the Headache.

The XI. Has this Commendation: It attenuates and evacuates the tartar of the
Lungs, and Reins, hence it is effectual in the Astma and Consumptions, and in
opening the Vrinary passages, it is profitable against Pestilential Diseases, and
putrefaction of the Humors, Cramps, and Convulsions, and refreshes the heart.

The XII. Is Celebrated for easing pains of the Head and Stomach, for clearing
the sight, for curing dispositions to vomit, for ingendring, and correcting,
milk in Women, for any Obstructions of the Liver, Lungs, and Spleen.

The XIII. Is Transmitted by Authors to us with this encomium; It attenuateth
thick Humors, heals Ulcers of the Lungs, and old Coughs, with all Diseases of
the Chest, opens the stoppages of the lower belly, and takes away the frets and
gripings in Children.

The XIV. Has a general Applause for an Alexipharmacon, and for its usefulness
in all Diseases of the Head, the Nerves and the Breast, for all Diseases
proceeding from Wind, as the Cholick: from Obstruction, as Hypocon^riaque
Melancholy, difficulty of Urine: and for the Chin-Cough in Children.

The XV. Is an Experienced Remedy in abating the sharpness of Humors, in
stopping the violence of Coughs, in opening all pectoral Obstructions, in
spitting of blood, in the Pleurisy, and hoarsness of the throat, and is of
frequent and vulgar use.

The XVI. Carries a Testimony of its Virtue in the very name, and having
acquainted you with its Usefulness in Coughs, in shortness of breath, and in
Vlceration of the Lungs, I take my leave of it.

The XVII. Has a great Estimation, in the curing of Catarrs, and the Dropsy,
in the comforting of the Liver, strengthening a feeble Stomach, in opening
Obstructions, and drying up superfluous moisture in any part of the Body.

The XVIII. Has been Eminently used, in all Distempers of the Head and Nerves;
as the Falling Sickness, the Palsy, the Vertigo, the Megrim, as also to
quicken and strengthen the sight, and to open Obstructions of the Liver, and
Spleen; to cleanse the blood, oppose Malancholy, and corroborate the Memory,
and comfort the heart, and prevent faintings.

The XIX. Is commended for an Excellent Stomachical, and Cephalical Simple; for
the dispersion of wind, promoting of digestion, refreshing the Faetus, removing
the Palpitation of the heart, the stopping of all manner of Fluxes, and for the
restoration of strength after sickness.

The XX. Which is added to render it Grateful, and give it a Consistence, and
as it were to Dilute it, is so well known, I shall wholly omit to speak of it.

The Last and Principal, I shall reserve even from conjecture, except you can
tell what it is, by being informed that in Chemistry, nothing is Esteemed More
Sacred.

Although I might bring in a Regiment of Worthy and Learned Authors, which
give in their Vote to what h^th been now propounded; yet I shall content my
self in the Impannelling a Jury of them, and trouble you with no more, their
Testimony being instar omnium, valid to all intents and purposes; Andernacus,
Dioscorides, Fuchsius, Dodonaeus, Matthiolus, Lobelius, Renodaeus, Gerardus,
Schroderus, Weckerus, Clusius and Camerarius: I have proceeded thus far to give
an account concerning my Balsom, to satisfy the reason of some, but not to
gratify the curiosity of any; and now I can appeal to the severest Censurers,
whether any thing can be made more Effectual to all the Purposes which were
before mentioned; And did I not believe there was no scruple left in my Readers
mind, I could with great facility show its Accommodation to its particular
ends by the Exact proportioning of those things which are its Fundamentals, to
those which are but vehicles, and how thereby the Virtue of the Whole is
Communicated to the several parts; but this would be oleum and operam perdere,
for those which are not by what has been already offered sufficiently
satisfied shall have my leave to abound in their own sense.

The Balsome is put up into Lattin Boxes, containing between the weight of four
or five Ounces, and sold for Five Shillings; which quantity in many Distempers,
may be taken before any sensible benefit accrue, or at least, the Cure be
complete; and where the Disease is radicated, more may be necessary: But
because Children may not need so great a quantity, and some have desired a
little for trial; I was induced to have some of it put into Boxes holding about
half so much, at half a Crown the Box; It will retain its Virtue for many years.

The Boxes are Sealed with this Coat of Arms.

coat of arms featuring stars and fleurs de lis

They are to be sold in London, by Mr. Tho. Fydge Apothecary, at the sign of
the Fox in Bishopsgate street, near to the Spittle. Mr. Henry Eversden, at the
Gray Hound in St. Paul's Church Yard. Mr. Tho. Clark at the South entrance into
the Royal Exchange. By Mr. William Flindel at the White Heart in
West-minster-Hall. Mr. William Fyge at the Hat and Feather in the Strand, near
the Savoy.

FINIS.

