PISTOS KAI KEPDOS

Christ the Life, and Death the Gain, of Every True BELIEVER: OR, THE Life of a
Saint Resolved into Christ, AND His Death into Gain.

Held forth clearly in a SERMON preached at the late sad and solemn Funeral of
the Right Worshipful Rowland Wilson, Esquire; a Member of the Parliament of
England, and of the honorable Council of State; and one of the Aldermen and
Sheriffs of the City of London.

By Obadiah Sedgvvick, B. D. and Minister of the Gospel at Covent Garden.

Together with an Epistle Dedicatory: wherein is an exact Account given upon
some years more then ordinary Experience of the superlative Worth of this
Eminent Servant of Christ, and of the Commonwealth.

By George Cokayn, an unworthy Teacher of the Gospel at Pancras Soper lane,
London.

Isaiah 57. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. Difficile est definire extra Christum, sitne mori
utilius quam vivere: rursum adsit Christus, and vitam nostram perinde ac mortem
benedicet, ut sit utraque nobis fausta and expetenda. Calv. London, Printed by
J. Macock for Thomas Brewster and Gregory Moul, at the three Bibles in Paul's
Churchyard, near the West end 1650.

To the truly Religious and ever Honored, Mrs Mary Wilson, disconsolate Widow
to the late worthy and godly Patriot, Rowland Wilson, Esquire; a Member of the
Parliament of England, and of the honorable Council of State, and one of the
Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of London. Grace and Consolation from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
VIRTUOUS LADY,
IT is enacted by the Supreme Power of Heaven and Earth, That man, the Master
of the Creation, should be a servant and a helper to the most contemptible
creature fallen under his burden: by virtue of that Law the Ox or the Ass might
Exo. 23. 5. Deu. 22. 4.
challenge and command help from their owners. Does God take care of Oxen?
Surely for our sakes these things are written, to show, that the Lord in a
special manner does oblige and command all that mention his Name, to make
themselves, to the utmost, comforting and refreshing to all his people, who
taste the bitterness, and feel the weight of an afflicted state. God no sooner
hears the sad cries and complaints of poor oppressed Israel in Egypt, but Moses
hears the news from Exodus 3^ 9, 10
God of his going with a present Message of Relief to them. Nay, the Spirit
himself, God equal with the Father and the Son, shall upon the same account be
Ioh. 14. 16
sent from Heaven, and this shall be the great Title he shall be invested with,
viz. [The Comforter.] To comfort the Saints is a work every way suitable to the
highest in Heaven or Earth to perform. When I consider these things, but
especially recollect the innumerable Obligations which are upon me from the
constant flowings forth of your expressions of friendship to me, I (being for
many years together your poor and unworthy Servant in the things of the Gospel)
could not but in a special manner account it my duty solicitously to endeavor
the bringing forth of something, which through the blessing of God might be
instrumental to the scattering of the darkness of that night which is now upon
you, through the late inexpected and sadly lamented setting of that Sun which
did shine so gloriously in your Horizon. And truly amongst all other things
which my thoughts endeavored to engage for your refreshment, I found none so
exactly calculated to your condition as that incomparable piece of Gospel (...)
by Mr Ob^diah Sedgwick.
that (...) and godly Messenger of Christ at the late sad and solemn Puneral of
your loving and beloved Husband. And seeing the reverend Author, through a
modest and humble disowning of himself, was unwilling to be Midwife to his own
Birth, I have (with his consent and leave obtained, through much importunity)
made bold to present it to you, as that which, through the concurrence of
divine blessing, may administer exceeding abundant consolation to your drooping
and decaying Spirit. I cannot but look upon this Text and Sermon as an exact
Comment upon your prec^^us husband his life and death: his life was nothing
else but a continual resolution of all his actions and ends into Christ; and
his death nothing else but a victory over sin, and a sure conduct into the
blessed state of eternity. And now did I not fear the further opening of the
sluices of your swelling passion, to the breaking in of an irresistible torrent
of sadness upon your Spirit, I could very easily engage my self to a voluminous
Discourse of this nature: but lest the lifting up of him, should renew an
occasion of casting down your Spirit, I shall the more briefly present before
you, and the whole world, what in my own observation was always, since I know
him, eminently deserving in him: Whereby it will plainly appear, that the Life
and Spirit both of Text and Sermon did clearly show forth themselves in him.
The truth is, when I consider the exactness of his carriage in all relations, I
am very apt to think, that as, for a complication of all perfections, he while
he lived was Nulli secundus.
second to none; so now he is gone, there will scarce another appear second to
him. He was an incomparable Husband to you, an excellent Man to the State, and
a precious Christian to God. He was to you the sweetest yoke fellow in the
world, not one of his carriages but apparently bearing the Image of that
Fountain from whence it sprung, viz. strong, wise and entire affections. He
loved exceedingly, and yet ruled discreetly. You had, I am sure, all you
desired, which was his heart, but not his head. He was Plin: not. Hist. li. 10.
cap. 62.
never like the hee-viper, which put his head into the sheevipers mouth. What
God gave him to keep, he kept, and what God gave him to communicate to you, he
did punctually perform. The truth is, both of you in this were ex^ct Disciples
to Moses, always confining your selves to your proper apparel. That perfection
methoughts which was amongst the rest, as the Sun in the midst of the Stars,
was his unparalleld contentedness in the want of children, like Abraham in
this, that he never in the least grieved you by abraiding you, but excelling
Abraham in this, that he never, either to God or man, unbecomingly complained
of the want of a mercy so naturally desirable, but still expressed his sense
of the full and complete making up of that trial, next to Christ, in your self:
And when it pleased God to lay a real foundation of hopes of enjoying that
blessing, he was indeed, like a Believer, affected with the goodness and
Providence of God, but not at all so transported, as if he had not been long
before crucified to it. And when it pleased God to return and blast those
hopes, he carried it like one that desired no will but Gods might be
accommodated. He expressed as much joy in his disappointment, as ever he did in
his expectation. He always said in that near trial, Not my Will, but thine be
done. He made it the business of his delight to scatter any cloud of trouble
that rested upon your Spirit; and though he naturally rejoiced in his own
melancholy, yet the least symptom of sadness in you was a burden too heavy
for him to bear. The truth is, all his carriages in this relation have left
behind them this true testimony of him, that he rather made most worthy
presidents, then confined himself to the best examples. But I fear I have been
too long in surveying his perfections in this relation; and in commending him
as a husband, I have discommended my self as a friend, in adding too much fuel
to the burning flame of your passionate affection. I shall therefore rather
bury him as your husband, and present him to you again as the husband of the
Commonwealth; to which indeed he was truly married, cheerfully spending
himself in a continual faithful pursuit of the Affairs thereof. He was a
Timotheus in the Phil. 2. 20. (...)
Commonwealth, naturally caring for their State: He was indeed by the
Providence of God in a very short time called to several places of highest
Honor and greatest Trust amongst us, wherein he always behaved himself, though
as a Ruler over the persons of men, yet as a true Servant to the good of men:
As in his private, so in his public capacity, no ones less then his own. He
still desired that Justice might be as a River, and never coveted, to pale it
in as a pond ^or his private use. He delighted immediately to serve the
public, and at the most but collaterally himself: Yea, many a time has he
vigorously and heartily appeared against his own private interest, that he
might approve himself a faithful friend to the Public. I know nothing he got
by all his Service, except Pluta. in the life of Thra^ybulus. p. 12 34.
Thrasybulus his reward, a crown of two branches, Bays, whereby he never
contracted the peoples envy, but to his last had an interest in all men's good
word and affection. And (which was the crown of all) he ever stood firm to his
Principles, and could never be justly numbered amongst them who were given to
change, always abhorring to wear that Glove which would fit both hands: If at
any time he went with the stream, it was because the stream went with him; and
still as the tide turned, he owned his Principles, and boldly adventured to swim
against it. No man can charge him to be like the bullrush, which always waves
with the wind; but all that knew him, can, without falsehood or flattery,
affirm, that nothing could move him but Reason and Honesty. The truth is, he
was in this capacity a man so excelling, that every one was ambitious (as they
were about Homer) to prove him to be his Homer.
Countryman. But why do I stay so long in this, which, to the judgment and
experience of his fellow Worthies, and almost to the whole Nation and City, was
so certain and infallible; I rather descend to speak to his spiritual part, as
he knew, owned, loved and obeyed Jesus Christ, and truly in this I know none
that profess the Name of God in the way of the Gospel, but may be glad to have
such a Copy to write after. I have observed several things in him as a Saint,
which I never saw met together in so much perfection in any man of his time.

1. He was a Real Christian; he was such a Christian, as Seneca.
Seneca was a Philosopher, Plut. in the life of Seneca.
more so in deed, then in name; though his face, with Moses, did always shine,
yet especially, with the Kings daughter, he was all glorious within: He much
delighted to be best to God, and to his bosom friends. His integrity was his
perfection. I may say of him (and I know the Lord says the same) as God spoke
of Job, in every condition, that there was none like him in the earth, a
perfect Job 1. 8. Job 2. 3. Gen 25. 27. Vid. car. in Job 1. 8.
and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil: That which is
here called perfect, in Jacobs Character is called plain, so that the plain
heart is the perfect heart, which was indeed the unparalleld perfection of this
Worthy.

2. He was a Humble Christian; the higher he was in Gods account, the lower
still in his own: He knew too much of God, as not to know himself: He often
spoke in the language of Job; I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear,
but Job 42 5. 6.
now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes. He was never like the Pharisee, who lived far from neighbors, and so was
necessitated to commend himself. He did indeed for his time very much for God,
yet Col. 3. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 5. (...) humilitatem animi vobis in fixam habete.
was he never heard to say, Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts. He always
observed the Apostles Rule, to put on humbleness of mind, and to be clothed
with humility; for all that ever conversed with him, did, from the sweetness of
his carriage, truly conclude him to be a man humble in Spirit. In the midst of
all his honors he was rather pressed down with the weight of them, then puffed
up with the blast of them. When he was at the highest, the poor, which received
the Gospel, he still with much delight received as his familiars and equals;
yea, with S. Paul, rather accounting himself the least, 1 Cor. 15 9 Ephe. 3 8.
(...) Miaimorum minimo Bez. Non jacto dignitatem meam fatcor me minimum esse
omnium Sanctorum. Pelica.
yea less then the least of all Saints.

3. He was a Sober Christian: though he much enquired into spiritual Mysteries,
yet he never was wise above what was written. I never knew him but a great
Lover of the Scriptures, and a special Admirer of that they testified of, viz.
the Glorious Mystery of Christ Crucified. He was never so superstitious, as
against clearer ^^ght, wilfully to retain dark and worm-eaten Principles;
neither was he so slight, as upon every specious show to sorego a well
experimented serious truth, to embrace a notional nothing. I am privy to many
temptations of this kind, which he often wrastled with: But this I know, that
downright plain truths, such as Peter preached, Acts 2. (an expression he
often loved to use) were more acceptable and sweet to him, then all the empty
highflown nations and speculations which this age, above all others, has
ushered into the world. God gave him the mercy of a plain heart, and that heart
delighted in pure and plain Simile gaudet simili.
truth. I have heard, that there is in Scotland a floating Island, that if the
Seaman cast his Anchor there, the Land will probably carry away his Ship. This
excellent Servant of the Lord did never cast the Anchor of his Soul upon such
an uncertain thing, but upon Christ, who is yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever.

4. He was a Believing Christian: The life which he lived Gal. 2. 20.
in the flesh was by the faith of the Son of God. He was clearly taught of God
that rare art of going out of himself, and acting in another. Hence it came to
pass, that what he did Deus magis delectatur adverbi is quam nominibus. Heb.
11. 5.
was not only good in the matter, but also in the manner of performance, with
which * God is well pleased. This is the testimony which the Apostle gives of
Enoch, that by faith he ple^sed God. And the grand thing which God will take
notice of at the last day, shall be the acting of Saints in a holy and
spiritual manner: Well done good and faithful Servant, enter Mat. 25. 21 (...)
id est, (...) Bez. Job 21. 15. Quid pro^^iemus? Iun. Mal. 3 14.
thou into the Joy of thy Lord. His faith led him forth to do all that he did
still out of pure and entire affection to God, and the things themselves. He
never served God for profit, but for pleasure; not like those which desperately
said, What profit shall we have if we pray unto him? nor like those who much
speak the same language, What profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance?
Nay, rather he accounted the work it self, wherein he enjoyed sweet and
intimate Communion with Christ, as suff^^ient wages. He delighted much to be
near Christ, to see his face, and to hear his voice: It was his frequent
expression, How dull is that Sermon or Ordinance to me, wherein I cannot see or
meet with Jesus Christ! Christ still was the Ce^^er of all his thoughts, which
made him so little to be taken with this world, that he did not so much as
carelessly mind the inheritance God gave him here, but still delighted to
accommodate his thoughts with better objects: It was but a trouble to him to
think of living to enjoy that which he was heir to, he still rather desired to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which he accounted best of all for him:
Though his time was but short in this world, yet he thought it extreme long
till he was in the arms of his Savior. It made him to bear his last sickness
with much patience and cheerfulness, because he thought after that sickness he
should be well to eternity: Upon that account, though he was sometimes full of
pain, yet he was always full of peace, insomuch that the very day before he
dyed, being asked by a friend, whom he loved, How it was now with his Spirit?
his answer presently was, I have now no trouble to wrestle with, but the
unwillingness of those that are dear to me to submit to the Will of the Lord
concerning me, expressing in himself much joy and satisfaction in his
expectation of the sudden accomplishment of Gods good Pleasure, wherein the
Lord not many hours after did fully gratify his longing desires, and even in
the strength and vigor of his understanding and parts he sweetly fell asleep
in the Lord. And now, Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that Ier. 9 ^1.
I might weep day and night for so irrepairable a loss. I know nothing here can
now take my heart, when the righteous are thus sadly taken away. But I must
correct my self, and retire into the Wilderness, and weep bitterly, where none
shall witness it, or be prejudiced by it. Therefore now seeing God has
determined his own Will, my great business is in the strength of Christ to
speak to your consolation (sweet Lady) who have the deepest share in this sad
loss. The truth is, the Lord has taken from you the most suitable and choycest
Quum non satis naturae, neque Gloriae, nequae patriae vix^sset.
mercy you had below himself, and that in the midst of your enjoyment of it;
when the flower in your bosom was most fragrant, it pleased the Lord that the^
it should be withered. God took him away before he had lived half long enough
to any relation; but the Lord has done it, and it is good to be silent in his
Will: Your business now is to see and receive the making up of this loss in
Christ, who is not only a Father to the fatherless, but also a Husband to the
Widow: Isa. 54 5.
Thy Maker is thy Husband. There are four things wherein the Lord does manifest
to you his tender sense of your condition.

1. He executes all your Judgment for you; He is the widows Psa 68. 5. Defensor
viduarum. Iun. Spei secularis societate destitutis dominus sibi templum
fabricat. Aug.
Judge: Hers in a peculiar manner. God was so good under the Law, as to Deu. 10.
81.
execute the judgment of the widow; much more is he so now under the Gospel:
Whether you are Plaintiff or Defendant, seeing the Judge is yours, the Cause
cannot but be yours also.

2. He establishes mercies to you: When a husband dies, the very pillars of
the house are broken; God then appears and establishes all again: so that now
what the widow has, though never so little, is more sure to her then to any
one else: Pro. 15. 25 Constituit terminum viduae. ^un. 1 King. 17. 16.
* He establishes the border of the widow. It was the widows oil in the cruse,
and the widows meal in the barrel, which did not waste.

3. He threatens all that afflict you; He proclaims to all the world what he
will do against them who do the least thing against you: Read often that place,
Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24. Yea, if any do but so much as vex you, God numbers it in
the Ezekiel 22. 7
Catalogue of their great prevocations.

4. He looks upon it as a signel act of goodness in all that show mercy to you:
He looks upon it as that wherein all Religion Jam 1. ^7. (...) Curare and pro
virili sublevare. Bez. Jor. 49. 11
is swallowed up: This is pure Religion, to visit the fatherless and widows in
their affliction.

Now from all this discovery of Gods goodness to you, what is it that God may
justly expect and challenge from you, but the casting of your self by faith
upon him? God encourages you to it: Let their widows trust in me. Now earth is
blasted and withered to you, whom should you fly to, but him in whom the life
and fullness of what you have lost still do abide and continue? What Earth
cannot repair, Heaven can. Oh that God would therefore by this dispensation
take occasion to lead you forth into further experiences of himself, that you
might, while you drink down this bitter cup, taste also and see that the Lord
is gracious. This I know will be your only relief, and that which in ^^^e will
certainly scatter that cloud of sadness which indeed at present rests with too
great darkness upon your Spirit, which the Lord, by the manifestation of
himself, will in his time totally dispel: In the mean while, let that sweet
Scripture as a companion rest with you: Unto the upright there arises light in
the darkness: he is gracious, and Psa. 112. 4.
full of compassion, and righteous. That the Marrow and Spirit of this Text may
be your Portion, is the uncessan^ Prayer of,

LADY, Your poor Orator at the Throne of Grace, and unworthy Servant in the
Work of the Gospel. GEORGE COKAY
Apr. 18. 1650.
PHILIPPIANS 1. 21. To Me to Live, is Christ; and to Dye, is Gain.
I Shall not trouble you with the Coherence, nor with the various Readings of
these words, which do consist of Two parts: 1. The Scope or End of a Christians
Life, [To me to live, is Christ.] 2. The Hope and Fruit of a Christians Death,
[And to dye, is Gain.] A Real Christian is (of all men) in the Best Condition:
For if he lives, he Gets; and if he dies, he Gains. None Improve Life well, and
None Enrich themselves by Death, but Believing Christians. From these Two parts
there are two Propositions, unto which I intend to speak at this time: 1. The
First is, That the Life of a Real Christian is Resolved into Christ. 2. The
Second is, That the Death of a Real Christian is Resolved into Gain. I begin
with the First of these.

That the Life of a Real Christian is Resolved into 1 Propo^^^.
Christ; (To me to live, is Christ.)

The Life of a Chistian has a Fourfold reference unto Christ. Christ is,

1. Principium, The Principle or Fountain of His Life: All Spiritual Life is
First in Christ, and Next in us; As the life of the Branches is First in the
Root, and from thence Imparted to the Branches: I Am the Vine, Ye Are the
Branches; Joh. 15. 5.

2. Objectum: Christ is the Object upon which the Christian lives; I live by
the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. As the Ordinary Man lives upon his
Food, so the Spiritual Man lives upon his Christ. Whatsoever makes for Life,
For that does the Believer live on Christ, who indeed is the only All of Life,
and for Life, unto his Soul.

3. Regula: Christ is the Rule and Square of a Christians Life; He that Abides
in him, Ought himself also to walk, As he walked, 1 John 2. 6. Hence those
expressions, My ways which be In Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 17. Your Good Conversation
In Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Be Followers of me, As I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Walk in love, As Christ also has loved us, Ephesians. 5. 2. The Life of Christ is
the Copy, and the Life of a Christian is a Line written after that Copy: The
Life of Christ is the Seal, and the Life of a Christian is the Character or
Expression of that Seal; His Life is (in this sense also) The Manifestation of
the life of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 10.

4. Finis, or Scopus: Christ is the End unto which, and for which, a Christian
does live. The Life of a Christian, (that is) the Course of a Christian, the
Course of his Thoughts and Designs, the Course of his Desires and Affections,
the Course of his Endevors and Labors, All the Course of his Life is directed
unto Christ; it is subordinate and serviceable to the Glorifying of Christ.
None of us (says the Apostle in Romans 14. 7, 8.) lives to Himself, and No man
dies to Himself: For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we
dye, we dye unto the Lord, etc. A man lives unto himself, who sets up Qui se
unum respicit.
himself As the End of his living, and only regards himself. You have a
suitable expression with this in Psalm. 49. 18. Whiles he lived, he Blessed his
own Soul: Hetib lenapsiselso.
(i. e.) All that he Aimed at, was to please, and benefit, and enrich, and
increase himself. So on the contrary, To live unto the Lord, to live unto
Christ, is Not only to Set up the Will of Christ As the Rule of Life, But Also
to Set up the Glory and Advantages of Christ, As the Superlative Aim or End of
Life.

You have the like passage in 2 Cor. 5. 15. He dyed for All, that They which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, But unto Him which dyed for
them, and rose again. The Apostle does here make a Parallel and Reciprocal
Intention 'twixt Christ and Christians. The Intention of Christ in His Death
was Their Good, (He dyed for them;) and the Intention of Christ in His
Resurrection was Their Good, (He Rose again for them; He was delivered for Our
Offenses, and was Raised again for Our Justification, Romans 4. 25.) Christ did
not live for Himself, but For Us; Christ did not dye for Himself, but For Us;
Christ did not Rise for Himself, but For Us: He intended Our Good in All these.
And so Reciprocally, Christians should, in their whole course of life, Not
intend Themselves, but Christ; Not live unto themselves, but unto Christ: Our
Good and Salvation was His End, and His Honor and Glory should be Our End.

Now, for the further clearing of this Assertion, I shall endeavor to
demonstrate two Things: Namely,

1. That Real Christians do propound Jesus Christ As the Scope and End of their
Life. 2. Why they do so, and why they should do so.
That Real Christians do Propound Jesus Christ 1.
As the End of their living, will plainly Appear, if you do seriously consider,
That Jesus Christ has All those peculiar Influences and Operations upon their
Hearts, which Any Chief End has upon every man who sets it up, As So, unto
Himself. That which is Any Man's Chief End, it has Six Qualities in it.

1. It does Excitare; it sets a man to work, it Finis movet ad Agendum.
sets the wheels going; it does awaken and stir every Faculty of the Soul, and
makes them Active. If a Man's Heart be Set on Any part of the World As his Chief
End, suppose it be Honor with Haman, or Pleasure with Belshazzar, or Riches
with Dives; why, presently All the Soul is drawn out, and works for that
worldly End: The Mind thinks and plods, the Will desires and stirs, the
Affections long and thirst, and the whole in that man acts and labors toward
that End. In like manner Jesus Christ (who is the Great End of a Christians
Life) has a very strong and influential virtue upon the Heart of a Christian:
The Glory of Christ quickens, stirs, draws out his Soul; The love of Christ
constrains us, said Paul in 2 Cor. 5. 14. It does urge us, puts us (...) Vid.
Beza. in locum.
Forward, wholly possesses us, Rules us, disposes of us, carries us on as men
possessed with a vehemence of Spirit; or as a Ship which strong winds do drive
apace. If Jesus Christ, if any Inter^st of his be concerned, the Christian
looks on himself so concerned therein, that he cannot but put out himself.

In Act. 4. 17, 18. The Council there threaten and charge the Apostles, That
henceforth they should speak to no man in the Name of Christ: What Answer make
Peter and John to this? See Verse. 20. We cannot but speak the things which we
have seen and heard, ((...)) Alas! do you command us to be ^^lent for Christ?
Why, it is impossible that we should not publish Christ, and magnify Christ:
We cannot but speak for him, and do for him: You may as well charge the Sun to
stand still, as charge us to be silent for Christ.

2. That which is a Man's Chief End, it does Commensurare; it does square, and
suit, and fit all Finis est Regul^.
his actions and ways with a conformable Subserviency and Respectiveness unto
that end. There is always a Proportion and Harmony 'twixt an End, and Actions
looking at that End. And therefore is it, That according unto men's several
Ends, there are several sorts of Actions; and always those are laid aside,
which are inconsistent with, or repugnant to our ends; and those only are
chosen, which are subordinate unto them.

Now thus it is between Christ and Christians: Christ is their End; and it
appears by this that He is so, Because all their actions of Life, in the course
of it, are fashioned and shaped with a respect to Christ. Christ is the Measure
of their ways and doings: We can do Nothing Against the Truth, but For the
Truth, says Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 8. So a Christian can do Nothing (knowingly)
against Christ, but for Christ. He considers of his actions and ways; Will
these make for Christ, or Not? As the Eagle does with her young ones, those of
them which can look upon the Sun, she owns, and those that cannot, she throws
off: So does the Christian on ways and services; such as directly look at the
Glory of Christ, he embraces and prosecutes; but such as are contrary unto
Christ, he rejects and forbears, as unworthy of his practice, because repugnant
to Christ's Honor.

3. That which is a Man's Chief End, it does Facilitare; the Thoughts and
Apprehensions of it do make the Services and Employments of the Man very easy
and light unto him, which otherwise would be very heavy and tedious. You could
not drudg so as some men do, nor break your sleep, nor go to bed so late, and
rise so early, nor endure such Cares, not converse with so many Troubles* yet
they make Nothing of these, because Their End is to be Rich and Great;
Therefore these things are not burthensom, but easy to them.

Thus is it with a Christian who makes Christ his End: Natural men do wonder
how a Christian can spend so much time in Holy Meditations, in Heavenly Duties,
in Spiritual Studies and Communions; that he can venture so much for Christ,
endure so much for Christ, part with, and lose so much, and suffer so much for
Christ! And yet all these are easy to the Christian, because Christ is His
End: I am ready, says Paul, not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem for
the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21. 13. The hardest Actions and the sharpest
passions were easy to him, so that Christ might be magnified.

4. That which is a Man's Great End, that same Finis dat Amabilitatem.
does Delectare, it does delight him; and it makes all the ways conducing unto
it, delightful. It is a Truth, that (Summus Finis est Summum Bonum) a Man's
chief End is a Man's chief Good; and then you know that whatsoever is a Man's
chiefest Good, the same is a Man's chiefest Delight.

There is Nothing in the World which is a more absolute Delight and Joy to a
Christian, then Jesus Christ; for whose sake even the most Bitter Services
become most pleasing and contenting. They, in the tenth of the Hebrews, took
Joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, because this was for Christ; and the
Martyrs could sing and embrace the very flames, because this was for Christ.
And as that Martyr was troubled that he had but one Life to lose for Christ, so
a Real Christian is Never* Troubled that there is so much to be done for
Christ, but rather that he has done so little for Christ. And as Solomon spoke
of the paths of Wisdom, (Prove. 3. 17.) that All her ways were ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths were peace; That the Christian can say of all
the ways and services of, and for Christ, they are his meat and drink, the Joy,
and Delight, and Rejoyceing of his Heart: Or as Christ spoke to His Father
concerning the work of our Redemption, Lo, I come; I delight to do thy Will,
Psalm. 40. 7, 8. The same can a Real Christian speak concerning Christ, and his
services for Christ. O Lord Jesus! Nothing is dearer to me then thy self; Thou
art my Love, and all that is to be done for thee is lovely; Thou art my
Delight, and all that I can do for thee, because it is for Thee, is therefore
delightful. It is my Salvation that Thou art my Christ; It is my Honor that I
am Thy Servant; It is my Heaven in Heaven to live with Thee; and it is my
Heaven on Earth to live unto Thee.

5. That which is a Man's Great End, it does Quietare; it is His Enough, it is
his Center: He looks not beyond it, for it is His Bound; and He moves not
beyond it, for it is His Rest; He is at his Journeys End (at the End of All his
Designs, and Desires, and Travels,) when he attains unto it, and enjoys it.
Thus it is 'twixt Christ and a Christian; There is Nothing but Christ, and
there is No more but Christ, with him: Less then Christ makes him Restless, and
the Fruition of Christ makes him Satisfied. If he can Get Christ, this is
Portion Enough; and if he can Glorify Christ, this is Honor Enough.

Show us the Father (said Philip) and it suffices. Or as Jacob about Joseph,
It is Enough, Joseph is yet Alive. Or as David, Return unto Thy Rest, O my
Soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. So, Christ gets ground in
my Heart, and the Kingdom of Christ is advanced in the World: His Kingdom and
Mountain is exalted above All the Kingdoms and Mountains in the World; This my
Joy therefore is Fulfilled.

6. Lastly, That which is a Man's Great End, that same does Compensare; If he
can but compass that, it is His Recompense, it makes a full Amends for All his
cares, and pains, and labors. So does the Glory of Christ abundantly Recompense
All the Services of a Christian. As when a Poor Soul has been panting and
looking after Christ, if at length he finds him, (I found him whom my Soul
loves, Cant. 3.) this makes a Full Amends for All his Tears, and Prayings, and
Waitings: So does this of the Magnifying of Christ; If Christ be set up in his
Throne, the Christian then Repents not, O No; This is Reward enough for All
that ever he has done or suffered for Christ. And thus you have the First Part
demonstrated unto you, That Real Christians do propound and set up Jesus Christ
as the Scope and End of their Life: Their Life is bound up in His Life. Nothing
lives, unless Christ lives. And this is the very sum of their All, to be
Servants with their All to Christ.

I now proceed unto the Second Part, Namely, 2.
Why Real Christians do live, and should live unto Christ? There are Five
Reasons for that, and I beseech you to weigh them well.

1. You are Christ's, Not only by Gift, (Thou gave them me, Joh. 17. 6.) Nor
only by Relation, (I will marry thee to my Self, Hosea 2. 19.) But also by
Purchase; Therefore you should live unto your Christ.

If you were Christ's only by way of Donation, you should live unto Him: What
is Given to Him, that is to be used for Him. If you were Christ's only by way
of Relation, you should live unto Him. The Inferior part of the Relation is for
the use and service of the Superior part of the Relation: 1 Cor. 11. 9. But
besides these, you are Christ's by way of Redemption and Purchase. You Are Not
your own; For you Are Bought with a Price: therefore Glorify God in your Body,
and in your Spirit, which are Gods: 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.

Mark the Apostle in this place; He says to Christians, You Are Not Your Own!
Why, whose are They then? They are Christ's* And How come they to be Christ's? He
tells them how, Ye Are Bought with a Price: And what of that? Therefore
Glorify God, etc. If the Land be my Purchase* should Not the Fruit of that
Land be my Benefit? Christians they are Christ's Purchase, He purchased them by
his own Blood, Act. 20. 28. And therefore All the Rent of their Lives must be
paid in unto his Glory.

Ah Christians! It cost Jesus Christ very dear to Redeem your Life from Death;
The Redemption of your Souls was the costliest Purchase that ever was made; Ye
were Redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19. This was the
Price. It did cost Christ His Life to Save your Life; and should he Not have
That Life which he purchased by His Life* yea, and by His Death? Quicquid es,
debes Creanti; Quicquid potes, debes Redimenti, said Bernard: Whatsoever thou
Art, Thou owe to Him who made thee; and whatsoever thou Have, Thou owe to
Him who Redeemed thee.

2. Jesus Christ is the Lord of Life, The Prince of Life, Act. 3. 15. The Lord
of the Living, and of the Dead, Romans 14. 9. He is the Lord of Life For
Efficiency, Our Life comes from Him who is our Life; and For Authority, The
Keys of Life are in his Hands. If Any of you be the Lord or Master of a
Servant; as that Servant may expect Protection, Sustenance, and Reward from
you; so do you expect and challenge Obedience and Service from him. His Work is
yours* His Trading is yours, His Gaining is yours; All the Stock which he
employs is your Stock, and it is employed for your Advantage: The Lord is the
End of the Servants Life: And so must Jesus Christ (who is the Lord of Life,
and the Lord of your Lives) be the End of your Lives; For He is Your Lord, 2
Pet. 1. 2. And you are Christ's Servants, 1 Cor. 7. 22. Your whole stock of Life
is from his Grace, and therefore it is to be laid out for his Glory.

3. All the Spiritual Principles of Life, which are conferred upon you, do
incline and enable you to live unto Christ, to set up Christ, to act for him,
and to exalt him: And they are given for this end, that you should be the
Servants of his Glory; and in their proper sphere do move for this very end, to
show forth the Praises of him who has called you. I will instance in a Few of
them.

First, Unto you is Given Precious Faith. And what is the Natural Labor of
Faith, but to Set the Crown on the Head of Christ? To Glorify Jesus Christ?
Faith makes you to Forsake All for Christ, and to Bestow All on Christ, who
Bestows His All on you.

Secondly, Unto you is Given a Superlative Love of Christ. Saw ye Him whom my
Soul loves? said the Church, Cantic. 3. 3. Thou Know that I love thee, said
Peter, Ioh. 21. 17. O Lord Jesus, said Bernard, I love thee more then All my
Goods, Plusquam mea, plusquamme^s, plusquam me.
and I love thee more then All my Friends, yea, I love thee more then All my
Self. Now you know that Love seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. 5. All the powers
and services of Love are His, whom we entirely love: His we Are, and For Him we
Are, whom we do love.

Thirdly, Unto you is Given Humble Self-denial. And what are Humility and
Self-denial, but the Footstool of Jesus Christ? But your selves in a dark
Cloud, that Christ above may shine in Glory? You in Nothing, and Christ in All?
You in Service, and Christ in Praise? None but Christ for your Confidence, and
None but Christ for your End.

Lastly, Unto you is Given Burning Zeal. And what is that Zeal, but a Flame for
his Cause and Glory? Whether we be besides our selves, it is to God, 2 Cor. 5.
13. All the Activities and Enlargements of Zeal are put forth in Services for
Jesus Christ.

4. Of All People, you who are Real Christians have the most forcible and
cogent Obligations to resolve your Lives unto Jesus Christ; For whatsoever may
emphatically engage Any to Respects and Services, that takes Abundant hold on
you to express these unto Christ. O Christians! What is not Christ to you? What
has not Christ done for you? What has not Christ suffered for you? What will
not Christ do for you? and what is that weight of Glory which you shall have
from your Christ, after that you have done a little more weak Services for your
Christ?

Christ is Life to you, and Love to you, and Mercy to you, and Peace to you,
and Righteousness to you, and Sanctification to you, and Redemption to you, and
Help to you, and Hope to you. He is your Friend, He is your Savior, He is your
Glory, He is your Christ to the utmost, For All, For ever and For ever! All
that ever he did, and All that He is Now doing, and All which ever he will do,
All this has a special and peculiar Respectiveness and Serviceableness to your
Good, to your everlasting Good. Why then, Eye for Eye, and Love for Love, and
Service for Service, and Life for Life again. Thou have Redeemed us to God by
thy Blood, and have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests: And therefore
worthy is the Lamb to Receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and
Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, Rev. 5. 9, 10, 12.

Nay, let me add one Obligation more which lies upon you, and that is this; You
are the only People in the world, whom Jesus Christ does entrust with his
Glorious Interests: He forms you for his Praise, he trusts you with All his
Honor here below amongst the sons of men. And truly, as it is your Great Honor
to be trusted with the Honor of Christ, So are you thereby the more obliged to
live and act for his Honor and Glory.

5. To direct and act the whole Course of Life for Christ; This is the Highest
and Noblest Improvement of Life. Beloved! Our Actions have their denominations,
partly from their Formal and intrinsecal cause, and partly from their Final and
extrinsecal cause. The Actions of Man are more Noble then those of Irrational
Creatures, because They do flow from a Cause, from a Soul, which is more Noble.
And the Actions of a Christian are more Noble then those of a Man, because they
do spring from Principles which are divine. And as Actions are thus dignified
by their Formal Causes, so likewise are They by their Final and Extrinsecal
Causes. The more low and sordid the Ends are, the more base are the Actions of
Life; As when they are unworthy of such a state and condition. If a Man should
form his course of Life only for such ends which do bound the Appetites of
Brute Beasts, in satisfying of himself with Sensual Objects, this sordid End
makes his Life a most sordid Life. And so on the contrary, the more excellent
the Ends are for which our Lives are improved, the more are our Lives raised in
the degrees of Beauty and Perfection. The more perfect Ends do always grace our
Actions with the more perfect Glory. The Actions of God himself are therefore
the most glorious, because they are Levelled at, and come up most perfectly to
His own Glory, which is the chief End of Himself. And so it is with the Actions
of our Lives, when they Rise to Christ, and are Terminated* in him; This is
their Dignity and Glory, they cannot be Raised unto a more choice Nature or
degree of employment; They are Now carried on and lifted up to the highest End.
As far as Christ and His Glory are above Sinful Lusts and Worldly Lusts, above
Earthly Pleasures and Earthly Profits, and Earthly Honors, and above our
Selves; So Far is a Living unto Christ above and beyond a Living unto Any or
All of these.

And thus have you heard the First Proposition in some measure cleared unto
you, Namely, That the Life of a Christian is Resolved into Christ. I Now come
to speak of the second Proposition, which is this,

That the Death of a Christian is Resolved into 2 Propo^it.
Gain, [To me to live, is Christ, And to dye, is Gain.]

I shall not trouble you with the several considerations of Gain, which yet
might be aptly applied to the present Subject; As (Lucrum ex Benevolentia, ex
Pacto, ex Societate, ex Re Accepta,) Gain by Favor, by Compact, by Society, by
Matter falling into hand, in respect of all which the Christian is a Gainer by
Death. But I shall briefly clear the Assertion, 1. By Scriptures. 2. By
Arguments.

1. By Scriptures. Ecclesiastes 7. 1. The day of Death is better then the day
of ones Birth. If it be Better, then it is Gain. If you get more by Death then
you do by Life, surely then Death is a Gain. Phil. 1. 23. I have a desire to
depart, (i. e.) to dye, (Death to a Godly man is but a departure from one
condition to another, and from one place to another,) and to be with Christ,
which is far Better. To be In E^e Christum cum Paulo, magna securitas; Esse
Paulum cum Christo* summa Felicitas. Bernard.
Christ, is very Good; thus we are whiles we live: But to be With Christ, this
is Best of All; and thus we are when we dye. For Christ to be with Paul, this
was a Great Blessing; But for Paul to be with Christ, this was chiefest
Blessedness, said Bernard. Take one place more, Revel. 14. 13. Blessed Are the
Dead which dye in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their works Follow
them. There is a Proportion of Blessedness which Christians have in this Life,
But the Full Portion of it is at Death; therefore Death is Gain. In this Life
we are laboring for Blessedness, but at Death you shall be Fully possessed of
Blessedness. Possession is better then Expectation, and Blessedness in Hand is
better then Blessedness in Hope; therefore Death is Gain to Christians.

2. By Arguments. It cannot be, but that Christians must Needs Gain by Death,
Because thereupon they pass into such an Estate, where they do receive a Full
Reward, and where All the Promises of God are perfectly made Good unto them,
and where All the Gracious and Eternal Intentions of Love and Happiness toward
them, are (as in their last End) Fulfilled and Accomplished. And beyond which
Estate there is Not in them, No Not a possible capacity for the Fruition of a
Greater Perfection and Glory.

But more particularly; If the Estate, into which the Christian is Translated
by Death, does more then Recompense All his Losses by Death, and does
transcendently exceed All the Benefits which he has in Life; then Death is
Gain or Advantage unto him: For herein does All Gain consist; It is a Fuller
Recompense, or a Larger Addition. If you lose a little, and for that Receive
more, this is Gain. If you lay out a little, and for this Take in much, this
also is Gain. Now consider,

1. The Christians Compensations by Death are far greater then any of his
Losses by Death. You read of the Phoenix, that her old Age falling into the
Flames of death, procures unto her a second Edition or Birth of a New and Fresh
Life; And hereby Death is an Advantage unto that Creature. Much more is it to
the Christian, concerning whom the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 5. 4. That Mortality
is swallowed up of Life, and that Death is but the dissolving of his Earthly
house, so that he might enjoy An house Not made with Hand, Eternal in the
Heavens: Verse. 1.

There is Nothing which you can lose by Death, but what must be lost, and what
(for the most part) may be lost in Life. And whatsoever that is which you so
lose by Death, it is superabundantly made up unto you again. You lose a Mortal
Life, but then you Find an Immortal Life: You lose the Society of Men, but
then you Find the Society of Angels: You lose the Sight of Friends, but then
you Find the Sight of God: You lose the Possession of the World, but then you
Find the Possession of the Kingdom of Heaven. Are Not these Compensations more
then Equivalent to your Losses? Do they Not Infinitely exceed them? The people
of Israel quit Egypt (the House of Bondage,) and possess Canaan (the Land of
Promise;) Would you call this a Loss, which exceeds All that was enjoyed in
Egypt?

O Christian! The least Good in Heaven (if there be Any thing there which can
be called The l^ast Good!) Far surmounts All the Good from which Death can part
you here on Earth. The Candle is out, I, But Now thou Have the Sun! I leave my
Earthly Father, I, but I Now Go to my Heavenly Father! I part with my Husband,
O but I Go to my Christ! The Streams are cut off, O but Now I am at the
Fountain! I shall Never meet with Creature Comforts more, O but I shall Now
enjoy Him who makes All Comforts, and who is All Comforts, God, My God; Christ,
My Christ for ever.

2. The Christians Estate Receives a larger Addition by Death, and therefore
for him to dye is Gain. There are three things added unto your Estate by Death,
which you longed to have, but Never might, Nor could enjoy in this Life: 1. An
Absolute Remedy. 2. A Perfect Fruition. 3. An Invariable Eternity.

First, The Christian has this Gain by Death, That it proves an Absolute
Remedy: Death does that for Him in One Moment, which All the Ordinances of
Christ could Never do, which All the Graces of the Spirit could Never do, which
All the Joys of the Holy Ghost could Never do: It does instantly cure his Soul
and Body; It does perfectly cure them and deliver them From All the Afflictions
of Life, from All the Troubles of Life, from All Infirmities and Diseases in
the Body, from All Sinful Corruptions in the Soul, from All the Temptations and
Assaults of Satan; All these are at their end, when Life is at an end. And
truly to lose All these, and All these for ever, is deservedly to be Reckoned
amongst Our Gains and Advantages.

I have Read of Alexander the Great, that he did once ask a Philosopher, How
long a Man should desire to live, who answered, Until he thinks it better to
dye, then to live. Is it Not Better to dye, and to be rid of All Sin, to dye,
and be rid of All Temptations, to dye, and be rid of All Miseries, then to
live, and carry about us a Body of Sin, which so often darkens our Light,
grieves our God, and troubles our Consciences?

Secondly, The Christian has this Gain by Death, Not only that he has the
Better of the contrary Estates, but also that by Death he p^sseth from an
Imperfect Good Estate, unto a Perfect Good Estate: He Now comes to be of Full
Age, and to be a Full Possessor. One says, That This Bernard.
Life, This Present Life, is Not Vita, sed Via ad Vitam, It is Not Life, but a
Motion, a Journey toward Life. He speaks it of the Natural Life, but we may
raise it even to the Spiritual Life of a Christian: His Spiritual Life
(comparatively considered) is rather Via, then Vita; a step toward Life, then
Life. Compare All which you are possessed of, as Believing Christians, in this
Life, with All that of which you shall be possessed in that other Life, you may
speak of them what Paul spoke of the Two Ministrations, Even that which was
made Glorious had No Glory in this respect, by reason of the Glory that
excels, 2 Cor. 3. 10. And therefore the same Apostle, comparing the Present
Condition of Grace with that Future Condition of Glory, says, Now we see
through a Glass, darkly, But Then Face to Face: Now I Know in part, But Then I
shall Know even as also I Am Known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Look how Great the
Disproportion is between a dark and a clear Seeing, and between our Knowing of
God, and Gods Knowing of Us, the one being very Imperfect, and the other being
very Absolute; So Great is the Disproportion of the present Condition of
Spiritual Life on Earth to that Glorified Life in Heaven. It Is true, you have
the same God on Earth, which you shall have in Heaven; and you have the same
Christ on Earth, which you shall have in Heaven! But yet your Conjunction with
Him, and your Fruition of Him in Heaven, is wonderfully more perfect and
exquisite, then it is, or can be, here on Earth. His Manifestations of Himself
to your Souls, and your Apprehensions of those Manifestations, are most
completely Enlarged You shall then Know, and Love, and Enjoy your God, even as
much as Glorified Souls can Know, and can Love, and can Enjoy a God. And God
himself discovers as much of Himself unto your Souls, as will make them
perfectly Blessed, and Fully Happy, in the clear Vision and Fruition of
Himself. Now this Addition, perfect Addition to Our Estate (occasioned by
Death) does plainly prove, That to dye, is Gain. You shall Never Reign, till
you dye: You shall Never Know as you are Known, you shall Never Apprehend as
you are Apprehended, you shall Never be at Home, you shall Never come to a
Perfect Holiness, to a Perfect Sight, to a Perfect Full Fruition, Never be
Perfectly Filled up, Until you Dye.

Thirdly, The Christian has yet one more Exaltation of His Estate by Death,
and that is, an Invariable Eternity. Whatsoever the Christian ^inds in Himself
in this Life, for the Habituals of Grace, It is Imperfect; and whatsoever he
finds for the Comfortables of Grace, It is very Various: Sometimes it is More,
and sometimes it is Less; Sometimes it is High, and sometimes it is Low, and
Sometimes it is None at all. Sometimes Heaven is opened, and Sometimes the
Vision is drawn up, and Heaven is shut. One while he sees the Face of God, and
Rejoices; Another while God Hides his Face, and then he is Troubled: But by
Death he comes to a Fixed and Invariable Eternity; He shall Ever be with the
Lord: And as the Angels, so shall He always behold the Face of his Father. O
Christians! It is always Day in Heaven, There the Sun still shines in Strength
and Beauty, and Never Sets, and Never Declines; Thy Joy shall be an Everlasting
Joy, Never Interrupted, Never Eclipsed, Never Diminished; Full at once, and
Full for ever! Eternal Happiness, Happy Eternity! Perfect Fruition and Eternal
Fruition! Perfect Pleasure, and Eternal Pleasure! As long as God is God, so
long will your Complete Happiness be, and abide in your God for ever, and ever,
and ever.

And Now having cast up All Accounts, Tell me whether you may not say with
Paul, To me to Dye, is Gain? I have read a Fancy of one Trophonius, that when
he had Built and Dedicated that goodly Temple at Delphos, asked of Apollo (for
his recompense) That Thing which was Best for Man! The Oracle willed him to Go
home, and within Three days he should have it, and within that Time he dyed. O
Christian! The Best thing on Earth is to live so, as to Get into Christ; But
the Best thing of All is to dye, and to be with Christ.

I have done with both the Doctrinal Propositions from the Text; There remains
Nothing behind, but the useful Applications of the whole unto our Selves.

Is the Life of a Real Christian Resolved into 1 Use.
Christ? Then I Fear that there Are But Few Real Christians in the World. What
Christ spoke of the Way which did lead to Life, Few there be that Find it,
Mat. 7. 14. That I may speak of Christ, as the Scope of our Life, Few there be
who make Him so, and mind Him as so. All seek their own, Not the Things which
Are Jesus Chri^ts; Thus the Apostle long since (and so may it Now be)
complained, Phil. 2. 21.

If we did faithfully cast up All the Ages of Life, and All the Services and
Disbursements of those Ages, What (think you) would, in the Foot of the whole
account, Fall unto the share of Christ?

"That Age of Infancy is found to be but a Cipher: We Know not what it was, Nor
for whom it was; it was a mere Fancy of Life.

"That Age of Youth is found to be but a Vanity: A Vain Life it is, and if laid
out on Any thing, that same Goes wholly upon the account of Pleasure, which is
the Bane and Madness of Life.

"That Age of Manhood is found to be but the Death of Life: therein men Serve
their lusts, weary themselves in their Iniquities, give up themselves to Sin
with greediness; this is the Reproach and Loss of Life.

"That Age of Old Age, wherein the Grave is digging for Life, wherein the Glass
is even run out, and the Candle is spent to the last inch; yet this Age, where
Men are stepping out of the World, is that Age wherein Men most dote on the
World, and are Scraping for the things of this Life. And thus, either Nothing
has our Lives, or Vanity (which is the best of Nothing) has our Lives; Or Sin
(which is worse then Nothing) has our Lives; Or the World (which is little
better then Nothing) has our Lives: And Jesus Christ (who is the Best of All
things) has no share at all; or if any, it is the last, the least, the dregs
and snuffs of our Lives.

This I speak only in the general: but give me Favor to Press this sad
Conviction a little closer unto our Selves. There are Four sorts of men, who do
not live to Christ; They cannot say, To me to live, is Christ.

1. Spiritually dead men, unconverted men; It is impossible to live to Christ,
until Christ does first live in us. Christ cannot be the End of Life, where He
is not the Principle of Life. It is an excellent Expression which Ambrose has,
That is not a Death, but Life, which Joins the Dying Ambrosius in 1 Timothy 5 6.
Man to Christ; and that is Not a Life, but Death, which Separates the Living
Man from Christ. Now, how many men are there who have not the Life of Christ in
them? Nay, who are Alienated from the Life of Christ, are dead in trespasses
and sins?

2. Self-Interested men, who live wholly unto themselves. The Apostle speaks of
Some who are Lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy 3. 2. and who are Seekers of
themselves, Philip. 2. 21. and who are Minders of themselves; They mind
Earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. Of all these we may say, as God spoke of Israel,
Israel is An Empty Vine, he brings forth Fruit unto Himself, Hosea 10. 1. These
men are so far from living unto Christ, that they would for Self ends make a
Living of Christ himself.

3. Offensive men, who live to the Dishonor and Reproach of Christ. Many walk,
of whom I have told you often, and Now tell you even weeping, that they are the
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. Christians in Name, but not in
Life; in Life they are the Enemies of Christ.

Salvian relates how the Heathen did Reproach some Christians, who by Their
lewd lives made the Gospel of Christ to be a Reproach: Where (said Salvianus de
G. D. l. 4.
they) is that Good Law which they do Believe? Where are those Rules of
Godliness which they do learn? They read the Holy Gospel, and yet are Unclean;
They Hear the Apostles Writings, and yet are Drunk; They Follow Christ, and yet
disobey Christ; They profess a Pure Law, and yet do lead Impure Lives. O Sirs!
A wicked Life in a Christian is so far from living unto Christ, that it is a
Blaspheming of Christ, and a Crucifying of Christ, and putting of him to open
shame.

4. Dull and unsensible men; of such did one long since complain, That they did
(Patientius far Christi Jacturam, quam Suam) more calmly pass by the Injuries
done to Christ, then those which were done unto themselves. Many men do carry
themselves toward the Blasphemous Dishonors of Christ, as the Priests did to
the heavy Complaints of Judas, What is that to us? See thou to that! Although
they do Know how much the Person of Christ, and the Truths of Christ, and the
Ordinances of Christ, are opposed and contemned; yet they lay None of these
things to Heart: They pass by the Wounded man; they speak not for Christ, stand
not for Christ, act not their Parts and Power for Christ. Is this your Love to
Christ? Is this your Care for Christ? Is this to live to Christ? Can you ever
answer Christ for this?

But I pass on; Is the Life of a Real Christian resolved 2 Use.
unto Christ? Then let us every one strive so to live, so to employ and improve
Life, that Christ may be magnified by us. You Read, That the Four and Twenty
Elders Fell down before Him that sat on the Throne, and worshipped Him that
lives for ever and ever; And did cast Their Crowns before the Thr^ne, saying,
Thou Art Worthy, O Lord, to Receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for Thou have
Created All things, and for Thy Pleasure they Are, and were Created, Revel. 4.
10, 11. So let Every one of us Prostrate All our Excellencies, and All our
Abilities, All our Places, and Powers, and Endevors, to the Honor and Glory of
Jesus Christ. If we had a more clear and experimental Knowledge of the
Surpassing Love of Christ, we would do so! That would Endear our Hearts to
Christ, That would Inflame our Hearts for Christ; It would make us to spend and
to be spent for Christ! O that you, who are Parliament Men, would live more for
Christ! Who amongst us have such Power, and such Opportunities to do for
Christ, as you have? God speaks Honorably of Phineas, He was Zealous for my
sake, Numb. 25. 11. And Christ commends Ephesus, For my Names sake thou have
Labored, and have not ^ainted, Revel. 2. 3. Put out your Selves against
Blasphemies and Profaneness, and put out your Selves for All the Ordinances,
Truths, and Ways of Christ, etc.

O that you, who are Magistrates of this City, would live more to Christ! Do
more for Christ! Be more vigorous in Punishing and Restraining the open
Profanations of the Lords Day, Notorious Drunkennesses and Abominations!
Encourage and support All the Interests of Christ!

O that you, who are the Ambassadors of Christ, would live more to Christ! Do
you desire to Know Nothing but Jesus Christ, and Him Crucified? Reveal the
Glorious Excellencies of Christ, make Know the unspeakable Love of Christ,
direct men, strive with men, persuade men to Know Christ, to come into Christ,
to serve Christ. What have you more to do, then to be doing for Christ?

O that All of us would live more to Christ! That All our Oil might be emptied
into the Golden Candlestick! That Parents and Children, Masters and Servants,
All might be doing more for Christ! Every Morning let us consider, What may I
do this day for Christ? Every Evening let us Review, What have I done this day
for Christ? And as he thought that day lost, wherein he had done No Good thing;
So let us repute that part of Life as dead and lost, wherein we have done
Nothing to the Honor and Advantage of Christ. O Christian! Thou live not;
until thou live to Christ. O Christian! Thou can not dye, but thou must dye
for ever, if thou have not lived unto Christ. It was a Good Speech of one, (Vis
in pace mori? sis Servus Dei;) Would thou dye in Peace? then be the Servant
of God. So say I, Would thou dye, and Go to Christ? then live so, as to be a
Servant of Christ.

Every Man, when he dies, Goes unto his Master whom he has served, and to whom
he has lived. A Wi^ked Man, when he dies, he goes to his Master whom he has
served; He goes to the Devil, and to the Place of Torment. A Godly Man, when he
dies, he goes to His Master, He goes to His Christ, and enters into the Joy of
his Master. If you would dye with Paul's Confidence, you must first live with
Paul's Conscience. I have fought A Good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have
Kept the Faith: Here is Paul's Conscience. Henceforth there is laid up for me A
Crown of Righteousness, etc. Here is Paul's Confidence: 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

O Blessed Christ! Be Thou my Master, make me thy Servant! Let me grieve that I
have done so little for thee, let me pray that I may do more for thee. When
Death comes, my work is at an end; I can then Never Speak more, Nor do more for
Thee, who have done so much for me. O that I could live many days in one day,
and many lives in one life! The time is short, the Reward is infinite; let my
remaining life be No longer mine, but thine; At least let this be found in me,
That I would serve none but thy Self; and that though others may exceed me in
Acting for thy Glory, yet None may exceed me in Sincerity of Endevor to be
Altogether Thine.

And thus have I said Something of the Best Life, and of the Best Death; To
live is Christ, To dye is Gain. I will borrow a little more of your Patience to
Speak a few words to the Present Occasion, concerning our Brother departed, who
whiles he lived could say, To me to live, is Christ; and being Now dead, has
found the other truth of the Text, To me to dye, is Gain.

His manner of Life from his youth, most, or many of you here present, do Know;
And therefore I shall say the less of him, of whom you Knew so well, and so
much.

There were three things, three choice Jewels, which were very Remarkable in
him, besides All the rest: The First was Humility, the Beauty of Graces. The
Second was Integrity, the Soul of Graces. The Third was Faith, the Crown of
Graces.

1. He was an Humble Christian under All those Eminent Places of Service unto
which He was called. For one who lived so short a space of Time (He lived not
above Thirty Six years in all) He was Advanced to as many, and (as the Times
Now are) to as Great Places of Employment, as Any of His Rank (I think) in the
Land; To be a Parliamentman, To be of the Council of State, To be a Justice in
the Country, To be an Alderman, and Sheriff of This Great City, etc. Under All
which weight of Advancements He deported himself with a discreet and lowly
spirit, Not lifted up, Not at all losing himself, Nor Altered by Any of these
Alterations. These things were under Him, Not above Him; and truly he looked on
them as Burdens, and Cares, and Greater Duties; Not as Dignities and Poor
Glories. It is Not an easy matter to bear a low condition with a contented
mind; No^ yet an High condition with a lowly Heart. It shows a strength of
Grace to be Patient in Troubles, and to be Humble in Dignities.

2. He was a Sincere Christian: Active and Sincere. His Integrity was
Answerable unto his Humility. In all His Places wasting his Life for the
Public Good: Doing much Good, but Scraping up Nothing to his Private Good.
The Public did not serve Him, but He did serve the Public: He was the
Servant, Not the Executor, of the Land. He might truly say, as once Samuel did,
Behold here I am, witness Against me, Whose Ox have I Taken? or whose Ass have
I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have
I received Any Bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith? 1 Samuel 12. 3.

3. He was a Believing Christian: prizing and exalting Christ Above All, and
Rejoicing in Christ as in His only Best of All; Nay, often exposing his very
life, Jeoparding it in the ^igh places of the Field, Not counting it too dear
for Christ and His Cause.

But, as one spoke well, Seldom is Excellency in Any Kind long-lived. When we
see Men Abundantly laid out for Christ, and Acting for Him, It is an Ordinary
Symptom, That they have Not much time left to do for Christ. When a Person is
High in Grace, He is Nigh to Glory; the Nearer the Center, the Swifter Motion.
And thus it befell him: His days were Fulfilled even in the midst of his days.
Weakness and Sickness suddenly seize on him, and at length translate him to be
with His Christ, which is best of All. And all these Death-summons and
Death-strokes he did Bear with that Heavenly Patience, and sweet composedness
of Spirit, that as the Jews ^eign of Moses's Soul, That it was Sucked out of
his mouth with Kisses; So His Soul did Kindly take leave of His Body, that,
without a Metaphor or Hyperbole, His Death was but a Sleep and Rest.

And Here, by the way, suffer me (as a Friend) to speak for him, who cannot Now
speak for himself, In Taking off that Falsehood, Bold and Notorious Falsehood,
Raised on him by That Generation of Liars, even whiles he was yet living, and
able to confute it, himself; As Luther did the lying Scandals of the Papists,
concerning his strange hideous Death and Burial.

Some had Raised on him, at the beginning of his weakness, That he was Fallen
mad, and they Assign the Particular Occasion of it; Then both which Nothing
could be more Falsely said. The very Truth is, That he was of a composed Mind
to the very last Gasp, and so composedly Himself, that within a Few hours
before his Death, he perfected his own Will with his own Hand.

But This is an old malicious Trick of the Devil, to oppose Good Men, living,
and to reproach Good Men dying, and dead. Jesus Christ could Not Escape it in
his Life, Nor yet when laid in his Grave. No more could the Apostles of Christ,
Nor the Primitive Christians, Nor those Eminent Servants of Christ against
Popery, Hus, Wicliff, Luther, Calvin, Oecolampadius, Beza, Junius, etc. Nor yet
many Glorious Instruments in our own days.

The Servant is Not Above his Master: If Christ himself were Accounted Mad, it
must Not seem harsh, Nor strange, that Any of his Servants be Reputed so. And
besides this, it is also a Comfort to Good Men when None speak evil of them,
but evil men; Nor can these speak evil of them without a lie, as Jerome has it.
And truly it is a Sure Sign, that there is something of Great Worth in that
Man, whose Name wicked men do strive so much to asperse and wound. The Dogs
bark most, when the Traveller Gallops.

But let these poor spirited men have leave to please themselves, who have no
other weapon, but a lie and a Reproach, left to Revenge themselves. This is the
Truth, Our departed Brother lived in Faith, and dyed in Peace. If in Any thing
he might truly be said Not to be Himself, it was only in this, That He was Not
his Own, but Christ's.

And so I have done with him, and with you, save that I have a Word to them who
stood in Near Relation unto him. I confess your loss is Great, but let this
comfort you, that so His Gain is also exceeding Great. You have more cause to
Rejoice that you had such a Husband, and such a Son, then you have to Grieve
that God has Taken him from you. He is but Gone before, you must shortly
Follow. In the mean time make up All your Comforts in God. Though these Outward
Comforts dye, yet the God of All Comforts lives for ever* The Sun still shines,
though the Glass-windows be broken.

And let us All here at this time Go away the Better. We must Every one, ere
long, dye, and come to Judgment, and Give an Account of our Life. Live so, that
you may live for ever; and dye so, that you may dye but once. You Are Servants,
and I trust Christ's Servants: Be doing the Work of Christ, and be Faithful in
That Work of Christ. Blessed is that Servant, whom His Master, when He comes,
shall Find So Doing, and So Liveing!

FINIS.

