A SECOND. CONTINUATION OF THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE OF Stitched BOOKS and Single
SHEETS Printed since the First Discovery of The Popish Plot, ( September 1678.)
From the 24th of JUNE to Michaelmas Term 1680.

The Continuation is intended to be published every Term.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's
Church Yard, where is to be had a Complete Catalogue of all Printed since the
Plot. 1680.

A Second Continuation. Of the Complete CATALOGUE OF Stitched BOOKS and Single
SHEETS etc. Printed since the First Discovery of the POPISH PLOT, ( Sept.
1678.) from the 24th. of June to Michaelmas Term, 1680.
Folio's.
Plot, and Popery. Number of Sheets. 1. Englands Calamity fore-shown in
Germanies misery, being the dire consequent of the growth of Popery Printed for
Langley Curtis. 1 2. The Trial of Sir Thomas Gascoyne Bar. for High Treason,
Printed for T. Basset, and S. Heyrick. 17 3. A seasonable caution to Apostate
Protestants; or Mercy and Judgment at once made visible, Printed for Langley
Curtis. 1 4. Truth known to few that the Jesuits are downright Atheists, proved
by two Sentences of the faculty of Sorbonne sold by Langley Curtis. 5 5. The
Roman wonder being truth confessed by Papists, wherein the Clergy of the Church
of England, in their charge of Heretical Doctrines upon the Jesuits, are fully
justified Printed for W. Kettilby. 15 6. A narrative of the late Popish Plot in
Ireland, for the subjugating thereof to the French King, together with the
Trial of the Earl of Tyrone, by Thomas Sampson Printed for S. Lee and D. Major.
9 7. Malice defeated or a brief Relation of the Accusation and Deliverance of
Elizabeth Cellier, Printed for her self. 12 8. The Scarlet Beast stripped
Naked, or a Brief Answer to Mrs. Celliers Narrative Instituted, Malice
defeated, etc. Printed by D. Mallet. 2 9. The Midwise unmasked being a second
Answer to Mrs. Celliers scandalous Libel, Printed for T. Davies. 1 10. The
Matchless Rogue or a Brief Account of the Life of Don Thomaso, Printed for
Elizabeth Cellier. 2 11. Mr. Dangerfield's Answer to Mrs. Celliers scandalous
Lying Pamphlet, entitled Malice defeated sold by R. Tailor. 5 12. An Abstract
of the contents of several Letters relating to the management of Affairs with
Rome, by the D. of Y. and others. 2 13. A Letter from the Lady Creswell to
Madam Cellier, on the publishing her late Vindication, Printed for Langley
Curtis. 1 14. The Trial of Mrs. Cellier at the Old Baily, Printed for Langley
Curtis. 1 15. The Trial and Sentence of Elizabeth Cellier for writing, and
publishing a scandalous Libell called Malice defeated, etc. Printed for T.
Collins. 9 16. The Popes Letter to Mrs. Cellier in relation to her great
sufferings for the Catholic cause, Printed by D. Mallet. 1 17. Mr. Prance's
Answer to Mrs. Celliers Libel, and other false Aspersions cast upon him, etc.
Printed for Langley Curtis. 5 18. Modesty triumphing over impudence or some
notes upon a late Romance published by Elizabeth Cellier Midwife and Lady
Errant, Printed for J. Wilkins. 5 19. A caution to all true English Protestants
concerning the late Popish Plot, by way of conference between an old Queen
Elizabeth Protestant, and his Country Neighbor, Printed for R. Janeway. 3 20.
Mrs. Celliers Answer to the Popes Letter, wherein she declares her fidelity and
saintness to the Catholic cause, Printed by D. Mallet. 1 21. The case of Tho.
Dangerfield, with some remarkable passages, that happened at the Trials of Mrs.
Cellier and the Earl of Castlemain, at the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster,
before the Lord Chief Justice Scrogs, Printed for the Author. 10 22. Dr. Oats
Narative of the Popish Plot vindicated, in Answer to a Scurrilous Libel, called
a Vindication of the English Catholics etc. Printed for T. Cocker^ll. 14 23.
The Popes threatening Letter to the French King, or the present grand
controversy between Pope Innocent the II, and King Lewis the 14th about the
Regalia, Printed for H. Brom. 2 24. The Popish damnable Plot against our
Religion, and Liberties discovered in the Breviats of Threescore and four
Letters, and Papers for Intelligence past betwixt the Pope, Duke of York
Cardinal Norfolk, of Cardinal Cibo, Cardinal Barbarino, Nuntio and internuntio
for the Pope in France and Flanders, and the Lord Arundel Mr. Coleman etc. as
they were drawn up by the secret Committee of the House of C^mmons; for the
satisfaction of the House of Lords, in the Bill against the Duke of York,
Printed for R. Janeway. 9

Quarto's.
Plot, and Popery. Number of sheets. 1. L'Estranges Narrative of the Plot set
forth for the edification of his Majesty's Liege-People, Printed for H. Brom.
4 2. The Church Papist (so called) his Religion and Tenets fully discovered, in
a dispute between a reputed Papist, and an open professed Romanist, Printed for
R. Harford. 5 3. The great Idol of the Mass overthrown in 24 Arguments, wherein
the Doctrine of transubstantiation is fully refused. Print. for E. Proser. 2 4.
Foxes and Firebrarnds or a specimen of the danger, and harmony of Popery and
Separation. Printed for B. Took. 5 5. The rise and fall or degeneracy of the
Roman Church. 4 6. The Memories of James Wadwort a Jesuit that recanted, etc.
Print-for H. Brom. 9 7. A Vindication of the English Catholics from the
pretended conspiracy against the Life and Government of his Majesty, Printed at
Antwerp. 1680. 8 8. The Popes third brief threatening to Excommunicate the most
Christian King, Printed for J. Vade. 2 9. The grand Inquest or a full and
perfect Answer to several Reasons, by which it is pretended his Royal Highness
the Duke of York, may be proved to be a Roman Catholic, Printed for J. Vade. 3
10. The Zealous and Impartial Protestant showing some great, but less heeded
dangers of Popery, Printed for H. Brom. 8 11. An Account of a Vindication of
the English Catholics, from the pretended conspiracy against the Life and
Government of the King, Printed for J. Vade. 4 12. The Case of Protestants in
England under a Popish Prince, if any shall happen to wear the Imperial Crown,
Printed for R. Janeway. 4

MISCELLANIES.
Folio's.
Miscel. Number of Sheets. 1 A Brief Method of the Law being an exact
Alphabetical disposition, of all the heads necessary for a perfect common
place, Printed for John Kidgel. 16 2 An exact Journal of the Siege of Tangier,
from the first sitting down of the Moors, before it on March 25 1680. to May 19
following, Printed for Joseph Hindmach. 4 3 A Narative of the Confession and
Execution of Thomas Pardue at Tyburn. June the 25th. 1680. 1 4 An Account of
the proceedings at the Common Hall London, June the 24th 1680. Printed for L.
Curtis. 5 Absalon's Conspiracy, or the Tragedy of Treason. 2 6 A Catalogue of
the Names of all his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in Commission, throughout
England and Wales, according to the late alterations, Printed for W. Davies. 9
7 Mr. Chillingworth's Judgment of the Religion of Protestants of Scripture the
only rule etc. Printed for Francis Smith. 3 8 Narative of the proceedings at
the Sessions House in the Old Bailey. 1 9 A Letter to the Earl of Shaftsbury
from Tom Tell truth. 1 10 A Relation of the extraordinary Thunder and Lightning
which lately happened in the North of Ireland. 1 11 An exact Copy of the
petition of the Protestants in France, to their Sovereign Lewis 14th. sold by
L. Curtis. 2 12 A Narative of the Confession and Execution of the Eight
Prisoners at Tyburn, July the 14th 1680. 1 13 A Letter written to the French
King, by the Archbishops and Bishops about the last brief of the Pope, upon
the subject of the Regale, Printed for R. Bently. 1 14 A Letter to the Duke of
Monmouth. 1 15 A Letter from the King of Morocco, to his Majesty the King of
England Charles the 1st for the redeeming of sally Argiers etc. Printed for
Rowland Reynolds. 1 16 A true List of Names of these persons appointed by the
Rump meant, to sit as a Council of State, Reprinted. 17 A Seasonable Address to
the L. Mayor and Court of Aldermen and Commoners of the City of London, upon
their present Electing of Sheriffs, July the 17th 1680. 1 18 The Trial and
Condemnation of John Giles, that notorious Ruffian, for wounding John Arnold
Esquire Printed for L. Curtis. 1 19 The Names of the Field Officers Captains,
Lieutenants etc. of the Militia of the City of London 1680. 1 20 The Protestant
Antidote or an answer to a Pamphlet, entitled a seasonable Address to the
Honorable the Lord Major, touching the Election of Sheriffs, Printed for L.
Curtis. 21 A Letter from Jack the Cobbler to any Body, sold by L. Curtis. 22
Narative of the proceedings at Surrey Assizes at Kingstone, upon Thames from
July the 19 to the 22th. 1680. 1 23 The Bill of Indictment against John Gyles;
for his barbarous attempt upon the Body of Justice Arnold, Printed for L.
Curtis. 1 24 The Character of a Town-Gallant, sold by W. Whitwood. 1 25 The
Character of a Town-Miss, sold by W. Whitwood. 1 26 News from Guild Hall, or an
answer to the address answered, 1 27 Relation of a great and Bloody Fight
between the English and the Moors before Tangier, 1 28 The proceedings of
Guild Hall for declaring the Sheriffs. 1 29 An Account of the defeat of the
Rebels in Scotland, by the Kings Forces at Crawford John. 30 Bloody News from
Southwark of a horrid Murder, committed on the Body of Walter Osily by his own
Wife. Aug. the 2d. 1680. 1 31 A true Copy of a Treasonable Paper called the
Fanatics new Covenant, taken from Mr. Donald Cargill, at Queens Ferry, Printed
for A. Forrester. 3 32 Goodman Country to his Worship the City of London. P.
for W. K. 1 33 Brief Compendium of the Birth and exploits of Thomas Earl of
Ossery. 1 34 The Cities just Vindication or a Scourge for a Vagabond Libel,
entitled Goodman Country to his Worship the City. 1 35 Tell-truths Answer to
Tell-truth's Letter to the right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury in
Vindication of his Lordship, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 36 The proceedings of the
grand Jury of Bristol against Mr. Edward Flower, for speaking scandalous and
seditious words. 37 An Act of Common Council of the City of London, for
retrenching the expenses of the Lord Major and Sheriffs, etc. with Reasons for
putting the same in present Execution, Printed for F. Smith. 2 38 A Letter to
Dr. Brurnett from the Earl of Rochester on his Death Bed, Printed for R.
Bentley. 1 39 A full relation of Two old Men aged above a Thousand years coming
invisibly into the City of Tholouze in France from Damascus in Galilee, Printed
for N. Thompson. 1 40 Address of the Common Hall, for the fitting of the
Parliament. 2 41 A Letter to Dr. Buract from the Lord Rochester on his Death
Bed, Printed for R. Bentley. 1 42 The Method of turning the Militin of
Scotland, into a standing Army, Printed for J. Gay, and W. English. 1 43 The
Imperfection of most Governments, taken out of the Epitomy of the Roman
History, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 44 A Relation of the two pretended Apostles
that came invisibly, into the great City of Tholouze in France from Damascus in
Galilee, aged above a Thousand years, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 45 A Whip for
the Tholouze Liar, in Answer to the Relation of the two old Men, Printed for D.
Mallet. 1 46 Great and Bloody News from Turnham Green, or a Relation between
the Earl of Pembrook and his Company, with the Constable and Watch, belonging
to the Parish of C^swick, P. for D. Mallet. 1 47 An Account of the misfortune
that lately happened to the Earl of Pembrook, Printed for Sam. Miller. Number
of Sheets. 1 48 An Account of the Sickness Death and Burial of Captain Willam
Bedlow, Printed for Rand. Tailor. 1 49 Great News from Saxony, or a Relation of
the mighty Gianr Koorbmep of his devouring Men etc. 1 50 An Account of the
behavior of the Condemned Prisoners in Newgate. Sept. 6th 1680. 1 51 The Bishop
of London's second Letter to the Clergy of his Diocese, Printed for H. Brom. 1
52 Will with a Whisp to Robbin Good Fellow, Printed for T. Davies. 1 53 A
Letter from the Duke of Brandenburg to several Ministers of State, showing his
resolution to defend the Protestant Religion, P. T. Davies. 54 A Relation of a
dreadful storm accompanied with Thunders and Hailstones, some of them being
above two pound weight about the City of Millain, Printed for T. Davies. 1 55
An Account of the Trials at the Old Baily, began the 10th of Sept. 1680.
Printed for T. Davies. 1 56 The two Noble Converts, or the Earl of Marlborough
and the Earl of Rochester, their dying requests to the Atheists and debauche'es
of this Age, Printed for Rand. Tailor. 1 57 Remarks on some eminent passages in
the life of Colonel Blood, in a Letter to a Person of Quality, written upon
the occasion of the late Trial, Relating to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham,
Printed for John Norris. 4 58 An Account of the New Sheriffs holding their
Office, Printed for Tho. Snowden. 1 59 The Speech of Sir Patient Ward the 29th
of September 1680. being the day he was Elected Lord Major of London, Printed
for Tho. Collins, and Brab. Milmer. 1 60 A Relation of two remarkable Trials,
at the Sessions of the Peace for the liberty of Westminster, on the third of
October 1680. the one for scandalous words by one Skippon, the other of a
Priest in the Gate House, for spoiling of a Girl of nine Years old, Printed for
W. H. and T. F. 1 61 The naked truth, (the second part) concerning the Cannons,
and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Canonical Obedience etc. Printed for F. Smith.
16 62 A Petition of the City of London to the Lord Major, against Sir George
Geoffrys the present Recorder. 1 63 A Serious Vindication of the Church of
England, showing the Nations happiness under the present Government, being an
Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled the Naked truth. 1 64 A Narrative of the
proceedings at the Sessions for London and Middlesex, Printed for T. Davies. 1
65 The dying Speeches and Confessions of the Prisoners Executed the 22 of
October, Printed for Tho. Davies. 1 66 A Petition of the Booksellers in
Westminster Hall, to the Honorable House of Commons, to Print their Votes. 4 67
Another Letter from Legorn to an Eminent Merchant in London, Printed for R.
Janeway. 1 68 An Answer to another Letter from Legorn, to an eminent Merchant
in London, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 69 The Confession of John Nicholson, who
committed that Barbarous Murder on the Body of John Dimbleby servant to Mr.
Marriot, Printed for Rich. Janeway. 1 71 The Protestants joy, or the Relation
of the Duke of Monmouth's reception in the City of London on the 29th of
October, Printed by D. Mallet. 1 72 An Account of the State of his Majesty's
Revenue, as it was left by the Earl of Danby at Lady Day 1679. (in a Letter to
a Friend) occasioned by his Lordships Answer to an examination of the State of
the case of the Earl of Danby, by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard, Printed for
T. Fox. 6 73 A Narrative of the Duke of Monmouths late Journey into the West,
in a Letter from an Eyewitness thereof, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 74 The Votes
of the House of Commons, (Printed by their Order) from the first day of their
sitting the 21 of October (1680) and usually comes out every Morning in half a
Sheet of Paper, Printed for T. Newcomb, etc.

Quarto's
Miscel Number of Sheets. 1 LOve and truth in two modest and peaceable Letters
concerning the distempers of the present times, Printed for H. Brom 4 2 The
Interest of the three Kingdoms, with respect to the business of the Black Box
in a Letter to a Friend, Printed for J. Vade. 4 3 Treason and Popery etc.
brought to a public test with regard to the grounds of his Majesty's late
Declaration, concerning Succession of the Crown; The same with the true
Protestant Sudject of the Nature, and rights of Sovereignty discussed and
stated in Anno 1679. Reprinted. 5 4 The Religion of the Dutch, represented in
several Letters, from a Protestant Officer in the French Army, to a Pastor and
Professor of Divinity, at Berne in Swisserland, Printed for S. Heyrick. 9 5
Richard Baxters Answer to Dr. Stallingfleet's charge of Separation, in his late
Sermon before the Lord Major, Printed for N Simmons. 12 6 Advice to a Soldier
in two Letters, written to an Officer in the late English Army, Printed for J
Gay. 2 7 A short reply to Mr. L'Estranges short Answer, to a litter of Libels
in a Letter to a Friend. 1 8 A persuasive to Reformation, and union as the best
security against the designs of our Popish Enemies, Printed for W. Kett^lby. 4
9 Short Animadversions upon a Sermon lately Preached by Dr. Tillosson, upon
Joshua 24.15. sold by B. Alsop. 3 10 The charge of Schi^m renewed against the
Separatists, in Answer to the renewer of that pretended peaceable design, which
is falsely called an Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's late Sermon, Printed for H.
Brom. 3 11 Aarons Rod Blossoming the Orthodox Government of the Church of
England, by Bishops etc. asserted from the practice of the Apostles etc.
Printed for R. Butler. 5 12 A strange Apparition of several Spirits and
Visions, at Cow Cross in St. Sepulchers parish London, Printed for J. Clark.
1680. 1 13 A Letter out of the Country to a Person of Quality in the City, who
took offense at a late Sermon of Dr. Stillingsleets. sold by S. Tidmarsh. 6 4
The Mischief of Impositions, or an Antidote against a late Discourse course
Preached at Guild Hall Chapel, May 2d, Printed for B. Alsop. 16 15 The Rector
of Sutton committed with the Dean of St. Paul's, or a defense of Dr.
Stillingfleets Irenicum and other writings; against his late Sermon, sold by R.
Janeway. 11 16 Magnalia natura or the Philosophers Stone, lately exposed by
John Joachim Becher, sold by L. Curtis. 5 17 Strange news from East-Barnet, or
a true Relation of a Murder committed by a Woman on her self and two Children,
Printed for J. Clarke. 1 18 A Relation of two conferences between Father
L'cheese and four considerable Jesuits. 5 19 Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter
against Baxter, being sober reflections upon a Treatise of Mr. Richard Baxters
styled sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry rebuked and tolerated
Preaching of the Gospel Vindicated, Printed for R. Chiswell. 10 20 Oration
Aniversaria habita in Theatro Inclyti Collegii medicorum Londinensium 55th
Augusti 1680 a Gualtero Charletono. M.D. Sumptitibus J. Baker. 4 21 The Casuist
uncas'd in a Dialogue betwixt Richard and Baxter, with a moderator between them
by Roger L'estrange, Printed for H. Brom. 11 22 The Moors Baffled being a
discourse concerning Tangeer, especially when it was under the Earl of Teviot,
by which you may find what Methods and Government is fittest to serve that
place, P. for W. Crook. 4 23 L'Estrange case in a Civil Dialogue betwixt
Ezekiel and Ephraim, Printed for H. Brom. 5 24 A Just and Modest Vindication
of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Printed for Tho. Benskin. 2 25 A Letter
to Monsieur Van B-de M-at Amsterdam written 1676. Printed 19. October. 1680. 26
Liberty of Conscience in its Order to Universal peace Impartially stated, etc.
Printed for T. Parkhurst. 2 27 L'estranges Appeal humbly submitted to the King
and the three Estates Assembled in Parliament, Printed for H. Brom. 5 28 The
Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan now called Eliz. Verboon, a person of
Quality of the Jewish Religion, who was Baptized the 10th of October 1680. at
St. Martins in the Fields, by the Bishop of St. Asaph, Printed for R. Chiswell
29 An Appeal of all the Non-conformists in England to God, and all the
Protestants in Europe in order to Manifest their sincerity in point of
Obedience to God and the King, Printed for R. Janeway. 4^ 30 The Grand Jury
Man's Oath and Office explained, and the rights of English Men Asserted in a
Dialogue between a Barrister at Law and a grand Jury-man, Printed for L.
Curtis. 3 31 Londons Glory or the Lord Mayors show, Printed for H. Playford. 2
32 The case of the People called Quakers stated in relation to their late and
present sufferings. 10 33 A prefatory discourse to a late Pamphlet, entitled a
Memento for England Protestants etc. or an Answer to that part of the
Compendium, which Reflects upon the Bishop nf Lincolns Book, P. by T. Dawks. 4
34 The Case of Protestant Diffenters of late prosecuted on old Statutes made
against Papists, Printed 4. Nov. 1680. 1

Octavo's.
Miscel. Number of Sheets. 1 TRuth made manifest or the dead Man's Testimony to
the living, being a Compendium of the last sayings of Captain William Bedlow,
with a Sermon Preached at his Funeral by Mr. T. Palmer, Printed for P. Rooksby.
1

POETRY
Folio 's.
Poetry. Number of Sheets. 1 THe Saints Jubilee, or the fullness of Joy to the
sweet Singers of Sion, sold by J. Blithe. 2 The Claret drinkers song or the good
Fellows design, Printed for R. Harford. 3 Elegy on the Death of the Earl of
Ossory. 1 10 Elegy on the Death of the Earl of Rochester, Printed for Langley
Curtis. 1 11 A Poem on the Death of Mr. Stephen Charnock, Printed by Tho.
Snowden. 1 12 Jockies downfall, a Poem on the late total defeat, given to the
Scottish Covenanters near Hamilton Park 22th. of June 1679. by His Majesty's
Forces. 1 13 An Elegy on the Death of Captain Bedlow, Printed for J. Gay. 1 14
A Poem on the Arrival of the Prince palatine of the Rhine, Nephew to Prince
Rupert, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 15 An Elegy on the truly worthy and ever to be
remembered Captain William Bedlow, Englands deliverer etc. with an account of
his pious end, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 16 Funeral Tears on the Death of
Captain William Bedlow, Printed for James Vade. 17 An Elegy on Colonel Blood,
who dyed the 26th of Aug. 1680. P. by J. S. 1 18 The Duchess of Mazarines
farewell to England; Printed for L. Curtis. 19 A Song upon Titus. 20 A Character
of a true Christian, sold by L. Curtis. 1 21 To the praise of Mrs. Cellier the
Popish Midwife, on her incompatable Book, Printed for Walter Davies. 1 22 The
Epitaph of Captain William Bedlow. 23 A Poem on the Earl of Ossory, who dyed
July the 30th. 1680. P. for L. Curtis. 1 24 The second part of the Loyal
Subjects Letany, Printed for B. Took. 1 25 A Satyr on Madam Celliers standing
on the Pillory, Printed for T. Davies. 1 26 The progress of honesty or a view
of a Court and City, Printed for J. Hindmarsh. 6 27 A Commentation on the late
Wonderful discovery of the new Popish Plot being the Jesuits device to inveagle
the Son to betray the Father, Printed for T. Adams. 1 28 A Poem on the History
of Queen Hester, and an Elegy on the Death of the Lord Chief Justice Hales and
other occasional Poems, Printed for W. Leech. 4 29 An Heroic Poem on the Right
Honorable Tho. Earl of Ossory, P. for W. Cademan. 10 30 A Congratulatory Poem
on the meeting of the Parliament. 1 31 A Panegyric, to his Royal Highness upon
His Majesty's late Declaration, Printed for the Author, sold by J. G. 1 32 A
Congratulatory Poem on the Right Honorable Sir Patient Ward, Lord Major of the
City of London, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 33 A pindarique Ode on the Death of
the right Honorable Tho. Earl of Ossery by Tho. Flatman Esquire Printed for B.
Took. 2

SERMONS
Quarto 's.
Sermon. Number of Sheets. 1 THe Improvement of Navigation a great cause of the
increase of knowledge in a Sermon June 7. 1680. by Mr. Richard Holden, Printed
for J. Martin. 5 2 The duty and happiness of doing good, in two Sermons, the
first at the Yorkshire Feast in Bow Church Feb. 17. 1679. the other before the
Lord Major etc. at the Spittle April 14. 1680. by Dr. John Sharp, Printed for
W. Kettilby. 11 3 The Plotters Doom, in a late Sermon upon the Hellish Plots,
which have been discovered in these Nations, and may be an Answer to Mr. Hs.
late Sermon upon Curse ye Meroz, Printed for B. Alsop. 5 4 A Sermon Preached
before the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen, June 27. 1680. by Mr. Charles
Hickman, Printed for H. Brom. 5 5 A Sermon Preached before the King at
Windsor, June 13. 1680. by Mr. John Lamb, Printed for W. Kettilby. 4 6 A
Sermon Preached on the fourth Sunday in Lent, in the Cathedral Church of
Norwich, by Dr. William Smith, Printed for W. Kettilby. 5 7 A Sermon against
Murmuring, Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. Peter Exon on the 29th day
of May 1680. by T. Long, P. for R. Royston. 4 8 Divine Providence the support
of good Men, under all events in a Sermon Preached before the Lord Major at
Guild Hall Chapel, June 20. 1680. by W. Shelton, Printed for N. Ranew and J.
Robinson. 5 9 A Sermon at the meeting of the Natives of the County of Worcester
Bow-Church; by Dr. Littleton, fold by J. Crump. 5 10 A Sermon Preached by Mr.
Charnock, on 2 Cor. verse 19, sold by L. Curtis. 5 11 The Christians prize and
race, or a discourse of the good things promised to us in Christ, being a
Sermon Preached by Mr. Zachary Cawdrey, Printed for J. Leigh. 4 12 Spirit of
Enthusiasm exercised in a Sermon, Preached before the University of Oxford, on
Act Sunday by D. G. Hicks, Printed for W. Kettilby. 6 13 A Sermon Preached
before the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London at Bow-Church, Sept.
2. 1680. by G. Burnet, D. D. Printed for R. Chiswel. 5 14 A Sermon Preached at
the Funeral of the Earl of Rochester; by Mr. R. Parsons, Printed for R. Davis
and T. Bowman. 6 15 The Shining forth of the Righteous being a Sermon Preached
on the Death of Mr. Stephen Charnock, by Mr. J. Johnson, Printed for T.
Parkhurst, W. Miller. and B. Alsop. 6 16 A Sermon Preached before the Artillery
Company of London, at St. Mary le Bow, Sept. 15. 1680. by Mr. J. Scot, Printed
for J. Baker, and W. Kettilby. 4 17 A Sermon Preached before the Lord Major in
Bow-Church, on the Feast of St. Michael, at the Election of the Lord Major by
Dr. Sharp, Printed for W. Kettleby. 5 18 A Sermon Preached before the Lord
Major at Guild Hall, 19. Sept. 1680. by Mr. Robert Hancock, Printed for Tho.
Fletcher, and W. Leech. 5

Weekly News.
1 THe London Gazette, begun with number 1. the 13. Nov. 1665, and is still
Printed twice a Week Mondays and Thursdays, in half a sheet of Paper by Tho.
Newcomb.

2 The City Mercury, from the Office at the Royal Exchange together with a
weekly Advertisement of Books in half a Sheet of Paper, Printed by R.
Everingham.

3 Another City Mercury, to which is also adjoined, a weekly Advertisement of
Books, Printed by T. James in half a Sheet of Paper, they are both published on
Thursday Morning.

WEEKLY NEWS.
Quarto's
1 THe Weekly Bill of Mortality in a Quarter of a Sheet of Paper, published
every Thursday Morning.

2 The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, left off Friday the 25th of June
1680. and on Friday the 9th of July it came out again with a new title (viz.)
the Anti Roman Packet or Memories of Popes and Popery, and so continues and
comes out every Friday in one Sheet Printed for Langley Curtis.

PROCLAMATIONS
Folio's.
1 A Proclamation in Scotland, declaring Richard Cameron and other Rebels and
Traitors, etc. Reprinted at London for Andrew Forrester. July the 15th 1680. 1

2 A Proclamation declaring the Parliament shall sit the one and twentieth day
of October. came out Aug. the 30th. 1680. 1

3 A Proclamation commanding all Papists or reputed Papists forthwith to depart
from the Cities of London and Westminster, and from within Ten Miles of the
same 4th. of October. 1680. 1

4 A Proclamation declaring that if any Church Wardens or Overseers of the
Poor, can find a Convicted Papist within 10 Miles of London, contrary to the
Proclamation of the 4th of October, they shall receive for the benefit of the
Poor of the Parish where such Papists, shall be sound the Moiety of a Hundred
Pounds penalty due by the Law to his Majesty. 16. October. 1680. 1

5 His Majesty's Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament on T^ursday the
21th of October 1680. 2

6 A Proclamation for Encouragement of the further discovery of the Popish
Plot. came out the 30th. of October. 1680. 1

FINIS.

