Mr. William Sedgwicks LETTER To his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, General
of the Parliaments Forces, In prosecution of his Answer TO THE Remonstrance of
the ARMY.

Printed in the Year 1649.

My Lord,
YOU drive furiously over the necks of King and Parliament, Laws, Covenants,
Loyalty, Privilege, and no humane thing can stand before you: You are now
faced by the majesty and light of God, while you are asleep in a dark night of
earthly affairs: You have appealed to God in your second Declaration, but did
not expect so sudden an answer: It Is eternal and almighty truth that must and
will prevail; if you come into it, 'twill save you; if you turn from it, you
forsake your own mercy; if you oppose it, you dash your selves in pieces; you
cannot go from it, or besides it, but into the darkness of hell: The Lord is
here obbraiding your unbelief, but mourning over his Jerusalem; with love to
your persons, but with fierce anger against your practices: I would you had
those lively and fresh evidences of your personal and everlasting good in your
own breasts, as I have; your eternal state is sure; it is your present
wanderings that are here condemned; Blindness has happened to you in part; and
this is the time of casting you away; you will have a time of being received
again; you are now broken off through unbelief, you will be graffed in
again: It Is your falt now, you shall have a restoring; you will wonder to
behold so much goodness to your enemies, and so much severity to you. Oh the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his judgments and his ways past finding out! I have reproved you sharply
or cuttingly, it is proper for you, with vengeance to save you, and to pull you
as firebrands out of the fire; your condition requires it; Gentleness is
abused, mercy despised, you have a long time trampled upon kindness, and
obstinately refused the word of the Lord: You must remember my Sermon to you at
Windsor upon that Text. Overturn, overturn, overturn; it is Scripture still, and
that word lives in and upon you. Saltmarsh his message quickly followed it,
Depart from the tents of these unrighteous men, he lives still: And Mr. Pinnels
Admonition from the Lord following that: These, and other testimonies against
you, have been slighted and disobeyed; your sins grow greater, and the anger
of God hotter against you; your reprieve is not your salvation; you are grown
to a height of confidence and presumption upon your successes; your necks are
as iron, and your brows brass; and you walk uncontrollable in your way,
triumphing as the only Princes in the earth, as sit to sway the Scepter of
England, and all nations; as the only righteous, honorable people in the
world; the great Lords of the Land: Therefore it pleases me to power contempt
upon you, to be shod with scorn and indignation, and so trample upon Princes
as mortar. Except I should deal thus with you, you would not be sensible of
what I say, being hardened against mercy; and having done all you have done
against love; Prosperity slayes fools, and therefore the rod is fit for their
backs.

I know my dealing is just and righteous to such as you are, being (as Phil.
3.18, 19.) Enemies to the Cross of Christ; seeming friends to his Gospel,
Ministry, and Kingdom, but enemies to his Cross: You hate to think that
those fair beginnings of your peace and deliverance, should come to end in
shame and death; you cannot think of leaving your hopes of outward glory, and
lying down quietly, to let the world trample upon you: This you count folly,
whose end is Destruction: Destruction you practice, it is your work, it is your
end, you cannot see beyond it, and you are hastening to it, it is the center to
which you tend; and therefore I cannot but show it you, that you may stop your
course before the pit shut her mouth upon you: whose God is their belly; Your
faith, understanding and God, is sunk into your bellies, and your rule, your
strength, your confidence is only in sensual and brutish things; your raised
spirits into the things of God are buried in an inferior region of gross,
dull, carnal affairs, and except I should pierce deep, your slow bellies
would not find ears: Indeed you are so lost and drowned in sensible things of
the world, and so eager in seeking for those things your belly, your carnal
affections require of you, that I doubt you will be deaf to what I say. Whose
glory is in their shame; you are full of glory in your great things that you
have done; wonderful things, a mighty presence of God. But in sum, what is it?
You have torn a poor, sinful Kingdom in pieces; You have executed wrath
upon your Brethren, Friends and Countrymen; You have laid desolate your Father
the King, the Parliament your Mother, your own Country; this is your glory to
be executioners; Assyria the rod of my anger: What a crown is this? Have you
restored, blessed, healed, comforted, saved any? No, you have but plunged the
Kingdom and your selves into a pit of darkness and confusion: When the things
of God are proposed to you, to suffer for others, to love enemies, to do good
to all, to bless all; you glory in your shame, and say, you serve the Lord in
this, and there be lower as well as higher dispensations: You are indeed
servants of God, so was Nebuchadnezzar, so is the Devil; and you do the work
of God, but it is base drudgery, it is his strange work, to be instruments of his
vengeance; and it is a lower dispensation indeed, to dispense curses, not
blessings, to be below in hell, exercised in the wrath of God; not above in
heaven in the glory and love of God; and for sons, heirs, so you would be
thought, to take pleasure in such mean employment, is vile and unworthy: Who
mind earthly things; this is another property of yours, your minds are now
captived to the earth, deep in the lower parts of the earth, pleading the
earthly cause of earthly people, or digging caves and holes in the earth to
secure an earthly peace to your selves.

'Its high time to withstand you, and to rebuke this destroying Angel; for it is
not men only that suffer from your violence, but the Lord; your sword go so
deep, That it peirces through his soul also: You are gone so far in dissolving
the foundations of government, that you are come to him that upholds the
pillars of the earth: You reach to the head of principalities and powers, to
the Lord who is the author and upholder of all these things; he is in these
poor, broken and despised Ordinances of his, and sensible of every blow that
is given to them: You have dug through the wall of flesh and men, and broke
down that partition wall that divided them from God; and now you are in the
bowels of the Lord, these miserable, broken powers are now the Lord: Go on to
tear and rend, you will at last look upon him whom you have peirced, and
mourn.

The King and Parliament cry unto God in their distress, saying, Doubtless
thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge
us not, Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer. Though you in the
greatness of your faith, and confidence in your privileges, as high as
Abraham and Israel in your literal form, do not know them, yet the Lord
ownes them, and will hear their cry and deliver them.

Your proceedings are against the Lord; and though you say these things you do
must be done till Christ come; and when he comes, then it is true, there will
need none of these things to secure your selves, but as yet you must act as
men: In this, you say, your Lord delays his coming, and so drunk with your
prosperity and victories, you beat your fellow servants.

But here you will find your Lord in an hour that you were not aware of: You
say he will come and destroy you and your ways in time, but he is already upon
you, and you are not aware of it, and cuts you asunder; opens your inward
parts, divides the secrets of your hearts, and appoints you a portion with
hypocrites and unbelievers, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth: You act
against God, and God against you; Your souls loath him, his soul loathes you.

Finally, Here Is nothing written but what was written in your hearts; it is the
opening your own souls; it is but what you have feared, and that punishment
which your own humiliations and confessions have acknowledged just and due to
you: Nothing but what I have suffered for acting in those ways in which you
are; What measure has been measured to me by God, that do I measure to you:
And as I lay it on you, so I suffer it with you, and shall be content to suffer
till you are restored from this condition of shame and wrath, to honor and
love, and so dwell with you in these everlasting burnings, which will purify
you from all your filth.

Till then, Farewell. I am W. Sedgwick.


