The Second Part of the Tragi-COMEDY, Called NEW-Market-FAYRE OR Mrs.
PARLIAMENTS New Figaryes.

Written by the Man in the Moon.

Prologue.

Gentlemen, our Poet bids me say,
You Are Welcome all unto his Second Play;
He prays you read; and if you find in it
Nothing but Treason, then expect no wit.
Some Rhyme there is; he hopes, some Sense, and Reason,
At least to make you say, It Is witty Treason.
His Scenes (he vows) do only aim to please
The Public; and cure each foul disease
Of Manners in the Government: discry
Where the State-humors and Diseases lie,
Prescribes a remedy to allay Pride,
Ambition, Treason, Lust, and Deicide.
Corbet will teach you in his part to paint
The Devil in the likness of a Saint.
Which cannot choose but make proud rebels rage,
To see themselves thus acted on the Stage.
But if you please, now to advance his Plays,
His Market's ended; and he is Crowned with Bays.
Printed at you may go look. 1649.

To his much Honored Friend, The Man in the Moon, on his Play called
New-Market-Fayre.
MY Fancy is too dull, my Muse to weak
To praise thy Genius; when each line does speak,
And claims for thee a Law^el* yet I Will strive
Within thy Play to keep my Name alive.
I cannot flatter Truth; this happy flame
More then thy Moon; gives thee Eternal Fame,
And builds over Time a Triumph; Cold desires
Grow warm, and kindle by thy Loyal Fires:
True hearts are now ^^viv'd, and learnt to sing
Vive le Roy; and God preserve the King.
Whilst Regicides whose vile memories rust
And Names descend much deeper then their dust:
Like painted Moons, that with dull Lamps profane
Thy cleerest Light, at Full; most in their Waine.
Whose Guilt must line their Coffins; whilst thy shine,
Shall be a Light unto the Sacred Nine.
F. W. Esquire The Actors Names.
Constantius and Fidelius Two Loyallists. Fairfax and Cromwell Possessed with
Devils. Three Traitors.
Ireton Huson Pride
Lady Fairfax and Mistress Cromwell, with Ruth Incontinence, and Abigal
Concupicense, their Maids of Honor. Gorge and Morley, Their Paramours. Miles
Corbet. A Jesuit. Hugh Peter's and Dorrislaws Ghost. Shrieffs, Aldermen, A
Keeper and Executioners.
The Second Part of the Tragi-COMEDY, Called NEW-Market-FAYRE. OR Mrs.
PARLIAMENTS New Figaryes.
ACT 1. SCENE 1.
Enter Constantius, and Fidelius. Constable. It Is strange Fidelius that they should
Recover!
'Twas said their wounds were Morral*
The Heavens are surely angry,
And lock their Azure Portals against our prayers,
Menacing the wors of miseries;
They would not else insuse their powerful influences
To rescue Traitors from their punishments.
Oh Fidelius, when I but think what they have done by Butchering Sacred Majesty
--
I am astonished!
What 'ist these fear to do?
They Would Martyr JOVE, could they come at him too:
But yet I Will not despair, but by my Constancy
And Faith vanquish all miseries:
Our griefs be folly; our Tears cannot suffice,
Unless our hearts make Charles a sacrifice.

Fidelius. Content thy self Constantius; though Traitors flourish,
and such dunghill weeds sprout up through fatness of the soil.
It Is but a time, and a time present too,
Then they will be weeded out:
They cannot demur, adjourn, or say to morrow;
When their Accountant calls, they must obey,
Though now they do over Truth and Justice sway.
The people say they were recovered by a miracle, wrought by one Peter's an
Excorcist, and now admire, adore, and think them Gods, more then they did
before; And say 'twas Justice made great Charles to bleed.


Constable. Blind ignorant wretches, that cannot perceive Gods from Devils;
Impostors from Potentates; it is but in vain to inform them, till their own
folly make them sensible; But does Cromwell mean to steer his Course for Ireland?


Fid. For Hell he does.


Con. I, that has been his Journey these seven years;

He will come to his journies end in time,
But to Ireland I doubt he will not.

Fid. He tells the People that he will go, but that is in the Mystery; he intends
nothing less in the History: It Is to get arrears, what men and money he can,
and then Fairfax will soon understand whether he intends.


Con. I hope his first days march will be to guard him to Tower Hill,
according to his desers, to make that his Headquarters; and after retreat to
Westminster and be Crowned, and then he may make Deputies, and not expose
himself to hazards upon so desparate a Design, as Ireland is like to prove: Oh
you know not the subtilty of that Jesuitical-head-piece! A little time will
make known his intents: whilst then we will observe the cause^ of their vile
Actions, and discourse the Effects to our selves; yet let us be as secret as we
can; these Serpents will sting us else.

We Will be as wise as Serpents, Serpents to prevent,
To Loyal-Doves, we will prove as Inocent.

Exit. Enter Fairfax and Cromwell. Crom. Wee're now at Amity, and made both one*
I hope there will remain no Jealousies or Fears each of other?


Fair. I have not any the least Jealousy or Fear of thee my deer Lieutenant;
but hug thee as my second Self: Oh that I could by this embrace beget a wit
like thine; the State wants Policy as well as Money; and mine is but little,
thine a full Magazine to arm a Kingdom, and muster all Designs, Plots and
Stratagems of State with safety and ease to keep, what we have waded through
blood and danger to obtain.


Crom. My Lord, I am your Servant, and the States; and must, and will endeavor
to keep for them what I have got: But still my Lord, the People are too rich
and powerful, they must have more Taxes and more Assessements to keep them
under; and when they are poor and needy, they will be the more our vassals, and
subject to our power: Have not the peremtory slaves disarmed Capt. Thelwels
troop at Drayton in Shropshire, taken both their Horse and Arms, and stripped
them to their skins? Have they not at Chester done the like? and since in
Worcestershire? Come, come, they will Robel unless we make them poor; let us Tax
them thoroughly; worse language then they do, they cannot give us; therefore
lets about it; you to the Parliament and I to the Council of State presently.

Money's the life of War, and must be had,
Although we make the silly Hyndes run mad.

Exit. Enter my Lady Fairfax, and Ruth Incontinence her Maid. Lady Fair. Is my
husband gone to the Parliament House Ruth?


Ruth. Yes verily Mistress; he is gone amongst the Members, the holy-members,
the fructifying-members, the increasing and multiplying-members. Indeed Madam,
something was the matter my Master called for Beer so early this morning; Ha,
ha, ha, I hope it will appear ere long: I promise you I thought something
notwithstanding when he fetched such a draught, (...) pitt^y your Case Madam,
but cold not cry; pardon me, I am your waiting-Maid, and can a little
understand what belongs to the case of a Gentlewoman.


Lady. Fair. If thou had as much cause as I, thou might cry (...) dye too:
I Will tell thee Ruth, he lies by me all night like a logge, though I warm him,
and warm him again, yet notwithstanding I can get no life nor motion in him;
And when my desires are fervent and ready for the onset, he like a Coward
faces-about, falls off, and basely retreates, and will observe no postures at
all: Nay, if he would but Present, it is so hot upon the matter, that it would
go near to give fire, and discharge it self, and do execution too: Let me woe
him, and woe him, he will do nothing, starts in his sleep, cries out Blood,
blood, and says he is damned in his bed; and Verily, verily, I must say unto
thee Ruth; that I think he is bewitched, for since he had the last wound with
the fall on his Sword, he has been so cold, and as useless to me, as a King is
to England.


Ruth. Intruth la Mistress get another, the world is not so dull, if one will not
another will; It Is no matter for Fame, it is but a Bladder of wind, one prick
of a Pin^^ lets it ou^; if you have a mind to taste the sweets of Love,
satisfy your desires to the full; I shall be as useful to put it forward as
another.

She that confines her beams to one man's sight,
Is a dark Lanthorn to a glorious light.
Madam I Will fetch the Party you wot of.

Exit. Lady Fair. Prithee do. I hate all bloudy-men, give me the man that arms
with an embrace; can make, not kill a man: O how powerful is Love, that it can
make an unjust Act seem honest, nay lawful too --


Enter Mr Gorge. Gorge. What makes my Love thus solitary and alone? Come my
Life, my Happiness, lets taste some sweets shall make the gods to envieus;
There is no pleasure, but in thy embrace.


Lady Fair. You men love to flatter us, and we like silly fools are pleased
with all that comes from them we love.


Gorge. I Will please thee if I can my Deer, the Paphian Goddess never was worthy
of such love as thee; Lets in and taste,

And by our close in-twines,
We Will teach the wood-him, to embrace the Vines.

Lady Fair. We must be secret though, because o'th wicked, they are apt to
scandal us, and bring us on their Stages; yet I have done the best to have my
husband put them down, yet all will not do.


Gorge. Come my dear, I Will ^^^thee down, and act a part, shall ravish thee, and
cheer thy grieved heart.

Such acts best please, whose s^^nes relish of love,
Sound Music then, and revish from above.
Sound.
ACT II. SCENE III.
Enter Mistress Cromwell and her Paramour Morley, with Abigail Concupiscence her
Maid. Mrs Crom. So, now we are in our Kingdom: What is it to enjoy the World,
and miss the thing we love? Here is a Jewel for thee, 'twas the late Queens,
wear it for my sake, and come to me to morrow, thou shall have Gold what thou will have; thou shall not want if the State has it: Spend freely, and when it is
gone, thou shall have more. My Noll shall fight with the Irish, thou shall
fight with me, clad in more softer Arms. Abigail how sits this Gown?


Abigial. It bears an exceeding Grace behind; Madam, you have rumpled the
Pleats with your Day-Couch, will you have another?


Mrs Crom. Fetch me the Cown that cost 2000 pounds, if it likes me, I Will put it
on; My dearest Marley shall see how it becomes me; and embrace me in it.


Morley. So sweet a body deserves the rarieties of Europe, and all to little to
dec^ you Madam, I am doubly blessed to enjoy so noble a Mistress as your self.


Mrs. Crom. Lets in my dear, and sport a while,
And with sweet love, the tedious time beguile.

Exit. Enter Miles Corbet with Search Letters to my Lord Fairfax and Cromwell.
Corbet. Yet I have managed State-Affaires with case and ^^ill, and thrive and
am grown Rich by my industrous practice: Here Is Letters from Scotland I fear
will not be pleasing; (...) I must deliver them; Yet I hope by this new
troubling the waters I shall get most Fish; I Will in, and seek my Lord General
presently.


Miles Corbet Enters the Chamber of Fairfax, where he discovers his Lady and
Gorge in the very Act; they start up affrightued, (thinking him the Devil) come
forth all un-ready, running over the Stage, crying The Devil, the Devil. Enter
Corbet. Corbet. Am I awake, or in a Dream? or do I walk in my Sleep? This is no
vision sure: methoughts I saw two (whom I am loath to name) glude like a pair of
Goats in a sportful dalliance; I must wink at this, there is danger to disclose
it, least that her husband should not credit me, and she should lay that to my
Charge, was acted by the other; It may be her Lord Consents: I know not what to
think! If these be Queent-street doings, I Will to Kings-street to the Lieutenant
General to see what he will say to these Letters. I Will be silent, there is nothing
to be got by this discovery; besides it is my own case at home daily.

He that will wind his borne in his own rounds
May chance to be devoured by his own hounds.

Exit. Enter Hugh Peter's Solus, like a Necromancer. If this trade fails, then
farewell all; Albertus was a mere Jugler to me; and Friar Bacon but an empty
scull, or brazen Image, his Walls of Brass, were Mud to mine: Preaching is too
redious for me; I Will leave that to Owen, and to Goodwin: Have I not done a
Miracle to re-possesse these Bodies with Spirits, that were before mere
Skellitons, and stinking Carcasses? (by their dispairing rage) they are now as
active as ever they were; and possessed with worser Spirits, if worser can be,
to manage the grand Design; But before I proceed further in my Art, I must
raise the Ghost of Dorrislaw, and ask his Counsel. Make a Circle and Cunjueres.

Dorrislaws Ghost appears from underneath the Stage in Fetters and flames of
Sulphire. Peter's. My hair stands upright! a flash of Lightning has gone through
my body, and cut my thread of Life a too; I have no power to speak!


Dorrislaw. What Is he that calls me from my place of horror, where all my
music is dismal shrieks of damned Souls, yelling in beds of burning Brimston;
Couches of poisonous Toads and stinging Serpents? O M. Peter's is it you? you
shall along with me.


Peter's. I pray thee gentle Ghost forbear, and tell me if the late King be in
these lower Regions?


Ghost. No, thou Viper, he reigns in Heaven; in Hell there are new torments
providing answerable for that damned Crime without all presidents but Bradshaw.
Cook, and Steel, and such as those have forged;

Knaves hired by Cromwell to corrupt the Laws:
Now all made food for Hells devouring jaws.
Next Judas, Faux, and Ravilock, their lodgings are prepared: there lies Essen,
Pym, Strend, Hamden, Rainthrough, and ten thousand more; there Fairfax,
Cromwell, Ireton, Pride, will all like me, Rue their damned Regicide:

Their vengeance hastneth, and come on a main,
Though the first be gone, the Second Charles shall Reign.

Peter's. Let me go tell them this.


Ghost. No, thou must not; Pluto will not give way,
His Fiends attend; and will not longer stay.

Exit the Ghost carrying away Peter's. ACT III. SCENE V.
Enter Mr Corbet with his Letter, going to Cromwels house. Corbet. I Will enter
here, and see if I can meet with such a sight I did before.

( peeks behind the ^^^gg^igns, and sees Morley and Mrs Cromwell a bed together.
Hell and ^^mnation (...) what, ^re we all turned Sodomites -- O my head, how it
^^es, I Will home presently; and If Roe be there, what shall I do? fight with him
I dare not; ^will but be the worse; for then my wife will take his part: since
others being my betters wear the horn; I Will think it honor, never dream of
scorn: but my neighbor will call me Wittall, that is the worst;

No matter, I am never the worse,
The Fox thrives best, when that the Geese do curse.
Since it is our fate; and now grows all the fashion*
I Will rather honor, then disgrase the Nation.
I Will love the man* that makes my Wife his mate*
And hug his Purse, till he does horn my pate.

Exit. Enter Ireton, Huson, and Pride. Hus. But does the news hold true
concerning Ire^^nd?


Ire. Too true, I fear; We must divert our Course some other way; Ormond is
20000 strong; it is thought he is now (...) Fortifying all the Ports, and then
intends for England.


Pride. I would we had him here.

It Is not a hundred thousand that we fear. Our Horse are lusty, and our Men be
strong.


Huson. I, but our Money's weak; how shall we do for that the People will not
disburse?


Ireton. Can we not force it then? Necess^^y must not observe a Law; make them
but poor, and then we shall not want Soldiers nor Moneys: Are we not the
Keepers of their L^berties? why not their Money too?

We will disburse, give them as they deserve,
It they will not sight; then let them h^ng and starve.

Pride. When we have all; we will order them at will: If we suffer them peaceably
to enjoy their Estares; we must not look to enjoy ours; No, I hold it best to
kirb^ them in, be s^^e to keep them down,

Prosperity will always aim to get a Crown.


Huson. Besides, when we have all; we know what to trust too; and not before:
then we can disburse at our pleasures; and rather then want; if there be urgent
necessity, make use of our own Estates at last, but not before; it is our best
policy to preserve all we can against a rainy day: Lands are but d^^^
Commodities, they will not off; besides we cannot mans^^^^ them: Money it is
must do the deed,

That Is our best friend, should we but be in ^^ed.


Ireton. We Will have it then: Come le^^ draw our Force^ into the Countries
first; and then we will come upon the City with afresh supply;

Fairfax ^^rall down; for he is grow^ to hi^*


Enter Fairfax and Cromwell. Fair. Will they murmer still? Indite me for Murder!
Who dares do it? have I not Forces to protect my self? this is Lilburn and his
Faction; they will never be quiet till they have my life; but perchance I Will have
some more of theirs first.


Crom. Hang up two or three more, 'twill make the rest to fear.


Fair. 'Twas by your Counsel I hanged up those I did: Did you not at War^
persuade me to have Arnold shot, and L^ckier since; that wone me hate of all
my Soldiers, and the People too.


aside. Crow. And that I hope will quickly end thy fate.
My Lord, Justice must be done; you know I, in all such cases,
cannot help ye; I am called hence and must away; the safety
of the State requires it: Farewell my Lord;
aside. If that my Plot hit right:
My Policy shall Conquer all your Might.

Exit Crom. Fair. My Lieutenant is too wise for me; well, if he does set the
People on me for their Agreement I am lost; I fear it is his Policy to
withdraw himself, that they may have the better opportunity to surprise me,
and free himself, so they cut me off; that he may enjoy all: Something is in it;
I am so troubled in my sleep;

My wife afflicts me too, which makes me weep.


Exit. ACT IV. SCENE VIII.
Enter 6 or 7 Aldermen and the Sheriffs, as if they came into New-Park a
hunting with hounds. Pennington. What Game is there in this Park?


Keeper. O Sir; here be Staggs of State, Hearts, Bucks, Does, Sorrells, Sores
Teggs, Prickets, Fawns; and abomination of Fish and Foul.


Pen. Will you give me the Names of them all, because (...) may know what to
thank the Parliament for (...) they have bestowed much of us, for this one
Dinner; enough to make us many: Staggs and Hearts I have heard of in the City;
and Bucks too; but Teggs, Brocks, Sores, and Prickets, I know not what they
mean: pray are they Fish, or Fowl?


Keeper. Neither Sir: they are Beasts, that come to it by degrees, as your
Children newly born, first they come to be Fawns, and then in their youth, they
come to be Prickets; in their prentiship, to be Brockets; in their freedom, to
Bucks of the first head; when Common Councel-men, of the second head, when
Aldermen, of the Game Royal; and then you may know them by their Brow-Antlers:
And for the Hinds and Does they be the Femals, as it might be your wives, or
your Sons wives.


Atkins. It seems there is a Commonwealth in a Park; but do they engender too?


Keeper. Yes Sir, in Rutting-time; how could they increase else? only they
defile their members.


Mayer. But do they do the Act like us?


Keeper. Very like you Sir; but increase more.


Atkins. Are there Conies too?


Keeper. Yes Sir, more then you have in your City.


Woolaston. But does not some vermin anoy them?


Keeper. Yes Sir, but we have another vermin called Ferits and Tarryers, that
like your Worships Clark Everet, can enter their grounds and so ferrit their
beries, that many times their skins pay for their offenses; and then our traps
are just like your prisons.


Bide. Their skins may serve to furre us Gowns.


Keep. Sir, no Skarlet nor Plush is finer wear.


Atk. Hereafter, you must preserve them for us then.


Keeper. Sir, they are my Fees; besides your Worships should not be clad in
Foxes, or in Pole-catts skins, least you be termed vermin; the Lions, or the
Panthers, or the Ermyns skine is more rich and fitting for your wear.


Fook. I know no great degrees of skins; methinks the Asses hide's as
serviceable as the Lions skin, and more fit for ornament.


Keeper. There be Asses too Sir in the Park.


Mayor. Then for Fowl and Fish, what store is there?


Keeper. O^^, they ^esin^^ite ^here be Owle^, Wood cocks, Buzards, Cuckoes,
Rooks, Wiggins, and all ^e^^ Worship^^^cen desire: Besides Parliament
Pu^trick^, Halpyes, Night-Ravens, S^^eech-Owles, and whatever your Worships can
name. And for Fish, here be Pikes, that like those you know where, eat up
their own kind; and C^^ps that die wallowing in the M^^^de (like your Worships
in your feather, beds;) besides the Carpes may serve for your servants, and the
people; and great Tench, that you may ca^ch without books or pullies; besides
Roach, Dace, Eles, Breams, Perch, and abundance more.


Pen. Are there no Whales, Saturn o^s or Lobsteks there?


Keeper. No Sir, they are in the Seas, where your Worships Ships sail.


Pen. I had thought they had come from hence.


Mayor. Well Brethren, it behooves us to give thanks to the Council of S^^^ and
the Parliament for all these benefits, and a (...) n^^ them the Sum; it is but
150000. l. a mere toy; if the Sea be but secured by their Navy, we shall fetch
it up again in a year, and less.


Omnes. Content, content, let them have it, let them have it; and our Letter of
Thanks (...) boor.

Since we have b^^k, O^d Sport and Deer such store;
If they do ask, they shall have ten times more.

Keeper. Yes, yes no doubt but they will be as free to you, of that that is not
their own. (...) aside. The ^ight Ma^^^, Pa^^^, Cha^es and Forests, are
liberally bestowed; the old proverb must be verified, Lightly come, lightly go,
but they that steal a Deer off the Kings Ground, the Horns may hereafter chance
to choke them; but they that steal Deer, Trees, Lands and all; the very stones
will fly in their faces I hope: What it blessed litter of City-puppies have I
to my Masters? O for a pack of good bloud-hounds to set on these Actaeons: Uds
-- fut, these be mere Gulls, Buffle-pates; there is not a man of them has so
much wit, us will reach from his nose to his beard: foh -- how they stink; I
think some (...) them have be-shitt themselves. Will your Worships please to
see some sport (...) the Game is ready, the Buck is Rour^d,


Tho. ^ingwood. -- (...) -- looe, -- ha -- loo^ -- (...) -- tat, -- tat, -- tat.


Bide. This is heavenly Music.


Exit Keeper, Mayer, (...) Pen. Wooed these Currs were choked, I cannot hear
it for them.


looks up. Bide. Why, it is the Dogs that makes it.


Pen. I had thought it had been come from the Skies. The Buck is down already.


Bide. It Is time we seek our Company, and give over the Chase.


Pen. This is no Chase Sir, it is a Park.

O^^ sounds a horn. We are summond in; let us haste away,
This idle sport has quite consumed the day.
Let Us tell our selves, and see if we have all our Company.


they call themselves, and a^ss two. Bide. Here Is two missing!


Pennington. I Will lay a Pot of Ale of that; have you told your self Sir?


Bide. I Will tell again.

tells. There wants four now -- O, Alderman Soams, and Alderman Chambers did
not come; there was but 13 came, and now there is but 11; then as I take it,
two are wanting.


Pen. But how shall we know which two?


Bide. It Is my Lord Mayor, and Alderman Atkins are missing.

Enter the Keeper running. O Gentlemen, Gentlemen, your Mayor has hanged
himself in a Tree, and if you go not quickly he is a dead man; and another is
fallen into a pit, and has so bewrayed himself, it is wonderful! I think he has
broke his neck, for he stirre^ not.


Pen. Brethren away, I fear there is some Treason.


exit Aldermen. Keeper. Treason (...) Traitors! Is not that Nonsense (...) I
have done my best to Lodge the Deer on that side the P^^^ where the most trees
and the pitts were; but surely that is not reason; and yet I know not neither,
for (...) everything (...) made treason, though it be but Reason in I Will away
to (...) it is good to prevent a mischief.

Farewell old Custard-eaters; I hold it reason.
Not to serve you, for fear I commit treason.

Exit. ACT V. scene X.
Enter Fairfax Bol^u. Fairfax THe Devil stop your mouths; will nothing serve
you but The Agreement of the People, The Agreement of the People! Are not the
Parliament the Peoples Represe^^^ives? why, do not they Agree? I am willing to
Agree to any thing; yet must their splee^ light upon me? O Cromwell, Cromwell,
for this I may thank thee; I am so heavy, sad and drowsy, I must take Rest.

Lies down and sleeps. Enter three or four Furies, and Anticks dancing about
him with their hands all bloody, and Exit. N^ stants and sleeps again Soft
Music from above, and this ^ong. I.
WHo on the top of Fortunes Wheel.
Stands more glorious then the rest?
Others sorrows li^^^ feel,
Thinking all like them at blessed.
II.
Guide the Chariot of the Sun,
And thence blind with too much light,
Such un-even Courses run,
(turns himself:) That they turn the day to night.
III.
These are they that cannot see,
Dazzled with the height of place,
How they may secured be
Of the peoples fickle grace.
IV.
But pretend their hearts so deep,
They are hopeless there to wade;
Where did they but measure keep,
Fortunes Children should not sade.
V.
Greatness here may learn to stand
Propt with Virtue, so it shall
Fearlesse from rude peoples hand
Sleep on Down, or softer fall.
VI.
Fumes of Sway must pass away,
Rebels fall, that stand by Art;
Charles His Virtue still shall sway.
And all England take His part^ (...)
VII.
What though Rebels fret and frown,
That durst aspire unto a Throne*
Virtue is a Sacred Crown,
Subject unto none but O^^.
He ^akes, and st^^ts up ^^^^ed. A C^^^d, a ga^^d; Treason, treason; I am
betray (...) O my distempered Fa^^y* how strange guilt (...) within, well,
since it is so (...) it is but a folly to despair; and to ^^pent, would argu^^ I
were guilty; I have had strange dreams (...) all it not well* Well come what
will, ^e bide the shock of all; And if I stand, I stand; it may I ^^ll.


Enter Sheriffs and others with the Agreement of the People in their hands.
People. Where be the Murderers? seize on them; knock them down: knock them
down; Traitors, Tyrants, bloud-suckers; away with them.


They seize on Fairfax, Pi^ion him, and had him away. Fairfax. Who builds his
Hopes upon a Comm^n Rou^, Thus must he f^ll, though for their Rights he fought.


Exit. Enter Fidelius and Constantius. Constable. Now my dear Fidelius; how likest
thou the times now? do they not change apace? doe^ not Divine Justice clearly
demonstrate to the World their guilt, and dog them at the heels? do not the
Phat^^^ ^^mble now? Blood must be revenged; Murder and Patricide, although
concealed long, at last betrays it self; nay often times proves his own
executioner; but this licensed and open wickedness, invites all hands to take
Revenge.


Fidelius. The People threaten revenge on all; and do dispute their deaths
before their ends: some report Bradshaw has hanged himself, another drowned; a
third is st^bb'd; when as they speak but as they would have it; or as it must be:
Thus they often times say, He Is a dead man, that is but condemned; and so are
they by heavens Impartial Law; they are but reprieved a while, the day will come.

They suffer must, a most assured doom;
That Subject make his Sovereigns heart to bleed,
Will find a Subject shall revenge the deed.

Constable. It Is true Fidelius; but they never think of that; Rebellion so
bewitches them, they know not what they do; but with stupidity and ignorances;
resolve to finish what they have begun, though to scale heaven, or to put out
the Sun.


Fidelius. When did you see Rebellion prosper? But for black damned Regicide,
(by Cook and Rad^^thus Se^^l accounted lawful) it is a sin made Iud^^ beholding
to a (...) to ease his Conscience, but these far worse then R^^^agaces or
Jews, must expect Judgments worse,

The more their sins against light, the worse their Curse.


Constable. They say that Fairfax does die to day; shall we go see him.


Fidelius. No, I love not to see the death of any man; nor have I envy at
their persons, but their Crimes; I Would rather see them live honest men, then to
die Traitors. This is Cromwels Policy, now he has filled this Sp^^ge to squeze
him; till another does so much for him, which will not be long; if Overton
speak true; that Bull's designed for the slaughter next; if he were but well
baited first in (...).


Constable. Dublin is for certain taken, Londonderry cannot held out; which makes
me think he can do little good there if that he were Landed, which is a thing
almost impossible.


Fidelius. Let Us leave the success to him tha^ prosecutes; and into (...).

The Sun decines, and takes leave of the West.


Exit. Enter Fairfax with a Jesuit, Sheriffs, Executioner, and People with
(...) and (...). She^iff. Come b^i^^^ion a way; I never thought he would come
to better end, fine* he (...) hi^ word as New Mark^^^ and likewise his Oath and
Covenant with his King, and his dear Brethren the Scots.


Sir, you had best repent; your time's but short.


Jesuit. Your Pardon from His Holiness is firm; whispers, is heard. You need
not here repent.


People. This is a Jesuit, a Jesuit: Hang him, hang him.


Jesuit. Nay pray good people spa^e my Life, and give me have to speak; I
shall tell you what will make you wonder.


People. Speak then; but be brief, pr^^raction may cause another Change.


Jesuit. And so it will; Let the Sheriff look in the N^pe of my Lord (...)
neck.

The Sheriff looks in the N^pe of his ^eck, and finds a Charm, which he pulls
away; and his Carcass falls and leaves a noisome stench.


Sheriffs. What Is the meaning of this, good Sir?


Jesuit. It is a Charm; the words are dubious, and cannot be made sense of;
and this he brought from Holland; Cromwell has the same; 'twas to preserve their
Carcasses while such a time expired; else they had been dead long time before;
and often killed by others.


Sheriff. How come it then that Peter's cured them?


Jesuit. Peter's weary of Preaching Schism; and finding others preferred before
him, turns Necromancer, and deals in the black Art: Now their Charms was to
preserve them from others hurts, but not their own; they falling by their own
swords, were by Peter's, re-possessed with Devils, which gave motion to their
bodies.


Enter Pride, Ireton, Huson. Ireton. Is the Execution past?


People. More Witches, more witches; fall upon them, stone them.


The people knocks them down with stones. Enter Gorge and my Lady Fairfax as
one door; and Morly and Mrs Cromwell at the other, and meet. Lady Fairfax. My
Husband murdered! Draw Mr Gorge.


Gorge and Morly fight, and both are mortally wounded. Gorge. I met with you
there Sir;


Morly falls. Mrs Crom. Nay then thou villain have at thee.

pistols him. And for thee Mrs ^r^^, ('it is no time to s^^ld) (...)

(She draws her knife and runs at my Lady (...) missing her; my Lady Fairfax
(...) Sword, and runs Mrs Cromwell th^row* (...) apprehend her for murder, and
carry her to (...)
Sheriff. Here is a sudden Tragedy indeed;

I doubt there is more ere long will bleed.


People. Hang them, stone them; Witches, Murderers, Th^^ves, Impostures: Let Us
Petition our King home; we shall never be happy else.


Owner. Content, Content;

Epilogue. Come Royal CHARLES, and with a cloud of thunder
Disperse this bed of Snakes, and keep them under.

FINIS.

