A Description of the SANDS. SHOALS. BUOYES. BEACONS. ROADS. CHANNELS. AND SEA
MARKS. ON THE COAST OF ENGLAND From the Southforeland to Flamborough head,
being furnished with new and exact draughts of the sands, acording to the said
descriptions.

By John Seller.

Hydrographer to the Kings most Excelent Majesty

And are to be Sold by him at the Hermitage stairs in Wapping.

depiction of English explorers Englands Famous Discoverers
Cap. Davies
Sr. Walter Rawleigh.
Sr. Hugh Willoughby.
Cap. Smith
Sr. Fran: Drake
Mr. Tho: Candish
free holder


view of London LONDON


A DESCRIPTION OF THE Sands, Shoals, Rocks, and Dangers; The Bays, Roads,
Harbors, Rivers, Ports, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks, etc. upon the Coasts of
England, from the South-Foreland to Flambrough-head. Showing the Courses and
Distances from one Place to another: The Setting of the Tides and Currents: The
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. With Directions for the bringing a Ship into any
Harbor on the said Coasts. Being furnished with New and Exact Draughts,
Charts, and Descriptions of every Harbor; gathered from the Experience and
Practice of diverse Able and Expert Navigators of our English Nation.

Collected, Described, and Published, by JOHN SELLER, Hydrographer to the
King's Most Excellent Majesty.
A short Description of the River of Thames, from London Bridge to the Point of
the Hope: Showing the Shelves and Dangers in each Reach.
The Pool,
IS that part of the River that lies from London Bridge to Cuckolds-Point, and
is divided into three parts. First, From London Bridge to Wapping-Ness, which
lies West-North-West and East-South-East. And about the lower end thereof,
near to Fountain-stairs, A Rock.
lies a Rock on the South side, which is dangerous for Ships to come aground
upon. The second part reaches from Wapping-Ness to Ratcliff-Check, and lies
N. E. and S. W. The third part reaches from Ratcliff-Check to Cuckolds-Point,
and lies rounding upon four Points of the Compass, from the N. E. to the East.
These three Reaches are noted in the Draught of the River with the letters a,
b, c.

Limehouse-Reach.
This Reach leads from Cuckolds-Point down to Deptford, and lies North and
South; on the West side are two Windmills, from the southermost of which, about
half a mile down the River, A Shoal.
is very shoal and flat, shoaling from the East side of the River, called the
Isle of Dogs; Isle of. Dogs.
there being not above six foot at low water. This Reach is noted in the
Draught with the letter d.

Greenwich-Reach.
This Reach lies from Deptford to the lower end of Greenwich, and is much
winding, but about the middle it lies East and West: At the lower end thereof
is a convenient place for Ships to ride, Greenwhich-hole.
called Greenwich-Hole; and there is in this Hole about two fathom at
low water. There is a Shoal, A Shoal.
at the upper end of this Reach, that lies off from Sanders-Ness. This Reach
is noted in the Draught with the letter e.

Blackwall-Reach.
Greenwich to Blackwall Town: Blackwall.
This Reach is very good for Ships to ride in any part thereof, but especially
on the West side, which is the best of the Channel from Layness or
Blackwall-point, which lies right against Blackwall, from whence runs off a
Shoal which is dry at low water A Shoal.
This Reach lies North by West and South by East, and is noted in the Draught
with the letter f.

Nel-Hope, (alias) Bugby's-Hole.
This Reach leads down from Layness to Hookness, and lies N. W. and S. E. It
is somewhat shoal off from Hookness, wherein is not above two foot at
low water. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the letter g.

Woolwich-Reach.
This Reach lies down from Bugby's-Hole to the lower end of Woolwich Town,
East by North, and West by South: On the North side is Ham-Creek, a little to
the southward of which lies a shoal, called Woolwich-shelf, Woolwich shelf.
whereon is not above two foot at low water; it lies one third of the Reach
over from the Essex-shore: In this Reach there is three fathom and a half
water, but below the Town deeper. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the
letter h.

Gallions-Reach.
This Reach lies from the lower end of Woolwich-Town, almost to Barking-Creek,
and lies N. N. E. and S. S. W. On the West side thereof stands a little
House and some Trees, called Gallions House and Trees; right against them is
good riding for Ships; and at the lower end of this Reach is a Point called
Maggot-Ness. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the letter i.

Barking-shelf-Reach.
This Reach lies down from Maggot-Ness to Cross-Ness; a little above
Cross-Ness, on the Kentish-shore, stood one of the halfway Trees,
Half-way-Tree.
and the other opposite to it on the Essex-shore; they bear that name, because
it is reputed to be halfway between London and Gravesend. This Reach lies
somewhat crooked, going in with a Bight on the Kentish-side. In this Reach is
the greatest shoal in the River, Barking-shelf.
called Barking-shelf, from whence this Reach takes its name, which lies in
the middle of the River: Between the Shelf and Barking-Creek, there is not
above six foot at low water, but the best of the Channel is between the Shelf
and the Kentish-shore; it is narrow, and there is but two fathom, and two
fathom and a half at low water. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the
letter k.

Half-way-Tree Reach.
This Reach extends it self down from Cross-Ness to Gillion-Tree,
Gillion-Tree.
which stands on a Point of Land on the Kentish-shore, almost against
Raynham-Ferry; it lies in two parts, the westermost lies E. S. E. and W. N.
W. and the other part East by South and West by North; in this Reach is four
fathom, and four fathom and a half at low water. In most parts of this Reach,
off the Point where Gillion-Tree stands, lies a shoal, but not very dangerous,
there being about eight foot at low water. On the Essex-side, lies out a Jetty
to secure the Bank from the strength of the Tide, (which sets very much on
that shore) it is called Dagenham-Jetty; Degeham-jetty. A shelf.
between which, and Cross-Ness on the Kentish-shore, lies a small Shelf, which
is sometimes dry at low water. This Reach is expressed in the Draught with the
letter l.

Erith-Reach.
This Reach lies N. N. W. and S. S. E. and extends it self from Reynham,
down to a Point on the Essex-shore, Gold-harbour.
called Cold-harbour. In most part of this Reach there is about four fathom
water; but right against the Church is the best place for great Ships to come
to an anchor, because it is somewhat deeper. This Reach is noted in the Draught
with the letter m.

The Rands,
Is a short Reach, extending it self from Cold-barbour to Crafford-ness, which
lies on the West side of Dart-ford-Creek, bearing East by North and West by
South: Right against which Creek, lies a shoal in the middle of the River,
called Rand-hill, but not dangerous. A shoal called Rand-hill.
This Reach is noted in the Draught with the letter n.

Long-Reach.
This Reach takes its Name from its Nature, being the longest Reach in the
River, and lies E. S. E. and W. N. W. and extends it self from Crafford-ness
to Greenhith-Town. On the North side, between Pursleet and Sleepers-hole, lies
a shoal, but not dangerous; A shoal.
in the upper part of this Reach there is five fathom and a half at low water,
and all down the North Reach there is seven fathom water. This Reach is noted
in the Draught with the letter o.

St. Clements-Reach.
This Reach lies in two parts, first from Greenhith to St. Clements, and lies
N. N. E. and S. S. W. and from St. Clements to Grayes it lies East and West.
This Reach is the most dangerous in the whole River, being very subject to foul
weather, by reason of its situation, especially with some Winds, as a
South-west and North-east wind, which does make very bad weather, so that here
are more Boats cast away, than in all the Reaches in the whole River; and by
reason of the bad weather that annoys this Reach, Fidlers-Reach.
it is called Fidlers-Reach, because any little wind will raise the Waves, and
make the Boats dance: At the lower end of this Reach, a little above
Grayes-Town, Black-shelf.
lies a shoal called Black-shelf, whereon Ships sometimes come aground, taking
no harm, but sit upright. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the letter p.

North-fleet-Hope.
This Reach leads from Grayes-Town down to North-fleet, which is on the
Kentish-shore, and lies North-west by North, and South-east by South; there is
about eight fathom water all along this Reach, and is bold enough, having no
danger on any side. This Reach is noted in the Draught with the letter q.

Gravesend-Reach.
This Reach lies East and West, and extends it self from North-fleet below
the Town of Gravesend, to a place called the Piles; Piles.
there is good riding on any part of this Reach: The water rises here three
fathom and a half; above the Town you will have eight, and below six fathom.
This Reach is noted in the Draught with the letter r.

Lilbury-Hope.
This Reach lies North-east by North, and South-West by South, and extends
it self from the Piles aforesaid, down to Mucking-Creek, which is on the North
shore; and Hope-ness, alias, Sands-head-Point, on the South side: Here is in
most parts of this Reach, five, six, and seven fathom at low water: Ships may
conveniently ride in any part of it. This Reach is noted in the Draught with
the letter s.

A Description of the Sands, Shoals, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks on the Coast
of England, from Thames-Mouth to Flambrough-head.
Showing their Bearings and Distances from the most Eminent Places on the Land;
with the Depths of Water on them, as well as in the Channels between them.
Blyth-Sand.
THis Sand begins at the lower end of the Hope, from Hope-ness, alias,
Sands-head-point, on the South side, and runs down below Hull-haven; it
lies E. N. E. the lower down the broader: there is some distance between the
eastermost end and the shore, but the westermost end joyneth to the Land: Those
that turn, either going up or down, must come no nearer it than five fathom at
low water, and seven fathom at high water. On the North side you will have five
and six fathom at low water. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the letter
a.

Hole-Haven-Scarrs.
Hole-Haven-Scarrs is a dangerous shoal, being very hard ground, and joining to
the shore a little below Hole-Haven, stretching off from the Land about two
Cables length, being very steep, and having ten fathom close by it. This, and
the lower end of Blyth-Sand, makes the Channel more narrow than either above or
below, and causes the Tide to run very strong. In Spring-Tydes it is dry at
low water. This shoal is marked in the Draught with the letter b.

The Chapman.
The Chapman is a shoal that lies about two miles below the Scarrs on the
North side: Chapman head.
The West end thereof joins to the shore, and is called the Chapman-head; it
lies down nearest from the Scarrs East, is near half a mile in length, and
steep too, having nine fathom close to it; a good part of the East end thereof
appears dry at low water, being hard, strong, and uneven ground, having six
fathom water close aboard of it. The thwart mark for the East end of the
Chapman, is to bring Hadley Church and Hadley Castle both in one. This Sand is
noted in the Draught with the letter c.

From hence runs a shoal which reaches below Canvey-Island, High-Sand.
and is called High-sand.

Middle-Ground.
This Middle-Ground is a shoal that lies against Lee, in the middle of the
Channel, and at low Tide there is no more than 11, 12, or 13 foot water, and on
each side about 4, or 4 fathom and a half. The South side is the deepest, it is
about two miles in length, and lies down East as the River does. Marks of the
middle Ground.
The Mark for this Sand, is to bring Lee Church on the East Point of the Marsh,
(which is the East end of Canvey-Island) then are you thwart of the shoalest
part of it, where you have but ten foot at low water: To avoid it, you may go
on either side thereof. This Shelf is noted in the Draught with the letter d.

The Nower and Buoy.
The Nower is a Sand that lies from part of the Isle of Grean, and runs down
nearest East two little miles; on the East Point thereof lies a Buoy in twelve
foot at low water: this Sand is broader in some places than in other, by reason
of some Swatches that are in it, Marks of the Bouy.
and dries every low water: Minster-Church, in the Isle of Sheppy, bears South
by East from the Buoy of the Nower, and Shyrness West, half southerly, about
three miles: From the Buoy of the Nower to the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, the
course is East, one quarter southerly, near five miles. This Sand and Buoy is
marked in the Draught with the letter e.

The Cant.
The Cant is a great Flat that lies on the North side of Sheppy, and joins to
the shore, and begins a little to the eastward of Shyreness, and so runs to the
East end of the Island, where the West end of the Red-sand and Spaniard joins
to it; this shoal lies off from Sheppy in some places a mile, in others two;
the more to the East the farther off, by means of its joining with the
Red-sand. There is no mark for this Sand, (only the depth of water being four,
five, or six fathom) so near the Ship may go (the time of Tide considered): But
from the lower part of the said Cant, begins deep water close to it down to the
Spile, as 11, 12, Spile.
or 13 fathom, and is called Bradgate-hole.

Shooberry-Ness.
Shooberry-Ness is part of a great Flat that begins below Lee-Town, and
runs down the River northerly to the North-east of Whitaker. This Ness lies
right off a mile from the shore, and falls dry at low water, is steep too,
having ten fathom close to it. To avoid this, come no nearer it than eight
fathom. Thwart Marks of Shooberry Ness.
The thwart Marks of it, Is to bring two high Trees a little open to the West
of Shooberry-steeple, which is a spire Steeple. To go clear of Shooberry-flat,
Longst Marks.
keep the high Land of Lee open of the Land on the North-east of it, and that
will go in the best of the Channel.

Black-Tayl.
This is a part of the foresaid great Flat, and lies below Shooberry-ness,
E.N.E. about four miles, being steep too, and having six, seven, and eight
fathom above and below it; but you must come no nearer it than 8 fathom.

The Warp.
The Warp is a shoal that lies in the Fair-way, coming out of the Swin up the
River, beginning near to the Buoy of Oaze-edge, and tayleth up as high as the
Middle-ground of Lee; upon it there is but four fathom at low water. On the
North side there is eight and ten fathom, and on the South side ten and eleven
fathom. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the letter f.

The Shoe and Beacon.
The Shoe is also a part of the forementioned great Flat, being very steep
too: The course from the Black-tayl to the Shoe and Beacon, is North-east,
half easterly, about four or five miles. You must not come nearer the Beacon
then nine or ten fathom; and you may stand over toward the Mouse in ten
fathom, and so nearer. From this Beacon to the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, the
course is South-west by South, distant about four miles. Between this Beacon
and the Whitaker, you may come in six fathom on the North-side, and on the
South Side, near the Mouse, in ten fathom. In the Fair-way is seven, eight, or
nine fathom. The Shooe-beacon and Buoy of the Red-sand, do bear North and
South, nearest one of the other, betwixt five and six miles.

Middle-Ground and Buoy.
This Sand lies between Buxey-sand and the East-Barrows, being about five
miles in length, and lies near North-east and South-west; upon the South-west
end is placed a Buoy, which bears from the Shooe-beacon North-east by North,
two degrees easterly, about five miles; you may sail from the Shoe (being
below it) by your Lead, toward the Whitaker, in 6, 6 fathom and a half, and 7
and a half, and on the Barrow side in 8 fathom; and in the Fair-way is 9 or 10
fathom; the Buoy, at low water, lies in 18 foot. And on this Sand, at
low water, is 4, 5, and 6 foot water.

The Middle-Middle-Ground.
This is a small Shoal that lies W.N.W. half a mile from the Buoy of the
Middle-ground, and extends it self a little below the Whitaker-beacon; on this
Sand there is no more then 14 foot at low water. To avoid it, you must keep
within two Cables length of the Buoy of the Middle-ground. At the North end of
this shoal there is 5 or 6 fathom water, This is noted in the Draught with the
letter g.

The Whitaker and Beacon.
The Whitaker is also a part of the forementioned great Flat, and is the
North-east Point thereof, on which stands a Beacon, from whence runs off a
tail of the foresaid Flat, a little to the northward of the Beacon: To avoid
which, come no nearer then seven fathom; betwixt this and the S. W. end of the
Buxey, goes in a small Channel up toward Foul-ness, called North-fletch,
useful only for small Vessels. From Whitaker to the Buoy of the Buxey, you may
sail in 6 or 7 fathom, and toward the Middle-Ground in 8 fathom; in the
Fair-way there is 7 fathom, and on this tail there is but two fathom at
low water.

The Burey and Buoy.
The Buxey is a Sand that lies on the North side of Whitaker, and stretches
it self South-west and North-east, falling dry at low water. At the North end
thereof lies a Buoy; betwixt this Buoy and the South-west end of the Gunfleet,
goes in a Channel called the Spits, where there is but six and seven foot at
low water, being a quarter of a mile broad. Marks for the Spits.
The Mark for it, is a flat Steeple, called great Holland; bring it into a
small Swamp or Gaul in a red Cliff, then does the Church bear North, half
westerly; then steer in North-west till your water deepen; then bear down
toward the Naze, according to your Wind; the nearer the Gunfleet, the deeper
the Water is; as you sail, you shall have 5, 6, 7, and 8 fathom water.

The Gunfleet and Buoy.
The Gunfleet is a long Sand, by judgment eight or nine miles, and has in it
some small Swatches; the South-west end of it, and the North-east end is flat,
and good shoaling, but on either side steep, in some parts of it more than
other: You may sail along it on the South side; from the South-west end
downwards in seven fathom, till you come within a large mile of the Buoy, come
no nearer then nine fathom: Here lies a Hook E.S.E. off from the Sand a long
Cables length; A Hook.
on the South-east side of which goes a small Swatch quite through the Sand to
the North-west, which causes the Tide to set in there; so that when Vessels
pass near it, (if not careful in time) it draws them into the Swatch, or upon
the Hook; to avoid which, come no nearer this part of the Sand then ten fathom.
From this Hook, to the North-east end, this Sand is very steep too, but at the
end flat as aforesaid: This Sand lies North-east and South-west, a good part
of it dries, in some parts half a mile, and other parts one third of a mile
broad; and if you stand from this Sand to the Heaps, come no nearer them than
ten fathom; in the middle of the Channel is eight fathom. The Buoy of the
Gunfleet lies from the Naze South-east by East four miles.

The Heaps.
The Heaps are several Banks of Sand, as it were, By some called the Hurdles.
joining to the North-east end of the Middle-Ground, E.N.E. and W.S.W. on
which, at low water, is but seven foot, and very steep too, and runs down about
three miles; the North-east end thereof does bear from the Naze South by East,
half easterly: The Channel betwixt them and the Gunfleet, is four miles broad;
in turning up or down, come no nearer them then ten fathom. Some of these Heaps
do dry on Spring-Tydes. These are noted in the Draught with the letter b.

The Andrews.
The Andrews is a narrow Point of small stones that lie out from Landguard
Point near half a mile, and dries at low water: On the South-west side of this
Spit, lies several heaps of small stones that also dry at Spring-tydes; but
when you have the two Light-houses in one, (sailing so) it directs you free
of them; and as you sail out of Harwich to the northwards, when you have
brought Bawdsey Steeple open of the Land to the South of Bawdsey, then are you
clear of the Andrews, and may sail toward Oazely-Bay. Oazeley-Bay.


The Altar.
The Altar is a small Ridge that lies N. N. W. and S.S.E. right against
Landguard-fort; the Channel here, at low water, is not more than a Cables
length broad; on the Fort side is five fathom, on the Altar is six foot at
low water; a Cables length within the Fort is a Cross Ridge, on which at low
water, Cross-Ridge.
is but fifteen foot, it lies quite cross the Channel; then you must sail
along the Beach on the Fort-side, to avoid the great Flat, called the Guard,
Guard.
that lies off from Harwich-Town, till you bring open Manning-Tree, and a high
Tree that stands to the southwards of the Hill Point (next above Harwich-Town)
in Manning-Tree-Water; then may you anchor where you please, in five, six, or
seven fathom, taking care of a long spit of Sand that runs out from
Shotley-Point, cross to Ipswich-Water. Shotley-Point.
This shoal is noted in the Draught with the letter i.

The Ridge.
The Ridge is a small Bank of great stones, and lies on the South side of you,
as you sail in by the Andrews, on which is four or five foot at low water. The
Mark to avoid it, is to bring the two Light-houses at Harwich in one; and if
you shut Harwich-Mill in the North end of the Cliff, you run right on it; if
open, then you may go clear; it lies North-east and South-west, and is but
narrrow, and half a mile in length. Noted in the Draught with the letter k.

The Rowling-Grounds.
The Rowling-grounds is the Road where commonly Ships ride, being without the
Altar, and within the Ridge, Marks of the Rowling-grounds.
and thwart the Andrews, where is at low water 4 or 5 fathom. The Marks for it
are, to bring the Windmill on the North end of Harwich-Cliff, and the Beacon
on Bawdsey-Cliff, over the North-east Point of the Beach that runs from
Landguard-Fort to the northwards.

The Platters.
The Platters are several Heaps and Banks of small stones that lie between
Landguard-Fort and Woodbridg-Haven, Wood-bridge-Haven.
they lie close to the shore: To avoid them, come no nearer than four fathom.
To the northwards, near Woodbridge-Haven, A shoal.
lies a small Shoal, where is but ten foot at low water: To avoid this, come
no nearer than five fathom off the shore thereabout. This Shoal is noted in the
Draught with the letter l.

West-Rocks.
The West-Rocks are a great many Heaps and Banks joined together, having
several small Swatches amongst them, the Ground being of several qualities,
partly Sand, and partly Stones, both great and small; in several places it
dries, and in most other parts of it but 2, 3, 4, 5 foot at low water; the
ground uneven, and is of great extent, N. E. and S. W. about 3 miles, and lies
N. W. and S. E. near 5 miles. There are several shoals that lie within it on
the N. W. side, that are accounted parts of it, and the Cork-Sand that lies on
the North side of it, there being only a small Swatch of 7 foot water that
parts them; the S. W. part of this Shoal, lies a mile and half from the Buoy
of the Gunfleet, North by East, and N. N. E. you must come no nearer to it than
7 or 8 fathom on the South side: when you are to the southward, Marks of the
West-Rocks.
and against the Body of it, then Harwich-Church will be a little nearer to
Landguard-Fort than to Harwich-Cliff.

The Cork.
The Cork is a Sand that lies on the North side of the West-Rocks, and does
almost join to them, there being only a small Swatch of seven foot water
betwixt them; it dries at low water, and lies near three miles from
Landguard-Fort, and S.E. by East from the outpart of the Andrews. The Marks to
go clear of it, in and out, is to bring Harwich-Church on a black Brewhouse,
that stands a little within the Land; as is before expressed in the going out of
Harwich.

The Cutler.
The Cutler is a shoal that lies off from the N. E. of Bawdsey-Cliff a small
mile, on which is but six foot at low water: This Sand lies badly, if men be
not careful of it, because the Tide of Flood or Ebb sets so right upon it, that
if a Ship comes aground, it is bad getting off, the Tide binding so directly
upon it; you may come in four fathom of it; in the Fair-way is 5 and 6 fathom:
it is almost round, and very hard ground. The Longst mark to keep clear of it,
Longst a mark.
is to bring Harwich-Steeple a Sails breadth open of Felsteed-Cliff. The
Thwart Mark for it, Thwart mark.
is Bawdsey-steeple on the North end of a thick Wood by the Water side; then
the Steeple bears off you North-west, five degrees West. This Sand is noted in
the Draught with the letter n.

The Middle-Ground.
The Middle-ground is a Bank that lies betwixt Orford-haven and Orford-ness,
half a mile from the shore; on which at low water is eighteen foot, and between
it and the shore is five and six fathom, and lies one third part of the way off
to the Whiting-Sand; it is about half a mile in length, and lies along as the
shore lies: between this and the Whiting is 6 and 7 fathom. This is noted in
the Draught with the letter o.

The Onion.
The Onion is a round Knowl that lies a third part of a mile to the southwards
of Orford-ness, just within the Stream of it; and there is on it, at low water,
14 and 15 foot. Marks there are none, but to observe the Tides. This Shoal is
noted in the Draught with the letter p.

The Sledway.
The Sledway is a Channel through which all Ships pass that come within the
Sands at Orford-ness, and go up or down the Swin. The Marks for it are, to
bring Bawdsey-steeple open a little to the northward of Bawdsey-cliff, in two
or three Trees, and then the Church will bear from you N. N. W. and so you must
keep those Marks together, and sail out S. S. E. in the very best of the
Channel, which directs you clear of the South-ends of the Sands of Orford-Town,
and of the Cork and West-Rocks to the northward of them; and if you bring
Bawdsey-steeple on the North end of Bawdsey-Cliff, then it will bear from you
North by West, and brings you very near the West-Rocks; and if you bring
Bawdsey-steeple N. W. from you, it will bring you near the South end of the
Shipwash: When you sail out of the Sledway from Bawdsey, (it bearing N.N.W.
from you) the depths are 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, fathoms; then steer S. W. by West,
and W.S.W. according to the Wind, and that will bring you near the Buoy of the
Gunfleet, to direct you up the Swin; and when you come to 10 and 11, then hale
South up toward the Buoy of the Gunfleet. This Sledway is very uneven Ground,
you shall have 7, 8, and 9 fathom, and the next throw 4 and 5 fathom.

The Whiting.
The Whiting is a Sand that lies against Orford-Town, and lies N.E. by North,
and S. W. by South, on which is but five foot at low water, and is in length 3
miles and a half, and in breadth 3 Cables length; the North end of it bears
from the Light-house on Orford-ness S.S.W. 4 miles and a half, and
Orford-Church N. N. W. a large mile from the shore; the South end is the
broadest, when you are at the South end in four fathom. The Marks are
Alterton-steeple, West, Marks of the Whiting.
eight degrees northerly; and Bawdsey-steeple West by South, three degrees
southerly: This end of the Sand lies from the shore two miles; and about half a
mile South-east from this end of the Sand, there is but five fathom at
high water: Not knowing whether this be that which some Colliers report, that
lies about the South end of the Whiting, which they call the Kettle-bottom,
being a round Knowl, on which some of them said they have seen a Ship aground,
but could not tell us where it was, neither could we find any other. The
Whiting is noted in the Draught with the letter q.

Bawdsey-Sand.
This is a Sand that lies without the Whiting, lying North-east and
South-west, in length four miles and a half, and in breadth three Cables
length, and a great part of it dries at low-tydes. The Marks for the South end
of it, is Bawdsey-steeple, North-west, six degrees: then the Church stands open
to the South of a little tuft of Trees. This end lies from the shore four
miles and a half, and is very steep, having eight and nine fathom close to it,
and a very strong Tide runs by it. Marks for Bawdsey-Sand.
The Marks for the North end, is Orford Castle, North by West, six degrees
westerly; the Light houses North, six degres easterly; five miles off this end
is more flat and broad than the South-end; this end, and the South-end of the
Whiting, does bear North-west by West, and South-east by East, two miles
asunder; the depths betwixt them is 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 fathom the most, and on the
East side, 8, 9, 10 fathom, and 7 and 8 at the West; and from Alterton-Church
it lies West by North, half northerly; and from Bawdsey-Church, West, half
southerly; then will Bawdsey-Church be on the North end of a short Wood.

The Shipwash.
The Shipwash is a Sand that lies without Bawdsey-Sand, and is properly so
called, it having, out of doubt washed many a Ship quite away; It is a very
dangerous Sand by reason of its length, and the strength of Tide that runs by
it, and the great part of it that dries at low water, and the devouring Nature
thereof, swallowing up any Ship that is lost on it, quite out of sight in few
days: it lies North by East, and South by West, and and is in length nine
miles, and in breadth a quarter of a mile; but at the South end it is half a
mile broad, by reason of a Hook that runs off the North-west side, as in the
Draught is described. Marks for the North end of this Sand.

Marks for the Southend.


The Marks for the North end, are Orford-Church, North-west, six miles off, and
five miles from the Light-houses: Or Orford-ness South-East by South. The Marks
for the South end, are Bawdsey-steeple North-west, five degrees West, eight
miles and a half off from the shore. The South-east side of this Sand is very
steep too, having ten fathom close to it; but the North-west side is not so
steep, for you may sail along that side in seven and eight fathom, taking care
of the Hook; the South end is more flat than the North end. The Depths between
this and Bawdsey-Sand, are 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 fathom; two miles without this
Sand, to the East, is fifteen and sixteen fathom.

Alborough-Knapes.
Alborough-Knapes is a Sand that lies about five miles from Orford-ness. The
Marks to carry you clear of it, are to bring Orford. Church and Castle one in
anothor: Alborough-Church, West, brings you just upon it; there is but two
fathom and a half Water upon it at low-tyde. If you come within the Knapes, you
will have twelve or thirteen fathom Water; and if you go without it, you shall
have sixteen fathom; which are sure Notes to know whether you are without or
within the Sand.

Bernard.
The Bernard is a Sand that lies a little to the northwards of Eastness; it
lies in the Sea North-East one mile and a half; the South end lies East from
Covehithe-Church, if you are bound to the northward; to go clear of the
North-east end of it, keep Southwold open of the South end of the Cliff, until
you bring Leystaff Windmil open to the northwards of the Town of Leystaff.

The Seahorse, or Newcome.
The Seahorse is a Sand or Bank which lies thwart the Steeple of Covehithe,
(which is a high sharp Steeple) not far from the shore, which falls almost
dry at low water, but at half-flood you may sail through between the Land and
it in 2 fathom: upon the outerside it is very steep, so that you cannot come
nearer it than in nine or ten fathom. When the Steeple of Covehithe is W. N. W.
from you, then you are to the southward of it; and when the Steeple is
South-west by West from you, then are you to the northwards of it two leagues.

St. Matthews-Sand.
Off from Pakesfield, almost three miles, lies St. Matthews-Sand, being in
length one mile and a half, and in breadth about three Cables length; it lies
in the Sea North and South; the South end bears from Eastness North-east by
North, five miles and a half; the North end lies from Leystaff East by South,
three miles and a half.

The Holms of Yarmouth.
Off from Leystaff begins the Holms of Yarmouth, which are several Banks and
Sands, having many Channels going between them, and you may sail through upon
diverse Marks, if you are acquainted: And also within these Banks, from Leystaff
until you come past Winterton, (for they reach thwart of it) most of the Banks
have particular appellations, as Corten-Sand, Leystaff, Knock, New-warp,
Cockle, Hombsby, Hurd, the Knock, Middle-ground, Thredle-dore, St.
Nicholas-Sand, Scroby, etc. If you sail along by the Land, you must keep the
Soundings of the shore in 5, 6, or 7 fathom; some of them are steep too on the
outside, where you may have 12 and 13 fathom; but off Thredle-door, St.
Nicholas-Sand, and Scroby, you have but 4, 5, and 6 fathom, three or four miles
off. To go without the Holm-head, keep the Knock-Beacons one in the other: Also
upon the Ebb, if occasion serves, you may borrow into four fathom of the North
end of the Newcome; or you may go off in 11 or 12 fathom as you please; coming
from the northwards, you must go no nearer the Cockle than five or six fathom,
but on the shore you may borrow in four fathom.

Scroby.
E. N. E. from the Town of Yarmouth, two miles from the shore, is a Sand called
the Scroby, lying North and South in the Sea, being in length almost two miles;
this Sand is steep too, having on the outside ten and eleven fathom; in the
middle of the Channel you will have twenty fathom between it and the New-warp;
the South end of this Sand lies half a mile from the end of the Knowls, and
the North end almost the same distance from the Knock.

New-warp.
South-east by East, five leagues and a half from Winterton-ness, lies a Sand
called New-warp, being in length two miles and a half, and lies in the Sea
East and West; on it, at low water, there is but two fathom; without it you
will have ten and twelve fathom, between it and the Holms five and six fathom,
but near the Holms ten fathom.

The Overfalls.
East from Yarmouth, about nine miles, lies the South end of the Overfalls;
extending it self to the northwards more than five miles in length, but in
breadth not considerable: This Bank is dangerous, because it is very shoal; on
the East side of it you will have five fathom and even ground, but being about
two miles distant you will have 20 and 24 fathom.

Bounses.
The Bounses is a Sand which lies North-east, a little northerly from
Winterton-ness about five miles and a half, being a round Sand, whereon there
is three fathom at low water; within it you have 16 and 17 fathom, but without
it 8, 12, and 16 fathom; it bears from New-warp North by West, a little
Westerly, about a mile.

Haseborough-Sand.
This Sand lies from Haseborough North-east by East, about six miles and a
half, and lies in the Sea North-west and South-east, being in length two miles
and a half; the South-east end lies from Wintertonness North and West, a
little westerly, nine miles and a half; between it and the shore you have 12
and 13 fathom water, but on it 3 and 4 fathom.

The Lemon.
The Lemon is a Sand that bears from Haseborough E. N. E. about 8 or 9
leagues; when you are near this Sand, you cannot see the Land, but
Haseborough-steeple will bear from you W.S.W. and if you stand that Course one
or two glasses at the most, you will then have sight of Haseborough-steeple,
and the Wood that is by it, if the weather is any thing clear. This Sand lies
a little more northerly than the Orrey.

The Orrey.
The Orrey is a Sand that bears near East by North, half northerly from
Haseborough-Church about seven or eight leagues off, and is about two miles
from the Lemon; between which two Sands there is a Channel, where you will have
about 17, 18, and 19 fathom water: When you are near this Sand,
Haseborough-Steeple will bear near West by South, half southerly.

Blackney-Sand.
This Sand lies before Blackney, being distant about five miles; on the inner
side you will have four fathom water, and without 4, 5, and 6 fathom.

Pole and Piper.
The Pole and Piper is a Shoal that lies between Blackney and Wells, joining
to the shore. The Beacons that you sail by, lie along by the Piper, at the
West end whereof goes in the Channel of Wells.

Burnham Flats.
Between Wells and Burnham, there lies the great Flat called Burnham-Flats, a
league distant from the shore, which at low water lies dry in diverse places.
At high water you may well go over it. The ground on the North side goes up
flat and plain; On the South side it is very steep; as soon as you are over the
shoalest, you shall get suddenly deep water, and good sandy ground; within it
is good riding for easterly winds.

Pearls-Hole.
In the Latitude of 53 degrees. 38 min. and to the East of the Meridian of
Flamberough-head, 20 leagues distant from it, E.S.E. two degrees southerly 22
leagues, and from the Spornhead East 19 leagues, is a great Hole called the
Hole of Pearls, wherein is 35 and 40 fathom, fine brown Sand, three Cables
length sailing, and then 13 fathom.

New-Bank.
Four leagues S. E. by East from this Hole, you will find a Bank whereon is but
5 and a half, 6 and 7 fathom for several casts of the Lead, and on either fide
16 fathom. The depth of water from Pearls-hole to this Bank, is 13, 15, 14, 14,
16, 10, 16 fathom, fine brown Sand and small Gravel: The Tide sets on this Bank
N. W. and S. E. it being in the Latitude of 53 degrees. 32 min. Distant from
Haseborough-steeple 12 leagues, North by East, and from Flamborough-head E. S.
E. 26 leagues. The Soundings here-abouts are uncertain in depth and ground, and
many Banks there are which we know not of.

The Sands and Shoals in Lin-Deeps.
The Sonk.
THe Sonk is a Sand which is nigh the South end of Burnham-flats, and lies to
the northward of Chappel-land, and is dry at low water; you may sail about it
on both sides.

Dousings.
The Dousings is a Sand which lies on the Northside of Burnham-flats; it
bears from Wells North, half westerly, 21 miles; the South Side is steep too,
where you will have 19 fathom not far from it, and on the North side 9 and 10
fathom.

Inner Dousings.
This Sand lies from St. Edmonds, N. W. by North 13 miles; and from Skegness
N.N.E. 10 miles.

Dogs-head.
Dogs-head is a small Sand which lies on the North side of Wilgriph, about a
mile from the shore.

Boston-Knock,
Is a Sand which lies off the Point of Legerness, which falls dry at
low water; between it and the Land there is but two fathom; but it flows
thereabout five fathom up and down. When Legerness bears W. N. W. from you,
then go on South-west through between the Knock and a Shoal (which shoots off
from the Westward of Legerness) until you can get again the depth of six or
seven fathom.

Long-Sand.
The body of this Sand lies against Legerness, distant about three miles;
being without the Point of the Ness, you may run through between Boston-Knock
and it; when the Trees in the Point come a hand-spikes length to the eastward
of Legerness, then go on Southwest, and you may run right into the Deep between
Boston-Knock and Long-sand: between the Knock and the Point of the Long-sand
you will have five fathom; being past the Knock you will have eight, nine, and
ten fathom deep.

A Description of the Sands, within the HUMBER.
Rose.
THe Rose is a Sand which lies before Salt-fleet, being a round Sand, and is
two miles from the shore.

Riff.
The Riff is a Shoal which joyneth to the shore between Sand-hall and
Clay-ness, and stretches it self N. E. by East almost six miles into the Sea,
the Point whereof lies from the Sporn S. E. by South, four miles, and from the
Buoy of the Bull Fast by South four miles.

Bull.
The Bull is a Sand which lies almost in the middle of the Channel, on the N.
E. side whereof lies a Buoy, which lies from the Sporn S. E. half southerly,
three miles and a half; the Buoy lies in 7 or 8 fathom water. The thwart Mark
of the said Buoy, is a House upon the West end of the Cliff of Clay-ness, and
from thence to Grimsby-Road, and anchor a little below the Beacon.

Stone-Banks.
These are several small Banks which lie East from the Sporn-head. If from the
Point of Kelsey you steer South by East, until the Point of the Sporn be West,
half northerly, then are you clear of them.

Borcom.
Borcom is a Sand which lies off Stanningborough about a mile from the shore;
on the North-side hereof lies a Buoy, which lies from the Sporn West by
South, half southerly, seven miles, and from the Buoy of the Bull East by South
four miles and a half.

Sonk in the Humber.
The Sonk is a Sand that lies on the North-side of the River almost as far
down as the Sporn; if going up on the South Side you bring Pauls-Tower open of
the Red-Cliff to the eastward, then you are clear, or about the Tail of the
Sonk.

Holms.
The Holms is a Sand which lies about a mile from the shore. The East end
comes within the Tail of the Sonk, and on the West end lies a Buoy, which
bears South a mile and half from Pauls-Church, and from the Buoy of the Bull
N. W. by West about 13 miles.

The Banks that lie off in the Sea.
The Dogger-Bank.
On the Dogger-Bank the ground is even for ten leagues together; on the
South Side of it there is 24, 24, 25, 25, 25, 24, 24, 23, 22, 21, 20, 19, 18
fathom, fine white Sand; and on the North-side it falls off with a flat, and
deepens by little and little; in sailing four leagues North after you have
sixteen fathom, you will have your water every cast deeper; at four leagues you
will have twenty fathom, fine white Sand; the Bank lies nearest North-east
from the Sporn, and runs near the Juttish-Riff: On the South Side, a mile
from the Bank, you will have 20 and 22 fathom fine white and gray Sand; you
will have 18, 17, 16, 14, 11 fathom, fine whitish gray Sand, and continues in
the depth of 11 fathom on the Dogger-bank for 7 leagues together, in the
Latitude of 55 degrees. 9 min. to the Eastwards of Flamborough-head 34 leagues. The
Soundings on the very Ridge of the Dogger-bank, toward the West end, are 11,
11, 12, 11, 10 and a half, 10 and a half, 10 and a quarter, 10 and a quarter,
10 and a half fathom. In standing a mile southerly, you will deepen from 10 and
a quarter to 12 fathom, and sailing Westerly you will find shoaler water: In
sailing 30 leagues East and West, the ground is of the same nature: For three
leagues breadth North or South, it is 11, 12, 10 and a half, 11, 11, 13, 14,
15, 14 fathom; then the water grows deeper on either side, but more steeper on
the North than on the South; yet toward the West part of this Bank, you will
find the South side to deepen more suddenly than to the East end: It lies
nearest S. W. by West, and N. E. by East, stretching within 16 leagues of
Flamborough-head. The Soundings on the West end Flamborough-head bearing East
by North, four degrees northerly, distant eight leagues, and steering W. S. W.
you will have white and brown Sand, 20, 19, 17, 16 fathom, with small stones of
Gravel. But further off toward the Dogger-bank 32, 30, 25, 32, 27, 30 fathom,
fine brown and gray Sand. About two leagues to the southward of
Flamborough-head you will have 10 fathom water, small gravel stones and brown
Sand. When Hornsey-spire-steeple bears W.S.W. about three leagues, and
Flamborough-head N. W. by North, you may anchor in 17 fathom, gravelly ground.
Flamborough-head lies in the Latitude of 54 degrees. 14 min.

In the Latitude of 54 degrees. 3 min. to the East of the Meridian of
Flamborough-head 5 leagues, you will have 25 fathom, gray Sand, with small
stones and pieces of shells. The Soundings from 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25
fathom, fine gray Sand, sometimes gravel, and sometimes shells.

Crouch-Bank.
In the midway between Flamborough-head and the Naze lies this great Bank,
North by East and South by West in the Sea, being in length 35 leagues; the
South end hereof is distant from the Dogger-bank five leagues, and from
Flamborough-head North-east, half easterly, 39 leagues; on the South end of
this Bank is 22, in the middle 38, 39, and on the North end 28 fathom, which
bears from the Naze W. S. W. 39 leagues.

The White-Bank.
About twenty leagues North from Friezland lies the White-bank, being in
length 27 leagues, and in breadth five leagues, being distant from the
Dogger-bank 13 leagues; lying East by North, and West by South in the Sea; on
the West end is 23 fathom, and on the South end 22.

The White-Water.
North-West by West, fourteen leagues from the Texel, lies a Bank called the
White-water, lying N. E. by East, and S. W. by South in the Sea, being in
length ten leagues, on which is 16 fathom, the West end being distant from the
Well seven leagues, where you will have 24 and 25 fathom, and between it and
the Dogger-bank 27 and 28 fathom.

The Well-Bank.
The Soundings of the Well-bank are 15 and 14 fathom, brown sand and small
gravel; between Flamborough-head and it the distance being 20 leagues, you will
have 25, 23, 22, 21, 22, 18 fathom; near the West side of the Bank you will
have 12, 14, 16, 17, 13, 15 fathom, brown Sand, with small gravel stones in it
red and black, and some Casts fine brown Sand, and pieces of shells. On the
South-west part of the Well-bank you will have 13 fathom, brown Sand: This
Well-bank stretches far easterly toward the White-sand. The depth of Water
between both is 15, 14, 18, 17, 17, 23, 17, 21, 21, 23, 21, 14 fathom, brown
Sand, but no certainty in any ground to know the distance of places from the
Land.

In the Latitude of 53 degrees. 6 min. Flamborough-head bearing N. W. by West, five
degrees westerly, distant 43 leagues; sailing South, your depth will be 16, 17,
21, 21, 23, 21, 14. In the Latitude 52 degrees. 54 min. 20, 18, 23, 19 fathom,
brown gritty Sand.

The Tides run North by East, and South by West, Flowing of the Tides.
of an indifferent strength; it is high water here on the Change-day of the
Moon.

A Description of the Sands, Shoals, Buoys, Beacons, and Sea-Marks upon the
Coast of England, from the Buoy of the Nower to Dover.
The Flats.
THE Flats are so called, by reason of their general flatness, on which you may
sail 4 or 5 miles and not alter one foot in depth. In the course from the
Narrow to the Red-sand, you may have ten foot water; to the eastward, in some
Holes, you have 15 and 16 foot water. The Dangers that are in these Flats, are
discoursed of in their place; for he that keeps himself on the Course that
leads from the Buoy of the Woolpack to the Buoy of the Red-sand, (which is N.
W. by West, a quarter North) if he take Tide according to the draught of his
Ship, shall not meet with any dangers.

The Gilman.
The Gilman is a Shoal that lies up from the Buoy of the Spell W.N.W. about
five miles, and a quarter of a mile South-east by South from the East end of
the Spaniard, and falls dry on Spring-tydes. He that keeps in the Course that
leads from the Buoy of the Woolpack, to the Buoy of the Red-sand, will not
come near it. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the Letter C.

The Spaniard.
The Spaniard is a Sand that takes its beginning from Sheppy-Island, and runs
down East by North, until the Buoy of the Red-sand is N. W. by North from the
East end of it, a mile and a half distance: a good part of this Sand falls dry.
And he that keeps the West end of St. Nicholas's Wood in the Gore, open to the
Eastward of the Reculvers-steeple, will not come near this Sand. Between this
and the Red-sand, runs down the first Depths, where there is 5, 6, 7, and 8
fathom; the more to the eastward the deeper water.

The Red-sand and Buoy.
The Red-sand is very long; on the East end whereof lies a Buoy to direct them
clear (to the North of it) into the Channel, betwixt this Sand and the
Oaze-edge, which leads toward London, or downward over the Flats; the North
side of this Sand, from the Buoy upwards, is steep too, but indifferent
shoaling. This Buoy lies from the Buoy of the Oaze-edge East, half North, Marks
of the Buoy.
and West, half South, about 3 or 4 miles. The Mark on the Land for this Buoy,
is to bring the Lands-end S. W. and St. Nicholas's Wood open to the Reculvers,
or to bring the Reculvers S. E. The eastermost end of this Sand lies out with
two Tongues, upon the northermost of which is placed a Buoy.

The Oaze-edge and Buoy.
The Oaze-edge is a Sand that lies to the northward of the Red-sand, and lies
E. N. E. and W. S. W. containing about 4 miles in length, and half a mile in
breadth. The Channel betwixt this and the Red-sand, is in some parts more, and
in some less then a mile broad: The South side of this Sand is steep too, and
the deepest part in the Channel is nine and ten fathom. At the West end of it
lies a Buoy, and bears North by East from the Lands-end, Mousehole-Church.
(on the N. E. of Sheppy) then Mousehole Church is open to the eastward of the
said Landsend; from this Buoy to the Buoy of the Nower, the Course is West, a
quarter South, about five miles.

The Spile.
The Spile is a small round Sand, and lies almost thwart the Buoy of the
Oaze-edge to the southward: On the North side of the West-tayl of the Red-sand,
you have but six foot at low water, and lies very dangerously.

The Buoy of the Woolpack.
The Buoy of the Woolpack is the westermost Buoy in the Narrow, on the North
side of the Channel, Marks of this Buoy.
and lies on the West Spit of the Woolpack-sand, and bears from
Reculvers-steeple North by West; then you have two little Hills like two Paps
on the upper Land to the southwards, just open and shut to the
Reculvers-steeple. This Buoy is noted in the Draught with the letter x.

The Buoy of the Spell.
The Buoy of the Spell lies on the South Side of the Narrow or Channel, a
little to the eastward of the Buoy of the Woolpack; betwixt these Buoys, the
Channel is a Cables length and a half broad, and but nine foot at low water.
This Buoy is noted in the Draught with the letter^y.

The Hook.
The Hook is a Shoal that runs out from Margetsand S. E. so far to the
southward, that it makes the Channel very narrow. The thwart Mark for this
Sand, is to bring Birchington-steeple into a green Dauk or Valley in the Cliff,
then the Steeple will bear from you S. E. five degrees southerly. The longst
Mark, is to bring St. Peter's Church upon the West end of the Cliff. This Shoal
is noted in the Draught with the Letter z.

The longst Mark to direct you clear of the Hook to the Buoy of the Searn,
Longst Mark.
is to bring St. Peters-steeple over the East side or Cl^ff of Westgate-bay.
You must keep them so, till you bring Birchington-steeple over the Gaul, when
you take hold of the Mark to go through.

Middle-ground at the Cliff-end.
The Middle-ground is a Shoal that lies below the Ho^k, nearest the shore, on
which there is but fourteen foot at low water, and on each side four fathom:
this being a small narrow Ridge, lies E.N.E. and W.S.W. one third of a mile
long. Marks to lead clear of it.
The Marks to keep you clear, Is to bring St. Peter's Church over the East Side
of the Westgate-bay as aforesaid; or to bring the nethermost Tree on the next
high Land (to the westward of the Reculvers) a little open to the southward of
the Reculvers, (this Tree leans a little to the southward) and is a good Mark
for the Hook downwards, or from Marget-sand upward. This Sand is noted in the
Draught with the letter A.

The Horse.
The Horse is a Shoal that lies a little above the Hook of Marget-sand; on the
South Side, a little below the Reculver Church, on which it is very shoal at
low water. The Mark.
To avoid this, you must keep St. Peter's steeple (on the East Side of the
Westgate-bay) a little upon the Cliff, upward to the Buoy of the Searn, and so
from the Buoy downward. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the letter B.

The Buoy of the Searn.
The Buoy of the Searn is the eastermost Buoy that lies on the North-side of
the Reculvers; the Steeple bearing from the Buoy South by West, then have you a
Windmill a little open of the Channel of Reculvers-Church, or to bring over a
small House that stands a little to the East end of the Church. The Course
upwards from this Buoy through the Narrow, is W.N.W. The longst Marks on the
shore, Marks of this Sand.
is to bring Birchington-Church right over a Gaul, or black Hole in the Western
part of the Cliff end. This Buoy is noted in the Draught with the letter w.

Between the Woolpack and the Pan-sands, or the West end of the Wedge and the
Pan-sand, goes down a Channel of one mile and a half broad, A new Channel.
and runs down E.N.E. At the first entrance, below the Wedge and Pan-sands, you
have five fathom water; and so down to the eastward deeper, as 6, 7, and 8
fathoms; but at the Northside of the Woolpack, betwixt that and the Pan-sands,
there is but three and a half, and four fathoms at low water; the more to the
East, the Channel is deeper and broader.

The Wedge.
The Wedge is a Sand that lies on the North side of Marget-sand, being broad
at the West end, and sharp at the East end, resembling its Appellation; it
lies West by North, and East by South, about six miles in length, having at
the westermost end, between it and Marget-sand, three fathom water, and so down
to the East end until it join with Marget-sand, there is two fathom, and on the
North-side 7, 8, and 9 fathom.

Marget-Sand.
The East end of Marget-sand lies before Marget, and Westgate-bay, and up till
you are thwart the Reculvers. And by reason of some Swatches that are in it, it
is divided into more names, the Searn, the Woolpack. The East end of this Sand
bears from Marget-Church North, half West, four miles distance; and as it
runs up to the westwards, so it grows nearer the shore. Marks for the East end.
The Marks for the East end, is to bring Marget-steeple and the Mill in one.
The Depths you have along this Sand, as you turn up or down, are at the East
end, and so upward, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5 fathom. On the North side of this Sand, a
quarter of a mile off, lies another Sand, called the Wedge, The Wedg.
which runs down along by it, and a Channel of 4, 3, 2, 1 fathom water; at
the lower end it joins with the other Sand: At the East end, the most part of
this Sand dries at low water.

The Colborn.
The Colborn is a Shoal that lies to the northwards of White-dike, and a
little to the southwards of Broadstairs-Peer, (which sometimes ebbs dry) it
lies a large half mile off the Shore, and there is nine foot water between it
and the shore. The Mark for a small Ship to avoid it, Is to keep the top of St.
Peters-steeple open over the Land. This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the
Letter u.

The White-Dike.
The White-dike is a Shoal that runs off from the shore a large half mile, and
lies half a mile to the northwards of Ramsgate; all the inner part of it dries
every Ebb, and on the outer part it is two foot at low water; and at sometimes
there is but eight or nine foot in the Channel betwixt this and the Querns.
Inner Channel.
This Shoal is noted in the Draught with the letter t.

The Querns.
The Querns is a small shoal that lies W.N.W. from the Brake; The Inner
Channel.
between them both is a Channel for good Ships at high water; it is a mile
broad, only at the South end there lies a small Middle-ground near to the
Brake, on which there is but seven foot at low water.

The longst Mark for this Middle-ground, Longst Mark.
Is to bring St. Margets-Church (near the South-Fereland) a Ships length open
to the southwards of Deal-Castle.

The thwart Mark, Thwart Mark.
Is to bring Winsborough-steeple a Ships length open to the northwards of
Sandwich-steeple, then are you to the northward of this Middle-ground.

The leading Mark through this Channel, Leading Mark.
Is to bring St. Margets-Church in the middle, between Wamor and Deal-Castle,
(the Middle-ground excepted) for when you come near that, you must keep the
Church as aforesaid: Or you may turn the Church from the middle between Deal
and Wamor-Castle. If you bring the Church more than half over toward
Wamor-Castle, you will be near the Brake, if not on it.

The Mark for the North-end of the Querns, Is to bring St. Lawrence-steeple a
Ships length to the Southward of the Cliff.

For the South-end, Bring the Mill near Ramsgate, to the northward of
Ramsgate-Peer.

Depths in this Channel, at low water, are two and a half, three and a half,
and four fathom; the nearer the Brake the deeper. This Sand is noted in the
Draught with the letter s.

The Brake.
The Brake is a Sand that lies to the westwards of the North part of the
Goodwin; between this and the Goodwin, is the Channel for great Ships to pass;
the North end of it is the narrowest, and most steep too, and dries most at
low water.

The Mark for the North end, Is to bring St. Lawrence-steeple on the South end
of the Cliff, to the northward of Ramsgate-Peer. This Sand lies N.N.E. and
S.S.W.

The Mark for the South end, Is to bring Ash-steeple open a hand-spikes length
to the South of Sandwich-steeple, then are you clear to the southward of the
South end; or else the Windmill on the Cliff, at the S. E. end of the Town of
Ramsgate.

The Depths in this Channel, are 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 fathom.

The Mark to lead through to the northwards of the Cliff of the South-Foreland
Point, or else Marget-Church on the third Cliff from the Foreland northward, to
te northward of the Bunt-bead. The Goodwin is not so steep too, but you may
come there in 8 fathom, and to the Brake in 6 and 7 fathom, according to the
time of Tide. This Sand is about two miles long, and a quarter of a mile broad.

The Goodwin.
The Goodwin is a Sand that lies before the Downs, and is from the shore, in
some parts four miles, and in some five; the southern half lies S.S.W. and
N.N.E. rounding toward the South-Foreland, the northern part of it lies North
and South, rounding to the East side, and is in most places steep too; at the
North end there is indifferent good shoaling. The Sand, by storms and strong
Tides, alters every year, is very broad, and dries a great part of it, but most
to the North end.

The Marks for to go clear of the North-sand-head, Marks for the
North-sand-head.
Is to bring St. Peters-steeple on Broad-stairs-Peer; this Mark will direct you
by it in 5 and 6 fathom, according to the Tide; and in the Night, the Light on
the North-Foreland N. W. half West.

The Mark for the South-sand-head, Marks for the South-sand-head.
Is the steeple of Ring-joul, on the Village called Kings-down, or the
light-Houses on the South-foreland together.

From this Sand, spits out against the Brake, a Sand called the Bunt-head,
Bunthead.
which is very steep too, having 11 sathom close to it. The North end lies off
Broadstairs about six miles, and the South end about 3 miles off the shore. If
you, coming from the West, do keep Folkston-Land open of Dover-Land, it will
carry you without the South-sand-head.

The Fatts.
The Falls is a long narrow Sand that lies South by West from the Galloper,
about 12 miles; it is 15 miles in length, and lies South by West, and North by
East: The South end lies about 7 miles without the Goodwinsand, and bears from
the Light-house on the South-fore-land E. N. E. about 13 miles: The North end
bears from St. Peter's Church on the North-foreland E. N. E. about 16 miles; the
South end is shoalest, where there is but 20 and 21 foot at low water: This end
has a broad, round, flat Head like the Galloper, where the Tide does ripple
and whelm very much; close to it there is 20 fathom; some say they have been on
it in 15 foot water; on the North part of it, 4, 4 and a half, 5, and 5 fathom
and a half. Whether it alters or not we cannot learn of any; the ground is
gross Gravel, and the Soundings about it are very uneven; a mile within and
without the North end there is 27 fathom; it is steep too on both sides. The
Soundings we had from the North-Foreland, are 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
19, 22, 24, 27, 28: 24, 23, 22, 20, 11, 6 and a half; and on the North end
there is, as about the South end, 15, 19, 20, 25, 28 fathom within and without
it.

The Galloper.
The Galloper is a Sand that lies near S. E. by South from the Gabard about ten
miles, and is properly so called, by reason of the great length of it, with the
strength and crossuess of the Tide that sets over it, being very steep on both
sides; all which, in foul weather, makes such a great short Sea, that if any
Ship come near it, it makes Her, and the People in Her to gallop to get from
it. Of all the Sands, none are like to this for narrowness; it is a wonder,
that being it consists on the upper part of small shingle or stones, and the
Tides setting so strong and cross over it, together with the Sea that must fall
upon it in foul weather, being so great, with the steepness on both sides, and
the narrowness atop, that it is not dispersed and carried away: It is supposed,
that the most part of this Shoal (some depth under the shingle) is a Rock, the
top whereof holds in the shingle: And it is also very like, that it does alter
every Winter in stormy weather; it lies North by East, and South by West; in
length it is 8 miles and a half, and in breadth 20 or 30 foot; but at the South
end it has a broad head, and flat at top, half a mile broad, but steep too
round about it: Close to the South end was a Hole, where we saw the Tide make a
very great whelming and ripling; we thought that the least water had been
there, but when we had hove the Lead within it, we had 20 fathom the next Cast;
without it we had but 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom. The North end of it bears from
Orford-Church S. E. seven degrees East, 24 miles off. The South end bears from
the North-Foreland N. E. five degrees North, 27 miles: Within the body of this
Sand we met with a Hole, S.W. and N.E. three miles in length, where we had 20
fathom water. Other Depths that we had betwixt this Sand and the Shipwash, were
14, 16, 17, 18, and 20 fathom, and such like. On the S. E. side of this Sand,
two miles off, we had from the Sand off-ward 15, 17, 18, 20, 24, and 26 fathom.

The Tide sets over it N. E. by East, and S. W. by West, four leagues a Watch;
and it flows South and North, and has but 14 and 15 foot at low water; on
the top of the Spring, and close to the outward side of the Sand, you will have
14 fathom, and at the inner side ten and eleven fathom.

The Gabard.
The Gabard is a Sand that lies near East from the Shipwash, about 8 or 9
miles, and lies North and South, being in length three miles, and a Cables
length broad; on which at low water there is but 12 or 13 foot, and has good
shoalings on both sides; it lies E.S.E. five leagues from Orford-Church and
Castle.

The Depths between this Sand and Orford-ness, Bearings of the Gabard.
is near 18, 19, and 20 fathom, only a mile W. N. W. from the North end of it
we had, two casts off, 27 fathom: The South end of it, by judgment, lies from
the North end of the Galloper nine or ten miles, S. E. by South, and N. W. by
North.

The Depths betwixt this Sand and the North end of the Galloper, were 14, 15,
16, 17, and 18 fathom.

Kentish-Knock.
The Kentish-Knock is a Sand, the body whereof lies five miles South from the
Long-sand-head, and is three miles in length N. E. and S. W. and in breadth 2
miles N. W. and S. E. This Sand has the resemblance of an Oval, and has a
ridge in the middle, from N. W. to S. E. on which there is but six foot at
low water: To the N. E. and S. W. of this Ridge, there is 18, 10, 12, 14 and 15
foot, as you are near the ends of it, and is steep too round about. Between
this and the Long-sand, is a Channel near two miles broad, where there is 12
and 13 fathom: From the S. W. and N. E. end of this shoal, runs a Ridge more
than a mile to the N. E. and S. W. on which there is 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10
fathom; and off either side more water. South by East from the Long-sand-head,
you will go to the eastwards of this shoal. To the E. S. E. of this, you will
quickly come in 15, Bearings of the Kentish Knock.
17, 19, and 20 fathom water. The body of this Knock lies from St.
Peters-Church (on the North-Foreland) N. N. E. three degrees East, fifteen
miles; The N. E. end of the Knock and the Long-sandhead, bears South by East,
and North by West.

To know when you are near the Knock or Longsand head, A note to know the Knock
from the Long-sand
is thus, When you are near the Knock, you shall see the Land of the
North-Foreland very plain; but when you are at the Long-sand-head, you will
hardly see the Land, except it be very clear weather, or unless you go up the
Shrouds. At the Knock you may see it plainly on the Deck.

Pan-Sands.
These are a heap of small Sands of diverse shapes, lying at the South-west end
of the Long-sand, which dries at low water, and has some water running betwixt
them, but no passage for Ships; one of which Sands joins to the S. W. end of
the Girdler, and lies up from it W. S. W. in length two miles and a half, and
makes the entrance into the Black-deeps, where the Channel is but half a mile
broad, and 10, 11, and 12 fathom water. The rest of these Pan-sands lie E.S.E.
from this 4 miles, and then trend away N.E. 5 miles and a half, even with the
Long-sand, and to it. These Sands are noted in the Draught with the letter E.

The Girdler.
The Girdler is a Sand that lies S. W. from the Longsand, and spits home to it;
it lies N. E. by East, and S. W. by West; it is four miles and a half long, and
half a mile broad, being steep too on the N. W. side, where there is 12, 15, 16
fathom water. From the N. E. end of this Sand, to the South-westward, the
Channel grows narrower and narrower. This Sand is noted in the Draught with the
letter D.

The Long-Sand.
The Long-sand is properly so called, by reason of its great length, containing
15 miles and a half; in breadth it is from one mile to two, and lies N. E. by
East, and S. W. by West. On the N. W. side it is steep too, having in most
places ten fathom close to it: But at the N. E. end, which is called
Long-sand-head, is good shoaling, lying off a mile N. E. but in nine fathom;
the S. E. side not so deep, you may sail along it in 4, 5, and 6 fathom.
Long-sand head.
Much of this Sand dries at three quarters Ebb, and in some parts of it there
is long narrow Swatches, two or three one by another, which run upward and
downward as the Sand lies, in which, at low water was three and four fathoms,
the Ridges between are dry: Bearings of the Longsand.
The Head of this Sand bears from St. Peters-Church (on the North-Foreland) S.
S. W. and N. N. E. about 20 miles; and from the Naze E. S. E. five degrees
South, 17 miles; and from the South end of the Galloper West, five degrees
South, about 11 miles; and from the North end of the Falls, it bears N. W. by
North about 16 miles. At the head of this Sand it flows North and South, and
the Flood and Ebb sets on several Points of the Compass.

The Shivering-Sand.
The Shivering-sand runs up to the S.W. from Knock-John, and lies N. E. and S.
W. being in length about seven miles, and in breadth a mile, running away sharp
at both ends, and rounding on the North-west side, where you have 8, 9, and 10
fathom close to it; on the South side 10 and 12 fathoms; and in the middle,
between it and the Girdler, there is 12, 13, 14, Black-deeps.
and 15 fathom: From the South-west end of this, to the Buoy of the Red-sand,
is three miles W.S.W. and E. N. E. and from the North-west end of the Mouse, to
this Sand, is four miles and a half, East by South, and West by North; and from
the South-west end of this, to the South-west end of the West-Barrows, is two
miles and one third, N. N. W. and S. S. E. and from the South-west end of this,
to the South-west end of the Pan-sands, is half a mile South by East, and North
by West.

Knock-John.
Knock-John is a Sand that lies at the South-west end of the Sunk, lying N. E.
by E. and S. W. by West, and is in length about six miles, and a mile broad in
the middle, growing narrower toward each end, and runs up with a Tail on the
North-west side of the Shivering-sand, where there is a small swatch that parts
them, but is not navigable: This Sand is winding and sharp at both ends, the
North-east end tayling on the South-west side of the Sunk: A great part of this
Sand dries at half-tyde, and is steep too on both sides, having ten fathom
close to it: Betwixt this and the Long-sand, the Channel is a mile and
three-quarters broad; and betwixt this and the East-Barrows it is a mile broad.

The Sunk.
The Sunk is a Sand that lies on the North side of the Long-sand, Bearings of
the Sunk.
whose North-east ends do bear one from the other E. S. E. and W. N. W. about
two or three miles distant; between them both enters the Channel called the
Black-deeps, where there is 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 fathom water, and ten fathom
close to the Sands on both sides. This Sand lies N. E. by East, and S. W. by
West, about 8 miles and a half, the West end running a little on the North-west
side of Knock-John, having a small swatch that runs through betwixt them,
dividing them into two Sands, but is not fit for Ships to pass through. This
Sand dries in several places, and is half, and three quarters of a mile broad.

East-Barrows.
The East-barrows is the North-east part of the whole Barrows-sand, and lies
down from the North-east end of the West-barrows, N. E. by East, about four
miles, in two several Sands, one at the end of the other, the South-west end of
them tayling upwards.

On the North-west side of the North-east end of the West-barrows, Bearings of
this Sand.
is a small swatch passing between them; also between the two East-barrows
there is a swatch, where small Vessels that are acquainted do pass through;
both these Sands fall dry at low water, and are in length about four miles; the
South side of these two Sands is steep, the North-west more bolder, yet
something steep. The North-east end of these does bear from the Naze South by
East, ten miles distant. The Channel betwixt this and the Heaps, is a mile
broad, in which you have 7, 8, 9, and 10 fathom water; and in one place a cross
Ridge lies thwart the Channel, where there is but two and three fathoms.

West-Barrows.
The West-Barrows is the South-west part of the whole Barrows-sand, there being
some Swatches two third parts down to the North-eastwards that divides this
Sand, which makes it to be called the East and West-Barrows. That part which is
called the West-Barrows, begins at the North-east end of the Mouse, and lies
down N. E. and S. W. it falls dry in several places at low water, and is steep
too on both sides; on the South-east side there is seven and eight fathom close
to the Sand; but on the North-west side, you have 10, 11, and 12 fathom close
to it. This Sand is in length 6 or 7 miles, and betwixt it and the
Shivering-sand, you have in the middle 9, 10, and 11 fathom; this Sand dries in
several places. Amongst all these Sands it flows South by East.

The Mouse.
The Mouse is a Sand that lies from the body of the Oaze-edge, North-east
about a mile; between them is a Channel, where is 7 or 8 fathom water, and
lower down to the Eastward there is 9 or 10 fathom. This Sand is between three
or four miles in length, and half a mile in breadth, being steep too on both
sides; it lies in length E. N. E. and W. S. W. and joins to the West-Barrows,
(only a small Swatch runs between them) the North-east end of this Sand
bears N.N.W. two miles and a half from the South-west end of the
Shivering-sand.

Directions for Sailing into all the Harbors on the East Coast of England,
from the Downs to Flambrough-Head; Showing the Marks for bringing a Ship to an
Anchor in any of the Roads and Harbors on the said Coast: The Depth and
Soundings amongst the Sands.
Directions for the Mouth of the River.
FRom the Point of the Hope, called Sands-head-Point, down as far as the Isle
of Sheppy, the Reach lies East and West: A little below Sands-head-Point, is
Cliff-Creek; and between this Creek and that Point, lies Blyth-sand, which
lies close by the shore, whereon is but seven foot at low water: Right against
Cliff-Creek, lies Shell-Haven on the North side, and a little below that lies
Hull-Haven; about a Cables length from the shore lies Rocks, called
Hull-Haven-Scars, Hull-Haven-Scarrs
which are very dangerous, for a Ship that draws but twelve foot water has
been aground on them. A mile to the eastwards of these Rocks, is the entrance
into Lee-Swatch; the Channel going into Lee, is at the eastermost part of the
Sand between the Marsh-Point and it. A mile below this entrance into Lee, right
against which Town is a low Island, Canvey-Island.
called Canvey; and from the eastermost Point runs off a Sand four miles in
length: There is also a Sand called the Chapman, Chapman.
lies far from the shore, and is steep too, for close by it you will have
seven fathom water, and the next cast a-ground; and to the eastward of the
Chapman, lies a smooth Sand which is dry at low water; and between this Sand
and the Kentish-shore, there are two Middle-grounds, which do tail down from
Shooberry to the Whitaker, and there is no riding for a Ship that draws 17,
18, or 19 foot water. From between Shooberry-ness and the Nower, and so down to
Black-tayl, there lies a Sand called the Warp, Warp.
whereon there is not above three fathom and a half, or four fathom at
low water; on the southermost side, right against Shooberry-ness, is a Sand
called the Nower, whereon is a Buoy, which is right against the West-swayl,
coming out of the Waters of the Medway, which lies between the Isle of Grean
and the Isse of Sheppy.

Directions for sailing from Tilbury-Hope down to the Buoy of the Nower.
When you break ground from Tilbury-Hope, if the wind be southerly, keep the
South shore close aboard, but be careful of Blyth sand, Blyth-sand
which lies close to the South-shore; and accordingly observe these marks to
carry you clear of it; keep the Steeple of Tilbury-Church a great Sayls breadth
without Sands-head-Point; or if it be in the Night, or hasey weather, keep your
Lead, and come not within five fathom at low water, and seven fathom at
high water, on the South Side, and that depth will carry you clear without the
Sand; and those depths will lead you down to the Nower-head. Nowerhead.
But if the wind be northerly, then you must keep the North-shore, which is
steep too, until you come as low as Hull-Haven; and so keeping the Soundings
aforesaid, you may come down to the Nower; and if you please, you may come to
an anchor at the East end of the Nower. And that you may know how to anchor
clear of the Sand, bring Prickelwel-steeple a Sails breadth to the eastward of
the Wood that is on the North-shore by the waterside, and there you may come
to an anchor.

Directions to sail from the Nower to the northward through the Swin.
From the tail of the Nower, or thwart of Shooberryness, to the Black-tayl, the
course is E. N. E. Black-tayl
but if the wind be westerly, you may keep along the Essex-shore, and you may
wear off and on the Sand, in six or seven fathom water; or keep the Hill to the
westward of Bemfiet, open of Hadly-Land above Lee, and that Mark will lead you
down to Black-tayl.

Thwart Marks for the Black-tayl, are the tuft of Trees upon the Kentish-shore,
called Challock-Trees; right over the Isle of Sheppy, commonly called the
Lands-end, from the Black-tayl to the Shoo beacon, the course is North-east,
and you may borrow off and on upon the Sand, in 6, 7, or 8 fathom water, until
you come to the Shoo-beacon, for there it is deeper, and steep to the Land.
Shoo-hole.
This Deep is called the Shoo-hole, where you shall have 10, 11, 12, or 13
fathom, according as the Tide is; by which depth you may know where you are,
and the Hole is not above half a mile in length: Right against the Shoo-beacon,
the tail of the East-barrows-head, East-Barrow-head.
extends from the eastwards very far, so that the Channel is narrowest in that
place, and is not a mile over.

From the Shoe to the Whitaker-beacon, the course is N. N. E. if the wind be
westerly, you may borrow upon the Sand in six or seven fathom; and when you are
right thwart of the Whitaker-beacon, the Mouth of Bornam-water will be directly
west from you, and the spire Steeple, that is three miles to the northward of
Bornam, will bear North-west, half northerly. From the Whitaker to the Buoy of
the Buxey, Buoy of the Buxey.
or the entering in of the Spit, the course is North by East about 5 miles; you
may borrow upon this Sand, in five, six, or seven fathom, which will carry you
clear within two middle Grounds that lies between you and the East-barrows; on
the westermost middle Ground, there is ten foot at low water; but on the
eastermost, there is not so much, for in some places it is almost dry: At the
South end of this Middle-ground, there lies a Buoy, which is almost a mile
below the Whitaker-beacon; Whitaker-Beacon.
if the wind be ^asterly, you must be careful to give the Buoy a Birth, for the
tail of that Sand is flat, and tayleth over toward the Whitaker, (being to the
North-west of this Buoy) then edge over to the eastward, and you shall have the
deepest water toward that Sand, about seven, eight, or nine fathom, according
as the Tide is; this Sand is steep also, so that if the wind be northerly, that
you are forced to run down, stand not over to that Sand, until your water
shoal, for you shall have eight or nine fathom, and the next cast aground, but
you may stand over to the westward Middle-ground into five or six fathom; the
North end of the eastermost Middleground, East-Barrow-head.
does tail or join to the East-barrow-head, and there it is flat, with a Tail a
good length over to the northwards: The North-east Flat lies near Northwest
from the Buoy of the Buxey, and then the Trees on the North side do bear
North-west from you.

When you are thwart of the Buoy of the Spits and Buxey, Spits and Buxey.
you may steer out N.E. by East, down the Kings-Channel; or, if the Wind will
give you leave, to borrow upon the Gunfleet in 7 or 8 fathom water, then that
depth will lead you down to the Buoy at the East end of the Gunfleet.

Also by this means you shall be sure to keep clear of the Middle-ground that
lies between the Gunfleet and the eastward Sand, which is called the Heaps,
which at low water has but ten foot in some places. This Middle-ground
reaches a great length; when you are at the South end of it, the Naze-land
will bear North from you, and Orford-ness N. N. E. When you are at the
North-east end of this Sand, then you will be thwart of the Buoy on the North
end of the Gunfleet, and Harwich-Church will be open and shut of Harwich-Cliff;
from whence, if you be bound for the North-Foreland, you may steer E. N. E. and
East by North, till you bring the Naze-land to bear W. N. W. from you, and then
you may be sure you are northward of the tail of the Sonk; but if the wind be
southerly, borrow close aboard the tail of the Sonk.

Other directions for the Swin, and so through the Kings-Channel toward the
Downs.
When you come down as low as the Whitaker, then take heed and keep the
shoaling thereof, until you are two miles below it; Middle-Ground.
then you come to the shoaling of the Middle-ground, which is steep too; for if
you do turn down, you must about when you come to ten fathom water, because it
is narrow; and so the shoaling of the Middle-ground does continue till you come
down as low as the Buoy of the Spits: Buoy of the Spits.
The Channel begins to be broader, and if the Wind be so that you must turn, be
sure to keep hold of the Gunfleet; Gunfleet.
but if the wind be fair that you may lead it, run down in the shoaling of the
Gunfleet, till you bring the Naze N. N. W. and then go thence North-east by
East also, that it will lead you clear of the Sonk; and go still that course,
till you have brought the Naze-land W. N. W. or West by North. The Sonk does
lie from the Naze North-east and South-west; so that if you bring the Naze-land
to lie West by North, you may be bold to go a more easterly course, until you
come to 16 or 18 fathom; for 14 or 15 fathom will go hard by the Kentish-Knock.
Note also that you may see the Trees over the Naze, when you cannot see the
Naze.

The Kentish-Knock does lie from the Long-sand-head, Kentish-Knock.
Longsand-head.
three or four miles E. S. E. And when you have the aforesaid sixteen fathom,
then you may judge the Naze-Land to be W. N. W. or West by North; then go
thence S. S. W. upon an Ebb, and upon a flood South, or S.S.E. as the Wind is,
or the weakness of the Tide, so must you work, and that will carry you clear
with the North-Foreland; and if you go about the North-sand-head, or about all,
or the Goodwin, then you must keep more easterly; and note, North-sand-head.
that the North-sand-head and the Long-sand-head, lies South and North, and
the Kentish-Knock lies from the North-foreland North by East, and South by
West; there is nothing between Marget-sand and the North-foreland, and
therefore you need not fear: And as I said before, to go about the Goodwin, run
off till you come to 26 or 30 fathom, for 18 or 20 fathom goes near the Sand;
and so run in this depth until you have brought the Land of Dover open of the
South-foreland, then you may be bold to hale in with the Foreland; there is
nothing between the Goodwin, and Marget-sand, or North-foreland to fear.

To sail unto Cowen and Malden-Water.
When you are at the Buoy of the Spits, Spits.
your course is W. N. W. in 4 or 5 fathom, as the Wind serves, for the Ebb
sets upon a Shoal that lies to the Eastward, called the Eagle; Eagle.
and the Tide of Flood sets on a Shoal, called the Knowl, and is to the
westward of your going in; and you may run down to the southward, borrowing in
five fathom upon the Main, until you bring Banbury-land (which is the high Land
that lies above Malden) a Sayls breadth open with Bradwell-point, (which Mark
will bring you between the Eagle and the Knowl) and run with these marks until
you bring a steeple that stands on the North-shore, open of the red Cliffs end;
and so run with these marks open and shut, North up, Marzey-Block-House.
until you come to Marzey-Block-house, and there you may come to an anchor in
six or seven fathom water.

Directions to sail into Harwich coming from the southwards.
If you come from the southward, keep Harwich-steeple open a good Birth off the
Cliff-end, and on the North end, keep Farberry-Clifts open of the Beach on the
East side; and so you may go in, bearing close by the Beach for fear of the
Altar, Altar.
which lies within a Cables length of the Beach; and so you may go along clear,
keeping by the Beach, till you come to the Wore-bore-head, and then you may
steer up with Ipswich-water, and anchor with Harwich S. S. W. in five or six
fathom water; and the higher up, the better ground, till you bring the Town
South of you.

Other Directions for Harwich coming from the Northwards.
When you come from the northward, and are shot past the Whiting as far as
Bawdsey-Cliff, keep Orford-Church and Castle open of the Cliff, and that will
carry you clear of the Andrews; and then when you see the Light-houses, bring
them one into another, and get into four or five fathom water, or somewhat more
toward high water, then run in about by the Point: The Channel lies in due
North, but in the midst of the Havens lies a sunken Rock, called the Altar,
which you must avoid, by sailing on either side, by one Shore or the other, but
along by the East-shore is best; being within it, you cannot sail amiss, or
take hurt, except you run against the shore: There you may anchor all over
where you please, before the Town, in 4, 5, 6, or 7 fathom-water; or you may go
further into the Bight, for it is every where clean.

Other directions to sail into Harwich.
The Mark in this Channel, to sail into Harwich, is to keep the top of
Harwich-steeple half way betwixt the Fire-beacon on Harwich, and the North end
of the Cliff, or the lower Light-house, a little open of the North end of
Harwich-Cliff, and so sail in N. N. W. keeping those marks so, till you come
within half a mile of Harwich-Cliff; then bear to the North-eastwards so far,
till you bring the body of the Church open to the northwards of the Cliff, then
edge toward Land-guard-Fort, till you bring both the Light-houses in one; then
run in with them so, till you see your self within the South Point of the
Andrews, which you shall know, by having Bawdsey-Church open and shut on the
Land to the Southwards of Bawdsey; or if there be any Sea or half-tyde, the
Andrews is plain to be seen; then you must edge near to the Beach where the
Fort stands, to shun the Altar, another Shoal that lies directly against the
Fort.

To sail out of Harwich.
In the North-Channel you may sail out, as is before described in the going in,
till you come without the Fort; then bring the two Light-houses into one, and
so sail out, till you bring the steeple open of the Land to the southward of
Bawdsey-Cliff, then are you clear of the Andrews and Ridge; then steer
North-east by East, until you bring Harwich-Church on the North side of a black
House, called the Brew House, which stands a little to the northward of
Land-guard-Fort, keeping them Marks so standing, until you bring Bawdsey-Church
open a little to the northward of the North end of Bawdsey-Cliff, then are you
open of the Sledway.

Between Alborough and Dunwich, half way, lies a Wood, which is high at both
ends, and the midst low, in form of a Saddle; this you shall commonly see
first, when you fall with the Land thereabouts, and is the best to know the
Coast by, for the Land without, and to the southwards, is very low, and shingly
ground; about two leagues to the southward of Alborough, lies Orfordness;
between them both there stands two Woods, which shows at a distance like
Castles and Towers; on Orfordness stands a flat steeple, and a broad Castle,
which has also a thick flat steeple, almost in fashion like the steeple of
Ranop, open above, with Holes in it like Bell-holes; before Dunwich you may
anchor; there is good lying in eight or nine fathom water, somewhat soft
ground: Before Alborough is the best Road of all the Coast thereabouts, in six
or seven fathom.

To know Bawdsey, Oasly, and Alterton- Churches.
Bawdsey-Church is the highest and biggest steeple, being flat at top as the
others are; it stands to the southwards of all the rest, a mile from the Shore.

Oasly-Church has a flat large steeple, but is lower than the other two, and
stands a mile to the northwards of Bawdsey-steeple, three quarters of a mile
from the Sea.

Alterton-steeple stands to the northwards of Oasly-Church a mile and a half;
it is a very high square steeple, but much smaller than the other two, and
stands about a mile from the Sea.

Some say that Oasly-Church is the northermost of the three; and if you keep
Alterton-Church (the middle of the three) open to the northward of
Bawdsey-Church a sayls breadth, you may run out clear of the West-Rocks.

To sail out of the Sledway to the North-Foreland.
First, Bring the North end of Bawdsey-Cliff North-West from you, then shall
you see a flat steeple right with a Cliff, which you must keep on, or a little
open of the Cliff-end, until you bring Beamont-Tree on the Naze-land W. N. W.
and then you may steer South-East, or South-east by South, if the Wind serves,
having not less water than seven or eight fathom; and when you have laid the
Netherland to water, you may sound for the Kentish-Knock, and come no nearer it
thau eight or nine fathom, as the Wind and Tide serves; and being about the
Knock, you may go S. S. W. as you see occasion.

To sail out at the backside of the Gunfleet.
If you will sail out at the backside of the Gunfleet, being in the Sleds in
seven fathom, borrow on the West-Rocks in four or five fathom, steering S. S.
W. or South-west by West; but go not to the southwards of five fathoms, till
you be over the tail of the Rocks; and when you are over the Rocks, you shall
have 7 or 8 fathom; but go not without 8 fathom on the West side, and borrow on
the Gunfleet in 6 or 7 fathom, going S. W. by South, or S. W. till you come up
to the Spits, or as you see occasion.

To sail by the Naze to the Northwards.
From the Eagle to the Naze, you may borrow to the shore, and the course is N.
E. by North, or N. N. E. To go by the Naze, you must bring Harwich-steeple unto
the East part of the Saddle in the Cliff-end; be sure you shut not St. Hellen
into the Naze, before you bring the Steeple into the Saddle; and so you may
steer with the Steeple, until you bring the Dove-house with the Naze; or the
Naze-end unto a Tree on the lower end of the Hedge-row that is to the southward
of the House; and being in one, then may you have your other marks, and steer
to the eastward, keeping the House and Tree in one; and more to the southward
of the Hedge-row, in the lower end of the Field, a stones cast from the Hedge,
is a lively Tree, or great Bush, which you may bring into a Tree, between two
high Trees, that are to the southward of the House; and these marks you may
keep in one, steering North-east by North, keeping Harwich-steeple open of the
East end of the Cliff, and then you may bear in with the Harbor; but the best
water is when the Steeple is on the Hommock, between the Beacon and the Cliff,
and so steer to the northwards as you please.

To sail clear of Alborough-Knapes.
East from Alborough, two leagues, lies Alborough-Knapes, which is a Sand that
at low water is not deeper than seven or eight foot; you may sound round about
it in five fathom, but it is not good to come nearer with Sea-winds; you may
discern it plainly by the breaking of the Sea; but with northerly and westerly
winds, the Sea breaks not at all upon it, if it be fair weather: he that
runs by it to the northwards with an Ebb, shall see it ripple much upon it,
likewise upon most of the English Banks; and indeed not upon the Banks, but
against them, for upon the shoalest of them is always the smoothest water, as
experience teaches every where: When As Alborough is West from you, and the
two Steeples of Orfordness one in the other, there you shall find
Alborough-Knapes. These are sure marks of that Sand.

To sail to the westward of the Whiting-Sand.
The Whiting is somewhat a small long Sand lying to the southward of
Orfordness, and the shingly ground to the southward of Alborough, lies along
the Reach, but the South end lies further from Land than the North end; there
is not above six or seven foot water upon it at low water: Coming from the
northward, men most commonly sail to the westward of it, that is, through
between the Land and the Whiting, toward the Naze; Men may also sail along to
the eastward of it, through between the Whiting and the eastermost points of
Bawdsey-sand; the North end of the Whiting lies near the Shore, and lies from
the Steeple of Orfordness S. W. by South; it is so exceeding steep and sharp,
that at one cast you have 9 fathom, and the next but five, and then you are but
a Ships length from it; and before you can heave the Lead again, you shall be
upon it; when you sit with the Fore-ship against it, you have 5 or 6 fathom at
Stern.

Along the inward side it is also every where so steep that you cannot sound
it; but on the outside you may run along by it in 5 fathom, till you come
within the Sands. When you come from the northwards, and will sail through
within the Whiting, you must run close along by the Shore, and South-west
about by the Point of the Shingle, to the southward of Alborough, until you
come within the North Point of the Whiting. When the Steeples of Orfordness
come to the N. W. by North from you, then you are right thwart of the North
Point of the Whiting; being within it, go again more southerly, (viz.) S. W. by
South, toward Barzey-Cliff.

To run in to the Eastward of the Whiting.
Bring the Steeple of Bawdsey W. S. W. from you, and so sail in right with it
until you come by the Whiting in 5 or 6 fathom; and lead it in so by it upon
the Lead, until you come by Bawdsey, or can get deeper water.

When you come near Bawdsey, whether you come in from the northward or
southward of the Whiting, you must keep somewhat off from the Shore, because of
a small tail that shoots off from the Shore, thwart of Bawdsey-Cliff, which
you must avord with Ships of great draught, for there remains upon it, at
low water, no more than two fathom; you may perceive it well by the ripling of
the Tide most commonly.

Directions from the Buoy of the Buxey down to the Kings-Channel, and from
thence to the Northwards.
When you are at the North end of the Gunfleet, or thwart of the Buoys, in ten
or twelve fathom, if you be bound to Sea for Norway, East-land, Hambrough,
Holland, etc. Steer out N. E. by East, and E. N. E. until you come to twenty
fathom water, then you are clear of all, and direct your course to the place
you are bound: But if you are bound for the North Coast of England, and would
hale in for Yarmouth-Road, then from the Buoy of the Buxey, steer North-east by
East, until you have brought Bawdsey-Cliff to bear from you North-west by West;
then you may borrow upon the Shipwash in ten or eleven fathom; or steer away
North-East by North, and North-east, until you come to bring Alborough-Church
to bear from you North-west; then bear in with it N. N. W. till you come to
nine or ten fathom upon the Shore, and that will bring you within the Sand
called Alborough-Knapes, on which there is 10 or 11 foot at low water, but
there is 17 or 18 fathom between that and the shore.

The thwart Marks for the South end of it, is Alborough-Church W. N. W. for the
North end of it, the same Church W.S.W.

The longst Mark for it, is Orford Church and Castle one in another, going
right upon it; but keeping them open, a great Sayls breadth one off another on
each side, carries you clear, either without or within the Sand.

From the Sonk to the Long-Sand, and so to the North-Foreland.
When the Naze-sand does bear North-west by West, you may hale up East, and
East by South, and E. S. E. being careful to keep the Lead, and to look out for
the ripling of the Sand, and bear off and on from it in seven or eight fathom;
and being below that in eleven fathom, then if you have a Neap-tyde, you may
steer for the Long-sand-head; but with a Flood, and an East wind, or northerly
wind, you may steer E. S. E. or South-east, till you come to 14 or 15 fathom,
dirty owsey Ground; then steer S. S. E. for a good distance, for you have Pits
of 20 fathom, and 14 or 15 fathom; but having a continuing depthing of 18, 19,
20, or 21 fathom, and stony ground, then you may assure your self that you are
without the Long-sand, and may steer S.S.W. with the Foreland, and S. W. by
South.

To sail along the Coast by Alborough, Dunwich, and Covehith.
The Coast lies North by East, somewhat easterly, and South by West, somewhat
westerly; from Covehith to Leystaff, North and South, two leagues. Between
Dunwich and Covehith lies the Haven of Southworld, Southwold.
which is a small Creek; and a little within it, divides it self into three
parts; upon the northermost Arm lies Southwold, Dunwich. Covehith.
upon the middlemost, Walderswick; and upon the southermost Dunwich: Covehith
has a high sharp steeple; thwart of this steeple lies a Bank not far from the
Land, which falls almost dry at low water, but at half-flood you may sail
through between the Land and it in two fathom; upon the outer-side it is very
steep, so that you cannot come nearer it than in nine or ten fathom: When the
steeple of Covehith is W.N.W. from you, then you are to the southward of the
Bank; and when the steeple of Covehith is South-West by West from you, then you
are to the northwards of it two leagues.

To the northward of Covehith lies Leystaff, Leystaff.
and two leagues to the northward of that lies Yarmouth; the Steeple is a high
sharp Steeple, and stands a great Musket Shot within the Land from the
Houses; so that in sailing along, you may bring the Steeple on both sides of
the Houses.

Off from Leystaff, begins the Bank called the Holms of Yarmouth, Holms.
Winterton
and lies along to the northward; past Yarmouth, until you come thwart of
Winterton, there go diverse Channels through them, which you may sail through
upon diverse Marks for those that are there acquainted; you may sail within
these Banks, off from Leystaff, until you are past Winterton.

You may anchor in Southwold-bay in 16 fathom, near six miles from the shore,
fine yellow Sand mixed with yellow Grits. The Soundings along the Coast are
20, 19, 20, 21, 19, 18, 17, 15, 16 fathom; when Leystaff-Church bears West by
North five leagues from you, the depth of water is 18 fathom, brown Sand, with
pieces of yellow shells; before you have sight of the Land, your Soundings will
be 25, 19, 21, 19, 18, 17, 18 fathom; at first white Sand mixed with red, but at
last brown Sand, with a stone or two in it.

The Sounding in the Channel is very fair, the water looks whitish, spotted
with white-water.

To sail within the Banks of Yarmouth.
If you will sail through from before Leystaff within these Banks, then look
out for the Light-houses which stand by Leystaff, which are two little white
Houses, the one stands beneath upon the Shingles on the Seaside, and the
innermost upon a little Hommock, somewhat farther within the Land; when you
come to the southward, then they show themselves to the northward of the Town,
but come at last thwart of it. In the night there is always fire on them.

To sail in there also by night, Bring these foresaid Light-houses North-west
by North, or somewhat more northerly from you, and sail in right with them
either by Night or by Day; when the Church of Leystaff comes to the southward
of the Town, over a Country House by the waterside, then you come against the
Channel, there is no more than three fathom at Low Water. Keep these foresaid
Light-houses one in the other, or bring the innermost rather a little to the
northwards of the outermost, to avoid a little Flat which lies to the South
side of the Channel: But the Channel is indifferent wide, run in until you come
against it, in two fathom and a half, or two fathom, as near as you will or
can; then go up northward along by the shore, you shall then (having sailed a
l^ttle to the northward) meet with a Flat, whereupon remains at low water
less than two fathom; you must anchor before that Flat, with laden Ships, and
stay for highwater; it flows there about eight foot up and down: As soon as
you are over the Flat, it will be five, six, and seven fathom deep; edge then
to the shore, and sail toward it, and you come before the Brew House; there is
a Road where you may anchor in five or six fathom; from thence northward
toward Yarmouth, along the shore, is all over good anchoring, and good
ground.

About a mile, or somewhat more, Yarmouth Haven.
to the southward of the Town of Yarmouth, it has two wooden Heads, you must
sail in between them both, against the highest water, when the strength of the
Flood is spent; at halfflood it is dangerous, because of the strong Tide which
shall forcibly carry you into the Bight against the shore; it is also best to
carry your Ship in along the South-head, for there it is deepest: At
Yarmouth, in the Road, men do commonly anchor to the northward of the Haven,
right over-thwart the Town, in five, six, seven, or eight fathom: The nearer
you anchor to the Sands, the deeper water you shall have, but all good Sand,
and soft Ground.

To sail into Yarmouth-Road through the Holms.
If you sail into the Road of Yarmouth, then bring the sharp little steeple
that stands to the Northward of Yarmouth, within the Land, over the broad
Castle; or, bring the Mill to the North side of the Town: Keep these Marks so
standing, and go in W. N. W. you shall find in this Channel no less than 8 or 9
fathom at halfflood. This Channel is called St. Nicholas-Channel, St. Nicholas
Channel.
on the North side it is deepest; being come in, the Road is right before the
Town, in five or six fathom.

Thwart, or over against the Haven of Yarmouth, goes also a Channel through
the Holms: To sail in there, coming from the Southwards, Bring the Souton over
the North side of the Haven, between the great Tree, and that flat little House
or Castle, and sail in right with them, and keep these Marks so standing within
the Holms; within them lies a Flat on the Starboardside, a little Northward of
the Haven, called the Middle-ground; you may sail about on both sides, the
inner side in five fathom; but toward the Holms, or toward the eastward of it,
in 8 or 9 fathom. From Yarmouth to Winterton, the Coast lies North by West,
and North-west, two leagues.

To sail from Yarmouth through the Sands.
If you sail from Yarmouth through within to the northwards, sail along by
the Land, and keep the sounding of the shore in 5, 6, or 7 fathom, until you
have the two Light-houses (which stand a little to the northwards of Castor)
one in the other, Castor.
and then sail in right with them, either by day or night, (in the night there
is fire in them) and then shall you run over a Flat without the Buoy, which
lies upon the Tail of the Sand called the Barber; Barber.
sail boldly in with the aforesaid Light-houses, until you come again near the
shore in 5 or six fathom; being come by the shore, run again along by it, and
keep the Sounding as before, till you come before Winterton.

To sail by Wintertonness.
This Ness formerly has been very shoal and dangerous, but now it is worn
away, so that Ships may run between the Ness and the Main, and you will have
three fathom water at half-flood; but if you sail without the Ness, there is a
Channel between it and a Middleground; and the Marks to carry you through, are,
to bring the two small Light-houses one into another, and keep the great
Light-house South of you, so you will keep in the best of the Channel.

To sail from Orfordness to Leystaff through the Stamford.
First, You must steer North, and North by East, and borrow on the shore in six
or seven fathom, until you come in the Midway between Alborough and Dunwich,
where you must give the shore more Birth, and come no nearer than five or six
fathom; and so you may borrow on the Shore, till you come between Southwold and
Covehith; and when Covehith-Church is West, you are then thwart of the South
end of the Bernard, Bernard.
it lies North-east into the Sea; and to go clear of the North-east end of it,
keep Southwold-steeple open of the South end of the Cliff, until you bring
Leystaff Windmill open to the Northwards of the Town, there may you steer with
the Town of Leystaff, keeping the Light-houses in one, to go within the Knock;
but to go without the Holm-head, keep the Knock-beacons one in another, (or if
you can see it) keep Goulston-steeple open and shut of the Waters-Edge and
Beach-end, and so you may go in the best: Also upon the Ebb, if occasion
ferves, you may borrow into four fathom of the North end of the Bernard or
Newcome, (for they point both together) and having Pak^field Church West, you
may go in with the shore, or you may go off into 11 or 12 fathom-water as you
please: And to go through the Stamford, bring the top of the Terret (on the
Clock-house) over the white-House in the midst of the Town.

To sail through Yarmouth-Roads to the Northwards.
First, To turn between the Cork-Sand and the shore, come no nearer the Sand
than five or six fathom; but on the shore you may borrow in four fathom, if
need be, and so you may keep until you come to Castorness, Castorness
and so run until the two Light-houses be both in one; the shoalest of the Ness
is a Musquetshot to the Northwards of the Light-houses; the Spit lies off the
Shore, and on the Cork you may borrow into six fathom, and on the Holms in ten
fathom, for it is all steep too; and the shoalest of Wintertonness, is when the
Steeple is S. W. Being thwart of the Steeple, a mile off the shore, lies a
Shoal, whereon is but two fathom and a half at low water, but within or without
there is six or seven fathom.

Being at Haseborough, your course with Flambroughhead is N. W. and S. E. as
you take the Tide, (for the Flood sets over Burnham-flat, and the Ebb cross
to the Sea) and being so far to the N. W. as you can see Haseborough-steeple,
(which is the highest steeple on all the Coast, and rises out of the water)
you shall have ten fathom water; and when you have it S. S. E. then
Cromer-steeple will be S. S. W. and being in this course, halfway over the
Well, you shall have sometimes 7 or 8 fathom, and sometimes more. From
Flambrough-head to New-Casile, the course is N. W. or W. N. W. but if you keep
the shore, the course is more northerly.

Directions for St. Nicholas-Gat and Yarmouth-Road.
From Alborough-bay, your course to Yarmouth-sands is North by East; and when
you are thwart the South end of Holm-head, you shall have 17 or 18 fathom
water, which is directly thwart of Leystaff; and being past that, you may
borrow upon the Sand in 7, 8, or 9 fathom water, until you have brought
Goulston-steeple, which is the Southermost steeple of the two, upon the North
Peer of Yarmouth; and steer with those Marks one over the other, till you come
to six or seven fathom water upon the shore; and then bearing to the Northward,
anchor at the South end of Yarmouth, or before, as you shall think convenient,
in 6, 7, 8, or 9 fathom water; from whence, if you are bound to the Northward,
and would go over Castorness, steer along the shore in 5, 6, or 7 fathom
water, and so along the back of the Barber-sand, until you have brought the
Light-houses one over another; and then bear within the Buoy of the Cockle,
Cockle.
borrowing upon the Main in 6, 5, or 4 fathom, until you come thwart of
Winterton, and that depth will lead you until you come within the
Middle-ground, that has not above twelve foot water: And when you have brought
Winterton Lighthouses S. S. W. from you, you may steer out N. N. E. until you
come to 8 or 9 fathom water, and then you may be sure you are without the Ness,
and may steer along the Coast, or direct your course as you have the Wind.

But if you be in Yarmouth-Road with a Ship that draws 17 or 18 foot water,
your best course is to go to the Northward, between the Cockle and Scroby.

Marks of the Channel are as follows.
You must bring the Southermost round Tower of Yarmouth to bear with the two
Southermost Windmills; To sail between the Cockle and Scroby.
and so run, until you bring the said Tower open of the Mills, the breadth of
the Tower; and so steer into the Northward with that Mark, which will carry you
out between the two Sands.

Also there is another nearer Mark, which is therefore better, (but they come
all to one) which is; The Windmill which stands on the North-west part of the
Town, a little Sayls breadth to the Westward of the North-west Tower of
Yarmouth, it shows like unto a Dove-house; this Mark will lead to the
Northwards, and you shall not have less than six or seven fathom, until you
come to the Sea-heads, which is a Shoal that lies thwart between the two
Sands, on which there is not above four fathom, or four fathom and a half at
low water; and when the Wind-mills come one upon another, then you enter upon
the South part of the Shoal, which will continue without deepning or shoaling,
until Winterton-Church and the Light-house be one in the other, and then you
may presently come into deeper water, and may steer away unto the Northward N.
W. or N. W. by West, or N. W. by North, and this course shall carry you clear
within the Rock that lies E. N. E. and W. S. W. from Winterton, on which you
shall not find fifteen foot at low water in some places.

If you be coming from the Northward, and would go into this Channel, follow
this direction: To the North-west of Haseborough you shall see a low flat
Church, keep that a Sayls breadth off Haseborough-Cliff, and steering directly
with this Mark, will bring you into the Channel before mentioned.

Yarmouth-Road.
To bring you into Yarmouth-Road, and to know the right Church, when it is open
and shut of the Cliff of Haseborough, is this; When Haseborough-Church does
bear N. W. by West from you, and steering away S. E. by East, will bring you
into the Marks and Channel aforesaid, and within all the Over-falls that lie
short of Wintertonness. From Winterton to Haseborough-Point, the course is N.
W. three leagues. From Haseborough to Cromor, the Coast lies N. W. and West by
North, and W. N. W. 3 or 4 leagues.

Directions for sailing from the Buoy of the Nower over the Flats, and through
the Narrow into the Downs.
From the Buoy of the Nower to the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, the course is East,
one quarter Northerly, and West, one quarter Southerly, distant about five
miles; betwixt the Buoy of the Oaze-edge, and the Buoy of the Red-sand, lies a
round Shoal called the Spile, Spile.
and bears South from the Buoy of the Oazeedge, on which shoal there is but six
foot at low water; the Buoy of the Red-sand bears from the Buoy of the
Oaze-edge, East, half Northerly, and West, half southerly, four miles.

If the weather be clear, you may have a direct longst Mark that will lead you
down directly between the Oaze-edge and the Red-sand, (viz.) you will see a
round Tree on the Island Grean; A mark to go between the Buoys.
keep that Tree in the Valley between the little Hills that are upon the
High-lands, next to the Westermost end of the Isle of Grean; and this Mark so
kept will lead you down.

The eastermost part of the Red-sand lies out with two Tongues, Red-sand.
on the northermost of which is placed the Buoy.

The Marks for the Buoy of the Red-sand from the Land, is to bring the
Lands-end of Sheppy S. W. and St. Nicholas-Wood in the Gore open of the
Reculvers South-east; the Channel goes in betwixt the Oaze-edge and the
Red-sand; The depth between them is 10 and 11 fathom.

From the Buoy of the Red-sand to the Buoys of the Spell and Woolpack, the
course is N. W. by West, one quarter northerly, and S. E. by South, one quarter
southerly, over the Flats, where you will have, at low water, on this course,
10 foot, and in somes Holes 15 or 16 foot water.

About a quarter of a mile S. E. by South from the East end of the Spaniard
lies the Gilman, Gilman.
which falls dry at Spring-tydes; but if you keep the aforesaid course you will
not come near it.

The Buoy of the Woolpack is the westermost Buoy in the Narrow, Woolpack.
on the North side of the Channel, and lies on the West Spit of the
Woolpack-sand, and bears from the Reculvers-steeple North by West; then have
you two little Hills like two Paps on the upper Land to the southwards, just
open and shut of the Reculvers-Steeple.

The Buoy of the Spell lies on the South side of the Channel, Spell.
a little to the Eastward of the Buoy of the Woolpack; betwixt these Buoys, the
Channel is a Cables length and a half broad, and but nine foot deep at
low water.

The Buoy of the Searn is the eastermost Buoy that lies on the North side of
the Channel, Searn.
the Steeple of the Reculvers bearing from the said Buoy South by West, then
have you a Windmill a little open of the Channel of Reculvers-Church. The
course upwards from this Buoy through the Narrow, is W. N. W. and downwards it
is E. S. E.

The longst Mark on the shore, is to bring Birchington-Church right over a Gaul
or black Hole in the Western part of the Cliff-end.

On the North side of a Channel, a little below the Buoy of the Searn, Hook of
Margaret-Sand.
shoots out a Shoal from Margaret-Sand S. E. called the Hook; it runs so
far to the southwards, that it makes the Channel very narrow.

The thwart Marks for this Sand, is to bring Birchington-Steeple into a great
Dauk or Valley of a Cliff, then the Steeple will bear from you South-east, five
degrees southerly; the longst Mark, is to bring St. Peter's Church upon the West
end of the Cliff.

The longst Mark to carry you clear of the Hook to the Buoy of the Searn, is to
bring St. Peters-Steeple over the East side or Cliff of Westgate-bay: You must
keep them so, till you bring Birchington-Steeple over the Gaul, when you take
hold of that Mark to go through a little above the Hook, on the South side of
the Channel.

A little below the Reculvers, lies off a Shoal called the Horse, on which it
is very shoal at low water. Horse.


The Marks to avoid it, Is to keep St. Peters-Steeple (on the East side of
Westgate-bay) a little upon the Cliff, which Mark you may use either going up
or down.

Between the Hook of Margaret-sand, and the Buoy of the Searn, is a good Road
for Ships to ride in, called the Gore, Gore.
which is useful for Ships when they have not wind and weather to carry them
over the Flats.

The Marks for the best Riding, Marks for good ancorage.
Is to bring a Mill (in the midst of a Wood) near the Seaside, and St.
Peters-Church, in the midst of Westgate-bay, together.

There is also a Shoal called the Middle-ground at the Cliff end, Middle-Ground.
which lies a little blow the Hook near the shore, on the South Side, on which
there is but fourteen foot at low water, and on each side four fathom, being a
small narrow Ridge, and lies E. N. E. and W. S. W. in length three quarters of
a mile.

The Mark to keep you clear, Is to bring St. Peters-Church over the East side
of Westgate-bay, or to bring the nethermost Tree on the next high Land (to the
westward of the Reculvers) a little open to the southward.

This is also a good Mark for the Hook downwards, or from Marget-sand upwards.

Marget-sand lies before Marget and Westgate-bay, on the North side of the
Channel. The East end of this Sand bears from Marget-Church, North, half
westerly.

The Mark to go clear of the East end, Is to bring Marget-steeple and the
Windmill in one.

The Depths you have along the Sand, as you turn up and down, are at the East
end, and so upward, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5 fathom; the greatest part of this Sand dries
at low water.

If you be to turn up in the Night, between the Main and Marget-sand, you shall
find, Middle-grounds.
by keeping of your Lead, two Middle-grounds; upon the innermost Middle-ground,
you shall have five fathom and a half, and to the southwards of it you shall
have 6, 7, or 8 fathom, as the Tide is high; without the inner Middle-ground
you shall have 8, 9, or 10 fathom, and then you shall have 7 or 8, as the Tide
is, and without that 9 or 10 fathom; and when it comes to shoal again, you may
be sure it is on the Sand, and likewise the shoaling on the Main within the
inner Middle-grounds; these Middlegrounds do reach up to the Gore; and the
farther you come to the westwards, the shoaler, for they tail unto the Searn
and the Dry-sand without it, which is called by some men the Girdler.

The Mark to Ride in Marget-Road.
The Mark to Ride in Marget-Road, Is to bring the Mill and Steeple together, as
far off the Shore as you please to anchor. The greatest part of Marget-sand
dries at low water, from Marget-Town up to the Cliffend: Above Birchington
spits off several shoal places that must be taken care of in turning up and
down, especially at high water near Marget; stand no nearer the shore than six
fathom, and from Westgate-bay upward in five fathom.

The Mark to go clear of all the Spits below Marget-Town, (that runs off the
shore on the North side of Foreland) Is to keep the top of Marget-steeple open
above the Land, and Fairness and Whiteness on the East side of the Foreland.

The Gore.
The Gore is a Road where Ships use to ride when they have not wind and weather
to sail over the Flats. This Road is to the westward of the Hook of
Marget-Sand, and to the eastwards of the Buoy of the Searn.

The Mark for it, Marks of the best Riding.
Is to bring the Mill on the middle of a Wood near the Seaside, and St.
Peters-Church in the middle of Westgate-bay.

Westgate-Bay.
Westgate bay is a Road where Ships do use to ride, by reason there is more
water and more drift, and better ground for Anchor-hold than is in the Gore.
The Mark for it, Is to bring a Windmill on an old House in the middle of the
Bay, in 7 or 8 fathom water.

Directions to sail from Margaret-Road to the North-Foreland, and the Marks for
both Channels in the Downs.
From Marget, steer down along the Shore, East, and East by North, as the
Wind is, but come no nearer the Shore than in 7 or 8 fathom, for the Spit of
Fairness lies far out; Fairness.
but that depth, or keeping of Marget-Church a man's height above the Land, will
carry you clear of it; when you have brought the South-Foreland and the Land of
the Downs open, then if the Wind be westerly, you may steer to the Southwards
along the Shore in 5, Marks to come into the Downs
6, or 7 fathom, as you have the Tide under you, or your draught of water, for
you shall find diverse Banks or Overfalls, where you shall suddenly shoal a
fathom, sometimes more, and then deeper again; there is one that lies in the
stream of five fathom and a half at low water, on the which there is not above
twenty foot: This lies something to the northwards of Broad-stairs-Peer; and
likewise something to the southward of Broad-stairs, there lies another in the
Stream of four fathom and a half at low water, whereon there is not above
fourteen foot: Also to the southward of that, right against a green patch that
shows on the upper part of the Chalk-Cliff, as if it were stained with Green,
there is another, on which there is not above ten foot at low water; these you
must be careful to shun, if there be any strong Tide, they show themselves by
the wasting of the water as an Overfal does; and where it is smoothest, there
it is shoalest. This Sand is called the Coleburn. When you are so far to the
southward that you can see the red tyled House of Ramsgate open of the Cliff,
then you are clear of this Shoal.

There is another Shoal to the Southwards of this, Mark of the Brake.
which some men call the Querns. The thwart Mark for the North-head of the
Brake, is St. Lawrence-Church which stands above Ramsgate, upon the North-Cliff
of Ramsgate, one sayls breadth, and the Querns lies N.N.W. from that a good
Birth, with the said Church, two Ships length or more upon the said Cliff; so
that when you come to have the Church but a Ships length upon the Cliff; then
if you will come into the Inner-Channel, you must sail into the shore by your
Lead; if it be thick weather, that you cannot see your leading Mark, (viz.) St.
Margarets-Church upon the South-Foreland, right over a Chalk-pit that shows
white, almost midway between Waymor-Castle and Deal-Castle; or the said Church
two Sayls breadth without Deal-Castle, and this Mark will lead you directly
through between the Brakes and Querns, and so into the Downs: Another Mark.
But if you cannot discern the aforesaid Marks, then there is another nearer
Mark, which is Winsberry-Church, and a round Tree not far from the Church,
which stands up in the Country to the South-westwards of Sandwich; keep that
Church and Tree between the two Southermost Steeples of the Town of Sandwich,
and this Mark will lead you directly through the Inner-Channel; and if so be
you be forced to turn through, you may stand to the Northwards, until you bring
the Trees to the middle Church, and to the South-eastwards, until you bring the
Steeple near unto St. Maries-Church, which is the eastermost Church of
Sandwich, and so you may turn between the Brake and Querns.

The thwart Mark for the North end of the Brake, Thwart Mark of the Brake.
is as aforesaid, St. Lawrence Church on the Point of the North-Cliff, or a
Wood end open and shut of the Cliff next Sandwich.

For the South end of the Querns, bring the Mill near Ramsgate to the Northward
of the said Peer.

Depths in the Channel, is two and a half, three and a half, and four fathom,
the nearer the Brake the deeper.

To sail through the Gulls.
The Gulls is a Channel that runs between the Goodwin-sand and the Brake; and
therefore the Marks to bring you through the Downs, going to the northwards,
are these; You must keep St. Margets-Church, which stands near the
South-Foreland, on a piece of Wall that is built near the third Cliff, to the
northward of the South-Foreland; Or else to bring the Light-house in the
South-Swamp; which Marks will carry you through the Gulls, and in the Fair-way,
between the Goodwin and the Brake, into 8, 9, and 10 fathom water; borrow on
the Brake in 7 fathom, and no nearer the Bunthead than 10 fathom; Bunt been
and between the Bunt-head and the North-sand-head in eight fathom.

FINIS.
All sorts of Books and Instruments belonging to the Art of Navigation, are
Made and Sold by John Seller, [the King's Hydrographer] at the sign of the
Mariners-Compass, at the Hermitage- stairs in Wapping.

map of the coasts of England, Flanders, and Holland A Chart of the Seacoasts
of ENGLAND FLANDERS and HOLLAND Showing all the Sands Shoals Rocks and Dangers
The Bays Roads Harbors Buoyes Beacons and Seamarks on the said coasts. By
John Seller Hydrographer in Ordinary to the King And are to be sold at his
Shop in Exchange-Alley in Cornhill and at the Hermitage in Wapping: London.
Ornat mo Consult moque Viro D. JOS. WILLIAMSON Equiti Aurato, Jn Regni
Comitijs Senatori. Regiae Majestati ab Archivis status, Et Sanctiori Concilio a
Secretis. Tabulam hanc qualem qualem L. M. D. C. Q Joh Sellerus.
Jo: Clark sculpsit.



