A NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Committee for preservation of the
Customs, In the Case of Mr GEORGE CONY Merchant.

By SAMUEL SELVVOOD Gent.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for William Sheares at the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

A NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Committee for preservation of the
Customs, in the Case of Mr GEORGE CONY Merchant.
FInding the expectations and discourses of men diversely and dangerously
engaged touching the Case of Mr George Cony merchant, now depending by writ of
Habeas Corpus in the Upper-Bench. Insomuch that on the one side the peace of
the Commonwealth, on the other side the Credit of the Gentleman himself, and on
both sides the truth is thereby endangered. I conceive my self in some measure
obliged, (having been employed in the soliciting of the whole business from
the beginning, and knowing every foot step and period thereof) to give the
Nation a true and faithful account of all proceedings in the case: that so the
evil hopes and expectations of some, and the groundless fears and censures of
others, may be taken away. And the error of that unlucky question which has
been stated by occasion of the said case in so unseasonable a juncture, may be
laid at the doors of those whose violence, weakness, or design has been
indeed properly and immediately guilty thereof.

For true it is that on the one side there is a generation of men, restless in
their spirits, thirsting continually after change, quarrelling with whatever
is present, and disliking all things wherein their own heads or hands are not
called to be principal Actors or Advisers, who have taken occasion from this
very business to fill the minds of the discontented of all Interests with an
expectation of some opportunity to spring from hence to serve the turn of their
particular discontents.

To this end they have given out several false reports of dangerous
consequence, which by way of impression or preparation may dispose the people
to a dislike of the present Government: as namely, That the Merchants of London
have combined together to overthrow the Customs, that to this end the
business of Mr Cony is purposely set on foot, that under the conduct of his
single case the whole design may march the more securely: that they have made a
common purse to bear the charges at law: that they doubt not but to obtain
Judgment of law against the Customs, and in consequence to overthrow the
payment of all other taxes in like manner not imposed by common consent in
Parliament. And the unsteady multitude (whose judgment and affection for the
most part is guided according to the more or less they suffer in their purses)
being encouraged by these reports, and not discerning further then this
immediate ease which they have fancied to themselves, by the hoped for
discharge of all taxes, as aforesaid, are hereby speciously drawn in, and
easily disposed, when the opportunity shall ripen, to assist the more dangerous
and deep designs of the enemies of the Commonwealth. In the mean time neither
reckoning what may be the issues of the changes they affect, nor measuring the
present necessity which induces such levies, nor considering that the common
safety is involved therein.

But on the other side, there is a certain sort of men (such as indeed are
always swarming in the Courts of Princes) described by the name of Flatterers
or Sychophants, men of low and abject spirits within themselves, but outwardly
of high and insolent deportment, capable of all forms and impressions
whatsoever, which the present power inclines to; who the better to raise or
radicate themselves in places of trust and profit, use to abuse the ear of
Greatness, to which they have access, with forged tales, and
misrepresentation of other men's actions, as much thereby imposing upon the
Prince, as the other sort did upon the people. And some of these have not been
wanting in this opportunity, to represent this case of Mr Conyes (though to a
different end) under the same notion of design and combination against the
present Government, which opinion by the help of a very small circumstance.
viz. Mr Conyes personal relation to a Gentleman not long since thought fit to
be secured, has the more easily obtained the reputation of a truth.

To contribute therefore as much as in me lies to the preventing of the
inconveniences on both sides, I do publish this ensuing Narrative, which I avow
to be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth: And thereby I
doubt not but it will appear, that whatever Mr Cony has done for the purchase
of his liberty, has been all occasional and necessary, and not in pursuance
of any design or combination as has been insinuated.

Nor is it likely if any such design or combination had been among the
Merchants, it could have totally escaped my knowledge, who not only was
conversant in all the passages of this business, from the time it came before
the Committee for Preservation of the Customs but do own Mr Conyes demurring
to the jurisdiction of that Committee, and the sueing forth of his writ of
Habeas Corpus upon his imprisonment to be the effect of my proper and peculiar
advise unto him, grounded upon their not publishing the power by which they
acted, and upon the illegality of the said Committees proceedings, And not at
all to start any unhappy question to the disturbance of the public peace.

For, for my own part I profess obedience to the present Government, and think
I am bound so to do not for fear but for conscience sake. And that I am herein
to follow the conduct of Gods providence, without so much as inquiring into the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of those means by which the acquest of Power and
Government is made: my obedience thereunto not at all amounting to any
justification of such unlawful acquest (in case any such were, which for my
part I must leave to the great Judge of Heaven and earth to determine) but
being fully grounded as I conceive upon that reason of the Apostles rule of
like obedience which he gives to all Christians. viz. For that the powers which
be, are ordained of God: which I understand generally of all Governing powers
which have once obtained in any Nation, be the bypast means of such obtaining
what they will.

And as to the particular question touching the Customs set on foot upon
occasion of Mr. Conyes case, touching the decision whereof all men's minds are
at present big with expectation, for my own part also I am convinced of the
necessity that induces the continuance of that and other payments for the
present, although peradventure the formality of law may be wanting. And as upon
this ground I never advised the bringing of the writ with any intention of
striking at the payment of the Customs, or to introduce question of his
Highnesses power in reference to the present levying of the same; So I must do
my Clyent that conscionable right as to aver that he never discovered to me
any such intention or inclination in himself: but that he seriously apprehended
the dangerous consequence of the unseasonable ventilation of this question let
the decision in law fall which way it would: If thereby either on the one hand
the letter of the law should be armed against the peace and safety of the
Commonwealth to the advantage of the Male content and difaffected, or on the
other hand the liberty and Property of the people after so vast an effusion of
the blood and treasure of the Nation should in the issue of this question be
either totally lost or at least subjected to the absolute will (whether good or
bad) of any present or succeding single Governor.

And in the sequel of this ensuing Narrative I presume the Reader will find,
that by the two First Warrants whereby Mr Cony was taken into and continued in
custody, there were legal advantages enough to have been taken by Mr Cony
whereby to have come off from his imprisonment, without the touching upon this
string if the Committee had not after the writ brought, sent two several new
Warrants to the Sergeant for his detention, in each of which they had taken
care (though by reciting otherwise then according to truth) to mend the errors
of the former: both which Warrants bear date after the test of the Habeas
Corpus, and the later of them not indeed actually delivered to the Sergeant,
nor signed nor sealed by the Committee until the 24 or 25 of May last, which
was after Mr Conyes Counsel had opened their exceptions to the former
Warrants; And yet the said Committee have the confidence to make the said
Warrant bear date on the eighth of February last, which was above three months
before the making and delivery thereof.

For the Reader may please to understand, that the first writ of Habeas Corpus
was brought in Hillary term last, the Sergeant at Arms, in whose Custody he
was, having then only two Warrants, the first for the attaching of Mr Cony, the
second to continue him in custody, till pay meant of his Fine or further order
of the Committee. But the Sergeant making no Return upon this first writ, we
were forced to move for an Alias with a pain; before the return of which, (but
after the Test of the said first Writ) the Committee upon discovery of the
errors of their former Warrants (to prevent his come off thereby) make a new
Warrant to the Sergeant for Conyes detinue, until he should pay the fine of
five hundred pounds, or be discharged by due course of law: And the return of
the Alias being not till the last day of that Term, it could not be filed of
Record until the first day of Easter term, for that the Counsel for his
Highness moved (according to reason and the course of the Court) to have a
view of the same before the filing thereof upon the first day of which term
the return was accordingly filed, and afterward upon opening the exceptions to
the Sergeants Return, Mr Cony was turned over by rule of the Court to the
Custody of the Marshall, and a day appointed for his Highnesses Counsel
toanswer the said exceptions: upon which day it appearing to the Court that the
said Return of the Sergeant was not rightly directed, and so indeed no return
at all in law, upon which the Court could not proceed, Mr Cony was remanded to
the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms and a Rule of Court given for a Plur^es
Habeas Corpus to be awarded him returnable Crastino Ascensionis, which was two
days after. But before the Return of the writ into Court (the Exceptions to
the former Warrants upon which, without meddling with the great question, Mr
Cony in the opinion of his Counsel might have come off, having been before
opened as aforesaid) the Committee send a fourth Warrant to the Sergeant,
antedated as aforesaid, wherein they mended the Errors upon which the former
exceptions were taken.

Now to what end this could be done, but to cut off Mr. Cony from all
exception, but that of the legality of the power by which the Committee acted,
and thereby to introduce and set on foot this so dangerous a question touching
his Highnesses power of levying Customs and other taxes for the necessary uses
of the public, let every sensible man judge. Except it may be said that it was
to justify the Rumor which was spread of a combination among the Merchants,
or was an effect of weakness and precipitation, which will equally leave the
guilt of such inconveniences as may ensue at the doors of the said Committee.

For let the Reader take special notice thereby (as that which is the main,
and (as I hope) justifiable end of my publishing this account) that this
question might for ever have slept in silence, and no opportunity have been
furnished thereby to further the designs of evil minded men to disturb the
public peace, (notwithstanding Mr Conyes bringing of his writ) had it not
been for this the Committees manner of proceeding, as well since as before the
said writ brought.)

For the prevention of which disturbance and the timely obvening of such wicked
and dangerous designs as may shelter themselves and march under the Color of a
legal defense of the Nations rights, if his Highness shall find himself
necessitated to enlarge the power of the Protectorship in order to the levying
of monyes, and thereby in succession of times (for in his days I hope it is
not to be feared) the liberty and Property of the people of this Nation should
become totally lost, and subjected to the absolute will of any one particular
person. I suppose the whole Nation will easily see by the ensuing Narrative,
and by what before has been observed, to whom they must reckon themselves
beholding for the benefit, whose Posterities doubtless will wear the Trophies
of those public honors which will be rendered them by the people for so
glorious a purchase.

But I withhold the Reader no longer from the narrtive it self of the whole
proceedings which were as follows. The Commissioners of the Customs upon the
bare suggestion of certain matters of Fact against George Cony of London
Merchant, without summoning him to appear and answer the same, do privately The
taking of Depositions in this manner being in the nature of an Inquisition upon
a penal statute and not by Jury is contrary to law, and has therefore been
damned in several Parliaments as contra-fundamentall to the rights and
liberties of the people.
take depositions of witnesses upon the said matter. And that being done
exhibit an Information or charge against him in their This is contrary to all
reason as well as to law, that the Informers themselves should have power to
take Depositions, and that before any Information Depending: and the
Defendentto bejudged upon that evidence.
own names before the Committee for Preservation of the Customs in these words.

To the Honorable the Committee for preservation of the Customs.
A charge of fraud force, and misdemeanour humbly presented by the
Commissioners for the Customs, against George Cony the elder, George Cony the
younger, Robert Hawkins Constable, and others.
THat the said Cony the elder and George Cony the younger and others did on the
fourth day of this instant November, 1654. affront and abuse Theophilus Colcoke
and others, Deputies for the Commissioners of the Customs in the execution of
the trust to them committed, and particularly opposed, beat, or caused to be
beaten some of the said Deputies when they peaceably entered the house of the
said Cony, in which several great quantities of silks, for which no Custom
was paid, were lodged.

That the said Hawkins being Constable, and required by the said Deputies to
assist them herein, the said Hawkins by force carried the said Colcoke to the
Justice of the peace as a Felon, on purpose that the said silks might be
conveyed away, which was accordingly done.

All which was acted and done by the persons above mentioned in contempt of the
Power and Authority of his Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament,
whom the said Cony much vilified; and in opposition to the laws and ordinances
made concerning the Customs: to the prejudice of the Commonwealth, and loss
in the Revenue of the Customs.

November. 6. 1654. This is a true copy examined by FRAN. MEVERELL Cler.

By Such warrant they had no powet to grant in any capacity whatsoever,
especially being the Informants themselves. It is true the Commissioners of the
Customs had formerly power by Ordinance of the 14. April 1645. and of the 16.
December. 1647. to constitute a Messenger who should have power to summon and
attach, etc. and carry the offender before the Committee of Parliament, for
Regulating the Excise, etc. But that Committee ceasing, the power of that
Messenger cease by impossibility of execution; and the Commissioners of the
Customs have no power to give special warrant in the case by any Act or
Ordinance whatsoever.
special warrant also under the hands of the same Commissioners (who, note,
are the Informants themselves) Cony the elder is attached upon the Exchange at
This favors of direction given to the Messenger, and of malice in the
directors, the defendant being a merchant, and was at that instant of time to
draw bills for at least 4000 l. neither was there any necessity of such
attachment when a summons would have served the turn, he being a person
resident and of note.
high Exchange time; and carried in custody before the said Committee, as yet
not understanding for what cause; the Officer This savours of direction also,
and is likewise contrary to law, for that no man ought to be denied a copy of
that warrant by which is either attached or imprisoned, neither can there be
any reason for it but malice and surprise.
denying him a copy of his warrant, and not so much as showing him the same
till he came to the door of the Committee.

Being carried in before the said Committee ( It is contrary to the common
light of nature that two parties coming before a Court, the one should have
greater countenance then the other: and Col. Harvie behaved himself here more
like a Judge then an Informant.
Colonel Harvy one of the Informants, sitting with them, and having been in
This was derogatory to the honor of a Court, to suffer themselves to be
prepossessed by one party.
private with the Committee almost an hour before) the Information is read; to
which Cony pleads not, but demands a Copy, and time to plead after advice with
his Counsel.

The Committee upon the motion Colonel Harvy (the Informant (note) as
aforesaid) deny No Court ought to deny any man a copy of his Charge, and it is
the highest injustice that can be, for a Court to endeavor the surprise of any
party, and there could be nothing less intended in such a denial.
him a Copy, and it is violently pressed by Colonel Harvy that he might be
required to plead immediately, and that no This was as ignorantly moved as
unjustly, for that according to the Law of England no Court shall deny me to
plead by Counsel, but in cases of Felony and Treason: and yet then also I shall
have Counsel assigned me to advise with if I desire it.
Counsel might be allowed to speak for him.

Cony being accordingly required to plead, alleges on the contrary, the
unreasonablenesse of such surprise, his own ignorance of the Law, and the
absence of his Counsel; But in the mixture of his discourse being much and
violently pressed by Colonel Harvey, And being at that instant also under the
distemper of an Hectique Fever which after a long sickness had not quite left
him, did incautiously let Fall, (but not by way of Plea) that he knew of
nothing contained in the said Information that he was guilty of: yet because he
knew not what prejudice he might do himself by making that Plea, he still
insisted to have a Copy of the Information, and a day appointed to put in his
Plea after advise with his Counsel.

The No Court can take that for a Pleading which I intend not for a pleading at
the time of my speaking, and declare my intention at the same time as here Cony
did; for by such declaration I refuse to put my self upon that issue; and if no
issue be joined, no Judgment can lawfully be given, except where the matter can
be taken pro confesso upon default when I was bound to plead and did not. But
in this Case, first Cony was not by law bound to plead, the Committee having
denied him a copy of the information. Secondly, the Judgment it self was not
given by default, but recites as if issue had been joined: whereas indeed Cony
declared himself expressly to the contrary.
Committee lay hold of this incaution of his words, and though Cony then
immediately declared that he intended them not as a Plea, yet will needs have
it understood, That he had thereby pleaded Not guilty to the Information: and
thereupon call the Depositions to be read, If issue had been joined, yet it was
contrary to all law, reason, equity, good conscience, or common honesty, that
such issue should be tried by the evidence of Depositions taken by the
Informants themselves: and that before any Information depending.
which Depositions were taken by or before themselves as aforesaid. There is
nothing more visible in this whole Case than that a surprise of the Defendant
was designed from the beginning; for mark, Cony is attached upon the Exchange,
carried in custody before this Committee, not knowing any thing that was
against him, required to plead ore tenus immediately, to an Information,
whereof he must have no copy; and Depositions ready taken against him
privately in the nature of an Inquisition, by the Informants themselves, upon
which the issue must be tried immediately: a proceeding so gross as I shall
not need to observe any thing to the Reader thereupon; the bare relation
sufficiently manifesting the injustice.
They containing three or four sheets of paper close written.

After the reading, Cony is asked by the Committee, what he had to say
thereunto: he alleges, that he had not yet pleaded, and insists as before to
have a Copy of the Information, and a day to plead.

In fine, after he was bidden to withdraw, and soon after called in again, a
Copy of the Information was If he pleaded before, why was he Ordered a Copy
and a new day? if he had not pleaded, how could the Committee proceed to
Judgment? doubtless he would have rather moved for Copies of the Depositions
than for a Copy of the Information, if in his own understanding he had pleaded.
Ordered him, and the same day sevenight given him to appear and answer:
against which day this ensuing Petition was drawn.

To the right Honorable the Committee for Preservation of the Customs. The
humble Petition of George Cony the Elder.
Shows,
THat of common right belonging to all and every Member of the Commonwealth of
England, any person or persons standing charged in any Court of Law or Equity
within the said Commonwealth, may have liberty to demurre to the Jurisdiction
of the same Court.

And although it is true, that the Judges of the same Court are the proper
Judges to determine the question upon such Demurrer whether the matters are
within their Jurisdiction or not, yet it has never been known that any such
Demurrer was refused, but as well for the satisfaction of the Party, as for
the avoiding of all Arbitrary proceedings was admitted to be argued, without
the Parties incurring the guilt of Contumacie, or stirring the passion of his
Judges.

That to make the Parties capable of Demurring if there be just cause, it is of
necessity, That that upon which the Jurisdiction of such Court is founded,
whether it be Common Law, Statute Law, Ordinance or Commission be known.

And therefore in all Courts that proceed by any new Authority, that which
gives the Authority whether Ordinance, Commission, or whatever ought as the
Petitioner humbly conceives to be openly read, published, and promulgated, or
otherwise no person can be in contempt of the same, none being bound to obey or
Answer before such an Authority or Jurisdiction as is not known.

Now whereas the Petitioner stands charged before your Honors upon an
Information of Fraud, force, and misdemeanour exhibited against him by the
Commissioners of the Customs, and not finding by the Common Law or Statute Law
of this Commonwealth, or any Act or Ordinance publicly or legally
promulgated, what the Jurisdiction of your Honors in reference to the said
Fraud, force, and misdemeanour pretended in the said Information may be: The
Petitioner humbly hopes he shall not be construed of any Contumacie against
Authority (to which he shall be always ready to yield a willing and cheerful
obedience) if as in right only of a Free Member of the Commonwealth of
England, and not otherwise, he shall humbly pray a sight of such Ordinance,
Commission, or other Authority by which your Honors are to proceed. Upon which
if he shall find cause of Demurrer, your Honors being your selves the proper
Judges to determine the question, after your Petitioners Counsel shall first
have been heard thereupon, the Petitioners purpose is humbly to submit to your
Judgments therein: and then afterward to plead or answer over to the said
Charge (if your Honors shall find the matters within your Jurisdiction)
according as by his Counsel learned in the Laws he shall be advised.

For his advising with whom afterward, the Petitioner shall humbly pray such
reasonable time may be given him as to your Honors shall seem convenient.

And he shall pray etc.
At the day Cony accordingly appears, but exhibits not the Petition, but
verbally He had good reason to demurre to their Jurisdiction, not knowing by
what Power or Warrant they sat, no man being bound to answer a Jurisdiction
that is not known, and that founded not in the Common Law, but in an Ordinance
of his Highness, which was never promulgated, nor so much as published in
print, whereby it might be known.
demurrs to the Jurisdiction of the Committee and prays liberty to argue his
Demurrer.

Whereupon being commanded to withdraw, the Committee without further hearing,
or If they had suffered their Jurisdiction to be argued, and had then
overruled the Demurrer, the Defendant must have pleaded over, and therefore
there was no necessity of such proceeding, unless to surprise him.
suffering their Jurisdiction to be argued, proceed to sentence; and Cony being
called in again is By the Statute of Magna Charta no Freeman shall be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseized, etc. or any way otherwise destroyed, nor shall the
King pass upon him but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the
Land. To this Statute there is no nonbstante in the Ordinance of his Highness,
by which this Committee are empowered, and if there had, yet by the sixth Article
of the instrument of Government, the Laws shall not be altered, suspended,
abrogated or repealed, nor any new Law made, etc. save only as is expressed in
the 30th Article, which 30th Article relates only to the raising of money in
cases of necessity, and preventing of disorders.
adjudged, in the payment of 500th in 14 days.

Cony having been served with this order of Judgment, and not performing the
same, is afterward by warrant of the said Committee of the 12th of December
last directed to the Sergeant at Arms, taken into Custody, and upon the 19th
of December is brought before the said Committee to answer the contempt (as the
said Order styles it) which Order follows in these words:

Tuesday the 12th of December, 1654. At the Committee for preservation of
Customs.
WHereas George Cony the Elder was by Order of the Committee, of the 16th of
November last, Ordered to pay in to the Commissioners for the Customs for the
use of the Commonwealth the sum of five hundred pounds of lawful money of
England, on or before the 30th day of the same month of November, being so
much imposed on him as a fine by this Committee for receiving goods not first
duly entered at the Custom House, opposing of the Officers of the Customs in
the execution of their duty, and several other misdemeanors. And forasmuch as
by Certificate from the Commissioners of the Customs, bearing date the 5th of
this instant December; it appears, that the said George Cony the Elder has
neglected to make payment of his said Fine in contempt of the said Order, This
Committee therefore in pursuance of the powers and Authority to them given, by
virtue of an Ordinance from his Highness the Lord Protector and his Council,
bearing date the 2d of September last, Do order that the Sergeant at Arms
attending the Parliament do forthwith apprehend and bring in safe Custody the
body of the said George Cony the Elder before this Committee to answer his said
contempt. And for so doing this shall be a sufficient VVarrant. And all
Officers as well Military as Civil, are hereby respectively required to be
aiding and assisting in the due execution hereof accordingly.

To Edward Birkhead Esquire Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament.
John Stone. Will. Roberts. Gervas Bennett. A. Baynes. Jo. Bockett.


To take off this contempt, it was by me urged on Master Cony's behalf, in
effect as follows:

That the Defendant in his own intention had not pleaded, and therefore that
the Judgment ought in reason to be revoked, having preceded the Defendants plea
or defense which he was to make.

That by the Law of England no person is compellable to plead ore tenus, but in
Cases of Felony and Treason.

That the Defendant being a person not skillful in the Laws had demanded
liberty to advise and to plead by Counsel, which by the Law he might, and
ought not to have been refused him.

That although upon advantage taken of some improvident expressions, which fell
from the Defendant in his Distemper the first day, by way of answer to Colonel
Harvey 's urgings, and not by way of Plea to the Court, the Committee did
indeed forthwith call the Depositions to be read, yet First, upon his insisting
afterward to have a Copy of the Information, and a new day to plead, after
advise with his Counsel, they themselves had granted him a Copy, and a new
day accordingly, which implied they were satisfied by the Reasons offered, that
they could not take those improvident Expressions as a Plea: And again,
although they had not, yet it was not reason he should be judged by the
evidence of Depositions so taken in private by the Informants themselves
without his knowledge, and therefore that they ought to have been suppressed.

That whereas at his next appearance, instead of Pleading (which he neither had
done before, nor was bound to do being surprised as aforesaid) he had demurred
to the Jurisdiction of the Committee, he might of right do it by the Law, as
well in that as in all other Courts in England.

That to demurre to the Jurisdiction of a Court is not to deny that the Court
has a Jurisdiction (that being rather employed than denied by the Demurrer) but
to enquire whether the particular Case in question be within such Jurisdiction
or no.

That all Courts being Judges of their own Jurisdiction, it ought not to give
offense to demurre thereunto, And therefore in the ordinary Courts of
Judicature, where the most grave and learned in the Laws sit as Judges, such
Demurrers never give offense, nor are denied to be argued.

That the Committee being in like manner Judges of their own Jurisdiction; if
it should happen that upon arguing the Defendants demurrer, they should
overruled the same according to Law, The Defendant was ready according to the
rule of other Courts to plead over as he should be advised by his Counsel.

That peradventure the Defendant might plead the same Plea that was before
pretended: and there was no reason for such extreme precipitation in this
business, being only upon matter of a penal Statute at most; the execution of
which Statutes in the rigor the Law favors not.

All this notwithstanding the Committee affirm their former Judgment, and by a
Warrant then dated being the 19th of December last continue Cony in custody of
the Sergeant at Arms, until he shall conform to the payment of the said
500li. or the said Committee shall further order.

A Copy of which Order follows in these words:

Tuesday the 19th of December, 1654. At the Committee for preservation of the
Customs.
WHereas George Cony the Elder was on the 16th day of November: last upon due
proofs on oath adjudged and fined in the sum of Five hundred pounds of
lawful money of England for receiving goods not first entered at the
Customehouse, and for refusing the Officers of the Customs to make search for
such goods in the day time, when they required the same and produced their
Commission in that behalf; and for resisting the said Officers, violently
assaulting them, and forcing them out of his house whereinto before they had
been peaceably admitted and entered, and demanded to make search, as aforesaid,
and committing also diverse other misdemeanors in contempt and disobedience of
the Ordinances of Parliament of the 14 of April, 1645. and 16 of December. 1647.
in that behalf made: And whereas the said George Cony the Elder being then
personally present was upon the 16 of November: aforesaid adjudged and ordered to
pay the said sum of Five hundred pounds unto the Commisssioners for the
Customs for the use of the Common wealth, upon or before the 30th of November
last: Which Judgment and Order has been since served and left in Writing, at
the house of the said George Cony the Elder; And for as much as the
Commissioners of the Customs have certified unto this Committee, that the said
George Cony the Elder, has neglected to pay in the said Five hundred pounds,
in contempt of the said Order, This Committee therefore in pursuance of the
powers and authority to them given by Ordinance from his Highness the Lord
Protector and his Council bearing date the 2 of Sept. last, do order, That the
said George Cony the Elder for his said contempt be and stand committed to the
custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament there to remain
until he shall conform to payment of the said Five hundred pounds, or this
Committee shall further Order; whereof the Sergeant at Arms is to take notice,
and to receive him into custody accordingly.

To Edward Birkhead Esquire Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament. John Stone.
Will: Roberts. Adam Baynes. Gerv: Bennett. John Bockett.


Upon Hillary Term last, by advise of his Council, Cony brings his Habeas
Corpus in the Upper Bench, his said Council finding such error in the Warrants
of his Commitment, as they were of opinion, that the Court would discharge him
immediately upon the opening of the same.

For first, although their said Warrant of the 19th. of December, it is
expressed that the same was made in pursuance of the Power and Authority to
them given by Ordinance from his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council,
bearing date the second of September last; yet there is no recital of what
that Power, and Authority is: And the said Ordinance being never published, nor
certified, and enrolled in Chancery, nor from thence sent by Mittimus into the
Upper-Bench, it could not be presumed that the Court could as Judges take
notice what the said Power and Authority was, and if so, it must follow, that
the Court was obliged to discharge the Prisoner.

Secondly, if they had recited the said Ordinance of his Highness of the
second of September at large, yet the powers thereby given to that Committee,
are not therein particularly expressed, but only in General, and by way of
reference, to a former Ordinance of his Highness, viz. to put in execution the
several powers given to the late Committee, for preservation of Customs, by
his Highness and Council, which were as unknown to the Court as the former.

Thirdly, there was no recital in the said Warrant of Commitment, that the
Customs themselves were continued by any Ordinance of his Highness: For (de
facto) all former Ordinances and Acts of Parliament, for continuance of the
Gustomes, were actually expired, before the giving of this Judgment; And if
there were any Ordinance of his Highness afterward, for continuation thereof,
such Ordinance ought to have been recited in the Warrant at large, otherwise
the same not being certified, nor transmitted to the Court as aforesaid, the
Court could not (for like reason as before) take any Judicial notice thereof,
nor consequently, that the matters of Fact mentioned in the said Warrant, viz.
Receiving of goods not first entered at the Custom House, refusing the Officers
of the Customs to make search, resisting and forceing them out of his house,
etc. were matters within the Law punishable by Fine and Imprisonment. And if
they could not judicially take notice of the matters of Fact, as such, then
also it was to be presumed, they ought to discharge the Prisoner upon his
Habeas Corpus.

Fourthly, the said matters of Fact were not in themselves punishable (as they
are there expressed and set forth) by any Act or Ordinance, either of his
Highness, or of the Parliament, if the Acts and Ordinances themselves, had
been well and fully recited.

For first, Receiving of Goods, not first entered at the Customhouse is not
penal; but importing and bringing from parts beyond the Seas, any goods by way
of Merchandise, into any Port of England, etc. and the same to unlade, take or
carry away, without payment of Custom, or Compounding, or agreement for the
same, is the thing, that by those Acts and Ordinances is penal: But in this
Warrant, the cause is said to be only for Receiving of Goods not Entered, and
those not expressed, whether they were such as ought to have been entered or not.

Secondly, Refusing an Officer of the Custom-house, to make search for such
Goods, no otherwise expressed or described, then as Goods not entered in the
Custom-house, is against no Act or Ordinance, either of Parliament, or his
Highness whatsoever.

Thirdly, Resisting and forcing of Officers of the Customs out of his House
(expressed with no other circumstance then is here) as no Crime, or misdemeanor
in the Law, or by any Act or Ordinance whatsoever: For there may be an
unlawful Entry made into any House, by Officers of the Custom House, or
unlawful attempts committed by them in any house (though peaceably admitted)
and consequently there may be a lawful resisting and forcing them out of my
House, and it is not recited in this Warrant, that the Officers were in the
lawful execution of their duty, but only that they came to seach for Goods
not entered at the Custom House, without expressing whether they were such as
ought to have been entered or not.

And let not the profoundnesse of any man reply that these are idle quirks and
quillits (as some men call all things in the Law that savor of Form) for in
things of this nature a Court must have certainty before it, otherwise it ought
not to give Judgment, and if any man thinks otherwise, he is fitter to follow
his private trade, than to meddle in matters of Judicature: For though as a
private person I may in my conscience be persuaded that the goods here
mentioned were intended of goods Imported, which ought to have been Entered at
the Custom House; yet as a Judge I must not follow my private persuasion, but
what appears by certainty of proof, or matter of record.

Fifthly, whereas the Warrant was to continue the Party in Custody till he
should conform to payment of the said 500 pounds, or that Committee should
farther Order, This was a Commitment not warrantable by Law; For that there
might be cause why he should be discharged by order of law, though he never
paid the Fine at all.

Upon these and other defects in the Warrant, M. Cony was advised and
encouraged to the bringing of his Writ for the obtaining of his liberty, and
not upon any other design whatsoever, especially not with intention to set on
foot any Question touching his Highnesses authority in levying of moneys for
necessary uses and safety of the Commonwealth; which I believe every sensible
man cannot but look on, not only as a dangerous but as a very vain question
too in this Juncture of time, when (let the strict point and formality of the
Law, be what it will, yet) the necessity of keeping up the Armies both by Sea
and Land, not only for the safety of his Highnesses interest, but of the
Commonwealths also, (which is now twisted together with it) is so
indisputable, as none but the passionate or injudicious can say, he sees it not.

But (it seems) to the Gentlemen who proceeded against Mr Cony, the peace of
the Commonwealth and Honor of his Highness was not of so dear and precious
concernment as the justification of their own proceedings, how irregular soever
and deviating from the Authority given them: And therefore having first (under
the specious pretense of his Highnesses service in the discovery) begotten an
impression that Mr Conyes bringing of this writ, was the effect of design and
combination among the Merchants, and that impression (by the advantage of some
seemingly pregnant circumstances) taking abundantly, they then resolved to
drive him into so narrow a Compass, that he should have nothing to plead
against his Commitment but to question his Highnesses authority it self, by
which the opinion of the design above mentioned would be made good, and the
reputation of their proceedings escape with thanks and reward, though at the
price of endangering the whole Commonwealth in the question.

But to proceed in the Narrative; When these gentlemen understood that Mr Cony
had brought his Habeas Corpus, In the first place it was advised to the
Sergeant at Arms (because of a small error in the writ by misnosmer) viz.
that the writ was directed to Edward Birkenhead Esquire Sergeant at Arms
attending the Parliament, whereas his name is truly written Birkhead, and the
Parliament was now also dissolved) that he should forbear to make any return at
all: So we were forced to move for an Alias and after that for a Pluries, both
which writts were also guilty of the like error (for that the Sergeant did not
discover to us the reason of his not making any return, till being called in
Court to give his reason he then discovered the error) and the Court allowing
thereof (as indeed there was reason) that error abated the writts and we were
forced to begin de novo, and to move for another original Habeas Corpus,
wherein we took care to have the writ rightly directed; But neither yet could
we obtain a Return thereof, because being a first writ he was not strictly
bound to make his return; So we moved for an Alias with a Pain of forty pounds
returnable the last day of Hilla^y Term, which was the twelfth of February
last. But before the return of Alias, and after the Test of the said First
writ, the Gentlemen of the Committee, having it seems discovered the
imperfections of their former Warrants, do sign and seal a new Warrant, which
was returned with the other two warrants, as the cause of the Plaintiffs
detainder, a copy of which Warrant follows in these words.

At the Committee for preservation of the Customs.
WHereas by a certain ordinance of his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, with the consent of his Council, bearing date the nine and
twentieth day of December 1653. It is ordained that Sir William Roberts Knight,
John Stone, Gervas Bennet, John Hildesly, Richard Lucy, Edward Clud, Thomas
Wood, Anthony Rouse, James Philips, and Nathaniel Barton Esquires, be a
Committee for preservation of the Customs, and that they, or any three of them
shall have power, and thereby have power and are authorized to take cognizance
of all causes and persons which should be transmitted unto them by the
Commissioners for the Customs in the custody of their messengers (who were
thereby empowered and required to transmit accordingly) and further, to receive
all such examinations and charges as should be taken by the said Commissioners
or their Deputies, authorized under their hands and seals, and should be
transmitted by the said Commissioners to the said Committee; for, or concerning
any fraud, force, guile, or mis-behaviour by them or any of them committed
touching the Customs or relating to the affairs thereof. And the said
Committee were thereby authorized and empowered upon hearing the said charge and
examinations taken as aforesaid, or such proofs as should be made before them
to punish all such persons offending by fine not exceeding double the value of
the goods in question, or by imprisonment, and if any person or persons by them
fined should refuse payment of the said fine to the Commissioners for the
Customs, for the use of the Commonwealth, to imprison every person so
refusing, until such fine or fines be paid accordingly, as by the same
ordinance more fully appears. And whereas afterward by another Ordinance
made by the said Lord Protector, with the advice and consent of his Council,
bearing date the second day of September 1654. It is ordered that the above
named Sir William Roberts, John Stone and Gervas Bennet, and Adam Baines and
John Bocket Esquires, be a Committee for the preservation of the Customs, and
they, or any three or more of them, are thereby authorized and required to put
in execution the several powers given to the late Committee for preservation
of the Customs by his Highness and Council: and also put in execution the
same powers relating to the Customs, as the Commissioners for Appeals were
enabled to do, by an Ordinance of the 27 of March last in relation to the
Excise, any Act, Ordinance, or Order to the contrary notwithstanding, as by the
same last recited Ordinance continuing still in force more at large appears.
And whereas George Cony the elder afterward, that is to say, the fourth day of
November 1654. did import and bring from parts beyond the seas unto the Port of
London, by way of Merchandise in a certain ship or vessel, several quantities
of wrought silk, to the value of one thousand pounds, and did unlade, take, and
carry away the said goods and merchandises without payment of Custom for the
said goods and merchandises, and without composition or agreement made for the
same Custom, contrary to the form and effect of the Acts and Ordinances in
that behalf made and provided: and did assault, abuse, and affront Theophilus
Calcoke, and Richard Bartlet, then, and yet Deputies, lawfully constituted of
the said Commissioners of the customs, in the execution of their place and
office, whilst they were searching according to the power to them in that
behalf lawfully given, in the day time for the said goods and merchandises so
imported and carried away by the said George Cony, as aforesaid, to the great
prejudice of this Commonwealth, and contrary to the Acts and Ordinances
aforesaid: of which said fraud, affront, force and mis-behaviour by the said
George Cony committed as aforesaid, information was then forthwith given to
Edmond Harvey, Robert Tichborn, Mark Hildesly, and Daniel Tailor, who then, and
at the aforesaid time of making of the several Ordinances aforesaid, were, and
yet, re Commissioners for the Customs. And the said Commissioners after due
proof made before them that the said George Cony the aforesaid fourth day of
November, 1654. had imported and brought from parts beyond the seas into the
port of London by way of merchandise in a certain ship or vessel the aforesaid
quantities of wrought silk, to the value of one thousand pounds, and had
unladen, taken, and carried away the said goods and merchandises as aforesaid,
without payment of custom for the said goods and merchandises, and without
composition or agreement for the same custom, contrary to the form and effect
of the Acts and Ordinances in that behalf made and provided as aforesaid; and
assaulted, abused, and affronted the said Theophilus Calcoke and Richard
Bartlet, in the execution of their place and office, whilst they were searching
in the day time for the said goods and merchandises, imported and carried away
by the said George Cony as aforesaid, to the great prejudice of this
Commonwealth, and contrary to the Acts and Ordinances asoresaid, and after due
proof thereof made by the testimony of several witnesses upon oath made before
the same Commissioners, who then had lawful power to administer an oath in
that behalf, they the said Cmmissioners afterward, that is to say, the sixth
day of the same month of November, did transmit the said George Cony in the
custody of Thomas Landsey, then and yet Messenger to the same Commisoners,
together with such examinations relating to the aforesaid misdemeanors of the
said George Cony, as were taken by the same Commissioners as aforesaid, unto
this Committee, And thereupon afterward, that is to say the sixteenth day of
the same month of November 1654. The said George Cony appeared before this
Committee, and was fully heard touching the premises, and after due
consideration then had and taken by this Committee of the said Charge,
examinations and proofs, it sufficiently appeared to this Committee, and this
Committee did then find that the said George Cony the aforesaid fourth day of
November 1654. had imported and brought from parts beyond the seas into the
port of London by way of merchandise in a certain ship or vessel the aforesaid
quantities of wrought silk to the value of one thousand pounds, and had
unladen, taken and carried away the said goods and merchandises as aforesaid
without payment of Custom for the said goods and merchandises, and without
composition or agreement for the same Custom contrary to the form and effect
of the Acts and Ordinances in that behalf made and provided as aforesaid, and
had assaulted, abused and affronted the said Theophilus Colcoke and Richard
Bartlet Deputies of the said Commissioners of the Customs in the execution of
their place and office whilst they were searching as aforesaid in the day time
for the said goods and merchandises imported and carried away by the said
George Cony as aforesaid to the great prejudice of this Commonwealth, and
contrary to the Acts and Ordinances aforesaid, and did adiudge the said George
Cony guilty of the fraud, force and misdemeanour wherewith he stood charged as
aforesaid, and thereupon this Committee did in the presence of the said George
Cony adjudge and fine the said George Cony in the sum of five hundred pounds
of lawful money of England for the offense aforesaid; which said sum of five
hundred pounds was sithence demanded of the said George Cony, but he refused to
pay the same. This Committee therefore in pursuance of the power and authority
to them given as aforesaid do order that the said George Cony be and stand
committed to the custody of Edward Birkhead Esquire Sergeant at Arms, who is
thereby required to receive the said George Cony into his custody accordingly
there to remain until the said George Cony shall pay the said five hundred
pounds or be discharged by due course of Law. Given under our hands and seals
the eighth day of February 1654.

To Edward Birkhead Esquire Sergeant at Arms his Deputy or Deputyes. John Stone.
William Roberts Gervas Bennet. Adam Baines. John Bocket.


but reason that his Highness Council should have the view thereof before it
were filed of Record, a rule of Court was given that the Sergeant should make
such return as he would peremptorily stand to the first day of the succeeding
Term, which was accordingly done, and then moved and granted to be filed.

And the Plaintiffs Council afterward being to open the Exceptions they had
thereunto, found that the errors of the two former Warrants were amended by
the last, But withal they found some error in this Warrant it self also, upon
which such legal exception might be taken, as still without touching upon any
question of the Authority, they conceived the Plaintiff ought to have been
discharged.

Which error was, That whereas by his Highnesse's Ordinance of the 29 of
December, 1653, recited in the Return, the Committee therein named were to
take cognizance of all Causes and persons which should be transmitted unto them
by the Commissioners of the Customs in Custody of their Messenger (who were
thereby empowered to transmit accordingly) It was recited in the said last
Warrant that the Commissioners of the Customs did indeed transmit to the
Committee the Person of George Cony in Custody of Thomas Lindsey then and yet
their Messenger, together with such examinations as were taken by the same
Commissioners; but it was not recited that they transmitted any Cause at all
against the said Cony, as by the said Ordinance they should have done before
the Committee could take cognizance thereof. And upon this exception they
prayed Judgment of the Court. And a day being appointed for the Council of
his Highness to answer this Exception, and the Return being that day read, The
Court were of opinion that by reason that the said Return was not directed as
it ought to have been, nothing lay before them upon which they could proceed to
give Judgment. So for the present the Plaintiff was remanded into Custody of
the Sergeant as before, and upon the Plaintiffs motion afterward, viz: the 23
of May a Pluries Habeas Corpus was awarded him returnable Crastino Ascentionis,
which was the 25 of May.

After the test of which Writ (and before the actual delivery of the Return
into Court) the Gentlemen of the Committee taking notice (as it seems) of the
Exceptions that had now also been opened to this third Warrant, upon which in
probability he would come off, make a fourth Warrant to the Sergeant at Arms
for the continuing of M. Cony in Custody, which they make to bear the same date
with the former Warrant, viz: the Eighth of February last, which was above
three months before the Warrant it self was made: And (the former Return being
judged no return at all, because not rightly directed) the Sergeant in the
Return which he was now to make upon the Pluries certifies this fourth Warrant
with the other three, the said Warrant reciting that the Commissioners of the
Customs did transmit as well the Cause as the Person and Examinations; by this
means mending the error upon which the Exceptions to the former Warrant had
before been opened, and thereby shutting this door also against the Plaintiffs
escape: which to what end it should be done other than as much as in them lay,
to cast a necessity upon the Plaintiff (unless he could subdue himself to a
submission to their Arbitrary proceedings) to except against the Authority of
their Commission, is not easily to be imagined. And what the sad effects of so
unseasonable a Question may be (let the beam of the Balance incline which way
it will) I am almost afraid to think, if either the dutiful moderation of the
Plaintiff, or the great wisdom of his Highness by a timely interposition do
not find a way to quench those flames which their violent and irregular
proceedings have already in some measure kindled.

I will not be so uncharitable as to charge the Gentlemen with any direct
design against the Commonwealth, or the peaceable settlement of the Public
affairs, because I believe them to be (as far as wellmeaning goes) men of
better integrity; but give me leave to tell them (at how remote a distance
soever from the sphere of their greatness they may look upon me) That the
rigorous bent they have stood in ever since the beginning of this business,
not to suffer Master Cony to obtain his liberty (when both in honor and
prudence they might) by any other way but that of absolute submission to their
Arbitrary proceedings, (involving therein the Liberty of the whole
Commonwealth) although peradventure it may not be the weapon it self, yet it
has at least furnished an handful to that weapon with which unquiet and
distempered spirits do endeavor to wound the Public peace.

And let it not here be enviously laid to my charge by any, that hereby I do
in some measure presumptuously tax the wisdom of his Highness in his election
of Public Ministers; for though I look upon his Highness as a Gentleman of as
great discerning and parts as any Prince now living, yet I remember still that
he is but a man, And in so troublesome and uncertain a condition of affairs,
being to set up a building hastily, that the Commonwealth might not always
lie in the field, and having been for the most part of these times more in
action than peradventure in observation of persons, it is no wonder if he
should be mistaken in the skill of some his workmen, especially in an Age when
so many pretenders to supernatural aides and endowments (rather than true
professors of experience) do thrust in their voluntary and unskilful hands
unto the work.

But however I trust it will be one step made toward the cure of this
distemper, now we have discovered the cause and fountain of the disease. For
let the discontented of whatever Interest or Faction know, that the bringing of
this Writ of Habeas Corpus by Master Cony was not advised upon any such design
as peradventure they have imagined, whereby to strengthen their hopes of New
troubles to arise, in the waters whereof they mean to fish for themselves; but
was the naked effect of mistaken zeal to his Highnesse's service on the one
side, and of a just desire of enlargement on the other side. And therefore I
shall advise them to return into themselves with peaceable resolutions, laying
aside the vanity of their new-raised expectations, there being no great
likelihood for new work upon this occasion to be made for the Hangman.

I have but one word more, which I desire may not detain any other Reader than
the Gentlemen themselves whom this Narrative has concerned; who peradventure,
to disarm the truth, may attribute my publishing hereof to private animosity,
sprung from the sense of some unrighteous measure I have received in my own
particular Case from some of them when they were Members of the late Committee
for Inspecting of Treasuries: But in answer (if not in satisfaction) I shall
pray them to be assured that as I do own the extraction and education of a
Gentleman (how much soever their injustice has outwardly divested me) so
through the grace and mercy of GOD I am called to be a Christian. And therefore
have at once both the Courage to call it Injustice, and the Charity to forgive
it.

FINIS.

