A WEDDING Ring Fit for the FINGER: Or, the salve of DIVINITY On the sore of
HVMANITY.

Laid open in a Sermon at a Wedding in Edmonton, by William Secker Preacher of
the Gospel.

London, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the three Crowns over against the
great Conduit at the lower end of Cheap Side. 1658.

Christian Reader,
IT is not good weighing ones worth in such unequal balances, where the
feather of opinion turns the scales. One spoke can never stand still whilst
the whole wheel turns round. The gifts and graces of Christians lay in common
till envy made the first enclosure. Here thou may show thy wisdom in
spinning a fine thread out of course wool. Do not hurt him by thy malice, who
would help thee in thy marriage. Who would plant a piece or Ordnance to beat
down an aspen leaf, which having always the palsy, will fall alone? This
piece neither desires supplanters, nor deserves supporters. It comes forth as a
pressed Soldier, not as a Volunteer, what it was in preaching, it is in
publishing; There is not one cubit added to its stature, to secure it from the
Avenger of blood, it flies to thy City of refuge. Let him who sowes his pains,
reap thy prayers.

Thine in the Lord Jesus William Secker.

Genesis 2. 18. And the Lord God said, it is not good that the man should be
alone, I will make him a help meet for him.


HUmane misery is to divine mercy, as a black foil to a sparkling Diamond, or
as a sable cloud to the Sunne-beames; Psalm. 8. 4. Lord what is man, that thou
art mindful of him! man is, In his Creation, Angelical. In his Corruption,
Diabolical. In his Renovation, Theological. In his Translation, Majestical. An
Angel in Eden. A Devil in the World. A Saint in the Church. A King in Heaven.


There were four silver Channels in which the crystal streams of Gods
affection ran to man in his Creation. 1. In his Preparation. 2. In his
Assimulation. 3. In his Coronation. 4. In his Association.


1. In his preparation: Other creatures recieved the Charter of their beings by
a simple fiat, but there was a consultation at his forming; not for the
difficulty, but for the dignity of the work. The Painter is most studious about
that which he means to make his Masterpiece. The four Elements were taken out
of their Elements to make up the perfection of man's complexion; The fire was
purified, the air was clarifi'd, the water was purged, the earth was refined,
when man was molded, heaven and earth was married; a body from the one was
espoused to a soul from the other.

2. In his assimulation: Other creatures were made like themselves, but man was
made like God, as the wax has the impression of the seal set upon it. It Is
admirable to behold so fair a picture in such course canvas, and so bright a
Character in such a brown paper.

3. In his coronation: He that made man and all the rest, made man over all the
rest. Quantillum Dominum posuit, Deus in tantum dominium, he was a little Lord
of a great Lordship; This King was crowned in his cradle.

4. In his association: Society is the solace of humanity: The world would be a
desert without a consort.

Most of men's parts are made in paires; now he that was double in his
perfection, must not be single in his condition, and the Lord God said, etc.

These words are like the Irongate that opened to Peter of it is own accord,
dividing themselves into three parts.

1. An introduction: and the Lord God said. 2. An assertion, it is not good that
the man should be alone. 3. A determination, I will make an help meet for him.
In the first, there is a Majesty proposed.

In the second, there is a malady presented.

In the third, there is a remedy provided.

Once more let me put these grapes into the press.

1. The Soveraignnesse of the expression, and the Lord God said. 2. The
solitariness of the condition, it is not good, etc. 3. The sutablenesse of the
provision, I will make, etc.
In the first, there is the worth of veracity.

In the second, there is the want of society.

In the third, there is the work of divinity.

Of these in their order.

And first of the first.

For the first. The Soveraignnesse of the expression, and the Lord God said.

Luke 1. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his Prophets. In other Scriptures he
used their mouths, but in this he makes use of his own: they were the Organs,
and he the Breath; the early streams, and he the Fountain. How he spoke it is
hard to be spoken, whether eternally, or internally, or externally. Quomodo non
est quod quoeramus, sed potius quid dixerit intelligamus, Bern.
we are not to enquire to the manner of speaking, but to the matter that is
spoken, which leads me like a directing star from the Suburbs to the City,
from the Porch to the Palace, from the Founder of the Mine, to the Treasure
that is in it, it is not good, etc.

In which you have two things.
1. The subject. 2. The predicate.
The subject, man alone.

The predicate, it is not good, etc.

First, the subject, man alone, take this in two branches.

1. As it is limited to one man. 2. As it is lengthened to all men.
First, as it is limited to one man, and so it is taken particularly, man for
the first man. When all other creatures had their mates, Adam wanted his:
Though he was the Emperor of the Earth, and the Admiral of the Seas, yet in
Paradise without a companion, though he was truly happy, yet he was not fully
happy; Though he had enough for his board, yet he had not enough for his bed;
Though he had many creatures to serve him, yet he wanted a creature to solace
him; when he was compounded in Creation, he must be completed by conjunction;
when he had no sin to hurt him, then he must have a wife to help him; It is
not good that man should be alone.

Secondly, as it is lengthned to all men, and so it is taken universally, Heb.
13. 4. Marriage is honorable unto all, not only (...), but (...). It Is not
only warrantable, but honorable. The whole Trinity has conspired together to
set a Crown of glory upon the head of Matrimony.

1. God the Father: Marriage was a Tree planted within the walls of Paradise,
this flower first grew in Gods garden.

2. The Son: Marriage is a christal-glasse wherein Christ and the Saints do
see each others faces.

3. The Holy Ghost by his overshadowing of the blessed Virgin. Well might the
world when it saw her pregnancie, suspect her Virginity, but her Matrimonial
condition was a grave to that suspicion; without this, her innocence had not
prevented her infamy; she needed a shield to defend that chastity abroad, which
was kept inviolable at home.

Too many have not worth enough to preserve their virginity, have yet will
enough to cover their unchastity; turning the medicine of frailty into the
mantle of filthiness. Certainly she is mad that cuts off her leg to get her
a crutch, or that venomes her face to wear a mask.

Saint Paul makes it one of the Characters of those that should cashiere the
faith, 1* Tim. 4. 3. Not to forbear marriage, which may be lawful, but to
forbid, it which is sinful.

One of the Popes of Rome, sprinkles this unholy drop upon it, carnis
polutionem and immunditiem.

It Is strange, that that should be a pollution, which was instituted before
corruption; or that impurity, which was ordained in the state of innocence; or
that they should make that be to a sin which they make to be a Sacrament.

But a Bastard may be laid at the door of chastity; and a leaden crown set upon
a golden head.

Bellarmine that mighty Atlas of the Papal power blows his stinking breath
upon it, saying, better were it for a Priest to defile himself with many
Harlots, than to be married to one wife. These children of the purple-whore
prefer their Monasteries before our Marriages; a concubine before a
companion. They use too many for their lusts, to choose any for their love;
Their tables are so largely spread, that they cannot feed upon one dish.

As for their exalting of a Virginstate, it is like him that commended fasting
when he had filled his belly.

Who knows not that Virginity is a pearl of sparkling luster? But cannot the
one be set up, without the other be thrown down? will no oblation pacify the
former, but the demolishing of the latter? Though we find many enemies to the
choice of marriage, yet it is rare to find any enemies to the use of marriage.
They would pick the lock that want the key, and pluck the fruit that do not
plant the Tree.

The Hebrews have a saying, He is not a man that has not a woman.

Though they clime too high a bough; yet it is to be feared that such flesh is
full of imperfection that is not tending to propagation; Though man alone may
be good, yet it is not good that the man should be alone; whichleads me from
the subject to the predicate. It is not good, etc.

Non bonum is not in this place as malum, but bonum est honestum utile jucundum.

Now it is not good that man should be in a single condition, upon a threefold
consideration.

1. In respect of sin, which would not else be prevented. Marriage is like
water, to quench the sparks of lusts fire, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Nevertheless to avoid
fornication, let every one have his own wife, etc. Man needed no such physic
when he was in perfect health. Temptations may break natures best fence and lay
it is Paradise waste, but a single life is a prison of unruly desires, which is
daily attempted to be broken open.

Some indeed force themselves to a single life merely to avoid the charges of
a married state; they had rather fry in the grease of their own sensuality,
than extinguish those flames with an allowed remedy; It Is better to marry, than
to burn; to be lawfully coupled, than to be lustfully scorched. It Is best
feeding these flames with ordinare fuel.

2. It Is not good in respect of mankind, which then would not be propagated.
The Roman Historian relating the ravishing of the Sabine women, excused it
thus: Res exat unius aetatis populus virorum, without them mankind would fall
from the earth and perish. Marriages do turn mutability into the image of
eternity; it springs up new buds, when the old are withered. It Is a greater
honor for a man to be the father of one son, than to be the Master of many
servants. Without a wife, children cannot be had lawfully; without a good wife
children cannot be had comfortably. Man and woman as the stock and the scien,
being grafted in marriage, are trees bearing fruit to the world.

Saint Augustine says, this pair is, primum par and fundamentum omnium, etc.

They are the first linck of humane society to which all the rest are joined.
Mankind had long ago decayed and been like a Taper fallen into the socket, if
those breaches which are made by mortality were not repaired by Matrimony.

3. It Is not good in regard of the Church, which could not then have been
expatiated. Where there is no generation, there can be no regeneration:

Nature makes us Creatures, before Grace makes us Christians.

If the loins of men had been less fruitful, the death of Christ would have
been less successeful.

It was a witty question that one put to him that said, marriages fills the
earth, but virginity fills the heavens. How can the heavens be full, if the
earth be empty?

Had Adam lived in Innocence without Matrimony, there would have been no
servants for God in the Church Militant, nor no Saint with God in the Church
Triumphant. But I will not sink this Vessel by the over-burdening of it, nor
press this truth to death by laying too great a load upon its shoulders.

There is one knot which I must unty before I make a farther progress, 1
Corinthians 7. 1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman.

Does all the Scriptures proceed out of the same mouth, and do they not all
speak the same truth* the God of unity will not indite discord, and the God of
verity cannot assert falsehood. If good and evil be contraries, how contrary
then are these Scriptures? Either Moses mistakes God, or Paul mistakes Moses
about the point of marriage.

To which I shall give a double answer.

1. There is a public and a private good. In respect of one man it may be good
not to touch a woman, but in respect of all. So it is not good that the man
should be alone.

2. Moses speaks of the state of man created, Paul of the state of man
corrupted: now that which by institution was a mercy, may by corruption become
a misery; as pure water is tainted by running through a miry channel; or as the
Sunne-beames recieves a tincture by shining through a colored glass. There Is
no print of evil in the world, but sin was the stamp that made it. They which
seek nothing but weal in its commission, will find nothing but woe in the
conclusion. Which leads me from the solitariness of the condition, man alone,
to the sutablenesse of the provision, I will make her an help meet for him.

In which you have two parts, 1. The Agent, I will make. 2. The Object, a help.


First, The Agent, I will make.

We cannot build a house without tools, but the Trinity is at liberty. Dic
verbum tantum. To Gods omniscience there is nothing invisible, and to Gods
omnipotence there is nothing impossible.

We work by hands without, but he works without hands. He that made man meet
for help, makes a meet help for man.

Marriages are consented above, but consummated below. Prove. 18. 22. Though man
wants supply, yet man cannot supply his wants. James 1. 17. Every good and
perfect gift comes from above, etc. A wife though she be not a perfect gift,
yet she is a good gift. These beams are darted from the Sun of
righteousness.

Have thou a soft heart? it is of Gods breaking: Have thou a sweet wife? she is
of Gods making.

Let me draw up this expression with a double application.

1. When thou layest out for such a good on earth, look up to the God of
heaven. Let him make thy choice for thee who has made his choice of thee. Look
above you before you look about you. Nothing makes up the happiness of a
married condition like the holiness of a mortified disposition. Account not
those the most worthy, that are the most wealthy. Art thou matched to the Lord?
match in the Lord, How happy are such marriages where Christ is at the Wedding*
Let none but those who have found favor in Gods eyes, find favor in yours.

2. Give God the Tribute of your gratulation for your good companions. Take
heed of paying your rent to a wrong Landlord. When you taste of the stream,
reflect on the spring that feeds it. Now thou have four eyes for thy
speculation, four hands for thy operation, four feet for thy ambulation, and
four shoulders for thy sustentation. What the sin against the Holy Ghost is
in point of divinity, that is unthankfulness in point of morality; an offense
unpardonable. Pity it is but that Moon should be ever in an Eclipse that will
not acknowledge her beams to be borrowed from the Sun. He that praises not
the giver, prizes not the gift, and so I pass from the Agent to the Object, a
help.

She must be so much, and no less, and so much, and no more. Our ribs were not
ordained to be our Rulers. They are not made of the head to claim superiority,
but out of the side to be content with equality. They desert the Author of
nature, that invert the order of nature. The woman was made for the man's
comfort, but the man was not made for the woman's command. Those shoulders
aspire too high, that content not themselves with a room below their head.
It Is between a man and his wife in the house, as it is between the Sun and
the Moon in the heavens, when the greater light goes down, the lesser light
gets up; when the one ends in setting, the other begins in shining. The wife
may be a Sovereign in her husbands absence, but she must be subject in her
husbands presence. As Pharaoh said to Joseph, so should the husband say to his
wife, Genesis 41. 40. Thou shall be over my house, and according to thy word
shall all my people be ruled, only in the Throne will I be greater than thou.
The body of that Household can never make any good motion, whose bones are out
of place. The Woman must be a help to the man in these four things.

1. To his Piety. 2. To his Society. 3. To his Progeny. 4. To his Prosperity.
To his Piety by the ferventnesse of her excitation.

To his Society by the fragrantnesse of her conversation.

To his Progeny by the fruitfulness of her education.

To his Prosperity by the faithfulness of her preservation.

1. To his Piety by the ferventnesse of her excitation, 1 Pet. ^. 7.

Husband and wife should be as the two milch-kine which were coupled together
to carry the Ark of God; or as the two Cherubims that looked one upon another,
and both upon the Mercy-Seat; or as the two tables of stone, on each of which
were engraven the Laws of God. In some families married persons are like
Jeremiah's two baskets of figs, one very good, the other very evil* or like
fire and water, whilst the one is flaming in devotion, the other is freezing
in corruption. There is a twofold hindrance of holiness; first, of the right
side; secondly, on the left; on the right side when the wife would run in Gods
way, the husband will not let her go: when the fore-horse in a teame will not
draw, he wrongs all the rest; when the General of an Army forbids a Martch, all
the Soldiers stand still. Sometimes on the left; How did Solomon's Idolatrous
wifes draw away his heart from heaven? A sinning wife was Satan's first ladder,
by which he scaled the walls of Paradise and took away the Fort-Royal of Adams
heart from him. Thus she that should have been the help of his flesh, was the
hurt of his Faith: His natures under-propper, becomes his graces underminer;
and she that should be a Crown on the head, is a cross on the shoulders. The
wife is often to the husband as the ivy is to the oak, which draws away his
sap from him.

2. A help to his society by the fragrantnesse of her conversation.

Man is an affectionate creature, now the woman's behavior should be such
toward the man, as to requite his affection by increasing his delectation.
That the new-borne-love may not be blasted, as soon as it is blossomed; that it
may not be ruined before it be rooted. A Spouse should carry her self so to
her husband as not to disturb his love by her contention, nor to destroy his
love by her alienation. Husband and wife should be like two candles burning
together, which makes the house more lightsome, or like two fragrant flowers
bound up in one Nosegay that augments it is sweetness; or like two well tuned
instruments, which sounding together, makes the more melodious music. Husband
and wife, what are they but as two springs meeting, and so joining their
streams that they make but one current? It Is an unpleasing spectacle to view
any Contention in this Conjunction.

3. To his Progeny by the fruitfulness of her education, that so her children
in the flesh may be Gods children in the Spirit, 1 Samuel 1. 11. Hanna she
vows if the Lord will give her a Son by bearing him, she will return that
son to the Lord by serving him. A Spouse should be more careful of her
childrens breeding, than she should be fearful of her childrens bearing. Take
heed last these flowers grow in the Devils Garden. Though you bring them out
in corruption, yet do not bring them up to damnation. Those are not Mothers,
but Monsters, that whilst they should be teaching their children the way to
heaven with their lips, are leading them the way to hell with their lives.

Good education is the best livery you can give them living, and it is the best
Legacy you can leave them dying. You let out your cares to make them great, O
lift up your prayers to make them good; That before you dye from them, you may
see Christ live in them.

Whilst these Twigges are green and tender, they should be bowed toward God.
Children and Servants are in a Family, as Passengers are in a Boat; husband and
wife they are as a pair of Oars, to row them to their desired Haven. Let
these small pieces of Timber be hewed, and squared for the Caelestial building.
By putting a Scepter of Grace into their hands, you will set a Crown of glory
upon their heads.

4. A help to his Prosperity by her faithful preservation, being not a Wandrer
abroad, but a Worker at home.

One of the Ancients speaks excellently; She must not be a Field-Wife like
Dinah, nor a Street-Wife like Thamar, nor a Window-Wife like Jezabel.

Phideas when he drew a woman, painted her sitting under a Snaile-shell, that
she might imitate that little Creature that goes no further than it can carry
it is house upon it is head.

How many women are there that are not laboring Bees, but idle Drones; that
take up a room in the Hive, but bring no Honey to it; that are Moths to their
husbands Estates; spending, when they should be sparing? As the man's part is
to provide industrously, so the woman's is to preserve discreetly; the one must
not be carelessly wanting, the other must not be causlesly wasting: the man must
be seeking with diligence, the woman must be saving with providence. The Cock
and the Hen both scrape together in the dustheap to pick up something for their
little chickens.

To wind up this on a short bottom.

1. If the Woman be a help to the man, then let not the man cast dirt on the
Woman.

Secundus being asked his opinion of a Woman, speaks thus, Viri naufragium
domus tempestas, quietis impedimentum, etc. But surely he was a Monster, and
not a man, fitter for a Tomb to bury him, than a womb to bear him.

Some have styled them to be, Like Clouds in the Sky.
Like Motes in the Sun.
Like Snuffs in the Candle.
Like Weeds in the Garden.


It is not good to play the Butcher with that naked Sex that has no arms but
for embraces. A Preacher should not be silent for those who are silenced from
preaching; because they are the weaker Vessels, shall they be broken all to
pieces? Thou that say women are evil, it may be thy expression flows from
thy experience; but I shall never take that Mariner for my Pilot, that has no
better knowledge than the splitting of his own Ship. Will thou condemn the
frame of all for the faults of one? as if it were true Logic, because some are
evil, therefore none are good. He has ill eyes that disdaines all objects. To
blast thy helper, is to blame thy Maker. In a word, we took our rise from their
bowels, and may take our rest in their bosoms.

2. Is the woman to be a help to the man? Then let the man be a help to the
woman. What makes these Debtors be such ill Pay-Masters? but because they look
at what is owing to them, but not at what is owing by them. If thou would
have thy wifes reverence, let her have thy respect. To force a fear from this
relation, is that which neither befits the husbands authority to enjoyne, nor
the wifes duty to perform. A wife must not be sharply driven, but sweetly
drawn. Compassion may bend her, but compulsion will break her. Husband and Wife
should act toward each other with consent, not by constraint.

There are four things wherein the husband is to be a meet help to the wife.

1. In his protecting of her from injuries. It Is well observed by one, that the
rib, of which woman was made, was taken from under the man's arm: as the use of
the arm is to keep off blows from the body, so the office of the husband is
to ward off blows from the wife: The wife is the husbands Treasury, and the
husband should be the wifes Armory. In darkness he should be her Sun for
direction; in danger he should be her shield for protection.

2. In his providing for her necessities. The husband must communicate
maintenance to the wife, as the head conveyes influence to the members; Thou
must not be a Drone, and she a Drudge. A man in a married estate is like a
Chamberlain in an Inn, there is knocking for him in every room. Many persons
in this condition, waste that estate in Luxury, which should supply their wives
necessity. Nec amor viget mariti, nec fides Christiani, they have neither the
faith of a Christian, nor the love of a husband. It Is a sad spectacle to see a
Virgin sold with her own money unto slavery, when Services are better than
Marriages; the one recieves Wages, whilst the other buys their Fetters.

3. In his covering of her infirmities. Who would trample upon a Jewel because
it is fallen in the dirt? or throw away a heap of wheat, for a little chasse? or
despise a golden wedge, because it retains some dross? These Roses have their
prickles. Now husbands should spread a mantle of charity over their wives
infirmities. They be ill Birds that defile their own nests. It Is a great deal
better you should fast, than feast your selves upon their failings. Some
husbands are never well, longer than they are holding their fingers in their
wives sores. Such are like Crows, that fasten only upon carrion. Do not put
out the Candle, because of the snuff. If the gold be good, allow it grains.
Husbands and wives should provoke one another to love, and they should love one
another notwithstanding of provocation. Take heed of poisoning those Springs,
from whence the Streams of your Pleasure flows.

4. By his delighting in her Society: A wife takes Sanctuary, not only in her
husbands house, but in his heart. The Tree of love should grow up in the
Family, as the Tree of life grew up in the Garden. They that choose their love,
should love their choice. They that marry where they affect not, will affect
where they marry not. Two joined together without love, are but two tied
together, to make one another miserable. And so I pass to the last stage of
the text, a help meet.

A help, there is her fullness; a meet help, there is her fitness.

The Angels were too much above him, the creatures were too much below him; he
could not step up to the former, nor could he stoop down to the latter: The
one was out of his reach, the other was out of his race: but the woman is a
parallel line drawn equal with him: meet she must be in three things.

1. In the Harmony of her disposition. Husband and wife should be like the
image in a looking-glass that answers in all properties to the face that
stands before it; or like an Echo that returns the voice it recieveth. Many
marriages are like putting new wine into old bottles. An old man is not a meet
help for a young woman. He that sets a gray head upon green shoulders, has
one foot in the Grave, and another in the Cradle. Yet how many times do you see
the spring of youth, wedded to the winter of old age? A young person, is not a
meet help for an old woman; raw flesh is but an ill plaster for rotten bones.
He that in his nonage, marries another in her dote-age, his lust has one wife
in possession, but his love another in reversion.

2. In the Herauldry of her condition. Some of our Europian Nations, are so
strict in their junctions, that it is against their Laws, for the Commonalty to
couple with the Gentry.

It was well said by one: If the wife be too much above her husband, she either
ruins him by her vast expenses, or reviles him with her base reproaches: If
she be too much below her husband, either her former condition makes her too
generous, or her present mutation, makes her too imperious.

Marriages are styled matches, yet amongst those many that are married, how few
are there that are matched? Husbands and wives are like locks and keys, that
rather break than open, except the wards be answerable.

3. In the holiness of her Religion. If adultery may separate a marriage
contracted, Idolatry may hinder a marriage not perfected. Cattle of diverse
kinds were not to engender, 2 Corinthians 6. 14. Be not unequally yoked, etc.
It Is dangerous taking her for a wife, who will not take God for a husband. It
is not meet that one flesh should be of two spirits. Is there never a Tree thou
likest in the Garden, but that which bears forbidden fruit? there are but two
channels in which the remaining streams shall run. 1. To those men that want
wives, how to choose them. 2. To those women that have husbands, how to use
them.


1. To those men that want wives, how to choose them.

Marriage is the tying of such a knot, that nothing but death can unloose.
Common reason suggests so much, that we should be long a doing that which can
but once be done. Where one design has been gravelled in the Sands of Delay,
thousands have been split upon the Rock of Precipitance. Rash adventures,
yields little gain. Opportunities are not like tides, that when one is past,
another returns; but yet take heed of flying without your wings; you may breed
such Agues in your bones, that may shake you to your graves.

1. Let me preserve you from a bad choice. 2. Present you with a good one.
First, to preserve you from a bad choice. Take that in three things.

1. Choose not for Beauty. 2. Choose not for Dowry. 3. Choose not for Dignity.
He that looks for beauty, buy a picture.

He that loves for Dowry, makes a purchase.

He that leapes for Dignity, matches with a Multitude at once.

The first of these is too blind to be directed.

The second, too base to be accepted.

The third, too bold to be respected.

1. Choose not by your eyes. 2. Choose not by your hands. 3. Choose not by your
ears.
First, choose not by your eyes, looking at the beauty of the person. Not but
that this is lovely in a woman, but that this is not all for which a woman
should be beloved. He that had the choice of many faces, stampes this Character
upon them all; favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain. The Sun is more
bright in a clear Sky, than when the Horizon is clouded. But if a woman's flesh
has more of beauty, than her spirit has of Christianity; it is like poison in
sweet-meates, most dangerous. Genesis 6. 2. The sons of God saw the daughters
of men that they were fair, etc. One would have thought, that they should
rather have looked for grace in the heart, than for the beauty in the face.
Take heed of Inning at the fairest signs. The Swan has black flesh under her
white feathers.

Secondly, Choose not by your hands, for the bounty of the portion.

When Cato's daughter was asked, why she did not marry, she thus replied; she
could not find the man that loved her person above her portion. Men love
curious pictures, but they would have them set in golden frames. Some are so
degenerate, as to think any to be good enough, who have but goods enough. Take
heed, for sometimes the bag and baggage go together. The person should be a
figure, and the portion a Cipher, which added to her, advances the sum, but
alone signifies nothing. When Themistocles was to marry his daughter, two
Suitors courted her together, the one rich and a fool, the other wise, but
poor; and being demanded which of the two he had rather his daughter should
have, answered, mallem virum sine pecunia, etc. I had rather she should have a
man without money, than money without a man.

Thirdly, choose not by your ears, for the dignity of her parentage. A good
old stock may nourish a fruitless branch. There are many children who are not
the blessings, but the blemishes of their parents. They are nobly descended,
but ignobly minded. Such was Aurelius Antonius, of whom it was said, that he
injured his Country in nothing, but in being the father of such a child. There
are many low in their descents, that are high in their, deserts. Such was the
Cobblers son, who grew to be a famous Captain; when a great person upbraided
the meannesse of his original, my nobility (says he) begins with me, but thy
nobility ends with thee. Piety is a greater honor than parentage. She is the
best Gentlewoman that is heir of her own deserts, and not the degenerated
offspring of another virtue.

Secondly, to present you with a good choice; in three things.

1. Choose such a one as will be subject to your dominion. Take heed of yoking
your selves with untamed Heifers.

2. Choose such a one as may sympathize with you in your affliction. Marriage
is just like a Sea-Voyage, he that enters into this Ship, must look to meet
with storms and tempests. 1 Corinthians 7. 28. They that marry shall have
trouble in the flesh. Flesh and trouble are married together, whether we marry
or no, now a bitter cup is too much to be drunk by one mouth. A heavy burden is
easily carried by the assistance of others shoulders. Husband and wife should
neither be proud flesh, nor dead flesh. You are Fellow Members, therefore
should have a fellow-feeling. While one stands safe on the shore, the other
should pity him that is tossed on the Sea. Sympathy in suffering, is like a dry
House in a wet day.

3. Choose such a one as may be serviceable to your salvation. A man may think
he has a Saint, when he has a Devil, but take heed of a Harlot that is false
to thy bed, and of a hypocrite that is false to thy God.

Secondly: To those women that have Husbands, how to use them. In two things.

1. Carry your selves too wards them with obedience. Let their power command
you, that their praise may commend you. Though you may have your husbands
hearts, yet you must not have their heads. As you will his love, so you should
love his will. Till the husband leave commanding, the wife must never leave
obeying. As his injunctions must be lawful, to her subjection must be loyal.

2. With faithfulness. In Creation God made not one woman for many men, nor
many women for one man: Every wife should be to her husband, as Evah was to
Adam, a whole world of women; and every husband should be to his wife, as Adam
was to Evah, a whole world of men. When a river is divided into many channels,
the main current starves.

To conclude: Good Servants are a great blessings: good Children a greater
blessing: but a good wife is the greatest blessing: and such a help let him
seek for her that wants one, let him sigh for her that has lost one, let him
take pleasure in her that enjoyes one.

And the Lord God said, it is not good, etc.

