THE Christian Man: OR, THE REPARATION OF NATURE BY GRACE. Written in French BY
JOHN FRANCIS SENAVLT; And now Englished.

LONDON, Printed for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. C. and are to be sold at their
Shop at the Middle-Temple-gate in FLEETSTREET, 1650.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
IT cannot be amiss, for preventing of misapprehension or scandal, by way of
Advertisement, to premonish the READER, that the Author (which is very obvious
to be perceived) is a Roman Catholic, whose opinions, in whatever repugnant
to the established Doctrine of the Church of England, the Translators intent is
no way either to defend or promote. That some such passages there may be (and
indeed are, especially in the Sixth Treatise, where he expresses himself too
grossly concerning the Christians Nourishment in the Sacrifice of the Altar, as
they usually phrase it; as elsewhere glancing at Purgatory, and other the
espoused Tenants of the Church of Rome, enforced by the necessity of the
Discourse) is no wonder to any man of Ingenuity; the wonder is, that there are
no more: All which, rather then to cause a Chasme in the Work, and so be guilty
of an incivility to the Author, are left to the Readers censure; and, which may
give no small satisfaction, the entire Piece delivered by way of Discourse, far
from any magisterial dogmatizing; so that with some, his modesty may soonest
prove prejudicial, which siding with no Party, does therefore engage him upon
the defensive against all those, who pressing their opinions with too much
heat, think all expressions crude, that are not peremptory. Besides, the whole
intendment of the Author being to the praise and glory of the Grace of God,
(which, how remarkable in a Romanist, and advantageous to Christianity, none
but a Pelagian will deny) will, I hope, make the whole Work at least a passable
Error. If therefore thy affection to the Subject shall invite thee to buy, and
thy charity to the Publisher, who professes himself no Master of Language,
bear thee company when thou read in pardoning his Mistakes, and giving a
candid interpretation to his Intentions; Thou will find, as thy honor to be a
Man, so thy perfection and happiness to be a Christian man. In the mean time,
referring thee to the Authors own Preface to usher thee in to the following
Treatises, the only design of this Preloquium is, not at all to commend the
Original; but to prevent, if possible, any prejudging the Translation as
scandalous to the Truths we profess, by advancing contrary Doctrines under the
disguise of well-worded Theology; which, if so, in the Authors native Style,
will even upon that score persuade none but those who account all expressions
true because handsome: whereas this being a Translation, wants that vanity of
allurement, having indeed the same face, but the eyes put out. Read therefore,
and let thy Charity give it light; or read not, and thou art charitable still
by leaving it in the dark; Every way it is at thy disposal: Unhappy He that is
seduced by what himself is allowed to guide. Farewell.

The PREFACE.
SInce it is the duty of Physicians to cure those diseases they have found out;
me thinks, it concerns me, having discovered the miseries of Man a Criminal, to
let you see the advantages of Man justified, and to search in the purity of
Grace the cure of Nature, corrupted by sin. To acquit my self of this
obligation is my business in this Work; where by an innocent Murder, I slay
Man the Sinner, to give birth to Man the Christian.

This seems to have been the principal design of the Son of God, and that next
to the Glory of his Father, he had no other motive for his Incarnation. Nature,
though never so powerful and wise, forms only our body, and having prepared
the organs for the operations of the soul, leaves Morality the care of
completing what she has merely decyphered: This goes a step higher; and
finding Liberty and Reason in Man, endeavors to husband them by her advice and
precepts: But if she be not assisted by Faith, she fills her disciples with much
vanity, and in stead of making them Men, many times renders them Devils.

Religion undertakes what Nature and Morality, corrupted, knew not how to
accomplish; she tryes to form the Christian Man by the Grace of Jesus Christ,
and in her School to teach him those verities he has not been able to learn in
those of Philosophers. To change his Inclinations, she changes his Belief, and
giving him another Principle then what he received at his Birth, makes him a
new Creature. In this Work I describe the miracles of Religion, I report the
means she uses to execute so high an Enterprise; and as in guilty Man I took
notice of the devastations of Sin, in the Christian Man I observe the happy
effects of Grace. I consider him in all his Conditions, and taking him at his
Birth, I lead him to his Happiness: I look upon all his advantages, and lest
Pride should ruin him, I present him with all his infirmities, that perceiving
what he has drawn from Adam, and what he has received from Jesus Christ, he
may shake hands with the first, and close with the second.

Not to wander in so difficult a path, I have taken the Fathers of the Church
for my Guides, I tread in the steps of those Great Men she reverenceth as her
Masters; and knowing very well that a man cannot easily fail with those that
destroyed Heresies, I stick to their opinions, that so I may not fall into
Error. But because S. Augustine seems one of the most famous, and most sound,
he is one of those I most diligently consult: From the beams of this Sun I
borrow my Light; I am instructed in the School of this Great Doctor, and after
the example of the Church, I have drawn out of his Books the most part of those
Truths I deliver in This. And as I do not less admire his profound Humility
then his deep knowledge, I labor to profit by both, and defending his opinions
without any eager heat, I not only reverence all those the Church does not
condemn, but I am ready to renounce all my own whenever she shall disprove
them.

Having given the world this account of my opinions, I conceive my self obliged
to make information of my proceeding and order in this Work: I promote very few
Conceits which are not supported by the Authority of the Fathers; and if
sometimes I fail to relate their words faithfully, I believe I never swerve from
their meaning. I have enriched my Margent with many passages which are not
inserted into the Discourse; but I hope I have no ways disobliged the Reader
in making him partaker of those Treasures I have discovered in Antiquity, nor
that he will be offended, if, like a Prodigal, I keep no measure in my
Largesses. For what concerns the order, I suppose I have very carefully
observed it, avoiding that confusion which is often incident to Works of this
length; and to impart some general Notion of what I intend to those that shall
take so much pains as to peruse it, I will lay down a plain and easy Scheme,
which shall present you with a short prospect of the whole Christian Man.

I begin the first Treatise with his Birth: which, as it is the fruitful source
of all the Allyances he contracts with God, I cannot speak of it soundly and to
the purpose, without discovering some of his Qualities, and letting you see
that as soon as he is regenerated, he is the adopted child of the eternal
Father, because he is the Temple of the holy Ghost, and the Brother of the Word
Incarnate; To this I add some other Privileges concomitants of his Baptism,
all which declare the misery he has avoided, and the happiness he has
obtained.

From thence I pass to the second Treatise, which represents the Spirit of the
Christian, and which comprehends all the obligations we have to follow his
motions, to act according to his orders, and to obey his inspirations, because
none are truly the children of God but those that are quickened by his Spirit.
Quicunque enim Spiritu Dei aguntur, ii sunt Filii Dei. Romans 8.

And because the Christian is but a part of a mystical Body whereof there is a
Head to guide it, as well as a Spirit to enliven it; in the third Treatise I
describe the near relations and close connexions this glorious quality
communicates to him with Jesus Christ, the advantages he receives from thence,
and the just duties he is obliged to return to this adored Head.

The fourth Treatise discovers all the secrets of Grace, which seem to be
nothing else but a sacred chain uniting the Christian with the son of God and
with the Holy Ghost, and putting him at their disposal to be conducted safely
in the way of Salvation.

The virtues that flow from Grace, as streams do from their fountain, are the
subject of the fifth Treatise, demonstrating a new Morality which the
Philosophers were ignorant of, and which severing man from himself, fastens him
happily to his Principle.

Forasmuch as he lives by Grace and virtues, in the sixth Treatise, I set
before him a heavenly Nourishment that preserves his life, and withal affords
him some pledges of Immortality. But because this food is also a Victime,
speaking of his Nourishment, I speak of his Sacrifice, and I lay down the just
Reasons the Christian has to offer up himself to God with Jesus Christ.

In the seventh Treatise I discourse of his glorious Qualities which I had not
touched in the former; wherein I make it appear, that being the Image of the
Son of God, he is also a Priest and a Sacrifice, a Soldier and a Conqueror, a
Slave and a Sovereign, a Penitent and an Innocent.

Lastly, to complete the Christian, who is but rudely drawn in Baptism, and
who, as long as he is upon earth, is always imperfect, I lead him to Glory;
where finding his Happiness in the knowledge and love of the supreme Good, he
is happily transformed into God; There he patiently waits for the resurrection
of his Body, that the two parts whereof he is composed being reunited, there
may be nothing wanting to the perfection of his happiness, and that both Soul
and Body being freed from the bondage of sin, he may reign for ever with the
Angels in Heaven.

Thus you see in a few words the drift and scope of the whole Work: where, if I
have repeated something that I formerly delivered in the Guilty Man, it is
because the Cure depends upon the Disease, Subjects are illustrated by their
contraries, and it is impossible to conceive the Advantages of Grace, without
comprehending all the Miseries of Sin.

A TABLE OF THE TREATISES and DISCOURSES.
The First TREATISE. Of the Christian's Birth.
Disc. 1. That the Christian has a double Birth page 1 Disc. 2. That Man must
be renewed to make a Christian of him. page 6 Disc. 3. That the principal
Mysteries of Jesus Christ are applied to the Christian in his Birth. page 10
Disc. 4. That Grace is communicated to the Christian in his Birth, as Sin is
communicated to Man in his Generation. page 15 Disc. 5 Of the Resemblances that
are found between the Generation of Jesus Christ, and that of a Christian. page
19 Disc. 6 Of the Adoption of Christians, and the advantage it has above the
Adoption of Men. page 24 Disc. 7 Of the Allyances the Christian contracts in
his Birth with the Divine Persons page 29 Disc. 8 Of the Principal Effects
Baptism produces in the Christian. page 34 Disc. 9 Of the obligation of a
Christian as the consequence of his Birth. page 39 Disc. 10 That the
Regeneration of a Christian takes not from him all that he drew from his first
Generation. page 43
The Second TREATISE. Of the Spirit of a Christian.
Disc. 1. That every Body has its Head, and what that of the Church is. 48
Disc. 2 That the Holy Ghost is the Heart of the Church. 53 Disc. 3 That the
Holy Ghost is in a sort the same to Christians that he is to the Father, and to
the Son in Eternity. 57 Disc. 4 That the Holy Ghost seems to be the same to
Christians that he is to the Son of God. 62 Disc. 5 That the Presence of the
Holy Ghost gives life to the Christian, and his Absence causes Death. 67
Disc. 6 That the Holy Ghost teaches Christians to pray. 72 Disc. 7 That the
Holy Ghost remits the sins of the Christian. 77 Disc. 8 That the Christian in
his infirmities is assisted by the strength of the Holy Ghost. 83 Disc. 9 That
the Holy Ghost is the Christians Comforter. 89 Disc. 10 Of the Christians
ingratitude toward the Holy Ghost. 94
The third TREATISE. Of the Christian's Head.
Disc. 1 That the Christian has two Heads, Adam and Jesus Christ. 100 Disc. 2
Of the Excellencies of the Christian's Head, and the advantages they draw from
thence. 105 Disc. 3 Of the strict Union of the Head with his Members, and of
that of Jesus Christ with Christians. 110 Disc. 4 That the Union of Christians
with their Head is an Imitation of the Hypostatical Union. 115 Disc. 5 That
Jesus Christ treats his Mystical Body with as much charity as he does his
Natural Body. 120 Disc. 6 That the Church is the Spouse of Jesus Christ,
because she is the Body; and of the community of their Marriage. 125 Disc. 7
That the Quality of the Members of Jesus Christ is more advantageous then that
of the Bretbren of Jesus Christ. 130 Disc. 8 That Jesus Christ has taken all
his Infirmities from his Members, and that his Members derive all their
strength from him. 134 Disc. 9 Of the duties of Christians, as Members, toward
Jesus Christ as their Head. 139 Disc. 10 That all things are common among
Christians as between members of the same Body. 144
The fourth TREATISE. Of the Grace of a Christian.
Disc. 1 That Predestination, which is the source of Grace, is a hidden
Mystery. 150 Disc. 2 Of the necessity of Grace in the state of Innocence, and
of Sin. 156 Disc. 3 That the Grace of a Christian ought to be more powerful
then that of Adam. 160 Disc. 4 Different opinions of the power of Christian
Grace. 166 Disc. 5 Wherein precisely consists the power of Grace effectual. 170
Disc. 6 That the names that S. Augustine gives Christian Grace do sufficiently
testify that it is effectual. 175 Disc. 7 That we may judge of the power of
Grace over a Christian, by the power of Concupiscence over a Sinner. 180 Disc.
8 That Grace effectual does not destroy Grace sufficient. 186 Disc. 9 Answers
to some Objections against Grace effectual. 193 A Prosecution of the same
Discourse. 197 Disc. 10 That the Christian finds more rest in placing his
salvation in Grace then in Liberty. 202
The fifth TREATISE. Of the Virtues of a Christian.
Disc. 1. Wherein consists Christian Virtue. 207 Disc. 2 Of the Division of
Christian Virtues. 212 Disc. 3 Of the Excellency and Necessity of Christian
Faith. 217 Disc. 4 Of Christian Hope. 222 Disc. 5 A Description of Christian
Charity. 227 Disc. 6 Of the Properties and Effects of Christian Charity. 233
Disc. 7 Of Christian Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance. 238 Disc. 8
Of Christian Humility. 243 Disc. 9 Of Christian Repentance. 248 Disc. 10. Of
Christian Self-denial. 253
The sixth TREATISE. Of the Nourishment and Sacrifice of a Christian.
Disc. 1 Of three Nourishments answering to the three Lives of a Christian. 259
Disc. 2 Of the Nourishment of Man in his Innocence, and of that of a Christian.
264 Disc. 3 That the Body of Jesus Christ is the same to a Christian that Manna
was to the Jews. 269 Disc. 4 That this Nourishment bestows upon the Christian
all that the Devil promised Man in his Innocence, if he would eat of the
forbidden Fruit. 274 Disc. 5 That this Nourishment unites the Christian with
the Son of God. 279 Disc. 6 Of the Dispositions that the Christian ought to
bring for the receiving of this Nourishment. 283 Disc. 7 That the Christian ows
God the honor of the Sacrifice. 288 Disc. 8 That the Christian had need that
the Son of God should offer up for him the Sacrifice of the Cross, and of the
Altar. 293 Disc. 9 Of the Difference of these two Sacrifices, and what the
Christian receives from both of them. 298 Disc. 10 Of the obligation the
Christian has to sacrifice himself to God. 303
The seventh TREATISE. Of the Qualities of a Christian.
Disc. 1 That the Christian is the Image of Jesus Christ. 308 Disc. 2 That the
Christian is a Priest and a Victime. 313 Disc. 3 That the Christian is a
Soldier and a Conqueror. 317 Disc. 4 That the Christian is a King and a Slave.
322 Disc. 5 That the Christian is a Saint 327 Disc. 6 That the Christian is a
Martyr. 332 Disc. 7 That the Christian is a Lover. 338 Disc. 8 That the
Christian is an Excile and a Pilgrim. 343 Disc. 9 That the Christian is a
Penitent. 347 Disc. 10 That the most glorious Quality of the Christian is that
of a Christian. 352
The eighth TREATISE. Of the Blessedness of a Christian.
Disc. 1. That every man desires to be happy, and that he cannot be so but in
God. 357 Disc. 2 That the Perfect Felicity of a Christian cannot be found in
this world. 361 Disc. 3 That the Christian tastes some Felicity here below. 365
Disc. 4 That Happiness consists not in pleasure, but in grief. 368 Disc. 5 That
Happiness is rather found in Poverty then in Riches 372 Disc. 6 That the
Felicity of a Christian upon earth consists rather in Humility then in Glory.
377 Disc. 7 That Felicity is rather found in Obedience then in Command. 381
Disc. 8 What is the happiness of a Christian in Heaven, and wherein it
consists. 385 Disc. 9 That the Soul and Body of the Christian shall find their
perfection in the Beatifical Vision. 391 Disc. 10 Of the Miracles that are
found in the Christian's Beatitude. 396
THE CHRISTIAN MAN: OR, The Reparation of NATURE BY GRACE.
The first TREATISE. Of the Christian's Birth.
The first DISCOURSE. That the Christian has a double Birth.
IF MAN have passed for a Monster in the opinion of some Philosophers, Est
inter Carnem and Spiritum colluctatio and discordantibus adversus se invicem
quotidiana congressio, ut non ea quae volumus ipsi faciamus: dum spiritus
coelestia and divina quaerit, caro terrena and secularia concupiscit, Aug. lib.
1. contra Julian.
because he is composed of two parts which cannot agree; certainly the
Christian may very well pass for a Prodigy in the judgment of the faithful,
since the parts whereof he is made maintain a war as long as life. For though
the body of man contain within its Constitution all the Elements, these four
Enemies agree when they are mixed together: The Fire is confounded with the
Water without losing its dryness, and the Earth is united to the Air without
losing its heaviness; if they are at odds by reason of their Contrariety, they
embrace by reason of their sympathy; and if sometimes they grow irregular,
there is always some external Cause that produces the Disorder. The Soul and
Body are yet more opposite then the Elements; it it is the strangest Marriage
within the Confines of Nature; Mirus amor corporis and animi in tanta
disparitate non potest esse sine fato. Pla.
and when God associated them together to make Man, he had a mind to show that
he was absolute in the Universe. In him we observe Sense with Understanding,
Passion with Reason, Heaven with Earth; Nevertheless, God has so well tempered
their qualities, that these two so different parts cease not mutually to love
one another. The Soul stoops below the privilege of her Birth, to succor the
Infirmities of the Body; and the Body soars above the meaness of its
Extraction, to be serviceable to the more noble operations of the Soul: If they
are exercised at the provocation of some rebel-lust, there is always found some
common friend that takes up the difference: Self-love is content to set them at
one, thereby to establish his Empire over sinners, Haec cupiditas vana ac per
hoc prava, vincit in eis ac frenat alias cupiditates, Aug. lib. 4. contra
Julia. c. 3.
and accompanies his Commands with so many charms, that these two subjects
wrong one another to obey him; The spirit basely submits to the Body in the
unclean conversations of the wanton, and the body does homage to the soul in
the pleasing caresses of the Ambitious; these two parties join their forces to
bid Grace battle; and though Divine Justice has divided them for their
punishment, they forget their quarrel, and are reconciled to execute their
vengeance.

But the Christian is of such a Composure that he can never taste any peace in
his person; Division seems to constitute one part of his Essence, and till
Glory shall put a period to his Controversies, he is continually infested with
a Domestic and intestine war. Though Repentance subdue the Body by its
Austerities, and Prayer elevate the Soul by its Raptures, both Soul and Body
continually rebel against the Spirit of God: Indicitur enim bellum non solum
adversus suggestiones Diaboli, sed etiam adversus teipsum; sed ex qua part
tibi displices jungeris Deo, and idoneus eris ad vincendum te, quia tecum est
qui omnia superat; quare autem permittitur ut diu contra te litiges donec
absorbeantur omnes cupiditates? ut intelligas in te poenam tuam. In te ex
teipso est flagellum tuum; est rixa tua tecum; sic vindicatur in rebellem
contra Deum ut ipse sit sibi bellum qui pacem noluit habere cum Deo. Aug. in
Psalm. 75.
The greatest Saints complain of these disorders, and wish an End of their
life, to find an End of their Conflicts. The internal peace that always
accompanies a good Conscience is not able to reconcile these two Enemies, and
experience teaches us that peace and war will sooner shake hands in a Kingdom,
then Concupiscence and Charity in a CHRISTIAN.

But certainly I never wonder at his Discord, since he has two Fathers, two
Births, and two Principles. He has two Fathers because he came from Adam and
from Jesus Christ; and deriving from one the Life of Sin, he derives from the
other the Life of Grace. Thus by a strange wonder he is at the same time
Innocent and Guilty; he hopes for heaven as his Inheritance, and is afraid of
hell as the place of his torment; and pursuing the several Interests he has
received from these two Parents, he is tossed continually between hope and
fear. He is Primas homo Adam sic olim defunctus est, ut tamen post illum
secundus sit homo Christus, cum tot hominum millia inter illum and hunc orta
sint; and ideo manifestum pertinere ad illum omnem qui ex illa successione
propagatur and nascitur: sicut ad istum pertinet omnis qui gratiae largitate in
illo renascitur, unde fit ut totum genus humanum quodammodo sint homines duo,
primus and secundus. Ex sent. Prosp. 299.
Adam and Jesus both together, in his person he unites their names as well as
their qualities, he resents their diverse inclinations, and holding something
of these two Fathers, he bears the Crime of the one, and the Innocence of
the other. They reign successively in his person, and the chief Employment of
his life is to make the first dye and the second live. This Parricide is
innocent, all Christians are obliged to commit it; neither does Jesus Christ
acknowledge them for his children, who endeavor not to strangle this Father,
who made them liable to Death before he entitled them to Life. They cannot
dispense with themselves from this murder, and whosoever spares Adam in his
person, gives evidence he has no mind that Jesus Christ should reign there.
Adam himself allows of this cruelty, in heaven where he now triumphs amongst
the Angels, he desires to dye in his Children, that he may see him live there
who has repaired his breach; and if there were any thing that could trouble
his happiness, it would be this, that he sees his sin still to reign in his
posterity, that he stifles Christ in their souls, and makes him suffer death
upon Earth, by whose benefit he enjoys life in Heaven. He complains that he
cannot utterly perish in his offspring, that he reigns there to this day
against his will, and that for punishment of a sin whereof he made them stand
convicted before they were born, they continue to make him guilty after that he
is dead. But nothing afflicts him so much as to behold sin in some sort more
powerful then Grace, that the One overspreads all mankind, the Other only
the Contra carnis concupiscentiam ita confligunt Sancti non ei consentientes ad
malum, ut tamen ejus motibus quibus repugnantibus resistunt non careant in hac
vita. Aug. l. 1. Retra. cap. 13.
Faithful, that sin oftentimes destroys all Grace, but Grace can never wholly
destroy all sin. Lastly, that Adam utterly exterminates Jesus Christ, and Jesus
Christ can never perfectly slay Adam.

These two Fathers are conveyed to their posterity by two different
Productions; the first is shameful and guilty, the second is glorious and
innocent: The first is inseparable from sin; For though it be noble according
to the Laws of the world, it is always ignominious according to the Laws of
God, and though it appear innocent to the eyes of men, it is always Criminal
in the sight of Angels: The Saints acknowledge it with grief, and though the
Issue of lawful Beds, they cease not to confess that they were Nunquid David
de adulterio natus erat? de Jesse viro justo and Conjuge ipsius? quid est quod
se dicit in iniquitate conceptum, nisi quia trahitur iniquitas ex Adam? Aug. in
Ps. 50.
born in sin. The second is ever joined with Grace, it gives us God for our
Father, the Church for our Mother, and Heaven for our Inheritance. We cannot
better express their differences, then in the words of St. Augustine Duae sunt
nativitates, una de terra, alia de Coelo; una de Carne, alia de Spiritu; una de
mortalitate, alia de aeternitate; una de Masculo and Foemina, alia de Deo and
Ecclesia. Aug. Tract. 11. in Joan.

Sicut eos vita spiritus regenerat sideles in Christo, sic eos Corpus mortis in
Adam generat Peccatores: Illa enim carnalis generatio est, haec spiritualis;
illa facit filios carnis, haec spiritus; illa filios mortis, haec
Resurrectionis; illa filios saeculi, haec filios Dei; illa filios irae, haec
filios misericordiae; ac per hoc illa peccato originali obligatos, illa omnis
vinculo peccati liberatos. August. lib. 1. de Pecca. men.


, who tells us, The one comes from the Earth and returns thither again, the
other comes from Heaven and ascends thither again; the one draws it is Original
from the Flesh, the other from the Spirit; the one tends to Death, the other to
Eternity; the one proceeds from Man and Woman, the other from God and the
Church. Or to deliver the same Truth in other terms, we may add with the same
Saint, That the Life of the Spirit regenerates the Faithful in Jesus Christ,
and the Death of the Body begets sinners in Adam: That of these two Births, the
One is Carnal, the Other Spiritual; The One produces Angels, the Other
engenders Men; The One designs them to Death, the Other prepares them for the
Resurrection; The One renders them the children of the Devil, the Other makes
them the children of God; The One exposes them to his Wrath, the Other to his
Mercy; Finally, the One engages them in Original sin, the Other by a more
happy and powerful influence frees them from all Iniquity.

These two Births produce two Lives which are preserved in every Christian till
he dies; their strength is more or less according to the Progress Sient
ignorantia minuitur veritate magis magisque lucente, ita and concupiscentia
minuitur charitate magis magisque fervente, Aug l. 6. contra Julia.

Per cupiditatem regnat in homine Diabolus and cor ejus tenet; per charitatem
regnat in illo Christus, Aug. lib. de Agone Christ. cap. 1.

Quanto magis regnum cupiditatis destruitur, tanto magis regnum charitatis
augetur. August. lib. 3. de Doctrina Christ. c. 10.


Grace or Sin makes in the Soul; They act by contrary principles, and divide
the Christian in his operations as well as in his person. For as he is
mystically compounded of Jesus Christ and Adam, so is he spiritually framed of
Concupisence and Charity: whatever he undertakes is under the conduct of one of
these Mistresses, who have no other design but to have an absolute Command over
his will: He is a slave to both; he complains that being wholly delivered up to
Grace, he is not wholly delivered from Sin; that he suffers the Evil he has no
mind to act; that he feels disorders he no ways approves of, and that
unhappily divided between his desires, he cannot so fully obey Charity, but he
must still serve Concupiscence.

Indeed every Christian is obliged to combat himself, he feels something within
him that cannot but displease him; he wonders to behold such different motions
in the same person, and not being able to comprehend how such contrary desires
grow in the same heart, he is amazed to find inclinations which transport him
to sin as much as to virtue. When he reflects upon himself, he observes that he
is just and guilty; that he partly obeys Jesus Christ and partly resists him;
that being a subject and a rebel at the same time, he bears about him the
seeds of Life and of Death. For he is righteous, as Eris in part emendata
justus, quamvis sis adhuc in emendanda pecoator: ex qua part tibi displices
justus es, ex qua part tibi displicet quod justum est in ustus es. August. in
Psalm. 1.

Praeponite delectationem mentis delectationi carnis; carnem quippe nostram
delectant delectationes illicitae: mentem nostram delectat invisibilis, casta,
sancta, dulcis justitia, ut non ad eam timore cogamini; si enim ad eam timore
cogimini nondu^ delectat; peccare non debes timore paenae sed amore justitiae,
Aug. sermon. 17. de verb. Apost.


St. Augustine says, with that part that is sanctified by Grace, but guilty
with that which is corrupted by Sin; He pleases God because he endeavors to
keep his Commandments; He displeases him, because he cherishes something in
his Soul that opposes his will.

These two Mistresses that govern the Christian have some correspondency in
their oppositions; both of them make use of the same subjects, nor undertake
any thing of importance but by the assistance of the Passions and faculties of
the Soul: But Concupiscence finds more submission then Charity, because she
asks nothing but what suits with their humor, and flatters their hope:
Nevertheless, Charity gains Obedience, because she acts in the power of the
Almighty, and is assisted by Grace to reduce all these rebels to their duty.
Her Empire though strong is nevertheless pleasing, and herein she imitates
Concupiscence her opposite: For this agreeable Enemy of a Christian reigns with
so much sweetness, that she is loved of those that persecute her; all her
persuasions are so many charms; and knowing very well that she commands over
free Creatures, she never propounds any thing that is not acceptable and
delightful. Charity takes the same course; all her inspirations are pleasant:
if she press us, it is with Charms; if she be victorious, it is without doing us
any violence; if she gain our Consent, it is without compelling our liberty; and
if she encourage us against our selves, it is not till she has persuaded us
that we are faulty.

Finally, these two Sovereigns wholly possess the Christian by their diverse
motions, and according as he is acted by them, he is Innocent or Guilty. When
he follows the provocations of Concupiscence he can do nothing but offend;
Libido non solum sibi totu^ corpus, nec solum extrinsecus vendicat, sed totum
hominem commovet, animi simul affectu cu^ carnis appetitu conjuncto atque
permixto. Aug. lib. 14. de Civ. c. 15.
whatever luster his actions put on, they are always bad when they proceed from
this principle. Though he give his goods to the poor, his assistance to the
miserable, expose his life for the safety of his Country, shed his blood for
the interest of Religion or Justice, if he act by the Counsel of Concupiscence,
he is criminal amidst the throng of so many splendid Actions; and the
principle he moves by being unable to propound any other end then vainglory,
can secure him neither from sin nor punishment. When on the contrary the
Christian being led by Charity, acted by the Spirit of God that quickens him,
and following the motions of Grace, endeavors to satisfy his Duty; all his
actions are Innocent and acceptable to God: Did he always act according to this
Principle, his condition would be no longer peccant, and did he obey its holy
inspirations he should be sure not to offend. It is in this sense that the
Beloved disciple of our Savior, assures us, Omnis qui natus est ex Deo
peccatum non facit; quoniam semen ipsius in eo manet, and quoniam ex Deo natus
est. 1 Joan. cap. 3.
That whatever is born of God sins not; that is, the Christian that always
follows the motion of the Divine Spirit, is never subdued by Concupiscence,
neither can he be overcome as long as he is actually guided by Charity. This
heavenly seed that preserves him, can produce nothing but what is excellent,
and this Tree that is planted in his heart, can bring forth none but good
fruit. But in as much as this actual assistance is not due unto him, and that
heaven leaves him to himself, to make him sensible of his weakness, he falls
many times into light transgressions, and is forced to confess with the same
Apostle, That, he that says he has no sin, deceives himself, and the truth is
not in him.

Thus the Christians life is a continual warfare; he resents his double
Extraction, feels the effects of both his Parents; and divided by his desires,
he learns by woeful experience that when he acts not by Charity, he is in danger
to act by Concupiscence. The second DISCOURSE. To make Man a Christian, he must
be Renewed, Regenerate, and raised from the Dead.
NOthing does so fully manifest the greatness of a Disease, Si cito caperetur
incarnatio, non opus erat ut crederetur; credendo ergo capitur quod nisi
credatur nunquam intelligitur. Aug. de vera Innoc. c. 45.
as the difficulty of the Remedy; neither does any thing make a man so sensible
of the Corruption of his Nature by Sin, as the difficulty of his Restitution by
Grace: The External Cause of his salvation is so strange, that it appears
incredible to all those that are not illuminated by Faith; Humane Prudence
cannot comprehend that the Death of a God was necessary for the Recovery of a
Sinner: It laughs at that Mercy that obliged Divinity to be clothed with our
miseries, it believes such excess of love unworthy an infinite wisdom, and that
to be persuaded of the mystery of the Incarnation, is to render the Divine
Nature ridiculous, and humane Nature insolent.

Nevertheless, Faith convinces us, that nothing has so much exalted God as
this Condescension; nothing has so much abased Man as this Exaltation. For
albeit the greatness of God be at the height; that neither Desires nor
Imaginations can add any thing to it; yet if we believe Saint Deus cum non
haberet quo cresceret per ascensum quia ultra Deum nihil est, per descensum
quomodo cresceret invenit veniens Incarnari. Bern. sermon. 2. de Asc.
Bernard, he acquired new qualities by the Incarnation: Men never more
reverenced him then since he thus humbled himself; and he has done things in
pursuance of this Mystery that might seem unprofitably attempted before he
vouchsafed to accomplish so transcendent a wonder. His Empire is increased now
that he is become a servant to his Father; Men have erected Altars to his
Majesty since the Jews lifted him up upon the Cross, and the Crown of Thorns
that encircled his head has merited the Crown of all the Kingdoms of the
Universe. If his Humiliation has exalted him, we must acknowledge that our
exaltation has humbled us: Haec medicina hominum tanta est, quanta non potest
cogitari; nam quae superbia sanari potest si humilitate filii Dei non sanatur?
Aug. de Ago. Chr. c. ii.
For there is no pride that will not stoop when it considers that our sin could
not find a perfect remedy but in the death of God-Man, that we must be washed
in his blood to be purified, and with his honor despoil him of Life to restore
us our Innocence.

This Truth finds new proofs in the Birth of a Christian; and if he consider
the names it bears, and the effects it produces, he will be constrained to
acknowledge that he was strangely corrupted by sin, since to re-establish him in
Grace he was fain to bestow upon him a Redditur nobis novitas per Baptismu^
vetustate discedente; deoneratur anima sarcinis peccatorum ut liberate novae
vitae induta adversus Diabolum cum adjutorio Divino valeat fortiter dimicare.
Aug. l. 4. de Sym. c. 9
New Birth. Indeed the Holy Scriptures teach us that the Baptism wherein the
Christian is Regenerated, is sometimes called his Renovation, sometimes his
second Birth, sometimes his first Resurrection, that from the very name of his
Remedy he may learn the greatness of his Malady: Let us admire these two
together, and show in this Discourse the Transgression of Man, and the
Reformation of the Christian.

Sin is a Secret poison that has spread its malice over the soul and body of
Man. Malorum omniu^ nostrorum causa peccatum est; non enim fine causa mala ista
homines patiuntur; Justus est Deus omnipotens; non ista pateremur nisi
mereremur. Aug. ser. 139. de Tempore.
The miseries it has produced in the body are so public that there is none
but knows them, because there is none but feels them. The Confusion of our
Humors, the Disorder of our Temperament, the unfaithfulness of our Senses, and
the revolt of our Passions, are miseries under which Philosophers groan as well
as Believers: But as the soul is more guilty then the Body, so is she much more
miserable: For Error has stolen into the Understanding, Malice has depraved
the Will, Oblivion has dropped into the Memory, and in so general a disorder
there remains no faculty that is not either weakened or corrupted. The Pride of
the Stoics has complained of this misfortune, which though they have
endeavored to sweeten by Reason, they have been forced to confess that so
impotent a remedy could not cure so obstinate a malady.

After the Divine Justice had suffered man for many ages to languish in his
Productior est poena quam culpa, ne parva putaretur culpa si cum illa finiretur
and poena. Aug. Trac. 124. in Joan.
miseries, at last Mercy furnished him with Baptism to rid him of his Evils:
But lest the Easiness of the remedy, consisting of the Commonest of the
Elements might render it contemptible, God was willing that the very name it
bears should inform us that we were so corrupt, that to be cured we must be
wholly new-made. For in this Sacrament Man seems to change his Nature, to
receive a new life, to assume other inclinations, Ecce libertatis serenitate
perfruuntur qui tenebantur paulo ante captivi; Cives Ecclesiae sunt qui fuerunt
in peregrinationis errore, and in sort justitiae versantur qui fuerunt in
confus^one peccati. Non enim tantum sunt liberi sed and sancti, non tantum
sancti sed and justi, non solum justi sed and filii, non solum filii sed
cohaeredes, etc. vides quot sunt Baptismatis largitates. Chrysostom. homil. de
Baptisatis citatur ab. Aug. lib. 1. contra Julia. cap. 2.
where being illuminated by faith he discovers other lights; being warmed by
Charity he conceives other heats; being united to another head he receives
other influences; and being quickened by a new Spirit, he forms new designs.

Is it not indeed a prodigious change, that he that was the slave of the Devil,
becomes the subject of Jesus Christ; that a Criminal is pronounced Innocent;
that he that had in him the seeds of all Vices, receives the seeds of all
Virtues, and that by a happy Metamorphosis which is wrought in a moment, and
with a word he is despoyl'd of Adam, and clothed with Jesus Christ?

This Renovation is so great and so consequentially admirable in the effects
thereof, that the Scripture to express the wonders that accompany it, has
sometimes called it a New Birth, sometimes a Regeneration. The Son of God who is
the Author of it testifies that no man can enter into the kingdom of heaven
except he be born again of Water and of the Holy Ghost. The Fathers of the
Church have given it the same name, and Theoyhylact teaches us that we were so
deeply swallowed up in the puddle of sin, that being not able to be drawn out
by an ordinary endeavor, nor cleansed by a simple washing, we were fain to be
Regenerated: And making use of another Comparison, he tells us, That being like
an old house that is ready to fall, it was requisite we should be quite
destroyed that we might be rebuilt again. Ita vitiis eramus immersi ut nulla
ratione purgari possemus, sed opus suit Regeneratione; nam secundam nativitatem
Regeneratio significat, and nos ut veterem domum quam evertere oportet Deus
denuo condidit. Theophyl. ad Tit. c. 3.
St. Augustine is of the same opinion, when observing what havoc sin has made
in our Nature, he says, God deals with us as he does with decayed buildings
which are good only to be thrown down, that upon their ruins may be laid the
foundation of a new structure, wherein the wisdom of the Architect is to be
admired, who from a heap of rubbish has been able to erect a stately Palace or
a magnificent Temple.

But not to wander from the subject of our Discourse in such figurative
expressions, Qui gaudes Baptismi perceptione, vive in novi hominis sanctitate,
and tenens fidem quae per dilectionem operatur habe bonu^ quod nondum habes,
and profit tibi bonum quod habes. Prosp. Sent. 325.
let us hold to the simplicity of the Gospel affirming that Baptism is called
the New Birth of a Christian; because thereby he receives a New-Being, and
passing from the person of Adam into that of Jesus Christ, he happily loses
those bad qualities he had contracted in his first conception: He becomes a
member of the Son of God, he enters by Grace upon all the rights of his head,
he converseth with God as with his Father, with whom not losing his respect he
gains a familiarity, till being insensibly disengaged from the Earth, he
aspires to Heaven, as toward his lawful inheritance.

Indeed this Generation is but begun in Baptism, it continues the whole course
of a man's life, nor is it finished till the general Resurrection. For though
Sin be blotted out by Grace in a Christian, Concupiscentia tanquam lex peccati
manens in membris corporis mortis hujus cum parvulis nascitur; in parvulis
baptizatis a reatu solvitur, ad agonem relinquitur, ante agonem mortuos nulla
damnatione prosequitur. August.
neither can all that he has received from Adam any longer shut the gate of
Heaven against him; yet there are a thousand disorders that hinder the complete
perfect establishment of Charity in his soul; It lives as it were in an
ungrateful and barren land, where there can be no improvement without a kind
of violence: Self-love opposes all its designs; and this Enemy who is often
beaten but never vanquished, gives it so many turns that were it not for the
continual assistance it receives from God, it could not preserve it self one
moment.

But admit this dangerous Enemy persecute not the Christian with so cruel awar,
the bondage whereto Infancy has reduced him, suffers him not to make any great
progress: For the Grace that we receive in Baptism cannot make us operate; as
we have not yet the use of Reason, neither have we that of Charity or of Faith;
we are faithful without believing in God, Charitable without loving him; we
possess a Treasure that we cannot dispose of, and our happiness having some
resemblance with our disaster, we have no other merits but that of Jesus
Christ, as we have no other sins but those of Adam. For this reason are we
obliged to be very industrious as soon as we are out of our childhood, and not
to suffer all those advantages we receive from our New Birth to lie useless and
unprofitable; we must have recourse to our Redeemer, and conjure him by our
prayers to finish the work he has begun, that perfecting us in Grace Cum
concupiscentia natus es; ut eam vincas, noli tibi hosts addere, vince cum quo
natus es; ad stadium vitae hujus cum illo venisti, congredere cum eo qui tecum
procedit. Aug. Ps. 57.
here, we may one day be happily consummated in Glory hereafter.

But to return to the subject we have necessarily digress'd from, Baptism bears
not only the name of a New Birth, but also that of a Resurrection; Therefore
the Great Apostle says An ignoratis quia quicunque baptizati sumus in Christ's
Jesu, in morte ipsius baptizati sumus cum illo per Baptismum in mortem, ut
quomodo Christus surrexit a mortuis per gloriam Patris, ita and nos in novitate
vitae ambulemus? Roman. 6.
, That the Christians are risen with Christ, that his Death quickens their
souls, and that these two contraries agreeing in their person, they are dead to
Sin and alive to Grace. This name, more excellent then the rest, does (me
thinks) more fully discover the misery of Man, and the happiness of a
Christian: For if Baptism be a Resurrection, if a Believer be not only born
again, but raisd from the grave, we must conclude, that before this second
Birth he was dead; and if he had some symptoms of a natural and sensitive, he
had not any Principle of a supernatural and divine Life: He was as much
pre-engaged in Death as in Sin, and according to the rules of Scripture, he was
truly dead; because truly a sinner. All the excuse he could alledg in his
misery, is, that his Death was contracted by the fault of another; and that as
he transgressed not but by the will of his Father, so neither was he obnoxious
to death but by his hand. In a word, to comprehend this rightly, He is the
cause of our misfortune; He committed the Crime that we contracted in our
birth; if he be guilty by design, we are so by necessity, and before we have
the use of reason we are therefore sinners, because we are his Children; by the
same means that he conveighs Sicut omnium fuisii parens, ita and omnium
peremptor, and, quod infelicius, omnium prius peremptor quam parens. Ber.
death to us, by the same does he communicate sin; he is our Parricide just as
he is our Parent; and, which puzzles all Philosophy, he commits as many
murders as his posterity begets Children.

In this deplorable condition as Baptism finds us, it not only gives us life,
but restores it, nor is it merely our Birth but our Resurrection. This is it
that St. Augustine, with no less Eloquence then Learning, delivers, when he
says, Resurrecturum humanum genus i^ saeculi consummatione post mortem nunc
resurgit in Baptismo: suscitandus est tunc populus Dei post soporem, nunc
suscitandus post infidelitatem, liberandus est tunc a mortali condition, nunc
liberatur ab ignorantiae caecitate; renasciturus tunc ad aeternitatem, nunc
renascitur ad salutem. August. Sermon. 163. de Tempore.
that the Church acknowledges two Resurrections in the world; the first is in
Baptism, the second will be at the day of Judgment, that the Christians shall
then awake from their long sleep which has so many Ages sealed them up in
their Tombs, and that now they do arise after they were buried in Infidelity;
then they shall be freed from all misfortunes that attend their mortal
condition; now they are delivered from all clouds of Ignorance that darken
their spiritual existency; then they shall rise to Immortality and Glory, now
they are regenerated to Grace and Salvation.

Though these effects of Baptism are sufficiently admirable by their own proper
greatness, Nonne mirandu^ et lavacro dilui mortem? atquin eo magis credendum,
si quia mirandum est ideo non creditur: atquin eo magis credendum est; qualia
enim decet esse opera divina nisi omne^ admirationem? Tert. de Bapt. Sine
pompa, sine apparatu, sine sumptu in aquae demissus inter pauca verba tinctus
inde exiliit innocentior. Idem ibid.
yet must we acknowledge that the easiness that produces them, extremely
heightens their Excellency: For, to revive a child, there needs only a little
water animated with the Word of God; all these changes are wrought in his soul,
when the Priest speaks, and sprinkles his body; he is miraculously raised, when
the Ceremonies of the Church are ended; and this way that prepares him to
eternal life, costs the Ministers of Jesus Christ nothing but the
Pronunciation of these words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

The Heathen who heretofore informed themselves of our Mysteries, were
scandalized at a miracle so mean and simple in its Administration, so glorious
in its Promises, and so powerful in its Effects: They could not comprehend
says Tertullian, that washing the body with a little water, the soul should be
cleansed from its sins; that without any Miratur incredulitas, non credit;
miratur enim simplicia quasi vana, magnifica quasi impossbilia. Ter.
pomp or expense, a few words mingled with the commonest of the Elements,
should assure us of the Conquest of heaven: But this Great Doctor answers their
doubts with such solid Reasons, that he at once blazons the honor of our
Religion, and the Majesty of our God. For he makes them see Prob misera
incredulitas quae denegas Deo proprietas suas, simplicitatem et potestate^!
Ter. de Baptis.
he was pleased to show his simplicity in the matter of our Sacraments, and his
State in their effects: that not to know God, was no more then to deny him
these two perfections which seem to constitute his Nature; and that it was to
want respect to make simple things pass for vain, and glorious things for
impossible; because it is easy for him who drew the world out of nothing to
draw our salvation out of an Element quickened by his Word and by his Spirit.
Baptism then being so fruitful of Miracles, and this Sacrament being the
Throne of the power of the Almighty, we need not wonder that the Christian
finds his birth there, that in it he is renewed by Grace, that he is raised
again by the virtue of Jesus Christ, and that there he commenceth a
supernatural life, whose Progress is as strange as the Beginning is wonderful.

The Third DISCOURSE. That the chiefest Mysteries of Jesus Christ are applied
to the Christian in his Birth.
IT is not without reason that St. Paul informs Christians newly baptized
Quicunque in Christo baptizati estis Christum induistis. Gal. 3.
, that they have put on Jesus Christ, since in their second Nativity they are
united to his Person, replenished with his Grace, and quickened with his Spirit:
For as a Induistis, id est, conformes ei facti estis quod est vobis honor
contra aestus and protectio. Glossa. ordinar. in hunc locum.
Garment is the ornament and shelter of a man, it covers his shame, and
protects him from the injury of the weather: so may we say of Jesus Christ; he
is the glory and guard of a Christian, whom having delivered from the confusion
that accompanies sin, he defends against the assaults of temptation, and
bestows upon him vigor and beauty, thereby to render him a complete work. But
as all graces in Christianity are mixed with pain, the Christian, according to
the doctrine of the same Apostle, if he intend to be perfect, must die with
Christ; death must bring him to the resurrection and to life: Whosoever, says
he, are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his death. All that we
are of Christians, we have by being baptized in his death: Sacri Baptismatis in
cruce Christi grande mysterium commendavit Apostolus eo modo ut intelligamus
nihil aliud esse in Christo baptismum, nisi mortis Christi similitudinem, ut
quemadmodum in illo vera mors facta est, sic in vobis vera remissio peccatorum;
and quemadmodum in illo vera resurrectio, ita in vobis vera justificatio. Aug.
in Beda.
we are buried with him in Baptism: we drowned our sins in the waters of this
Sacrament, and in this laver happily lose whatever we received from Adam in our
first birth. This death is fruitful, producing in us the life of grace: this
burial prepares us for the Resurrection; neither does Jesus Christ make us
partake of his Cross, but thereby to make us partake of his Glory. The Tomb is
a step to our Birth: like the Phoenix, we find life in our ashes; and, by a
wonderful prodigy, the Sepulcher of the Sinner becomes the Cradle of the
Believer. For the Christian receives a Being in Baptism, according as he
expires there; and, contrary to all the Laws of Nature, Death is the Midwife of
Life.

All the Fathers speak the same dialect with S. Paul; Baptismus Christi nobis
est sepultura in quo peccatis morimur, criminibus sepelimur, and veteris
hominis conscientia in altera^ nativitatem rediviva infantia reparamur.
Baptismus inqua^ Salvatoris vobis sepultura, quia ibi perdidimus quod ante
viximus, and ibi denno accipimus ut vivamus: magna igitur sepulturae hujus est
gratia, in qua nobis and utilis mors infertur, and vtilior vita condonatur:
magna inqua^ sepulturae hujus gratia, quae and purificat peccatore^, and
vivificat moriente^. Aug. Sermon. 129. de Temp.
never mentioning Baptism but as a Sacrament where the life and death of Jesus
Christ are equally applied unto us, that we may live to grace, and die to sin.
The Baptism of Jesus Christ, says S. Augustine, is a burial wherein we
bequeath sin; and losing the conscience of the old man, we enter upon a second
Infancy by a new Nativity. In a word, the Baptism of our Savior is a Tomb
wherein we are buried, and a Cradle wherein we are born again: it is a pleasant
dormitory where receiving a death beneficial, we receive withal a life far more
glorious; and where leaving off to be Sinners, we begin to be Innocents.

In this it is that I admire the Providence of the Son of God, who made use of
sin to destroy sin, as says the Apostle of the Gentiles; De peccato damnavit
peccatum; and changing his death into a sacrifice, made it a satisfaction for
all our iniquities. For if Baptism make us die to sin, it is upon no other
ground, but because it imprints in our souls the merit and image of the death
of Christ, and by an invisible, but a true and real grace, works in us a desire
to part with all that is derived from Adam. This makes the Infelix ego homo,
quis me liberabit de corpore mortis hujus! Romans 7.
Saints that they cannot endure the rebellions of concupiscence; that they
employ all their strength to smother these embryo's; that being true to Grace,
they resist all the motions of its Enemy; groaning when they are compelled to
follow or suffer his disorders. They know that Christ died to oblige them to
die to sin; that he was not nailed to the Cross, but to crucify them to the
world; nor buried in the grave, but that the earth might be their sepulcher.
All that is in the world, Crucifixus est Christus, ut and vos crucifigamini
mundo: mortuus est, ut and vos moriamini peccato, and saeculo, and vivatis Deo:
sepultus est, ut and vos consepeliamini illi per baptismum; Apostolo dicente,
Consepulti sumus, etc. ut sicut ille semel surgens a mortuis, jam non moritur;
ita and vos vetustate mortalitatis per Baptismum mortificati, and vitale
indumentum induti non iterum per peccata in anima in morte retrahami^i. Aug. de
Expos. Orat. Dom. and Symbol. Sermon. 3.
displeases them; diversions are their torments; that which is a recreation to
sinners, afflicts them; and knowing very well the mind of the Lord Jesus, they
endeavor to fulfill it, even with the loss of their own lives. Saint Augustine
entertained the Catechumeni heretofore with these obligations; and expounding
to them the doctrine of the Gospel, taught them that Baptism engaged them in
death. Jesus Christ, said he, was crucified, that you might be so to the world;
he suffered death, that you might die to sin: he was buried, that you might be
together with him: and having put off the old man Adam, and being clothed with
the new man Jesus Christ, you may die no more in your souls by sin.

All the other Fathers speak the same language, teaching us that there is a
death and a life hid in Baptism, producing real effects in our souls. Thence
arises the inclination all Christians have to die and to live: thence proceed
those obstinate conflicts they entertain self-love with: thence spring those
violent desires to be separated from the world and the flesh, that they may be
no longer subject to their tyranny.

But because this Mystery very much concerns our salvation, it deserves a more
ample explication from us, that we may disclose the truths and obligations that
lie wrapped up in it. The Son of God is willing that as his death is the
Principle, so it should be the Rule and Example of our salvation: as he died to
deliver us, he would have us die to honor him: and as he entered not into
glory but by the door of the Cross, neither must we pass to the resurrection
but by the gate of the Grave. He died, says the great Apostle, that by his
death he might ruin the Empire of sin. He died, that losing all the
imperfections he drew from Adam, he might rise again to life everlasting. He
died, that satisfying his Father, we might be no longer responsible to his
Justice. All these considerations oblige us to die in Baptism: Pro omnibus
mortuus est, ut and qui vivunt jam non sibi vivant, sed ei qui pro ipsis
mortuus est; debet ergo vita hominis in se deficere, in Christo proficere, ut
dicat cum Apostolo, Vivo ego, jam non ego. Aug. Sermon. de Epiphan.
if we intend to be the images of Jesus Christ, we must destroy sin by death,
that dying we may be born again; and making a sacrifice of our death, we may be
changed into spotless Victims.

But as the Son of God was not content only to die, but was willing to join
the ignominy of the grave to the bitterness of his death; Sicut Christus
sepultus fuit in terra, sic baptizatus mergitur in aqua. Nicol. de Lyra.
because there was a second punishment of sin comprised in those words of our
Arrest, Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return, he will have our death
followed with a funeral; and that the same Sacrament that makes us die, bury us
together with him. Consepulti sumus cum Christo.

Burial adds to the dead corpse two or three notable conditions. The first is,
Coemeteria extra urbes, utnullum esset viveniu^ cum mort uis mmercium.
that he that is buried is separated from the company of the living, that he
remains in the regions of death, and has no more commerce with the present
world. So the Christian is buried with the Son of God, because he is removed
from amongst wicked men; neither does the state of death into which he is
entered, suffer him to converse with them. Quid est mori peccat^ and
consepeliri cum Christo, nisi damnandis operibus omnino non vivere, nihil
concupiscere carnaliter, nihil ambire? sicut qui mortuus est carne, nulli
detrahit, nullum aversatur. Prosp. de vita contemp. c. 21
He has now no ears to hear calumnies, no eyes to gaze upon the beauties of
the earth, no desires nor pretensions after the honors of the world; and his
death being attended with a funeral, he protests aloud that he has renounced
all hopes of the things of the world.

The second condition of this state, is, the duration that goes along with it:
For though death be eternal in respect of the Creature, nor can any but an
Almighty power reunite the soul with the body when once separated; yet there
seems to remain some faint hope, as long as the body is not committed to the
grave: we watch it, to see if that which appears a death, be but a swoon or
trance: and there have been those that have died and rose again the same day,
without a miracle. But when the body is laid in the sepulcher, drooping Nature
is then past all hope. This dismal abode has no intercourse with life: it is an
everlasting habitation whence there is no return but by a prodigy: Sepulchra
eoru^ domus illoru^ in aeternu^, jam quia constructa sunt sepulchra, domus sunt
sepulchra, and quia ibi semper crunt ideo domus in aeternum. Aug. in Psalm. 48.
it is the place where worms serving for ministers of the Divine Justice,
discharge their fury upon men, till being reduced to powder, there remains
nothing of these famous criminals. Thus the Christians, when baptized, are as
it were interred; to instruct them, that this death ought to be immortal, that
the divorce which they have made with the world can admit of no accommodation,
and that a departure accompanied with so solemn a funeral, should in all reason
extinguish the desire and hope of the life of Adam.

Finally, the last condition of a burial, is, the oblivion of the world. For
notwithstanding men desire to live after death, whereof those proud Mausolaeums
they erect to their ashes is a witness as vain as it is confident; Postquam per
mill indignitates ad dignitates pervenerint misera subit eos cogitatio
laborasse tantum in titulu^ sepulchri. Senec.
and that the care they take for their Obsequies, gives testimony they would be
thought to live still in the opinion of the world: nevertheless experience
teaches us, that Tombs are the chambers of Forgetfulness, that they steal out
of our remembrance those they cover, and that contrary to the intention of the
builders, they many times, together with their Body, lay a stone upon their
Name and Memory too. The holy Scripture, whose plainness of expression has not
wholly abandoned the figures of eloquence, calls graves the receptacles of
Oblivion; Oblivioni datus sum tanquam mortuus a cord. Psalm. 30.
disciplining us by so elegant a metaphor, that the sepulcher draws a black
line over the glory of mortals; and death having spoiled them of their life,
takes pleasure still to plunder their reputation. As the Christian is entombed,
so ought he also to be forgotten: if he repent not of the grace he has
received, Nunquid cognoscentur in tenebris mirabilia tua, and justitia tua in
terra oblivionis. Psa. 87
he ought to be dead in the memory of men, lest their calling him to mind
prove fatal to his innocence; and being remanded into the world, whence death
had given him a retirement, he begin again to live in Adam, and die to Jesus
Christ.

Though this Doctrine appear harsh, yet is it sweet and comfortable to those
who know, that the sepulture we find in Baptism prepares us for the
Resurrection: Per Crucem datur credentibus virtus de infirmitate, gloria de
opprobrio, vita de morte. Leo. Sermon. 8. de Passio. Dom.
For as Christ by his death entered into a new life, the Cross contributed to
his glory; nor was heaven opened to him but through the passage of shame and
grief: so the Christian in death embraces life, and in the grave finds a new
conception. He is quickened with a new spirit in Baptism; he tastes the joys of
heaven there: and the grace he receives in that holy Sacrament is not only an
Earnest, but an Antepast and Prelibation of glory. His life is answerable to
his dignity: having God for his Father, his pretensions must needs be high; and
despising whatever the world can promise, he aspires at no less then the
felicity of Angels. This is the consolation of the faithful in their troubles;
it is the reason the great Apostle makes use of, to sweeten his travels: and as
often as persecution flats our spirits, he endeavors to raise them up again
from the consideration of the recompenses that are prepared for us.

The truth is, this life lies secret, undiscovered; the precedent death being
much more visible and apparent. Ye are dead, says the Apostle, and your life
is hid with Christ in God. Our miseries are public, our advantages walk in the
dark. Men see what we suffer, but doubt of what we hope for: Mortui estis, and
vita vestra abscondita cum Christo: quomodo videutur arbores per hyemem quasi
aridae, quasi mortuae: ergo quae spes? Si mortui sumus, intus est radix, ibi
radix nostra, ibi vita nostra, ibi charitas nostra. Quando autem ver nostrum?
quando aestas nostra, quando circumvestit dignitas foliorum, and ubertas
frucluum. Quando hoc erit? Audi quod sequrtur: Cum Christus apparuerit vita
vestra, tunc and vos apparebitis cum ipso in gloria. Aug. in Ps. 36.
and in the judgment of Infidels, our Religion passes for an Imposture,
because the good things it promises are invisible, but the evils it threatens
are sensible and present. We are, says S. Augustine, like those great trees
which during the sharpness of the winter are naked of all their leaves; their
life is enclosed in their roots; their vigor is retired into their sap; and
all the soul and vegetation they have, is hid from the eyes of the beholders:
but their death is conspicuous; every branch publishes it; and all the bavock
winter has made them feel, are so many arguments to make us doubt of their
life. Thus it is with Christians: they are dead, and they are alive: but their
life is in a cloud, their death manifest: the persecutions they suffer, the
temptations they contest with, the conflicts they undergo, persuade Infidels
that their life is but a languishing and doleful death: but their vigor is
over-shadowed, their beauty is like that of the Spouse, whose advantages are
the fruits rather of her mind then of her body: their glory is retreated with
Christ in God. And as the Spring must needs return, to convince the ignorant
that a tree that has lost his leaves is not dead; so must the general
Resurrection happen, to assure unbelievers that a Christian persecuted by the
world is alive with Christ in God. Let us die therefore with him, if we mean to
live with him: and, to end this Discourse with the words of S. Gregory cited by
S. Augustine; * Cum Christo ergo nascamur, cum Christo crucifigamur, and
consepcliamur ei in mortem, ut cum ipso etiam resurgamus ad vitam. Greg. citat.
ab Aug.
Let us be born with the Son of God in Baptism, die with him upon the Cross, be
buried with him in the Tomb, that we may rise with him in Glory; and that from
this present receiving the Pledges of his promises we may in the same Sacrament
find a Birth joined with Death, and a Resurrection with a Funeral.

The fourth DISCOURSE. That Grace is communicated to the Christian in his
Regeneration, as Sin is communicated to Man in his Generation.
THough Providence display its banner in all the occurrences of our life, and
there is no moment wherein we may not take notice of its dispensations; yet me
thinks it never appears with greater luster, Vt qui in ligno vincebat in ligno
quoque vinceretur.
then when from our fall it raises our salvation, or makes use of a remedy
that has some resemblance with our disease: Thus we see it makes the malice of
the Devil serviceable to the Glory of the Martyrs; employes a Man for the
Redemption of all Men, that their fall and recovery may have the same
Principle. It Is Adam that destroys us; Debitum quide Adae tantum erat, ut illud
non deberet solvere nifi homo, sed non posset nisi Deus; ita opus erat ut idem
esset homo qui esset Deus. Aug. lib. cur Deus homo, cap. 6.
it is Jesus Christ that saves us: It was a woman that served as an Interpreter
to Satan, to deceive our first Father; and it is a Virgin that serves as a
Handmaid to Jesus Christ, to begin the work of our Restitution: Finally,
Generation is the Channel whereby sin passes into the soul of Man, and Baptism
is the Regeneration whereby Grace descends into the soul of the Christian:
Their Relations are so wonderful, that it is easy to judge that Divine
Providence has ordered them both, and that we should admire its conduct in the
work of our Redemption.

The first resemblance is, that Sin precedes our knowledge; we are Delinquents
without knowing it, our Ignorance furnishes us with no excuse; and though we
know not the Parent from whom we are descended, we fail not to be the heirs of
his obliquity. Thus the Remedy imitating the Disease, prevents our Reasoning;
we are absolved in our Baptism without knowing our Redeemer; Grace enters into
our soul, and brings no light along with it; it leaves us in the dark, and
knocks off our chains; Quaeis utrum ex voluntate peccatum originale? respondeo
prorsus esse, quia et hoc ex voluntate primi hominis seminatu est, ut and in
illo esset, et in omnes transiret. Aug. lib. de Nup. and Concup. c. 28.
and the Divine Mercy regulating it self after the measure of Justice, is
unwilling our Ignorance should exclude us from Grace, since it no way excuses
us from sin.

Besides, the offense that was voluntary in Adam is natural in his children,
they draw it in with their breath, it infects not their Will but because it
corrupts their Nature. This Sin was voluntary only in the first Man; his
posterity cannot hinder it; and as Infants have not the use of Reason, they are
transgressors by the will of their Father. We must rise as high as Paradise to
find the Spring of our misfortune; we are unable without the help of faith, so
much as to comprehend that we are guilty of a sin committed in the Nonage of
the world; and that without knowing or willing it, we do in the first moment of
our Conception contract it.

But if the Disease be strange we must needs acknowledge the Remedy is no less
admirable. For Christians are justified in Baptism by the Grace of Jesus
Christ, they enjoy his merits without asking for them, they are enriched with
his spoils, and entering into a Community of Goods with him, they have as much
share in His Innocence, as they had part in Adams Transgression. It Is not their
Consent that sanctifies them, their Salvation is no effect of their Will; and
if they satisfy the Justice of God, it is by the sole Merits of Jesus Christ.
They believe in him as they doubted in Adam, and their Satisfaction being
parallel to their Fault, they are Innocent and Guilty in the person of their
Fathers.

In the Third place, Adam lent us his Body in Paradise to make us Criminals; We
saw the forbidden fruit with his Eyes; We gathered it with his Hands; We are it
with his Mouth; and as if with Him we had committed all these sins, We are to
this day punished in all our members after his death: For whether we made up
one part of him; whether he was a Universal and General Man, whereof all
others are but the Members; whether he perpetuates and transmits himself into
his descendants; or whether having stipulated for us before God, his Crimes
became ours, Per unius illius voluntatem malam omnes in co peccaverunt, quando
omnes unus fuerunt, de quo praeterea sin. guli peccatum originale traxerunt.
Aug. l. 2. de Nup. and Concup. c. 3.
what he has done is imputed to us, and we bear the punishment of a sin we
could not commit but in his Person. But that our Salvation may answer our Fall,
we use a borrowed support in our Baptism; we believe by the faith of another,
we act by the mediation of the faithful, and the Church affords us her favor
to make us partakers of the Grace of her Beloved. Accommodat Infantibus matter
Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, alioru^ Cor ut credant, aliorum lingua^ ut
fatcantur, ut quemadmodum quod aegri suut alio peccaute gravantur, sic hi cum
sani sunt alio consitente salventur. Aug. sermon. 10. de verb. Apo.
Indeed this Charitable Mother lends us her mouth to answer at the Font of
Baptism, the Arms of her Confessors, to carry us thither, her Heart to form
acts of faith, that as we were lost by the prevarication of our Father, we
might be saved by the piety of our Mother. This was the argument the great S.
Augustine sometimes made use of to confound the Pelagians, who judge Baptism not
necessary for Infants. They believe already says he, though they cannot
reason, and if you ask me how they believe, I answer, it is by the faith of
their Parents; whence I conclude they are infected with their sin, Si
baptizatis infantibus credentibus dicis aliquid Christum prodesse, been dicis;
Credunt and Infantes. Unde credunt? fide parentum: si fide parentum purgantur,
peccato parentum pollutt sunt; corpus morcis in primis parentibus generavit cos
peccatores, Spiritus vitae in posterioribus parentibus regeneravit eos fideles
Tu das fidem non respondenti, and ego peccatum nihil agenti. Aug. Sermon. de Bap.
Parvul. contra Pelag. cap. 14.
because they are purified by their faith: neither are you to think it strange
that I admit sin in Children that act not, since you admit faith in them that
answer not. Thus the one are sinners without Acting, the others are bel^evers
without Speaking: Sin is imparted as Grace is, and Salvation imitating the
Fall, the sole merit of Jesus Christ makes them live, whom the sole fault of
Adam made dye.

Their destiny is like that of the holy Babes of Bethlehem; those innocent
victimes, immolated to pay homage to the Birth of the Son of God: The Church
places them in the Catalogue of Martyrs: it is the purest blond she ever shed
upon the earth, to honor that which the Son of God spilt at his Circumcision;
These are the first fruits that were offered to him in Judea, the most
illustrious testimony his Greatness received whilst yet he lay in his cradle.
In the mean time, these Infant Martyrs were happy and never knew it, Occiduntur
pro Christo parvuli, pro justitia moritur innocentia: Quam beataaetas, qua
needum Christum potest loqui, and jam pro Christo meretur occidi. Aug. Ser. 2.
de Innoc.
they powered out their blood upon an occasion they could neither foresee, nor
wish for: their will accepted not this Sacrifice, and if we judge of their
thoughts by their actions, we shall be obliged to doubt of their courage, and
mistrust their merit; They neither apprehended the greatness of the danger that
was threatened, nor the cruelty of the Tyrant that condemned them to death, nor
the fury of the Executioners that searched them out to massacre them; their
happiness was as unknown to them as their misery; they were ignorant that they
suffered for Jesus Christ, that in their person they sought for Him, and that
receiving the stabs of the poniard thrust at their heart, they had this double
honor to die for their Savior, and by yielding up their own life to secure
his. Nevertheless, all the Fathers of the Church confess, that their
Martyrdom was true, that the power of God supplied their weakness, that his
grace prevented their will, and that their sacrifice fayl'd not to be
meritorious, though it was not voluntary.

Amongst all those that have been their Advocates, there is none has pleaded
their cause with more Eloquence then St Bernard; his Reasons and his Words are
equally powerful; and it seems, that, preserving the glory of their Martyrdom,
his design was to preserve that of their Baptism. Si quaeric little apud Deum
merita ut coronarentur, quaere and apud Herodem crimina ut occiderentur: An
forte minor Christi Pietas, quam Herodis impietas, ut ille quidem potuit
innoxios neci dare; Christus non potuerit propter se occisos coronare? Bern. de
natal. Inn.
If you ask (says he) what desert they had in the sight of God to merit a
Crown, ask what their crime was against Herod, that deserved such a butchery:
shall the Piety of the Son of God be less powerful then the Impiety of Herod?
Shall the Tyrant be able to massacre Innocents, and their Savior not able to
crown their sufferings? Their Martyrdom exalts the mercy of Jesus Christ, and
their example teaches us, that as good desires without works are sometimes
recompensed in men, works without desires may be recompensed in children. If we
doubt of their Martyrdom, Ille pro Christo trucidatos Infantes dubitet inter
Martyrs coronari, qui regeneratos in Christo non credit inter adoptionis
silios numerari. Idem ibid.
(as the same Father goes on) we must doubt of the salvation of all those that
are baptized; and if we believe that Baptism sanctifies Infants though they
cannot speak, we must believe that Martyrdom consecrates these, though they
cannot express themselves. After this example, we need not think it strange,
that the Eternal Father acknowledges those for his Children, whom the Son
acknowledges for his Brethren; nor doubt, that imitating his Justice, he saves
by borrowed merits, those he had condemned for accessory crimes.

But one of the most remarkable resemblances between our Recovery and our Fall,
is, that both of them began by the Body. For though this be less guilty then
the soul, neither did the corporal revolt solicit our first Father to sin;
yet is it the pipe through which his offense passes into the essence of his
posterity; Certum tenemus quia caro contracta de carne per legem
concupiscentiae, quam cito vivificatur originalis culpae vinculo premitur,
cjusque affectionibus anima quae carnem vivificat aggravatur, sub hoc peccati
vinculo demerguntur parvuli qui sine remedio baptismi moriuntur. Habent enim
originale peccatum non per animam, sed per carnem utique contractum animaeque
infusum: carni namque ita unitur anima, ut cum carne fit una persona. Aug. lib.
de Spir. and Anim. c. 41.
if they were not a part of his flesh, they should inherit neither his sin nor
his punishment; and if concupiscence were fully extinguished by grace,
Generation would not be criminal: Man is not faulty in his conception, but
because he is clothed with Adam's flesh; it is by means of it, that sin
overspreads the soul; for issuing from the hands of God, it is stained with no
impurity; but no sooner is it united to the body, but it becomes guilty; their
marriage begets sin; and having quickened that unhappy moity, it enters into its
imperfections and disorders; it begins to affect terrestrial things, it dwells
upon perishable goods, and is at a distance from eternal ones: lest it should
sad the Body, it readily complyes with all its desires; and as if it were
become corporeal, it longs for those objects that please and entertain the
senses: Though it be not carried yet by deliberation this way, it is by
inclination; and though it offend not willingly, we may say it does naturally;
and that the privation of Grace joined to its union with the body, is the
source of its transgression and misery: In this point the Regeneration of the
Christian holds so full a proportion with the Generation of the Man, that the
one is as well the proof as the Image of the other: Quaeris in parvulis culpam?
invenis ex carne traductam. Quaeris in eis gratiam? invenis a Deo collatam.
Aug. de Spir. and Anim. c. 41.
For Grace, though spiritual, enters not into the soul, but by the mediation of
the body; The Sacraments that dispense it, communicate not their virtue to the
Spirit, till they have first imparted it to the flesh. God is pleased to
imitate his enemy, and following his steps, he cures the noblest part of man
by the more ignoble: Caro abluitur, ut anima emaculetur; caro ungitur, ut anima
consecretur; caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, ut anima saginetur.
Tert. de resur^ect. carnis.
The spirit of the Christian Champions is not strengthened in Confirmation,
till the holy oil is sprinkled on their forehead: Their soul (to use
Tertullian's expressions) is not fatted with the Eucharist, till it receives
the body and blood of Christ by their mouth; nor is their spirit purified in
Baptism, but when their body is dipped in water. The Remedy is symbolicall to the
nature of the disease, it is affixed to the prime delinquent; and this maxim
admits of no contradiction, that the soul is incapable of being healed as soon
as it is separated from the flesh. It seems, the divine Justice will have Grace
enter by the same passage into the soul, that Sin did; Nulla omnino anima
salutem potest adipisci ni dum in carne est. Id. Ib.
and that the flesh should be the Christians ligament to Jesus Christ, as well
as the sinners to his first Progenitor.

Neither truly is it harder to conceive one then the other; for as grace is
insinuated into the soul by Baptism, of an offender making an Innocent,
despoiling us of Adam, and putting us on Jesus Christ, 'Anima in corpore
tanquam in vitiato vase corrumpitur, ubi occulta justitia divinae legis
includitur. Aug.
and finally passes from our body into the Essence of that part that
inanimates us; so also may we easily comprehend that concupiscence is the
conduit of sin, that the miseries of the flesh make an Impression upon the
spirit, that this is infected with the contagion of that, and that sin, tracing
grace, prevents the will, making it criminal before it be free.

The only thing that may seem strange to us in this Economy, is, That a
Baptized person does not communicate Christian grace to his children though he
be possessed of it; and yet does communicate original sin though he be freed
from it. Miraris quare peccator nascatur de semine Justi; non te delectat
mirari quare oleaster nascatur de semine olivae. Accipe aliam similitudinem:
non attendis quia de grano purgato frumentum cum palea nascitur sine qua
seminatur. Aug. Sermon. de Verb. Apos. 14.
But our wonder will cease, if we consider that a grain of corn which is sown
without chafe springs up notwithstanding with it: and on the other side a
learned man derives not his sciences to his children, though he do his being:
Ideo de baptizato non justus nascitur, quia non eum generat unde regeneratus
est, sed unde generatus est. Id. ib.
And because as Saint Augustine observes, Christians beget not their children
by the Spirit which is sanctified, but by the body which still remains
corrupted: neither is Grace the concomitant of the Birth of Adam, but of the
regeneration of Jesus Christ, who absolves not the guilty, till they are
clothed with his merits in Baptism.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. Of the Resemblances that are found between the Birth of
Christ, and that of a Christian.
AS the Christian takes his denomination of Christ, so also does he his Glory;
neither has he any Privilege which he is not obliged to him for. If he have
any merits that render him acceptable to God, it is from the Ex sacramento
unctionis and Christi Christianorum descendit voeabulum et nomen: quod nomen
ille frustra sortitur qui Christum minime imitatur. Aug. de vita Christi.
Actions or Sufferings of Jesus Christ that he borrows them. If he pretends any
right to heaven as his inheritance, it is because Christ is his elder Brother;
if the Angels do him any service, it is because he is a member of his Body, and
that this quality equals, if not prefers him before these blessed Spirits: If
(lastly) his birth be holy, it is because it resembles that of the Son of God,
and receives in the bosom of the Church the same advantages the Son of God
received in the womb of his Mother. Indeed, could the tongue of man recount the
wonders of a Nativity that astonished the Prophets, they might happily be reduced
to three or four heads that render it glorious and full of luster.

The First is, That the Son of God was conceived by the operation of the holy
Ghost: He it was that managed this great Design, who curdled the most pure
blood of the Virgin, who formed the Body of the Word Incarnate, and becoming
his principle, did in a manner give him in Time what he had received from him
in Eternity. The Angel spoke thus of it to the Virgin, when for the interest of
her Virginity she desired to be instructed how she might be the Mother of God.
Superveniet in te dando foecunditatem, and servando Virginitatem. Bern.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Glory of the Highest shall
over-shadow thee. The Holy Ghost was the dispenser of this mystery; his
goodness wrought this miracle of love; and he that was barren in Eternity, to
give Jesus Christ to the world, became fruitful in time. Though this favor be
admirable, exalting the Son of God above Prophets and Kings; yet is it common
to him with Christians, who have the privilege to be born of the Holy Ghost,
and to enter into a new life by his grace: For he it is, and not an Angel, that
sits President in this sacred Omni homini renascenti aqua baptismatis instar
est uteri virginalis; eodem Spiritu sanctorcplente fontem qui replevit et
Virgine^, ut peccatum quod ibi vacuavit sacra conceptio, hic mystica tollat
ablutio. Leo.
pool wherein we are regenerated: he it is that stamps upon us the character
that makes us Christians, and sheds abroad charity into our hearts, whereby we
are made the children of God: It Is by his virtue that our sins are blotted out,
and by a secret influence that penetrateth the essence of our soul, that we
become the adopted sons of the Everlasting Father, and the brethren of Jesus
Christ. The holy Scripture teaches us this transcendent verity in common
ordinary words, but which in their deep sense, comprehend almost an infinite
number of mysteries: Except a man be born again of water, and of the Holy
Ghost, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. As it is he that gives us
the being of Grace, so he gives us a right to Glory; and as he made the Virgin
Originem qua^ sumpsit in utero Virginis posuit in font baptismatis, dedit
aquae quod dedit Matri; et obumbratio Spiritus sanctiquae fecit ut Maria
parerot, eadem facit ut aqua rogeneret credentem. Leo Sermon. de Not. Christi.
fruitful to bring forth Christ, so he makes the water prolificall to
regenerate the Christian. It Is the opinion of St Ambrose, and of St Augustine,
who both conspire together to make us admire the excellent grace that we
receive of the Holy Ghost in Baptism: The same Grace, says the later, that
makes Man-God, makes Man-Christian; the one is re-born by the same Spirit
whereof the other is born; and as This is wholly exempt from all sin, That is
fully delivered from it. Thus the Christian may boast that he has God for his
Principle, that he owes his birth to the Holy Ghost, and that this privilege
is common to him with the Word incarnate.

The Second Advantage of the Son of God in his temporal Nativity, is, That he
had a Mother who miraculously united Fruitfulness with Purity; for the Fruit
that she bare shed not her Flower; the quality of a Mother made her not lose
that of a Virgin; and Nature stood amazed, that being so pure, she was
notwithstanding brought to bed. The Ecce Virgo concipiet, ct parict filium.
Isa. 7.
Prophets have prepared us for the belief of this miracle by their predictions;
they beheld it in the secrets of Futurity, and knowing very well that it was
one of the greatest Privileges of the Messiah, they have made it one of the
fairest observations in his History. The very Heathen were not ignorant of it:
The Sybils have proclaimed it for the rarest ornament of Virginity; and there
were some people who (moved by their Predictions) erected Altars to the Virgini
pariturae.
Virgin Mother. Nothing in all our Religion has carried so much luster with it
amongst the Heathen, as this glorious particular; neither had they much ado to
believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, seeing he was the Son of a
Virgin: This Prerogative has repaired the scandal of the Cross; and if some
impious wretches have thought meanly of him when they knew he suffered upon a
Gibbet, they could not choose but highly admire him when they learnt that he was
born of a Virgin. The Fathers of the Church are of opinion, That if the Son
honored Nobilitas fuit nascentis in Virginitate parientis, et nobilitas
parientis in Divinitate nascentis. Aug. Sermon. 30. de Temp.
his Mother by his Divinity, the Mother honored her Son by her Virginity,
Finally, they thought, if God must have a Mother, she must be a Virgin; and if
a Virgin must have a Son, he must needs be a God. Though this be so
extraordinary a Privilege, that Christ never communicated it to any mortal
(the greatest Monarchs are born of a woman that purchases her condition of a
Mother with the expense of that of a Virgin); yet has he been pleased to
honor every Christian with the same favor: For they are born of the Church,
who like Mary, is pure and teeming together: Their Mother is a Virgin; and as
Age impairs not her fecundity, neither does the number of her Progeny sully her
purity: She is delivered of them without sorrow, as she conceives them without
sin; and because she engenders the members of Jesus Christ, she has the same
privilege with her that brought forth their Head. The Church is a Virgin,
says Et Virgoest, et parit, Mariam imitatur quae Dominum peperit; numquid non
virgo sancta Maria, et peperit, et virgo permansit: sic est Ecclesia, et parit,
et virgo est. Aug. Ser. 117. de Temp.
St Augustine) she imitates Mary that conceived Christ: Mary is a Virgin,
though she were delivered of a child; the Church also bears children, and
continues still a Virgin: And if you well weigh her privileges, you shall
perceive, that even she also brings forth Jesus Christ, seeing those that are
baptized are his members. Thus the Birth of Christians is as glorious by their
Mothers side, as by their Fathers; they have, as Christ their elder Brother, a
God for their Principle, a Virgin for their Mother, and a Kingdom for their
Inheritance.

To all these Graces we may add a Third, which is common to them with their
Head, for the Holy Scripture silently hints that the word of the Virgin
contributed something to the production of her son; she yielded her consent,
before she surrendered her womb, she spoke to express her intentions, and her
word had so much virtue that it gave life to Jesus Christ.

This word Verbum quod erat in principio apud Deum, fiat caro de carne mea
secundum verbum, fiat mihi verbum non prolatum quod transeat, sed conceptum ut
maneat. Bern. super missus est. Hom. 4.
Fiat which began the Incarnation, was in a manner as powerful in her mouth, as
that which began the Creation; and if we judge of the Cause by the Effects, we
are more obliged to this, then to that which produced the whole world, since
one Jesus Christ is more worth then the whole Mass of Men and Angels together.
This Word, as efficacious as it was humble, glads heaven and earth, repairs the
disorders of the Universe, and giving a product to a Divine Expectat Angelus
responsum, expectamus and nos verbum miserationis quos premit sententia
damnationis: Ecce offertur tibi pretium salutis nostrae, statim liberabuntur si
consentis: si ergo tu Deum facias audire vocem tuam, ille te faciet videre
salutem nostram. Bern. ibid.
Redeemer, laid an obligation upon all creatures. But if with our Mysteries we
may raise our contemplations; let us say that the Virgin imitated the Eternal
Father, and as He conceived his Son by speaking, she conceived him so too; she
declares his divine Original, and becoming the Mother of him of whom he is the
Father, she begat him, if not by her Thought, at least by her Word: Her sacred
Mouth began the work of our salvation, her Virgin-Womb finished it, and as soon
as the Holy Maid returned her answer, and contributed her blood, the Word was
found Incarnate in her bowels.

I confess this Miracle would be without a Parallel, had Jesus Christ no
brethren: but since he was willing to honor them with all the Privileges of
his Nativity, he was pleased also that his Spouse should be fruitful as his
Mother was. Indeed, the Church produces us by speaking; the water that
regenerates us receives the virtue from her words; and did not the Ministers
pronounce them when they baptize us, this Sacrament would have no power to give
us a Being: It Is the lips of the Mother that quickens us, her voice that draws
us out of the bosom of death; neither would all the water of the sea be able
to wash away the least sin, were it not enlivened with her word: She acts as
her Beloved does, makes things by her speech, inspires a secret virtue into the
Elements, ennobles them above their nature, and by a miraculous impression
gives them an insluence upon the soul: She imitates Mary, her speech is
prolificall; and as her production is spiritual, she needs only speak to
enliven her children. What is water, says Saint Augustine, without the Word of
God in the mouth of the Church, but the commonest of the Elements? but when
quickened with her voice, it becomes fruitful; and by the union of these two
Principles together, the Sacrament is completed, sins are absolved, the dead
are raised, Christians are regenerated, and sinners converted.

Let us add Miracles upon Miracles to unfold the excellencies of Man a
Christian, and pronounce this fourth wonder in the Birth of Christ, that
without losing the quality of the Son of God, Idem est in forma Dei qui formam
suscepit servi; idem est incorporcus manens, et corpus assumens; idem est in
sua virtute inviolabilis, and in nostra infirmitate passibilis; idem est a
paterno non divisus throno, et ab impiis crucifixus in ligno. D. Leo Ser. 10.
de Not.
he assumed that of the Son of Man: For having two Natures united in one
person, he relates to his Father from all Eternity, and to his Mother in the
fulness of time; from the one he received Divinity, from the other humanity: The
manger that cradled him in his Temporal Birth, obscured not the Glory of his
eternal Birth: Greatness was always mixed in his Person with meannesse; and as
God and Man are never separated since first they were united; Nihil ibi ab
invicem vacat, tota est in majestate humilitas, tota in humilitate majestas:
nec infert unitas confusionem, nec dirimit proprietas unitatem; aliud est
passibile, aliud inviolabile; and tamen ejusdem est contumelia cujus and
gloria. Leo Ser. 3. de passi. Dom.
in this divine composure may still be discerned an admirable Medley of glory
and humility, which ravisheth Christians and confounds Infidels. These cannot
comprehend that the Son of Man is the Son of God; that he that is equal to the
Father, is his servant; that he gives Orders, and receives them; that he
commands, and obeyes; that he comes down upon the earth, and yet never leaves
heaven; that he dies, and still lives; that he is confined in a Sepulcher, and
yet fills the whole world. This Miracle prepares us for the belief of another,
no less strange then the former: For if we consult the Holy Scriptures, we
shall find that the Son of God was made the Son of man for no other end then to
make us the Children of God; he was humbled, that we might be exalted; and he
has facilitated the belief of our future greatness by the example of his
debasement. His birth is a pledge of ours, he was born of a woman, but to
assure us that we might be born of God; neither was he apparelled with the
flesh in the womb, but to persuade us that one day we shall be clothed with
glory in the heavens: And this is the Argument the most illuminated of the
Evangelists makes use of to establish our second Generation; for having taught
us that Baptism and Faith give us God for our Father, fearing lest so high a
promise find no credit in our understanding, Venit Filius ut illo
participantemortalitatem nostram per dilectionem, nos efficeret participes
divinitatis suae per adoptionem. Aug. de Cons. Evangel.
he gives us the Generation of the Word for an assurance of our Regeneration:
and having ravished all men with those magnificent words, He gave them power to
become the Sons of God, he discovers the cause of that miracle, and clearing
us of one wonder by telling a greater, he tells us man may become God, since
God by an excess of love was willing to become man: And the Word was made
flesh and dwelt amongst us. This is the admirable argumentation of St. John and
the solid establishment of our greatness: It Is by this unparalled example
that he prepares us for the belief of our mysteries; this is the proof all the
Fathers make use of to persuade us that the misery of our condition can no way
hinder us from being the children of God, since the glory of the Word was no
obstacle to his being made man. Give me leave to express these wonders in the
words of S. August. Vt homines nascerentur ex Deo, primo ex ipsis natus est
Deus. Non quaesivit quidem nisi matrem in terra, quia jam patrem habebat in
coelo; natus ex Deo per quem efficeremur; natus ex foemina, per quem
resiceremur. Noli ergo mirari quia efficeris Filius Dei pergrat am, quia
nasceris ex Deo per verbum ejus, prius ipsum Verbum voluit nasci ex homine ut
tu securus nascereris ex Deo; and diceres, nasci voluit Deus ex homine, ut
immortalem me faceret, and pro me mortaliter nascitur. Aug. Tract. 2. in Joan.
and to join the pomp of his eloquence to the majesty of my subject. God that
makes all things with so much justice, was willing to be born of a woman, that
men might might be born of him: He sought out but one Mother upon the earth,
because he had already one Father in heaven; being born of his Father he made
us; being born of his mother he re-made us, associating by an admirable
conjunction, the quality of Creator with that of Redeemer. Wonder not then if
by grace ye are the Sons of God, since ye are born of him by his word; nor
think it strange that ye shall be one day immortal in glory, since God in his
second Generation became mortal, was willing to suffer death upon the Cross
for our salvation. Thus his Charity makes us like him, his goodness surpasses
the miseries of our nature, and renders us partakers of his glory: so that
there is no Christian but may boast that his Baptism confers upon him by grace
all the advantages Jesus Christ possesses by nature, and that the Mystery of
the Incarnation being repeated in the faithful by their new Birth, exalts them
by a happy Indulgence to the greatness of Jesus Christ.

The Sixth DISCOURSE. Of the Adoption of Christians and the advantages it has
above the Adoption of Men.
IF it be true that the end why the Son of God was made the son of Man, was,
that we might be made the children of God, we need not think it strange, that
the adoption of a Christian is one of the chiefest effects of Baptism, nor that
man, changing his condition by his regeneration, change also his Father and
Mother. But it is a thing very well worthy our admiration, to consider, that he
is adopted by a Father, who having an only Son equal to himself, should in
reason cast out all adopted children, were he not obliged to accept them at the
entreaty of his own proper Son. Adoptio nuptiarum subsidium fortunae remedium,
supplet sterilitati, vel orbitati. Jurisc.
For to take this Truth at the rise, and unfold the wonders contained in it, we
must know that Adoption was invented among men to supply the barrenesse of
Parents, or the death of children. Indeed it is a thing never heard of, that a
Father to whom Nature has given a Son, should adopt another, and seek that in
a strange Family which he may find in his own: He would believe himself to
offend against paternal charity, should he divide it; and injurious to his Son,
should he assign him coheirs: Though this be his only one, he never resolves
to provide him companions, neither has he ever recourse to this remedy, but
when the death of his son makes it lawful, in making it necessary. In the mean
time the Eternal Father adopts us; though he have an immortal Son, he extends
his affections to us, and admits us into his Family, to make us share in his
Inheritance.

But that which most furprifeth us in this Economy, is, That he undertakes
this design at the request of his Son, nor does he honor us with the
condition of Children, till Jesus Christ has honored us with that of
Brethren: It Is one of the chiefest motives of his incarnation, and we may say,
that he had never chosen a Mother upon earth, but that he might have Brethren
in heaven. He is the only begotten in the bosom of his Father: He shares not
this quality with the Holy Ghost; and as their processions are different, one
is the Son, the other the Spirit of the Father; the One remains in his bosom,
the Other in his heart; the One proceeds by Knowledge, the Other by Love. But
this only Son is first born of the chaste spotless womb of the Virgin, by his
temporal birth he gains Brethren, and clothing them with the robes of his
merits, obliges his Father to avow them for his Children: For we enjoy not
this quality but after we are instated in the person of the Word: nor can we
have God for our Father, but we must have Jesus Christ for our Head: But when
Grace has made us his members, Unicum Filium Deus habet quem de sua substantia
genuit; nos autem non de sua substantia genuit: Creatura enim sumus quam non
genuit, sed fecit; and ideo ut fratres Christi secundum modum faceret,
adoptavit. Aug. lib. 3. contra Faust. cap. 3.
and being quickened by his Spirit, we make up one body with him: the Father
loves us as his children, looks upon us as a portion of Jesus Christ, contracts
an alliance with us, that honors us, and imitates that which he has from all
Eternity with his Son: Thus we are his sons and his subjects; he is our Lord
and our Father, and we bespeak him in the same language our Head does; we call
him our Father and our God.

This Alliance is not only true because founded in Grace; Vinculum igitur
nostrae cum Deo Patre unionis Christum esse constat, qui nos quidem sibi
conjunxit ut homo, Deo vero genitori suo sic unitus est, ut naturaliter in eo
sit. Cyril. Alex. in Joan.
but so proper, that it relates only to the person of the Son, agreeing not so
much as to the holy Spirit: For as he is not the Father of Jesus Christ, so
neither is he ours; and as he has other Alliances with him, so has he also
with us: The Father alone is our Father, it is to him that we address our
selves when we use that name; and knowing very well, that we are inseparable
from his Son, we know very well that the affection he bears us is an overflowing
beam of that love he bears him, of whom we have the honor to be members.

Though this mystery be wonderful, and it is a hard matter to comprehend upon
what motive Jesus Christ was willing to procure us this honor; yet the
condition wherein he found us redoubles the wonder: For Adoption has this
advantage above Nature, that it is in its liberty to choose the most
accomplished. Nature is blind in her affections, as well as in her
productions; she knows not, for the most part, what she does, her works are
many times defective; and as if she had lost her light together with her
innocence, she brings forth Monsters as often as Men: In the mean time she
forbears not to love her imperfections; she has the heart of a Mother for all
her productions, and compels parents many times to embrace Monsters, because
they are their children. In this particular, Adoption is much happier then
Nature; it sees what it admits of, chooses upon knowledge of the cause, loves
that which is lovely and amiable, nor does impart affections or goods but to
persons that merit them: Nevertheless, contrary to all these rules, we find,
that the Eternal Father adopts children born in sin, and having nothing but the
Apennage of Adam, are rather the objects of his wrath, then of his love: He
goes to seek them in the mass of perdition, he separates them from the Guilty
to render them innocent, and applies to them the merits of his Son to make them
worthy of his inheritance: For of all the Favors (says St Promisit hominibus
divinitatem, mortalibus immortalitatem, peccatoribus justificationem, abject is
glorificationem; quicquid promisit indignis promisit, ut non quasi operibus
merces promitteretur, sed gratia nomine suo gratia, gratis daretur. Aug. Psalm.
102.
Augustine) God the Father was pleased to honor us with, he has continually
prevented our deservings; he pardoned us in our delinquency, heaped honor upon
us in our misery: To wretches condemned to death he has promised immortality;
to the guilty, innocence; to base contemptible creatures, glory; to men,
divinity; that we may receive all these favors as the gracious endearments of
his mercy, and not the recompenses of our merits. Thus our Adoption is founded
upon his goodness; he chose us but because it was his good pleasure; he has
made us his Children because Christ has made us his Brethren; and in the
apprehension of so great an advantage, all we have to do, is to humble our
selves at the sight of our miseries, and to give him thanks at the
consideration of his mercies.

But to the end that this grace may appear more precious, we must reckon up its
Privileges, and allow the rest of this Discourse to its more noble
Excellencies. The Adoption of men is indeed an Alliance, but we may without
offense call it an imaginary one; it has no other foundation but the affection
of him that adopts, and the true or apparent merit of him that is adopted: the
conjunction is so impotent, that it produces nothing real in their minds;
it is, as we have observed, a mere denomination, constituting no true relation
between the two persons it unites; and in this particular we must needs
confess, it is much weaker then Nature: For this ties men with flesh and blood,
her chains are so strong, that it is almost impossible to break them: The Father
looks upon his Son as a piece of himself, the Mother beholds him as a portion
of her own bowels; nor can the Son die, but both of them die in conceit with
him. Adoption has nothing of this vigor in it, it leans upon interests, and
as soon as he that is adopted has no more any hope, he has no more love nor
respect. But the Christian Adoption is like that of Nature; the links that
compose it are of Diamond, Missus est Filius, non adoptione factus, sed semper
genitus Filius ut participata natura filiorum hominum, ad participandam ettam
suam naturam, adoptaret etiam filios hominum. Aug. lib. de Gra. Novi Test.
and the Grace that supports it is so firm, that it is able to subsift
eternally: It penetrates the very essence of the soul, and cleanses it from
the spots of sin, darts a light into the understanding, heat into the Will;
plants the seeds of Glory in that intellectual substance, gives it a true right
and title to the kingdom of heaven: and constitutes an Alliance between man and
God so strict and combining, that it imitates that that is between the Humanity
and the Divinity by the mystery of the Incarnation. From the very instant of
Baptism the Christian is truly the Son of God; the misery of his Nature, the
shame of his Birth, and the Crime of his first Father hinders not Jesus Christ
from being his Brother, the Church from being his Mother, nor eternal glory
from being his portion.

But I wonder not at all that the Adoption of Christians is more substantial
then that of men, since it is celebrated with greater pomp and ceremony. For
when a man intends to adopt a child, he needs only declare his will, and make
use of the Princes authority to make his Adoption public and valid; as soon as
this Instrument is drawn, he that was but a stranger becomes a Son: But the
Adoption of Christians is as full of mysteries as of circumstances; for the Son
of God must make himself the son of man, must charge himself with our sins, and
enrich us with his merits, that satisfying the justice of his Father, he may
oblige him to change his hatred into love, and to accept those for his Children
that he accounted his Enemies: The Christian also must be washed in the waters
of Baptism, must borrow the voice of the Church to renounce the tyranny of the
Devil and the pomp of the World; must put off Adam, and put on Jesus Christ,
that being filled with grace, and cleansed from sin, he may receive the benefit
of Adoption: Under the shadows of these Ceremonies there are performed a
hundred miracles, which faith only can discover: For an Element animated with
the Word of God acts in the soul, and defaceth the spots sin had imprinted
there; Man changes his condition, though not his nature; he that was a slave
becomes free, and he that deserved damnation by the fault of Adam, is accounted
worthy of Glory by the Grace of Jesus Christ.

But the last and rarest Circumstance of this Adoption is, that it admits
Christians into an inheritance not at all divided by the number of heirs. One
of the greatest misfortunes of the world is, that the goods are so small, Ista
quae appetitis, quia exigua sunt, nec possunt ad altcrum nisi alteri erepta
transferri; etdem affectantibus pugnam and jurgia excitant. Senec. lib. 5. de
Ira. cap. 35.
one man cannot be proprietary of them, without ravishing them from another;
every man impoverisheth his neighbor to enrich himself: and humane prudence,
that seeks for tranquillity in estates, has not to this day been able to choke
this unhappy seed, the root of all disorders. Sovereigns will reign alone in
their Dominions, Fathers will be Masters of their Families; both of them are
jealous of their Children, nor do they invite them as partners in the
possession of their goods, because they know very well they cannot be divided,
but they must be lessened. Death must take away the Father, that the Son may
succeed him; so that the lawfullest Succession in the world is never without
grief, because it can never be without loss. This unhappiness proceeds
certainly from the scantiness of earthly goods: for were they large enough to
be parted without suffering a diminution, every one would possess them without
jealousy: Kings would not fear their Successors, nor Fathers their Heirs: And
as Light and Virtue breed no quarrel amongst those that have them in their
possession, there would be no more War among Sovereigns, nor Lawsuits among
Subjects. This benefit is an inseparable consequence of the Adoption of
Christians; Their Inheritance is so large, that the number of children cannot
diminish it: The Good they hope for has two properties that secure it from
envy; it is one, and cannot be divided; it is infinite, and suffices the
whole world: its unity is the cause that every one possesses it entire; its
infinity, that none are afraid of a lessening; they are all rich of the same
substance, they are all happy by the same felicity; the difference of their
condition troubles not their rest, and this Summum bonum, though in diversity
of endowments, makes men neither envious nor proud: Every one is content with
another prosperity, and with his own; and the charity that reigns among the
Citizens of this heavenly Jerusalem, does so intimately unite their hearts,
that the diversity of particulars disturbs not the happiness of the whole. But
that which compleats their contentment to the full, is, that death never
separates the children from their Father; he has Heirs, but no Successors; he
despoils not himself to enrich them; but living and reigning with them, he
conferrs all his goods upon them without losing them: He himself is their
everlasting Inheritance, who fills their desires, perfects all the powers of
their soul, and communicates himself so abundantly, and so surely to his
children, that as there is nothing they can fear, so neither is there any thing
they can wish for. And to describe this happy state with St Augustine, let us
profess, Deus sit baereditas nostra; non forte temere dicimus faciendo vobis
Deum possessionem, cum ipse sit Deus and Creator; non est ista temeritas,
^ffectus est desiderii, and dulcedo spei. Dic securus, ama securus, spera
securus, Dominus pars haereditatis mcae. Aug. in Psalm. 32. Ser. 2.
That God is our Inheritance to Eternity, that it is no presumption to style
him so, though he be our Creator and our Sovereign; because it is the fervency
of our desire, and the sweetness of our hope that puts this name into our
mouth. Say we therefore with assurance, that he is our heritage, since the
Scripture obliges us to believe it, and forbids us to doubt of it: But let us
remember, that as he is our Inheritance, we are also his, that he will possess
us as we shall possess him; and that we shall never be completely happy, till
possessing our God, we shall en^irely be possessed by him. Let us live always
in this desire, comfort our selves with this expectation, and by a certain hope
taste the happiness we shall one day be satisfied with in an everlasting
enjoyment.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. Of the Allyances the Christian contracts at his Birth,
with the divine Persons.
THe Creation is the first Alliance Man contracted with God: for as soon as
ever he came forth out of Nothing, he began to be his Creature; and all the
advantages he possesses are so many sacred chains to fasten him to his
Creator. His Alliance is founded in his servitude, and his servitude is founded
in his Essence; he must be annihilated to render him an independent from the
Almighty; neither yet in this condition would he cease to hold of him, since
God Vocat ea qua non sunt, tanquam ea quae sunt. Unde existimavit Clem.
Alexandrinus, Decum esse Dominum creaturarum, antequa^ esset illarum Creator.
commands the creatures in their nonentity, from out whose abyss he has
extracted all the elements. Thus man obeys God before he has an existence, he
is his Vassal before he is his Creature, and he submits to his Orders before he
can understand them: But if his obedience precede his creation, his Alliance
succeeds it; neither has he any affinity with God, till he is made his
workmanship: It Is in that instant that he enters into society with him, when
his spirit enlightened by Faith, knows the prime verity, and his will warmed by
love, seeks out for the sovereign Good: Assisted with this double succor, he
soars above himself; and knowing that he came forth from God as from his
Principle, he endeavors to return thither as to his ultimate end.

Though this be a very noble Alliance, yet we may say, it relates not to God in
his Persons, but in his Essence: For all the perfections Man received in his
Creation, are but the droppings of the perfections of God: His Power expresses
that of his Creator; his Liberty is an emanation of that Being which is as free
as it is necessary; his Reason is a product of the first primitive Reason; and
all the other qualities that raise him above the rest of Creatures, are rather
images of the Unity of God, then of the Plurality of his Persons. Nay, the very
Angels, which are of nobler extraction then Man, seem not allied to the divine
Persons: Every one of their Cernere est in Seraphin, quomodo amet, qui unde
amet non habet: cernere est in Cherubin Deum scientiarum, qui solam nesciat
ignorantiam: cernere est in Thronis judicantis aequitatem, nec vacat sessio
tranquillitatis insigne est. Bern. lib. 5. de Consid. cap. 4.
Orders respect some one of the perfections of their Creator; The Seraphims
express his Love, the Cherubins his Light, the Thrones his Rest. The
Hierarchies lead us not to the Trinity; or if they give us some umbrages
thereof, they deliver no exact knowledge: We see nothing in these blessed
Spirits that discovers to us the Generation of the Word, or the Procession of
the Holy Ghost; and having well considered them, there is nothing we admire in
them but the Goodness or the Power, the Greatness or the Majesty of him that
created them. All their Allyances, as well as those of Men, are terminated in
the divine Essence, and pass not to the Trinity of the Persons: They are rather
Servants then Sons; or if they are Sons, their Adoption is not Nusquam enim
Angelos apprchendis, sed semen Abrahae apprehendit. Heb. 2.
founded upon the Mystery of the Incarnation. This glory was reserved for
Christians, who at the moment of their Nativity have the honor to be allied to
all the Persons of the Trinity: The Son loves them as his Brethren, the Father
adopts them as his children, and the Holy Ghost quickens them as his Temples;
therefore are they baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost: Their Birth consecrates them to this ineffable mystery; and
from the time they receive the Being of Grace, they bear the Character of the
Trinity.

The Son began this Alliance by the Mystery of the Incarnation; he was made
Man, to make us his Members; he has united us in his Person by such a near
combination, that his advantages become ours, and our transgressions become
his. Every thing is common to us with him, and giving his Person to our Nature,
there is no Greatness he has not communicated to us: our Grace is an effusion
flowing from his, our Birth is an image of his eternal Generation; Gratia
nihil est aliud quam participatio divinae filiationis: secundum Divum Thomam.
and if we believe the Master of the School, our Adoption is a copy of his
divine filiation. Finally, to express so high a Verity in a more noble Elogie,
Every Christian seems to be a second Jesus Christ, every believer is a son of
God; and as they are happily blended with the Word Incarnate, they may boast
themselves as he is, Men-Gods. It Is on this occasion Love makes his power
appear, that of many persons mutually affecting one another, he makes but one;
that he makes greatness bow, and sets humility on high; that he transforms God
into Man, to transform Man into God; and surmounting all obstacles that oppose
this Union, constitutes Jesus Christ the Head of Christians, and Christians the
Members of Jesus Christ. Now it is in Baptism that they obtain this honor; for
albeit the Son of God is united to our Nature in the Mystery of the
Incarnation, and that there this eternal affinity was contracted, which death
cannot dissolve, we are not engraffed upon his Person but by Baptism; till we
are bathed in this Laver, we have nothing but the miseries of Adam, nor any
part in the merits of Jesus Christ. It Is by the virtue of this Nemo fit membrum
Christi, nisi aut Baptismate in Christo, aut morte pro Christo. Aug. lib. 1. de
anima.
Sacrament that we enter into society with him; it is there, that putting off
the old man, we put on the new, and beginning to be united to the Son of God,
we participate of his divine qualities. From this time the Christian is a new
creature, he receives the Spirit of Jesus Christ, without changing his nature
he changes his condition; though he has yet but the seeds of glory, he has
notwithstanding the rights of a Son, and looks upon the Kingdom of heaven as
his inheritance: The grace of Jesus Christ blots out all his sins; of a slave
he becoms a child, of an object of wrath he becoms an object of love; and big
with the merits of his Head, he hopes one day to reign with him in glory.

By a necessary consequence he enters into an Alliance with the Father
Everlasting: not considering the meanness of his Extraction, nor the misery of
his Original, he treats with God as with his own Father; he makes use of those
amorous terms the Church puts in his mouth, and without losing the respect of a
servant, he enters into the liberty of a child. Grace fastens so strict a union
betwixt them, that nothing but sin can divide them; as it is an emanation of
the divine Sonship, it is not a bare Adoption; and if it bear this name, it is
because we have no other to express its excellence by. But to comprehend
rightly; this Alliance is as true as that which flesh and blood entitles us to
with our Fathers and Mothers: if this be founded in Nature, that is founded in
Grace; if this be sensible, that is spiritual; if this be close, that is more
intimate; neither is the quality of children in Christians a mere denomination,
as it is in those that humanely are adopted. We are the images of our Father, in
the donation of Grace we participate of his nature; and as it is true according
to the saying of St Peter, that by grace we are God's; so is it certain, that
by the same grace we are the children of God. "All the trouble in this
Alliance, is, that it depends upon our Liberty for its preservation; we have
the power to dissolve it, there needs but one act of our will to break the
Association; and though the chains that entertain it are stronger and more
precious then those of Diamond, one mortal sin is able to dash them all in
pieces; there is nothing but Glory that unites us inseparably with God; as long
as we live upon the earth we are divided between hope and fear, and if the
greatness of Alliance makes us joyful, it is frailty causes us to be
apprehensive and fearful: As long as it lasts, it protects us from all
disasters, we have nothing to be afraid of but our own weakness; and provided
we remain true to Grace, we may promise our selves victory over our greatest
enemies." God watches over us as over the members of his Son, he has a care
of our Interests, he blesses all our designs, he makes the hatred of our
adversaries serviceable to our salvation; and spite of the fury of all Devils
that tempt us, and the rage of all Tyrants that persecute us, he at last brings
us happily to Glory.

But that which I find most admirable in this Alliance, is, that in some sort
it makes us enter upon the rights of a Father over his Son Jesus Christ: for we
Nomen Paternitatis ex divinis ad humanos Patres translatum est. Damas. de fide
cap. 9.
produce him on our Altars, and in the souls of Believers; we are his Fathers
and his Mothers, and by a manner as true as incomprehensible, we give him a new
life here below. The Priests bring him forth by their words, and the Church
acknowledges she should not enjoy her Beloved upon the earth, did not the
Priests make him descend from heaven. It Is in this administration that (more
powerful then Joshua) they command Jesus Christ, and entering into the authority
of his Father, they prescribe him Laws which never he dispenses with: when
they speak, he obeys; he works an hundred miracles to comply with their Orders.
The Preachers O praeclara, O reverenda potestas vestra! certe non est potestas
post Deum sicut potestas vestra; quod enim vobis dedit primo loco sancta Verbi
Incarnatio, vos de die in diem nobis ministratis nobis ex collatae potestatis
officio. Ber^de Coena Dom.
imitate the Priests, and from their Mission receive the same power the others
do from their Character; their lips are fruitful in the Church, they never
preach, but they hold forth the Son of God; their word is a sacred branch that
gives life to their Auditors, and by a strange miracle, they are the Fathers of
Jesus Christ and of the faithful, they travel with them both together; and
when God blesses their labors, they bring forth these two Twins at the same
time. This is the happiness the great Filioli mei, quos iterum parturio donec
formetur Christus^n vobis. Gal. 4.
Apostle of the Gentiles boasted of heretofore, when he called the Galatians
his children, and forming Jesus Christ in their souls, he endeavored to
perfect both by his Evangelical labors. Thus Preachers and Priests take their
fruitfulness from the Father Everlasting; they have no authority over his Son,
but because they have the honor to be his Ministers; nor do they enter into
his power, but because they have an interest in the divine Paternity.

This advantage is not so peculiarly theirs, that it is not common to them with
the faithful; Every Christian may conceive Jesus Christ in his own soul, and
bring him forth in others, he may be both Father and Mother; and the Son of God
teaches us, that so holy an Alliance is contracted by an humble obedience: He
that does the will of his Father, becomes his Mother, he that preaches by his
good example becomes his Father; and every Christian may boast he returns that
to Jesus Christ he received from him in his Baptism. But certainly, we must
acknowledge, there is no person that more honorably possesses this advantage,
then the blessed Virgin: she is the Mother of the Son of God in so August a
manner, that she comes near that of his Eternal Father; it is the noblest copy
of that divine Original; neither is there any creature to whom God has more
largely communicated his fecundity: He takes pleasure to see himself imitated
by the Virgin, and to observe in the person of Mary the properties of his
divine Hypostasis: He begot his Son of his substance, and Mary of her blood; He
conceived his Word in his bosom, and Mary in her womb; He produced him by a
virtue that constitutes his Person in the Trinity, and Mary brings him forth by
the same virtue communicated to her in the moment of the Incarnation; He
produces him by the knowledge of his Greatness, and Mary by the consideration
of her Nothingness. Finally, the Father begets his Son equal to himself, Et
erat subditus illis. Luc. 2. Quid fecit Verbum, non capiebatur in se, descendit
ita etiam ut esset subditus illis; sic mutavit confilium suum ut quod tunc
caeperat usque ad trigesimum annum dimiserit. Ber. de Resur. Domin. Ser. 3.
and Mary brings forth her firstborn like unto Men: She holds the place of
the Eternal Father upon earth, she is the Regent of the Son in his Minority,
she prescribes laws to him that gives laws to the Angels; and Jesus Christ
reverencing the Authority of his Father in the person of his Mother, was
obedient to her the space of thirty years. Thus the Eternal Father has nothing
so proper, that he communicates not to Christians; the Alliance he contracts
with them is so strict, that together with him they are all the fathers of the
same Son; and we may say, 'twas drawn out of that communication, seeing he
reserves not that very quality that distinguishes him from his own natural
Son.

As the holy Spirit is the sacred bond uniting all these divine Allyances, he
also is pleased to associate himself with the Christians, and entertains so
firm a union with them, that he is as well their Spirit, as that of the Father
and the Son: for he is shed abroad in our hearts by charity; he erects his
Throne in our hearts, he quickens us by his presence, leads us by his motions,
illuminates us by his light, and warms us by his heat. He is so well blended
with us, that he is more the Principle of our actions, then we our selves: If
we pray, he furnishes us with words and conceptions; he expresses himself by
our mouth, weeps with our eyes, works with our hands; and as if he were
incarnate in each of us, he makes use of all our members to accomplish his
designs. This divine Spirit accommodates himself to all our affairs and
conditions; he acts diversely in the faithful, and as the soul, diffused over
all the body, sees with the eyes, works with the hands, hears with the ears; so
he preaches by the Apostles, suffers in the Martyrs, instructs in the
Doctors, and in his adorable Unity produces an acceptable Diversity of
operations and effects: His infinite charity obliges him to intermeddle with
our affairs; he comforts the miserable without troubling his own happiness, he
strengthens the weak, and makes Maids and Children triumph in the infirmity of
their Age and Sex, he teaches the ignorant, and this Divine Master distills
Truth into the Understanding without the mediation of the Senses. Finally, he
is the Spirit of the Church, the bond of the faithful, the love of Christians,
the mutual gift of Men to God, and of God to Men.

But that which surpasses all belief, He is so absolutely in our disposal,
that the faithful communicate him to others: The Priests are not only the
Ministers, but the Principles thereof, they produce him by their word, as they
do Jesus Christ; neither are there any Sacraments in the Church which are not
so many channels by which they power forth the Holy Ghost into the souls of
Christians. Nay, many times they that have him not themselves impart him to
others; being poor, they make others rich; and having not the grace, they
notwithstanding communicate the source; for though they lose their sanctity,
they lose not their power; and as it is founded in their Character, which can
never be obliterated, they have always the right to give the Holy Ghost, and
to remit sins. But because I intend to make a particular Treatise of the Spirit
of the Christian, I shall reserve my larger Discourse of the Allyances we have
with him, for that place; and conclude the present subject with those words of
St Leo, That the Believer is obliged to acknowledge the advantages he has
received from Jesus Christ in his Birth, by no means to degenerate from his
Nobility; and to think he ought no more absolutely to dispose of himself,
seeing he has the honor to be the Son of the Eternal Father, the Brother of
Jesus Christ, and the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

The Eighth DISCOURSE. Of the principal Effects Baptism produces in the
CHRISTIAN.
FOrasmuch as Effects are the images of their Causes, we never judge better of
the power of these, then by the greatness of those: A great Effect leads
always on to a great Cause, and this Maxim is as true in Grace as in Nature.
For if God sometime make use of a weak Instrument to produce a miracle, Aliud
est enim baptizare per ministerium, aliud per potestatem; Baptisma enim tale
est qualis est ille in cujus potestate datur: no^ qualis est ille per cujus
ministerium datur. Aug. Tr. 5. in Joann.
he raises the puissance thereof, and by himself supplies what infirmity would
sink under. Thence it comes to pass, that the Fathers of the Church attribute
to Jesus Christ all the effects of Baptism, teaching us, that it is neither the
virtue of the Water, nor the merit of the Minister (though both are requisite)
that justify the Christian. God reserves to himself the glory to act in this
Sacrament; He it is that baptiseth by the hand of his servants, and without
having respect to their deserts, works grace by a Devil, as well as by an
Angel. Wherefore we need not wonder that so common an element produces such
rare effects, seeing it is in his hands who of nothing was able to create all
things. These effects are almost infinite, their number as well as their
greatness astonish us; and to observe them well, we had need be illuminated by
his light whose works they are. Nolite contristare Spiritum sanctum, in quo
signati estis. Ephesians. 4.


The most part of Divines are of opinion, that the impression of the character
is the first effect: for he that is baptized wears the Livery of his
Sovereign, he is marked with his Seal, and from the time of his Baptism there
is formed in the essence of his soul a Character that neither Time nor Eternity
can blot out: He carries it with him to heaven for his glory, into hell for his
confusion; and that which was a mark of his alliance with God, becoms a mark of
his rebellion against God. Men make their slaves wear upon their garments
visible Badges of their vassallage, and there are some so cruel as to
stigmatize their very faces: The Devil (who is Gods Ape) engraves his Character
upon the bodies of those miserable wretches that serve him; and if we believe
the report of the Magicians, and the experience of the Judges that have
examined them, there are not any Witches who bear not the shameful marks of
their abominable servitude. This proud Spirit imitates his Sovereign as far as
his weakness will give him leave, and he is ravished that the creature who
has given himself to him, witnesses his fidelity by an external and visible
impresse: since he cannot act in the souls of men, he is content to act upon
their bodies; and he is satisfied, when upon the works of the Creator may be
seen some characters of his Tyranny. But God who is absolute in his State, acts
upon the souls as well as upon the bodies; and at the same time that the
Ministers sprinkle the water of Baptism upon the body of the Neophytes, he
imprints an eternal character in their souls.

This first effect is followed with another, to wit, the Infusion of Grace: for
as soon as the words that consecrate us are pronounced, the holy Spirit enters
into our hearts, and there produces that divine quality which renders us the
children of God. We know not whether it be equal in all those that are
baptized: Some are of opinion, that the disposition of those that are at age
augments or diminishes it, and according as they have more or less actual
love, they receive more or less habitual Grace. Some others pass the same
judgment upon Infants, and are persuaded, that the design of God upon their
souls makes the difference of their Graces; and that those who are destined to
the highest degrees of Glory, receive also at their baptism a higher degree of
Grace. This question being not yet resolved, every one may abound in his own
sense, though it seem, that as every man equally sinned in Adam, every
Christian is equally regenerated in Jesus Christ. But I conceive our Fall and
our Restoration are two Abysses that cannot be sounded; and that the example
alleged for confirmation of the first, is as much concealed, as the Truth they
would thence elicite and extract. Therefore, not confining our selves to any
one of these opinions, it is better to confess our ignorance, and acknowledge
there are secrets in the order of Grace, as well as in that of Nature, which the
spirit of man can by no means discover.

The third Effect of Baptism is the restitution of the Innocence we lost in
Paradise: Every one explains it according to the conceit he has of it; and
there are store of Divines who imagine that man by the virtue of Baptism,
reenters into all the advantages of Adam; that his will recovers its Perfect
freedom, his understanding its light, and every faculty of the soul is
re-established in its primitive vigor and activity. But certainly, experience
gives this opinion sufficiently the lie, seeing every day the faithful to their
cost find that their will is a slave to concupiscence, and if the assistance
of Jesus Christ give them not the mastery, there is no temptation but would
engage them in a sin. Indeed, though we should affirm, that habitual grace
restores us with advantage whatever Adam despoyl'd us of; yet must we
acknowledge that concupiscence remains in those that are baptized, making
havoc in their souls as well as in their bodies; that it weakens their wills,
because it divides them; obscures their understandings, because it sheds
darkness over them; troubles their rest, because it stirs up seditions in their
person, which end not but with their life: Let us say then that this innocence
is nothing but a freedom from sin, which flowing from grace, causes that the
disorders of concupiscence render us not guilty, and that there must be an act
of the will to occasion the loss of that which grace has endued us with. This
binds us so powerfully to Jesus Christ, that we find more strength in him then
in Adam, and are more secure in our Banishment then we had been in the earthly
Paradise. But this Innocence, though never so substantial, is not quiet, its
conflicts make up the best part of its glory, its enemies prepare triumphs for
it; and it is always armed, because it is well assured Heaven cannot be gained
now but by violence.

The fourth Effect of Baptism is the weakening of our concupiscence: For though
it remain in the baptized for their exercise, it loses much of its vigor,
being left an orphan, in respect of the father that gave it life, it droops and
languisheth; and separated from sin, it gives us no assaults but such as we may
easily defend our selves from. The grace that assists us is more potent then
the adversary that sets upon us: and it is upon this occasion that we may say,
Stronger are they that are on our side, then those that are against us. A man
must needs play the coward, to suffer himself to be overcome in a combat where
the victory depends upon his own will animated with Grace. If we want help, we
may pray for it; and the Christian has this comfort, to know that his own
consent is necessary to his undoing. True it is, inasmuch as he is not ignorant
that his victory is affixed to Grace, and that Grace is not so due unto him, as
that it may not be justly refused him, he has still reason to fear; and
distrusting his own strength, is obliged to have recourse to the mercy of his
divine Redeemer.

Though all Christians are persecuted by concupiscence, Cecidit primus homo,
and omnes qui de illo nati sunt, de illo traxerunt concupiscentiam carnis. Aug.
Tract. 5. in Joann.
yet is it not certainly known whether it be equal in all; for it is so
impotent in some, it seems utterly extinct; all their inclinations are so good,
we have great reason to believe that Grace is rather the Principle of their
actions, then corrupted Nature; and having had a greater share in Jesus Christ
at their Baptism, they have less of Adam then others of his Posterity. Nothing
pleases them but virtue, sin appears with no shape but that of horror; and
whether it be that Grace has weakened Concupiscence, or fortified Nature, they
have none but holy desires, and just and upright hopes: Others, on the
contrary, have so many bad inclinations, that Baptism seems not to have
regenerated them; Adam appears more in their actions and in their words then
Jesus Christ, the old man is more thriving and operative in their persons then
the new; and did not faith instruct us, that the Sacraments infallibly produce
their effects, we should with reason doubt, whether they had received that of
Baptism or no. These two differences can proceed from nothing but from those
two Principles which we are equally ignorant of, to wit, whether some men have
more transgressed in Adam, or more merited in Jesus Christ then others have;
unless we will lay all the blame and misfortune of the later upon their own
constitution, or upon the disorders of their Parents, who many times make them
undergo the punishment of their debauches.

To all these internal Effects may be added a great number of external ones,
which makes us greatly admire the power of Baptism. For by the virtue of this
Sacrament the Christian is freed from the slavery of Satan, he changes his
Master, as he changes his Condition; Hell is shut against him, Heaven is
opened to him; the Angels look upon him as one of their Companions; and seeing
in his soul the Mark of their Sovereign, they are very tender and respective of
his Grace and Privileges. Circumcision had not this advantage; for if it
distinguished a child from an Infidel, enrolled him in the number of the
Israelites, and by the belief of his Parents shed forth faith into his soul;
yet all Divines are of opinion, that it gave him no entrance into Heaven, and
that dying in that state, they went down into Limbo, the skirts and fringes of
perdition: The heavens were not opened till the Ascension of Jesus Christ; He
it was that delivered our Fathers from their Captivity; and that he might
triumph over Hell, as well as over Earth, made them partakers of his happiness.
But to give us a clearer apprehension of the right we have to Glory by Baptism,
Baptizato Domino, Caeli sunt ap^rti; ut declaretur nobis quid ex Baptismo
operari possemus. Div. Thom.
he was pleased that the Heavens should be opened when he received this
Ceremony at the hands of his Precursor, and the Confession of his Father,
declaring him his wel-beloved Son, was an Earnest and Pledge assuring us that
we should one day receive the same favor.

From this advantage there arises another which greatly promoteth the
Condition of Christians: As they are ingrafted into the person of Jesus Christ,
passing into a new order, they live under other laws; and I can hardly believe
that they are subject to that common Providence that rules over all men: For
the illustration of this Truth, which may seem strange because it is new;
Effectus rerum omnium aut movent aut notant sydera; sed sive quod
evenitfaciunt, quid immutabilis rei notitia prosiciet sive significant, quid
refert puovidere quod evitare non possis. Sen.
we must suppose that the sin of Adam has not only changed Man, but the World
also: The Elements bid him battle, the Stars persecute him, and the fires of
the Firmament sparkle with pernicious qualities to infest him: Man's life
depends upon their influences, his constitution is altered by their motions,
and the greatest part of his adventures are regulated by their favorable or
malignant aspects. Astrologers therefore have some reason to search for good or
bad successes in the stars, and to learn from heaven what shall happen upon
the earth: It Is a book wherein knowing men may read the alteration of
Monarchies, the events of battles, the birth and death of Sovereigns, and all
those other accidents which surprise the vulgar: This Opinion, whether true or
false, pretends to be founded in scripture; In sole posuit Tabernaculum suum.
Psalm. 18
and that there are some passages in it assuing us that the stars are the
Channel through which Providence conveighs its virtue upon the Creatures. The Sun
is the Throne where God sits in state, and where he acts with more force; It Is
by means of this glorious Star that he produces the rarest wonders of
nature, and from the very moment that he drew all things out of nothing; he
never appears in the production of any visible Creatures, but he makes use of
his light or heat. His Ecilpses are dreadful to the Universe; he never suspends
his influences but Nature suffers by it; and his course is so necessary to the
constitution of the World, that a moment of rest would be able to destroy it.
Though this great body of Light have so absolute a superintendency over all
Creatures, yet do I not believe that the Christians hold of his Empire, though
he enlighten them with his beams, warm them with his heat, and entertain their
life with his motion: yet am I of opinion there is a particular providence that
governs them: Dominus custodit te, Dominus protectio tua, per diem Sol non uret
te, n^que Luna per noctem. Psalm. 120.
that their occurrences are regulated by another sun; neither is it in the
power of Astrologers to discover the adventures of the faithful. In that they
are the members of Jesus Christ, their happiness is affixed to his person,
their predestination is included in his, and we must understand the secrets of
the Apocalypse to divine their good or bad fortune. The devil himself, though
never so subtle, cannot penetrate this depth; if he have some conjectures for
the future, they prove false in what concerns Christians: the Grace that
includes them, blindes him; and as the heavenly Light strikes his spirit with
obscurity, he is altogether unacquainted with the ways by which providence
happily conducts them to their end. Therefore is it that Astrologers are never
so much at a loss, as when they pretend to judge of the fortune of Believers,
by the rules of Astrology; they must dive into the mind of the eternal Father
to understand his thoughts concerning the members of his Son, and less then to
be admitted into his Cabinet where the unchangeable designs of his
predestination are contrived, cannot enable them to foresee the smallest
accidents of their life.

If the sanctity of their Condition cloud them from the curiosity of
Astrologers, it moreover protects them from the fury of Devils. For though
these wretched spirits are called by scripture the Princes of the World, and
the divine Justice suffers them to employ the Elements to content their fury:
yet have they no power over the faithful: All their rage turns to our profit,
they are serviceable even while they persecute: Their notable attempts, which
testify their power as well as their hatred, contribute greatly to our merit:
The Divine Providence that regulates all their motions, makes use of them to
our glory; and we learn by experience, That nothing can hurt those that love
GOD, because they are beloved of him. Thence arises that profound tranquillity
which Christians enjoy; For as they know nothing happens in the world but
according to the order and disposal of their Sovereign; that the fury of
their Enemies is subject to his Providence, that the Devils execute his Will,
that the Elements serve his Justice or his Mercy, they look upon all Accidents
with a Holy indifferency; they embrace Life and Death, Honor and Dishonor,
Pleasure and Pain with one and the same disposition of spirit, and knowing very
well that they are the members of Jesus Christ, they count it not strange that
his Father makes them climb up to honor by affronts, and to felicity by
persecution.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. Of the Obligations of Christians in pursuance of their
Birth.
INdependency is so natural to God, that some Philosophers have doubted whether
he could be engaged by his promises: But me thinks to preserve his Independency
they would take away his Veracity, and that they might make him an absolute
Sovereign go about to render him an unfaithful one: The perfections of God
never clash one against another, and those that seem to have some contrariety
in the creatures preserve a peaceful harmony without loosing their
differences in the Creator. He is absolute in his power, and faithful in his
promises, he is subject to those Laws he himself prescribes, and he respects
his own Orders without infringing his Supremacy. Seneca, who had only natural
reason for his light, judged that obedience did not at all injure the
Sovereignty of God, Ille ipse omnium conditor ac rector scripsit quidem fata
sed sequitur: semper paret, semel jussit. Senec. de prove. c. 5.
and that observing the ordinances he had set from all eternity, he obeyed
always, and commanded but once. David acknowledged fidelity in God as well as
Independency, and though he knew that all his graces were mercies, he forbeares
not to exact from him the effects of his promises, and to conjure him upon the
truth of his Word, God is faithful in all his words.

Wherefore I conceive I shall no ways wrong the Almighty, if I say that he
treates with the Christian in Baptism; That he imposes Laws upon himself,
which he never revokes; and obliges himself to conditions, which he inviolably
keeps. He receives the sinner into favor, signs him the pardon of his sin,
invests him with the merits of his Son, and promises all things necessary for
his preservation in this new condition. I cannot imagine that this Peace is but
a Truce, that there are any Christians to whom God does not sincerely and
really remit original sin: Cr^dentes in Christum per lavacrum regenerationis,
soluto reatu omnium peccatorum, and originalis quod generatio trahit,
liberantur a damnationc perpetua and vivunt in fide spe and charitate
peregrinantes in hoc saeculo. Aug. tract. 124. in Joan.
His goodness gives me not leave to pass this judgment upon his justice, and
though I know that he performs an Act of Grace to a Delinquent in Baptism; I
believe that considering him in the person of his Son, he refuses him not those
graces which so holy an alliance seem to require: if he condemn them, it is not
for the sin which is blotted out, and if God be deficient to the Laws of this
Treaty, it is because the Christian has first broken the Covenant. The gifts of
God are without repentance, he deserts none, but those that forsake him, and
were we true to his grace he would never dispense with his promises.

The unchangeable Laws of Predestination clash not at all with this Maxim, and
at that instant when he resolved to leave the Reprobate in the mass of
Perdition, he saw their sins as well as those of Adam: It Is upon these that he
rests, when he refuses them Grace, and had they made good use of that they
received, I cannot believe he would have abandoned them. Si gratia dicitur,
gratis datur; si operibus additur, mer^es redditur. Aug. Psalm. 103. Ser. 3
The doctrine of S. Augustine does not destroy it self, though he teach us that
Grace is not due to the Creature, he never told us that it was not due to Jesus
Christ; and where he said that it was justly refused Christians, he always
presupposed that they had committed some Crimes, which rendered them unworthy.

There is some secret in Grace which yet we understand not, whereby it comes to
pass that without destroying the virtue of its efficacy, we may resist its
operation; its charms perhaps are not so strong, that they are always
inevitable, its powers rob us not of our liberty, and though it be very often
victorious, yet it is sometimes worsted: We have a miserable power remaining in
us to resist its motions, and did it infallibly without any intermission
produce its effect, the Saints would not complain of their Infidelity. Whatever
good we do, bears witness of the great Empire it has over our wills, since it
changes them without compelling them, and a thousand times more powerful then
eloquence, it makes the sinner act what he never had a mind to before; it
knows how to conquer our rebellion, and its charms are so sweetly prevalent,
that they master the most obstinate, and subject the most rebellious. But the
evil we do, is an argument that our liberty may resist it, that at all times
it acts not with the like force; and if at its birth it work more vigorously,
in its progress it grows more languishing and remiss, In this point consists
all the difficulty, this is the secret God has not been willing to discover to
us, it is the cause of our differences, and I am of opinion, this will never be
understood till Jesus Christ raise up some new light in his Church. I reverence
Saint Augustine when he defends the party of grace, when he sets it above man's
freewill, when he styles it victorious, and to express its efficacy, affirms
that it infallibly produces its effect: I am ravished when I read that great
Doctor, how he makes man stoop to God, the will to grace, salvation to mercy.
But withal I respect the Council of Trent, teaching us that our liberty may
resist grace, that when it receives its impressions, it may reject them, and
that in the very motion whereby it is carried it may remain obstinate and
unmovable; what ever is said to reconcile these two opinions does not at all
satisfy me, and whatsoever answer is returned, I always meet with difficulties
great enough to persuade me that earth is not the mansion of light, I honor S.
Augustine and the Holy Sea, I subscribe to the Anathema's the Church has
thundered out against Pelagians and Calvinists: and as I believe that Sin has
not destroyed the Liberty of Man, neither do I believe that Free Will ruins
the power of Grace.

But to return where I left, I hold for certain, that God is never wanting to
the Covenant he made with the Christian in Baptism; that he never forsakes him,
till he be forsaken by him; and that there is always some secret infidelity on
man's part, that renders him unworthy of the assistance God would afford him:
his grace is many times offered to the Christian, though it be not due to him;
and as he is constantly obliged to combat sin, I conceive he has continually
some helps which he scarce ever fails of. If God make us sensible of our
weakness, it is that he may oblige us to have recourse to his goodness: if he
suffer us to fall, it is to punish us: and the withdrawing of his grace
supposes always some notable infidelity. When he pardons in Baptism, it is with
as much Sincerity as Mercy: he does not quicken a sin that he has made to die:
he goes not to Adam to seek for motives to destroy a man that begins to revive
in Jesus Christ: and I verily believe he never refuses grace to a Christian for
an offense he has so solemnly pardoned.

But we must certainly confess that we observe not our promises with the same
faithfulness, and that we are many times wanting to those oaths and
protestations we have made in Baptism. For the Christian publicly vows that he
does renounce the devil, That he dies to himself, to live to Jesus Christ, That
he will be crucified with him; and as he takes his party, he is resolved to
fight his enemies. Let us examine these promises in particular, and see what
they exact from us. Baptism in those of age begins by Instruction, in children
by Exorcism; it presupposes that they are possessed with Devils; whom if they
torment not as a Tyrant, they command as a Sovereign. If this Maxim be not
true, the Ceremonies of Baptism must pass for illusions; and the Church, to
amaze us with vain fears, increases the misery of our thraldom, to augment the
benefit of our deliverance: when she sets us free from this shameful captivity,
she obliges us to have no more commerce with the Evil spirit: and knowing that
the World is his State, that it lives under his Laws, follows his Maxims,
obeys his Directions, she gives us in charge to hate it: and to the end we may
submit to her injunctions, we promise, by the mouth of our Godfathers, to
renounce the World as well as the Devil. But because the grace that defaceth
Sin destroys not Concupiscence, but this monster still lives in our flesh,
stirs up disorders there, makes parties, and raises seditions; we engage
moreover to weaken his Empire, to combat his designs, to check his motions.
Thus the Christians in their Baptism are obliged to a War, nay to Death; they
must die, if they intend to live; they must fight, if they mean to overcome:
and knowing that the New man is a soldier, they must consider Life as a
Combat, the Earth as the Pitched Field, and the Devil, the World and the Flesh
as irreconcilable Enemies.

In the rere of these, marches a terrible Troop of sins which Christians are
bound to grapple with and subdue. For the grace they have received in Baptism,
differs much from that which Adam received in the state of Innocence. His was
quiet, and gave no alarms; it subjected the Soul to God, the Body to the Soul,
and the Senses to Reason; its commands were executed without the least dispute;
it found no resistance in its subjects: and as it commanded with Gentleness, it
was obeyed with cheerfulness. This of Christians is obliged to join Force with
Sweetness: and as the most part of its subjects are rebels, they must be
threatened, to reduce them to their duty. It commands always with the sword in
the hand: and knowing very well that when a people are up, Justice can execute
nothing if it be not assisted with force, it must be feared, that it may be
obeyed. Hence it is that it calls in severe virtues to its aid, which make the
Body afflict the Senses, and swallow up the Passions. But use what endeavor it
will, it finds by woeful experience, that its subjects are so mutinous, that
they cannot be brought in subjection: They are rather tired then overcome: and
at the very instant they seem to submit to Grace, they listen to Concupiscence;
and taking new courage from this rebel-lust, they set upon their Sovereign
afresh. Thus our whole life is a continual Warfare: we begin at our Baptism,
and we end not till our Death. This is it that S. Cyprian expresses so
handsomely in his Treatise of the Deluge; where speaking to the Neophytes, he
says, You are baptized, you have the honor to bear the character of Jesus
Christ; you have been admitted to his Table, and his Flesh has served for
nourishment: Take notice how this new kind of life engages you in a combat
where you must grapple with the whole family of sins: If you overcome
Covetousness, Lust will set upon you; if you foil Lust, Ambition steps in its
place; and joining craft to violence, endeavors to persuade us that all his
designs are reasonable: If you master this combatant, Envy, Anger,
Drunkenness, accompanied with their partisans, will presently draw into a body
to destroy you. Therefore does S. Augustine compare the condition of
newly-converted Christians to that of the Jews when they went out of Egypt:
They, says he, were delivered by Moses, these are delivered by Jesus Christ;
they passed through the red Sea, these pass through Baptism; they saw all their
enemies dead upon the shore, these see all their sins drowned in the waters:
But remember, my brethren, that the Jews having passed the Red Sea, were not
suddenly landed in Palestine: the wilderness and deserts exercised their
patience, hunger and thirst oppressed them a long time, fiery serpents
persecuted them, and a thousand strange nations opposing their passage, made
them stand to their arms to defend themselves. Thus the Christians spend their
life in conflicts, and find the world a horrid desert, where a hundred several
monsters serve as trials of their courage, and exercises of their virtue. They
sigh after their dear Country, they long to reign with Jesus Christ; but
disciplined by these precedent Types and Figures, they are taught, that to
arrive to his Triumphs, they must share in his Combats. Therefore ought they
not to think it strange, though being brethren of Jesus Christ, and children of
their heavenly Father, they yet enjoy not their inheritance; and if, while they
are on the earth treated like slaves or enemies, they still feel the revolt of
the Creatures, the persecution of Satan, the War of those two parts whereof
they are composed. Let us profit by these Examples, and remember that if Heaven
be our Inheritance, it is also our Recompense; if we be Children, we are also
Soldiers; and if God be Good enough to prevent our Deserts, he is Just enough
to require our Good Works.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. The Regeneration of a Christian takes not away all that
he drew from his first Generation.
AS Grace and Nature proceed from one and the same Principle, Erat Deus in
Angelis and in pr^^ homine natura condens and largiens gratiam. Aug.
they have in their differences certain wonderful resemblances which cannot be
considered without ravishment. They act both together; and though sin have
divided them, yet does not Grace forbear to make use of Nature in its highest
operations. Their designs are alike, only they seek after God by diverse
ways: but Grace has this advantage over Nature, that it never wanders. They
have one and the same End, as they have one and the same Beginning; and when
they seem to contest, their only design is to make Man happy. Both of them
are admirable in their Variety: Nature puts as many differences in men's Minds,
as in their Countenances; and though all faces have the same parts, yet she
ranks them with so much artifice, that there appears a diversity in their very
likeness. Grace is not inferior to Nature in this advantage; all its
productions are different: and though the Saints are quickened with the same
Spirit, the Church, recording their Panegyric, instructs us that they are
singular in their species.

But one of their greatest resemblances, is, that Nature is flow in her
operations: she brings not her works to pass without much labor and time: one
grain of Corn costs her a whole year; and she needs the several Seasons, to
bring it to a perfect maturity. Flowers that are not so useful as Fruits, stand
her not in less time: and to give them their Color and their Smell, Winter and
Spring are requisite. Grace is yet more slow then Nature: for whether it find
resistance in its designs, or labor in more difficult undertakings, it
perfects not but in Eternity, what it begins in Time: There remains something
still to be reformed in the Creature: and whatever excellency of endeavor it
bestows upon the greatest Saints, it continually meets with some disorders to
be regulated, some sin to be corrected, some inclinations to be vanquished.
Thence it comes to pass that in Baptism, where it gives life to the Christian,
it acts with so much weakness, that wiping away the stain of sin, it leaves
notwithstanding Concupiscence there still. For though by the virtue of this
Sacrament we become new creatures, that Adam dies, and Jesus Christ is born in
us; yet are we but rude draughts, unpolished works expecting their perfection
from time and travel: We are, says one Apostle, but the embryo of a new
creature; and we bear the denomination of Children by reason of our Weakness,
as well as of our Innocence. The Principles of Christian life are in our souls;
we have the seeds of all virtues: but if we husband them not with great care,
they are choked among the thorns of our evil inclinations.

For the understanding a truth that so much concerns our salvation, we must
know that the grace of Baptism defaceth the sin of Adam, invests us with the
Innocence of Jesus Christ; and giving us admittance into his rights, bestows
heaven upon us for our inheritance: of children of wrath which we were before,
Salus hominis in Baptismate sacta est, quia dimissum est peccatum quod ex
parentibus traxit, vel quicquid etiam propric ante Baptismum peccavit.
we become children of mercy; and contracting a true alliance with the holy
Trinity, we renounce all affinity with flesh and blood. In this happy
condition, we are no longer afraid of the just wrath of God; the thunders he
threatens sinners with, are no longer terrible to us; and living securely under
the shadow of Jesus Christ, we know that the sole sin of Adam can no longer
prejudice our salvation: we meditate with delight upon those words of S. Paul,
There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. We have the
earnest of our salvation in our selves; Grace is a pledge of glory: and
remaining under the Conduct of the holy Spirit, we are sure that under so good
a guide we cannot miscarry. But whatever hope our spirit flatters us with, we
cease not to have just apprehensions of our fall: For though God never forsakes
the sinner, till the sinner first forsake him; though he be faithful in his
promises, nor is ever wanting to the Treaty he made with us in Baptism:
Nevertheless there remains in us a wretched faintness, that so weakens us in
temptation, that without a continued assistance of Grace, we cannot hope for
victory. Concupiscence always sides with sin; it labors to revive what it
first gave birth to; and over-spreading all the faculties of the soul, and
members of the body, it sollicites all of them to rise-against Grace: its
Fruitfulness is equal to its Malice; it contains in it the seeds of all sins:
and when Temptation hatcheth them, there is not so much as one whereof man may
not become guilty: As long as he carries about him this enemy, his salvation is
in danger; he groans under its tyranny: and knowing that there wants but one
mere act of the Will to be the midwife to sin, he would willingly not be free,
that he might not become criminal. For all Theologic confesses that
Concupiscence is not taken away by Baptism, That it is left with the faithful
to exercise them, That it continually provokes them to evil, That it
contributes as often to their fall as to their glory; and if it increase their
merit, it swells their danger. Though it be not a sin in Christians, it keeps
them still in breath; they are equally afraid of its smiles and of its frowns:
and whether it flatter or frighten, they have still reason to fear lest it
render then delinquents. In a word, Is it not a sad condition for a man always
to carry his enemy in his bosom; to be obliged to fight, without any assurance
of getting the better; and to know that Grace with all its supplies may
enfeeble him, but never utterly defeat him? If Man account himself miserable in
Nature, because he carries the principles of his death in himself; and that the
opposition of the elements which make him live, must one day make him die: Is
not the Christian very unhappie in grace it self, when he sees how he bears
about the source of sin in his soul, That Baptism sets him not free from
slavery, That Virtue engages him to fight; and at the same time that Hope
promises him Victory, Fear appales him with the apprehension of a Defeat?

This vexation is redoubled by a troublesome division which his second birth
has not composed. For the Christian is unfortunately parted between
Concupiscence and Grace: he never sights with his full strength; and when he
has a mind to obey Charity, there is always some part of Himself that holds
with his Enemy. The Flesh always faceth the Spirit: Man is the Theater of this
dreadful combat; he cannot disarm those that trouble his rest: though he
sometimes prevail over them, he fears lest rallying their forces they triumph
over their conqueror. 'Twas this inseparable misfortune of the Christian, that
made S. Paul sigh; 'twas this potent enemy that made him long for death: and
supposing that 'twere better die then sin, he desired to lose his Life, to
preserve his Integrity.

But admit the Christian were delivered from Concupiscence that torments him,
and from Sedition that divides him; he is still exercised by another trial
which Baptism leaves him to grapple with: For he is subject to Illusion;
Error, as well as Truth, steals into his Understanding: his giddy and
unfaithful Senses side more with Wickedness then with Grace: and these parties
for the most part holding intelligence with the Devil, threaten him with
Blindness and Ignorance.

It Is by this gate that the devil surpriseth the Will; it is by our eyes or by
our ears that he seduceth us: and having these rebels always at his devotion,
we need not wonder if he gain so many victories against us. When he tempted our
first father in Paradise, he set upon a place where he had no intelligence; the
Senses did not all assist him against the Intellectual faculty, nor Passions
against Reason: Man's forces were united; and when his Will pronounced the
definitive sentence, he found as many ministers to execute it, as he had
Faculties. But now he has scarce any members which are not instrumental to his
enemy: his Grace, though never so powerful, stamps no faithfulness upon the
Senses, nor obedience upon the Passions: he has no submission but by violence;
and reigning in a state where Concupiscence lives still, he meets with more
rebels then subjects. All his stability consists in Grace: instructed by the
defeat of Adam, he has recourse to his divine Redeemer; and knowing very well
that his forces are weakened by sin, he finds no better expedient to vanquish
his enemy, then to confess his impotency. Haec una praesentis vitae perfectio
est, ut te infirmum and imperfectum agnoscas. Hieron. ad Ctesi.
He remembers that Virtue is preserved in Infirmity, that the Distrust of
himself is the mother of Safety, and that in a Religion where we live not by
our own spirit, neither do we overcome by our own strength.

But whatever artifice our Humility makes use of to defend it self, yet must we
confess that it is an extreme affliction to know that the devil that tempts us
can trouble our Imagination, and make a part of our selves serviceable to his
malice: For in conclusion, Concupiscence is a trusty minister which executes
all his commands, sets all the Passions in a commotion in behalf of him,
debaucheth all the Senses to serve him; and carrying disorder into the inmost
recesses of the Soul, undertakes to make the Understanding and the Will stoop
to his lure. S. Augustine acknowledged this misery; and confesses, that though
the body were sanctified by Baptism, it had not lost its corruption; that in
the language of Scripture it lay heavy upon the soul, disposing it to sin.
Nay, the soul it self, though it have a greater share in grace then the body,
is nevertheless engaged in self-love: Though in Baptism it received remission
of all sins, yet its bad inclinations are not obliterated in a moment: nor do
the first fruits of Grace produce Virtues, if they be not husbanded with much
care and diligence: the New man must increase daily, if he intend to ruin the
Old; and dismantle the body of Sin, if he will establish the Spirit of Grace.
For it is an error, says that great Saint, for a man to persuade himself, that
from the very moment that a Christian is baptized, all the infirmities of the
old man are quite washed away: his renovation indeed begins by the remission of
sins; but it cannot arrive to perfection, but as he goes on in virtue, and
tastes those spiritual delights which serve as nourishment to the new life.
They therefore are much deceived, who anchor their hope upon their Character;
who think, to be a Christian, is title enough to Salvation; and never
considering that they have only the seeds of Christianity, labor not to make
them fructify by good works: whoever neglects this care, cannot preserve his
grace any long time; and he that resists not Temptation which remains after
sin, is in great danger to be speedily deprived of the Innocence of Baptism.

To all these internal evils which seize us, may be added those external ones
which surround us: for if Regeneration reform not the disorders of our soul nor
of our body, it never asswageth the persecution of the Elements: Though we be
justified by Baptism, we are not instated in our primitive advantages: The
Curse issued out against the Creatures, is not taken away by Grace; and as we
experience revolts in our person, we resent them also in our state. The Earth
has not recovered her former fruitfulness; it brings forth thorns to this day
to punish us; it nourishes monsters that make war against us; it rends asunder
in gaping chasms to swallow us up; and levels mountains to overwhelm us. Every
Element minds us of our misery: they make no difference between an Infidel and
a Christian. Though the Angels respect their character, Creatures despise it,
or know it not. The Sea drowns Our Vessels, as well as those of the Turks. To
be reconciled with God, makes us not friends with the Winds: a man must be a
Saint that commands the Waves: And if together with our Charity, we have not
also the gift of Miracles, we know not how to calm the Sea, nor to appease
Tempests. The Fire spares not all Innocents; it has burnt Martyrs who had no
less faith then the Three Children that walked untouched in the midst of the
fiery furnace: it sometimes blends it self with Thunder, and, being blind,
strikes the Just as often as the Guilty. The Church canonizeth some Saints,
which that element has reduced to Powder: and because she knows that the
sentence of our death speaks of dust and ashes, she wonders not if Thunder have
the same operation upon some Saints, which Time is designed to have upon All
men.

Finally, all the Elements teach us that we are Miserable, though we be not
Criminal: Baptism, that delivers us from Sin, frees us not from Punishment. God
will have the World persecute us, that we may hate it: he has ordained the
place of our banishment to be troublesome, lest it should make us forget our
Country. This is the Advantage we draw from our Evil, the Comfort we retain in
our Miseries: and it is enough to make us stoop with all humility to the Justice
of God, inasmuch as we know that our Punishment may as well be serviceable to
our own Salvation, as to his Glory.

The Second TREATISE. Of the Spirit of a Christian.
The first DISCOURSE. That every Body has its Spirit; and what that of the
Churches is.
IN Nature, every thing has its own Spirit: and if we believe Chemists, there
is no element, though never so simple, out of which the Essent, though never so
simple, out of which the Essence may not be extracted: They make daily
Experiments hereof with the Fire; and dividing what Nature had united, they
separate the Form from the Matter. The World, according to the relation of some
Philosophers, has a Soul that inanimates it, which is shed abroad through all
its parts, and which, according to their diverse dispositions, produces diverse
effects. It Is this Divine Spirit that gives it motion; that waters it with
fruitfulness, whereby it hatcheth all those wonders whose causes men are
ignorant of. As Artificial things are the images of Natural, neither do men
make any thing whereof they take not the Copy from Nature, as from a perfect
Original; there is not any Sect that has not its particular humor and
difference.

The Peripateticks take all their light from Argumentation and Experience; Alii
alia de anima disceptant, prout aut Platonis honor, aut Zenonis vigor, aut
Aristotolis tenor, aut Empedoclis furor, aut Epicuri stupor, aut Heracliti
maeror, persuascrunt. Tert. de Any.
Authority has no credit in their School: they desert their Master, when he
agrees not with Truth: and laughing at the blind obedience of the
Pythagoreans, they believe nothing but what they discover by Sense or by
Discourse.

The Platonicks march upon the higher ground, but less certain, less solid:
Animus cernit, animus audit; reliquae surda and caeca sunt: impedimentum est
corpus, non socium ad cognoscendam veritatem. Tert. de Plato.
for they withdraw from the Senses, as from the enemies of truth; they look
upon them, as upon faithless ministers, or pleasing impostors, which beholding
naught but the shadows of things, present us with nothing but Errors and
falsehoods. Their Spirit savours more of Intelligence then of Science; as if
individuals were unworthy of their observation; they consider nothing but
generals, and leaving men and beasts, Iste Academicue quiae omnia esse
contendit incerta, indignus est qui habeat ulld in his rebus authoritatem.
August. de Cice.
they contemplate only Angels and Ideas.

The Academicks are parted between these two, they allow something to Reason
and Intelligence, they are more noble then the Peripateticks, but not so
credulous as the Platonicks; they make the senses servants to Reason, but
having a mind to see a part of what they believe, they make a Sect whose
principal difference is doubt and uncertainty.

The Stoics are as capacious as they are proud; Magna promittitis and quae
optari quidem nedum credi possint; deinde sublato alte supercilio, in eadem
quae caeteri desceuditis, mutatis rerum nominibus. Seneca.
ordinary proceedings please them not, nothing seems generous that is not
extravagant, all common Opinions stumble them; they judge so ill of the people,
that they take all their votes for Errors: Their Pride, which is the very soul
of their Sect, forms Ideas of virtue, which not one of them can reach unto;
and they propound a Sage so exactly perfect to their Disciples, that they put
them past all hope of imitating him, at the very same time they stir up a
desire in them to become their Proselytes.

The Epicures search after nothing but pleasure, because they conceive it
inseparable from virtue: Their Sect which is soft only in expressions, is
austere really and in deed; Mea quidem sententia est; Epicurum sancta and recta
praecipere and si propius accesseris tristia: voluptas enim illa ad parvum and
exile revocatur, and quam nos virtuti legem dicimus, eam ille dicit voluptati:
Jubet illam parere naturae; parum est autem luxuriae quod naturae satis est.
Senec. de vita beat. cap. 13.
they reduce the desires of men to things merely necessary, they part with
superfluities joyfully, and placing their felicity in their Conscience, they
count themselves happy in the midst of Torments: These Philosophers speak not
of pleasure, but to make their Disciples in love with virtue; and if there have
been found some who have deserted virtues side to embrace that of pleasure, it
has been not only contrary to their expectation, but also to their belief:
For the foundation of their Opinion, is, that the will cannot be charmed by any
thing but by pleasure, and that pleasure cannot be separated from virtue, so
that the mind and intendment of this Sect is to render a man content in
rendering him virtuous, and to make him in love with virtue by catching him with
pleasure.

If from the Schools of Philosophers we pass to the conversation of sinners,
we shall find there is not one of them who is not carried with a particular
humor, and who seeks not out in the sins he does commit some shadow of
happiness. The Ambitious have no other Spirit but vaineglory; This is that
proud passion which inanimates all their designs, inables them to surmount all
difficulties, engages them in conflicts where the success is doutfull, and
obliges them to sacrifice their own lives to purchase a little reputation.
Interest is the soul of the Covetous; whatever is profitable is welcome and
glorious: It Is the hope of gain that sweetens their travels; and when in
despite of Rocks and Tempests they pass the Seas, it is that Idol of Interest
which scatters their fears, and boys up their hopes. Pleasure is the life of
the Lascivious; this passion fosters their desires, surmounts their griefs,
entertaines their fidelity and so besots them with the senses, that nothing can
any way divert them, but what is agreeable or sensual.

But not to trouble my self with the proof of so known a Truth, and leaving
the state of sin to consider that of Grace; we must confess there is not any
Society in the Church which finds not its difference in its Spirit; and being
linked together in the same bond of Charity, is not distinguished by some other
particular virtue. Carthusianorum spiritus solitudo.
For to begin with that order which has no commerce with men, that they may
have the more with Angels; solitude is its spirit and advantage; they take
their probation in the Deserts: They find Thebais in Europe; and reviving the
Anchorites in these last Ages, they present us in their Disciples with the
happy Image of those great Saints that succeeded the Martyrs, and who began to
combat pleasure, Labia Sacerdotis custodiunt scientiam. Mala. 2.
after others had triumphed over grief. The Dominicans have the Spirit of
Preaching, their Name which obliges them to this Exercise, is an emblem of
their duty; and because the Gospel subsists by knowledge as well as by Piety,
they are the Cherubins of the Church, the Depositaries and Guardians of
Learning, the Masters of Divinity, and the fruitful Seminaries whence other
Orders derive Knowledge and Truth: 'Twas their Order that bare those
Constellations of Doctors that enlightened the whole Church; the Alberts,
Thomas's, Jourdains, Renoults, Raymonds, and Vincents, are the Stars which
sparkle in this Firmament, and who for these four Ages dispense Light and
Science round the Europian Christendom. The Order of St. Francis is inanimated
with the spirit of Penance and Poverty; these are the two severe ascetick
virtues that preserve it, representing in every one of this Fraternity, as
their blessed Founder, the Image of Jesus Christ Crucified; all their other
Privileges are reduced to these two, as to their Principle: what ever they do
or say, their design is to fasten the whole World to the Cross; and infusing
their Spirit into the Church, Surrexit Elias Propheta quasi ignis, and verbum
illius quasi sacula ardebat: verbo Domini continnit ignem, and dejecit de coelo
ignem ter; sic amplificatus est Elias in mirabilibus suis. Eccles. cap. 48.
to make all Christians they converse with, so many Votaries of Penance and
Poverty. That Order that takes its Name and Original from Carmel, has no
other Spirit then that of Elias; The zeal of this Prophet breathes still in
his Disciples; wrongs done to God injure them; whatever offends him wounds
them; and these Boanerges more sensible of his glory then their own
concernments, care not for being persecuted, so God may be known and
reverenced. If as their Father they retire into Deserts, it is because they
cannot away with the sins of the World; if they preach, it is to gain subjects
to Jesus Christ, and to enlarge the bounds of his Empire; if they pass the
Sea, it is to make war against Idols, and to teach all people that they are the
children of that Prophet who must support the state of the Church to the end of
the World: Its Daughters are not inferior to its Disciples; their zeal
imitates that of their Father, after his Example they live in Wildernesses,
they destroy wickedness by their good Works, they do Penance for those sins
they never committed, and tempering the fervency of Elias with the sweetness
of Jesus Christ, they pray for the salvation of sinners, and the ruin of sins;
they assist the Preachers with their Devotion, and neither breaking their
Cloister nor their Silence, they are carried in Spirit into New France and
England, to convert by their fervor, Heretics and Infidels.

But as all these companies make but one portion of the body of the Church,
their spirits are but a part of hers, and we may say that from her fullness
they have borrowed all their riches: For the spirit of the Church is the spirit
of God; he that formed Jesus Christ in the womb of the Virgin, formed the
Church in the world; Venit Christus; complentur in ejus ortu, vita, factis,
dictis, morte, resurrectione, ascenfione omnia praeconiae prophetarum: mittit
Spiritum sanctum, implet fideles in una domo congregatos, and hoc ipsu^ ante
promissum, orando, and desiderando expectantes. Aug. ad Volus.
he it was that composed it when he descended upon the Apostles in the
likeness of tongues; and as the Synagogue took its denomination from mount
Sinai, when the Law was written upon two stones in the midst of thunder and
lightning; so the Christian Church derives its original from mount Sion, when
the law of love was engraven in the heart of the faithful, by the finger of
God, which is nothing else but the holy Spirit. It Is from this happy moment,
that the sacred Historians begin the Annals of our Mother, and then it was that
the Apostles her Fathers, and her Children, cured of their ignorance and
infirmity, prepared themselves for the conquest of the Universe, and the
couversion of Infidels. The same spirit that inspired them with life, inspired
them with courage for so generous a design, and hell trembled with amazement
when it beheld twelve fishermen, and seventy Peasants, resolved to lose their
lives, or to work the downfall of Infidelity: Their strength triumphed over the
power of Kings, their simplicity confounded the prudence of Politicians; their
ignorance convinced the obstinacy of Philosophers; and their discourse, void of
all rhetorical ornaments persuaded the minds of Orators.

These Prodigies are very apt to beget wonder; but when we consider that the
Apostles served as interpreters to the holy Ghost, that he spoke with their
mouths, and that he resided in their hearts, we shall not conceive it strange,
that he that subdued Egypt with an army of flies, converted the world by a few
fishermen. This spirit which was the force of the Church, was also the light;
as it assisted her in her combats, Impleti Spiritu sancto loquumur repent
linguis omnium, arguunt fidenter errores, praedicant saluberrimam veritatem,
exbortantur ad poenitentiam, indulgentiam de divina gratia pollicentur. Aug.
epist. 3. ad Volusi.
it instructed her in her doubts; and as often as she would resolve a
difficulty, or settle an Article of faith, she consulted the spirit of her
welbeloved, and finding truth in his answers, she pronounced nothing but
Oracles to her children.

I see nothing more venerable and august in the infancy of the Church, then the
first Council held in the City of Jerusalem, to decide a matter that might
separate the Jews from the Gentiles; It was not convened with so much pomp as
others have been; there appeared not the Ambassadors of Christian Princes,
because the whole Church was included within the walls of one only City; there
were no Philosophers who made use of the vanity of their Sciences to impede the
progress of the truth of the Gospel; there were no strange Nations, because
all the believers were of one Country; the epitome of the Universe was not
seen in one Convocation, because the Church had not yet displayed her banner,
neither in Europe, nor Africa: But there might be seen the Lieutenant of Jesus
Christ, with a zeal worthy of his charge; there was the Bishop of Jerusalem,
who was to water with his blood the Church that he had built by his example,
and instructed by his sermons; there might you see the Apostle of the Gentiles
take the interest of the people he had newly converted, and prove by his
reasons that the Gospel being the accomplishment of the Law, they were not to
make that live again which Jesus Christ had crucified with himself upon the
Cross.

But of all the circumstances that give an excellency to this Council above
all others, I am ravished with none so much as with that great assurance, and
unshaken confidence the Apostles begin their decisions withal; For they
acquaint us that they were the Organs of the holy Ghost; that he that resided
in their hearts, expressed himself by their mouths; that he pronounced his
Oracles in their words, and confirming all they had ordained, he had no other
sense but theirs. Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. It has seemed good to
the holy Ghost and to us. Let Kings conclude their Edicts in terms never so
absolute, let them second their reasons with that imperious clause, Such is our
pleasure, and let them prescribe laws to their subjects liberty, they shall
never persuade us that the holy Ghost is the Author of their Ordinances, and
that he that spoke by the mouth of the Apostles speaks by the mouth of
Monarchs. Infallibility is promised to none but to the Church, and to the head
thereof; there is but that Assembly alone that makes the holy Ghost vocal.
Truth is suspected in the mouths of Philosophers and Orators; Sovereigns are
constrained to have recourse to force to make their laws valid, and of credit.
The Church only can impose obedience upon her children when she will, Potest
fieri ut homo mentiatur, non potest fieriut veritas mentiatur; ex v ritatis ore
cognosco Christum ipsam veritatem, ex veritatis ore cognosco Ecclefiam
veritatis participem. Aug. in Isa. 57.
because to her alone is promised the assistance of the holy Ghost. He is her
Author, because he formed her in her birth; he is her strength, because he
defends her in persecution; he is her light, because he instructs her in her
doubts; and he is her Spirit, because he gives her life, motion, and direction.

The second DISCOURSE. That the Holy Ghost is the Heart of the Church.
THough there is not any part in a man's body useless or unprofitable, yet
Natural Philosophy acknowledges the Heart and the Head for the two principal.
The Head is placed in the highest and most eminent seat, as the Sovereign,
having all the Senses as so many faithful ministers; gives orders aad sheds
influences through the whole body of the State: thence every part receives Sense
and Motion: and no sooner is there any obstruction that hinders the commerce of
the Head with the rest of the Members, but they remain stupied or benumbed. The
Heart is not inferior to the Head in dignity: And we may affirm the Body an
Empire that obeys two Sovereigns, without the inconvenience of a Schism; and
takes Law from two absolute Potentates, without dividing their Royalty. For the
Heart resides in the midst of the Body, as a King in his Kingdom, conveys the
Spirits through the Arteries, dispenses Life to all his Subjects: so extremely
sensible of the Public good, that not the least disorder can arise, but he
gives notice of it by his irregular motion. As these two parts are the Noblest,
so are they most United: their fair correspondence cements the peace of the
Body; their division threatens its ruin: and when they no longer entertain a
free communication, the State must necessarily perish, without any hope of
recovery.

If we may compare Great things with Small, Ecclesiae Corporis Christus est
Caput, Spiritus sanctus Cor. Thom.
we may say that the Church is a mystical Body, whereof Jesus Christ is the
Head, and the holy Ghost the Heart: They act diversely, but to one and the same
end: The one Guides this great Body, the other Quickens it; the one gives it
Motion, the other Life. As there is no misfortune that can divide them, the
Body which they constitute is immortal; and whatever enemies set upon it, they
shall never be able to prevail against it: all its Combats are attended with
Victory: Death despoils it of no parts which Eternity restores not again: what
it loses upon Earth, it recovers in Heaven; and by a happy dispensation of
Providence, finds Rest in Persecution, Life in Death, Glory in Shame. But as
its greatest advantage is to have the holy Ghost for its Heart, and the Son of
God for its Head; let us speak of the First, till we shall have an opportunity
to treat of the Second; and let us discover those Graces and Blessings the
Church receives from his guidance and direction.

Where, that we may not pass the terms of our Comparison, we say, that the holy
Spirit being the Heart of this great Body, inanimates it by his Presence,
unites it by his Charity, guides it by his Light, and comforts it by his
Goodness. The Heart is the Noblest Seat of the Soul, the Throne where she
reigns, the Center of her Principality, where she keeps her chief residence; so
that we may say, it is the Heart that inanimates the Body, and that part that
gives life to all the rest. Thence it comes to pass, that, to express the
operations of the holy Spirit in the Church, we call him the Heart thereof; and
not wronging his greatness, we make use of this Example to express his Charity
by. For it is an undoubted truth, That he inanimates the whole Church, That he
is conveyed into all her Members, Quod est in corpore nostro anima, id est
Spiritus sanctus in corpore Christi, quod est Ecclesia. Aug. Sermon. 186. de Temp.
That he never forsakes her; but in whatsoever condition she is, she is always
fully in his possession. He is the Principle of her Operations, as the Author
of her Life: She acts not but by His motions; and whatever She undertakes, it is
by his Counsels, or his Inspirations: He prosides in all Her Assemblies; She
determines nothing but by His advice; and in Her General Councels She
pronounces no Oracles which She has not received from Him. As He speaks by
Her Mouth, She conceives by His Thoughts; and she delivers nothing upon trust
to her children, which she has not learned in the School of this Divine Master.

If he instruct her in her doubts, he keeps her at unity, maugre those rents
and divisions that threaten to distract her; entertaining that admirable
harmony amongst the different parts whereof she is compacted. One of the
wonders in Man's body, is, that the same Heart which is the fountain of Life, is
also the bond of Peace: it is the Ligature of all the Members; and the Spirits
it imparts unto them, are so many invisible Chains which entertain their mutual
Society: As soon as it leaves off to inanimate them, it cease to unite them;
neither can it suspend its influences, but all the parts of the State fall
apieces. Credentium erat Cor unum, and Anima una. Act. 4.
The Holy Ghost works the same thing in the Church: He is the Soul and the
Cement of this Great Body: he concentres all the Faithful by his Love: and
doing that in Time, which he does during Eternity, he unites Christians, as he
unites the Divine Persons: Si charitas de tot animabus fecit animam unam, and
de tot cordibus fecit cor unum, quanta est charit is inter Patrem and Filium!
charitas autem Patris and Filii, Spiri^us sanctus est. Aug. Tract. 14. in Joan.
For the Church raigns in the Unity of the Spirit; she finds her rest and
strength in that admirable incohabitation: nor is she afraid that Heresies
should dissect her, as long as the holy Spirit preserves her unity. It Is this
good intelligence that makes her terrible to her enemies: This is it that
maintains her, for so many Ages, against the violence of Tyrants, the fury of
Devils, and the subtle stratagems of Heretics. Neither do I wonder at it,
since the force and power of States consists in their Union; and Politicians
study no one design so much, as to banish Division, thereby to keep their
people quiet and at rest. For Experience teaches them, that growing Kingdoms
have no surer Bulwarks against the Approaches of an Enemy, then the Concord of
their Subjects. When they conspire together, they are invincible; and when they
are divided, Q^ bus erat una sides, erat una substantia; quibus crat communis
spiritus communis erat and sumptus.
they are at the eve of their ruin and destruction. But notwithstanding all
the care Politicians take to keep Peace in their Commonwealth, there are a
thousand subjects of Division which they cannot hinder. Men's Interests are more
different then their Conditions: the People are industrious to preserve their
Liberty, the Prince to enlarge his Prerogative; and Private men cannot endure
the ruin of their Families, for the preservation of the Public. Though all
these Disorders were not able to sow Division in a State, the diversity of
Opinions would effect it: For though every one mean well, yet all ministers aim
not at the same thing: the worst Counselors are many times most listened to;
and those that more respect the Fortune of the Prince then his Person, are most
dangerous. But the Church is secured from all these dangers: though she have
many Ministers, she has but one Counselor: Gods Spirit is her Spirit: she is
never divided in her determinations: her embracing of an Opinion, makes it a
Truth: and having consulted him that governs her, all her Decisions are
Articles of Faith. She never erres in Councels: whatever she pronounces there,
is infallible: and her children are no less observant of her words, then of
those of the Evangelists: She cannot be contradicted, without much rashness:
those that desert her Judgment, are involved in a Lie: and if those who
acquiesce in her bosom may happily be in the cloud of Ignorance, they cannot be
in the snare of Heresy. The same Spirit that gives Authority to the Church,
stamps Obedience upon her children: so that there can be no falling out in a
Body where Charity stisles Schisms, Light dispels Darkness, and Power
suppresseth Revolts and Insurrections.

But nothing so much magnifieth the Unity of the Church, as to behold her not
divided by the disparity of Conditions; and that the same Spirit which unites
all the Faithful, employs them about diverse Offices, according to his designs,
and their own inclinations. In this it is that the Church more resembles a
Natural body, and the Spirit the Heart that inanimates it: For though the Heart
be one, yet is it different in its operations; it acts diversely, according to
the diversity of the Members: It expresses it self by the Mouth, guides it
self with the Eyes, defends it self with the Hands; and making every part
serviceable according to its power, it preserves the Public good, without
interessing the Private. Thus one and the same Spirit causes a thousand
different effects in the Church: it speaks by the mouth of Prophets, enlightens
their understandings, informs them of secrets to come; and violating the method
of Time, recals things past, and makes futurities present. He it was that wrote
the History of the Son of God, before he was born of his mother: he it was that
expressed his Truths in Figures, his Light in Shadows, and the most important
actions of his life, by those of the Patriarchs. The same Spirit that spoke by
the mouth of the Prophets, spoke by that of the Apostles: he was their Master,
after the Ascension of Jesus Christ into heaven: he instructed them in those
Mysteries they were yet ignorant of; and making them capable in a moment,
taught them without the tedious expense of labor and delay what they were
suddenly to preach to Infidels.

To facilate this design, he gave them the gift of Tongues; and working a
Miracle incredible to reason, he inspired them with words which the whole World
understood, that all Nations might obey them. 'Twas a prodigy that surpised
men, Per linguas diversas dividi meruit genus humanum; Eeclesiae contulit
unitate, ut quod discordia dissipaverat colligeret charitas. Aug. ser. 3. de
Pentecost.
when God (intending to stop the progress of that proud Tower, the aspiring
Posterity of Noah raised to get them a Name) confounded their Language, and
scattered the people by the division of their Dialects: But it was a far
greater wonder, when the Holy Ghost to unite all Nations, honored the Apostles
with the gift of Tongues, and made one man speak the Language of the Universe,
that the Gospel might be preached without an Interpreter through all the
Provinces of the World: And we must confess, the Church was never more
glorious then when consisting but of one people, it already spoke the Language
of all Countries, and proclaimed by this Miracle, that her Conquests were to
have no bounds, but those of the Universe. To this day she enjoyes this
Privilege, but with less splendor; she speaks all Languages, because she
possesses some of all people; she has that in her progress, which was
conferred upon her at her birth; and she owns that amongst all the Faithful,
Loquor omnibus linguis quia in co sum Christi corpore, hoc est, in Ecclesia
quae loquitur jam omnibus linguis. Aug. in psalm. 54.
which heretofore was eminent in every one of the Apostles. Therefore says S.
Augustine, is the gift of Tongues now superfluous, because the Church having
overspread all the Earth, she finds in the meanest of her Disciples, what was
consigned heretofore to the College of her Masters; and she may boast she has
lost nothing of her ancient Privileges, because the goods of a Body being
common among the Members, she has no children that speak not all sort of
Tongues by the mouth of their brethren.

But because speech, without the effect, is but a dead letter; the same Spirit
that gave the Church the gift of Tongues, gave her also the power of working
Miracles; she has subjects to whom nothing is impossible; Nature submits to
their orders; Faith that inanimates them, makes them absolute in the state of
their Sovereign: The Sun stands still in the midst of his Course to do homage
to their words; the Sea becomes firm under their feet, and the Earth trembles
under those of their Enemies; and they oblige that common Mother to make a
sepulcher of her Womb to swallow them up alive. Indeed, this favor that exalts
them so high, is transient to humble them; Donum miraculorum sicut aliae
gratiae gratis datae non sunt in sanctis nisi per modum transeuntis. D. Tho.
their will is not the rule, but the motion of the Holy Ghost; they act not,
but when he acts with them; they work miracles, when they receive the power
from him; and as soon as ever he leaves them, they return to their former
inability. Miracles cost them prayers and tears; they acknowledge their
dependence, even whilst they exercise their Empire; and whilst all people look
upon them as Gods, they find themselves obliged to confess that they are
nothing but mear Creatures. Is it not a wonder, that St. Paul drives away
Devils, heals the sick, and yet by his prayers cannot deliver either himself
from that Devil, or that malady, which exercised his humility as much as his
patience?

Finally, this Spirit that acted so powerfully by the hands of the Apostles,
establishing the Gospel no less by their miracles then by their words,
fortified them in persecutions, and gave them courage at the same time to
triumph over grief and pleasure too. For as the Tyrants employed subtilty and
violence, power and policy to vanquish the Martyrs, making use of threats and
promises to astonish or seduce the Apostles, it was requisite that the Holy
Ghost should inspire them with continence and strength; and that Grace serving
them instead of a Sword and Buckler, gained them as many Victories as they were
bid Battles. His power never appeared more glorious then upon this occasion;
Quld magnum est si fortis Angelus? magnum est si fortis est Caro; sed unde
fortis Caro? unde forte vas fictile nisi a Domino? Aug. in Psalm. 238.
Miracles have not procured so many conquests as persecutions have; the Saints
never got so much credit by their power, as by their constancy; and infidel
Rome has more admired the patience of the Martyrs, then the puissance of the
Apostles. In the mean time, he that shall consider these effects in their
primitive cause, will confess that one and the same spirit has produced them;
and that as he inanimates the Church by his presence, so by his assistance he
communicates the understanding of Tongues, the knowledge of things to come, the
power of Miracles, and the victory over torments. Wherefore the Church knowing
very well that she owes all to the Holy Spirit, Nihil agunt fideles inconsulto
Spiritu Sancto; quae petunt illi commendant, quae accipiunt illi adscribunt.
Bernard.
undertakes nothing but by his direction; and being persuaded that she has no
strength, which she is not beholding to his aid for; she forms no design
wherein she implores not his succor; and when any happy success compleats the
Enterprise, she gives public testimony by her Eucharisticall deportment, that
she is beholding to the favor of the Holy Ghost, for the benefit she rejoices
in.

The Third DISCOURSE. That the Holy Spirit is in some sort the same to
Christians, that he is to the Father and the Son from all Eternity.
THe alliance that the Eternal Word has contracted with men, is the source
and original of that which the Father and the Holy Spirit contract with the
same Creatures. The Father loves us as his children, because we are the
brethren of his only Son. Heaven is as well our inheritance as our recompense;
and the quality of mercenaries or soldiers which we bear, is no bar to that
of children and heirs: The Holy Spirit has an influence also upon our souls by
charity; he rears an altar in our hearts, and of the members of our body, he
vouchsafes to make living Temples. But as his infinite love has no bounds, his
communications are much aforehand; and by an excess of goodness, he was
pleased to be in time to the faithful, what he is in the Trinity to the
Father and his only Son.

The whole Scripture teaches us that the Holy Spirit is a sacred bond, uniting
the Father and the Son from all Eternity: The Church which is very wel-sighted
in these profound Mysteries, Nexus amoris quo conjungitur Pater cum filio and
filius cum Patre.
calls him the True-loves-Knot: The conclusion of her prayers, clearly instruct
us that the Father and the Son reign together in the unity of the Spirit. Admit
they were not one and the same Thing by their Essence, they would be one and
the same Principle by the Holy Spirit; since all Theology knows very well
that the Father and the Son are admirably united together to produce him:
Therefore has he received a name that perfectly expresses his ineffable
procession; Charitas quae pater diligit filium and filius patre^, quae est
Spiritus Sanctus, ineffabilem communionem demonstrat. Aug. de Trini.
for being the production of the Father and the Son, he bears a name common to
both; and he is called the Spirit, because the Father and the Son call him so
in Scripture. Now this Spirit is the sacred Bond which conjoyns all Christians
together; he is not only the soul, but the unity; and he it is, who by
admirable and secret Ties, entertaines a fair correspondence between all the
parts of this great body: The diffence of their conditions, the contrariety of
their humors, the diversity of their designs, hinders not the Holy Spirit from
uniting them together; nor that he that is the agreement of the Father and the
Son, be also the peace and agreement of the faithful. He it is, that decided
the differences between the Jews and the Gentiles; he it is, who breaking down
the partition Wall, has made of them one building; he it is, who perfecting
the design of Jesus Christ, has happily taken out of the way all obstacles
that impeded the unity of the Church; and he it is, who equalling the poor with
the rich, the freeman with the slave, the learned with the ignorant, has
framed that wonderful body, the most perfect Image of the Trinity.

Therefore must we acknowledge that all those figures that represent to us the
person of the holy Ghost, abundantly bear witness that his principal work is
unity. For sometimes he is called Fire, because that element combines metalls
in melting them, and of two different substances makes a third, which is
neither one nor the other, but rather both: Sometimes he is called Water,
because he gives consistency to the earth, watering it by secret veins, and of
a fluid sand makes a solid heap, which serves for the foundation and center of
the whole Universe; Therefore is it that the great Apostle of the Gentiles
never speaks of unity, Solliciti servare unitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis.
Epist.
but he mentions the holy Ghost, as the source and fountain of it: As often as
he recommends peace to the faithful, he wishes them him that reconciles men
unto God, by the remission of sin that separates them asunder. Neither has
charity, which is the principal effect of this ever to be adored Spirit, any
more worthy employment, then to unite Christians together, after he has united
them with the Trinity.

The second Alliance that he contracts with us, is, that he becomes the gift of
God to men, as he is the gift of the Father to the Son, and of the Son to the
Father back again. If we believe profane Philosophy, Love is not only the
first production, but the first profusion of the will; This faculty is
liberal, as soon as it is amorous, and parting with its love, it makes a
donation of whatever holds of its Empire: Thence it comes to pass, that all
Lovers are prodigal, that they engage their liberty, stripping themselves of
their goods, and renouncing their own inclinations, as soon as ever they begin
to be affectionate: Now as the holy Spirit is the Love of the Father and the
Son, so is He their mutual gift; they give themselves whatever they are in
producing him; and it seems the Son renders to his Father, by the production of
the Spirit, all that he received by his birth. Though we want terms to
express the greatness of these mysteries, Faith which supplies our impotency,
steps in to persuade us, that the holy Spirit is the uncreated Liberality of
the Father, and of the Son, from all eternity; and it is the same faith that
teaches us, that the holy Ghost is also the gift of God to the Christians, and
that at the same time he entered into alliance with them, he bestowed his love
upon them, as a mark of his largess; wherein I observe two or three things
worthy of admiration. The first is, that God makes us a Present equal to
himself, Dedit dona hominibus, quale donum? Spiritum sanctum; magna est autem
Dei misericordia, donum dat aequale sibi, quia donum ejus Spiritus sanctus est.
Aug. ser. 44. de verb. Dom.
which the truest and most affectionate Lovers never do; for though gifts are
the effects of love, they never equal it; and if the Lover makes not himself a
slave to the person he loves, he can offer no Present equivalent to his
affection: Pearls and Diamonds are but weak expressions of his good will;
whatever contents others, are but incentives to his desires; he would be a
Monarch, that he might bestow a kingdom; and in that height of fortune, he
would profess, no prodigality can satisfy a Lover. But God, to whom nothing
is impossible, has in presenting his love, presented a gift commensurate to
the greatness of that best love he would express; that which he bestows
equals himself, his Present is infinite; and when he tenders us the holy
Ghost, he makes offer of a divine Person. The second excellency of this Present
is, that it prevents our merit, because it finds us in the state of sin; and
did God consult his justice, as much as his mercy, we should appear the objects
of his wrath rather then of his love: For he bestows his Spirit upon his
enemies, he sheds his love abroad in the hearts of believers, and we receive
this favor from him, when we deserve nothing but chastisements. The third
excellency of this gift is, that it is the source of all others; for being the
prime radical donation, it is that from whence all the bounteous liberality of
God issues and proceeds, who confers no benefit upon us, which bears not the
image and superscription of this first and prime gratuity. Whatever comes from
heaven, is a copy of the holy Spirit; riches are the expresses of his bounty;
advantageous parts of soul or body, are the marks of his goodness; Graces and
virtues are his immediate impressions; and in a few words to comprehend the
privileges of this Divine Offertory, we must say with S. Augustine, it is the
Pandora through which all other gifts are bestowed upon us. If the Angels
descend from heaven to protect us, if the Sun enlightens us, if the Stars
favor us, if the Earth nourish us, if the Trees shade us, if the Eternal Word
leave the bosom of his Father to take upon him our miseries, it is by the
counsel and mediation of the holy Spirit: and this gift that ravished the
Apostle who tells us of it, was nothing but an effect and consequence of that
primitive largess which is the cause of all others. Thence I infer, that when
we receive any grace, we ought to look upward to the Holy Spirit; and
acknowledging him the fountain of all blessings, profess our selves bound to
render him the eternal calves of our lips.

This favor would take away all hope of gratitude, did not the following
surpass it. For the Holy Spirit is the Love of the Faithful, as he is the Love
of the Father, and of the Son. But to understand this truth, we must inform
you, that the Word being begotten of the Father by the Understanding, is his
only Son; and that the Holy Ghost being produced by the Will, is his Love. The
Father and the Son reciprocally love one another by this mutual charity; they
find their happiness in this common dilection: and should they cease to love,
they would cease to be happy. Having a mind to exalt us to their happiness,
they raise us also to their love; and pouring forth charity into our souls,
they make us capable of loving them. For God is so great, that he can neither
be known but by his own Light, nor loved but by his own Love: the Holy Spirit
must enlighten our Souls, warm our Wills; and by the purity of his flames,
purge away the impurity of our affections: he transforms us into himself, to
make us happy. This holy Love is a particular effect of the Holy Spirit: the
beams that heat us, are an emanation from that Divine fire that burns the
Seraphims: and the charity that raises us above the condition of men, is a
spark of that personal charity wherewith the Father and the Son love each other
from all eternity.

But that we may not challenge the Holy Spirit as sparing of his favors, he
has vouchsafed to be the accomplishment of the Church, as he is the
accomplishment and perfection of the Trinity. For though there be no defects in
God, though this Sun is never clouded nor eclipsed, this Supreme Truth labors
under no shadows nor errors this excellent Beauty has no spots nor blemishes,
and this amiable goodness be full of charms and graces; yet may the Holy Ghost
be called the Complement thereof. The Father begins this adorable Circle, which
the Son continues, and the Holy Spirit finisheth: he it is that bounds the
Divine emanations, draws forth the fruitfulness of those that cause his
production: and if it be lawful to speak of an ineffable mystery, and to
subject to the laws of Time Eternity it self, God is not completed, but by the
production of the holy Spirit: He is the rest of the Father and the Son; his
person is the perfection of the Trinity: and this Divine mystery would want its
full proportion, did it not include the Holy Spirit with the two Persons from
whence he proceeded. The holy Scriptures, to afford us some light of this
verity, attribute all the perfection of the works of God to the blessed Spirit:
They represent him to us moving upon the waters in the Creation of the world;
finishing by his Fecundity, what the Father and the Son had produced by their
Power: They teach us that it was he that gave motion to the Heavens, influences
to the Stars, heat to the Sun: They inform us that 'twas by his virtue that the
earth became fruitful, and that from his goodness she received that secret
Fermentation that to this day renders her the Mother and the Nurse of all
things living. And the Gospel, to give this Truth its full extent, instructs
us, that it is the holy Ghost who by his graces in the Church makes up what
Jesus Christ has begun in it by his travels. He is his Vicar and Lieutenant:
he came down upon the earth, after the other ascended up to heaven: nor has he
any other design in his descension, then to complete all the works of Jesus
Christ. The Apostles were yet but embryo's in Christianity when the Son of God
left them: three years of conversation was not able to perfect them: the
greatest part of the discourses of their Divine Master seemed to them nothing
but Aenigma's; his Maxims Paradoxes, his Promises pleasing Illusions: every
thing was a mormo to these timorous spirits: ths name of the Cross scandalized
them: and so many Miracles wrought in their presence, were unable to calm their
Fear, or heighten their Courage. To finish these demi-works, the Holy Ghost
came into the world: he descended upon their heads in the shape of fiery
tongues, to make them eloquent and bold: he inspired them with Charity, to cure
them of Fear; made them Lovers, thereby to make them Martyrs: he cleared their
Understanding, warmed their Will; that light and heat being blended together,
they might more easily overcome Philosophers and Tyrants. Finally, he set up a
Throne in their hearts, that speaking by their mouths, and acting by their
hands, he might render them accomplished pieces to the service of their Master.
And indeed, we must acknowledge the Apostles changed their condition after the
descent of the Holy Ghost: their Fear vanished, as soon as they were confirmed
by his Strength; the Cross seemed strewn with Charms, as soon as they were
kindled with his Flames: they found Sweetness even in Torments, Glory in
Affronts, Venit Vicarius Redemptoris, ut beneficia quae Salvator Dominus
inchoavit, Spiritus sancti virtute consammet; and quod ille redemit; iste
sanctificet; quod ille acquisivit, iste custodiat. Aug. Sermon. 1. Feria 32.
Pentec.
and Riches in Poverty. This made S. Augustine say, that the Holy Spirit came
to finish in Power, what the Son of God had begun in Weakness; to sanctify
what the other had redeemed, and to preserve what Christ had purchased. If you
seek, says the same S. Augustine, what was wanting to the Apostles, and what
might be added to their perfection by the coming down of the Holy Ghost, I will
tell you: Before that happy moment, they had Faith, but they had neither
Constancy nor Fidelity: they were able to forsake their possessions to follow
Jesus Christ, but they would not lose their lives to glorify him: they were
able indeed to preach the Gospel, but knew not how to sign it with their
blood, nor seal it with their death: they were virtuous as long as they
conversed with the Son of God up on earth; but they were not grown up to
perfection, till the Holy Ghost had communicated to them his graces; and adding
force to charity, had made them the Foundations of the Church, the Fathers of
the Faithful, the Terror of Devils, and the Astonishment of Tyrants. Finally,
it is the holy Spirit, according to the saying of S. John Damascen, that
perfects the Christians, because it is he that Quickens them by Grace, and
Deifies them with Glory: So that we are obliged to confess, that he enters into
alliance with them, that he is the same to the Church that he is to the
Trinity, and that after he has been our Bond, our Gift, and our Love upon
Earth, he will be our Accomplishment in Heaven.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. That the Holy Ghost seems to be to Christians, what he
is to the Son of God.
IT is not without ground, that the Christian is called the Image of Jesus
Christ, since he is his other Self; the one possessing by Grace, what the other
does by Nature. For if Jesus be the Natural Son of the Father, the Christian is
his Adopted one; if Jesus be the Heir of the Father, the Christian is the
Coheir of the Son, according to the expression of the great Apostle; if Jesus
be Innocent, the Christian is Justified; if Jesus be born of the Spirit, the
Christian is regenerated thereby; and receives in his Baptism, what the Son of
God received in his Birth. Inasmuch as this last wonderfully exalts the glory
of the Faithful, I conceive I ought to bestow this whole Discourse upon this
matter, and to make it appear that the Holy Ghost, by an excess of bounty, will
be to every Christian what he is to Jesus Christ.

Faith teaches us, that though Jesus Christ be the Son of the Everlasting
Father, yet is he withal the Workmanship of the Holy Spirit: he that was barren
in Eternity, became fruitful in Time: he that produced nothing in the Heart of
the Father, produced the Word Incarnate in the Womb of the Virgin: and he that
before the world began was the Spirit of the Son, in the fullness of time became
his Principle. The Scripture insinuates this Truth, when it brings in the Angel
speaking these words to the Virgin, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee: And
the Church teaches it all her children, in the Symbol of her Creed, in these
terms, He was conceived of the Holy Ghost. Et licet aliud quidem ex te, aliud
ex Patre sit; jam non tamen cujusque suus, sed unus utriusque erit Filius and
Sanctus. Bern. super missus est homil.
Thence it comes to pass that his conception is so pure, that sin has no part
therein, and that he is free from shame, as the mother that bare him was from
sorrow. He was so born, says Tertullian, that he need not blush at the name of
Son. This great privilege is granted the Christian in his Baptism; and his
second birth is as holy and as noble, as his first was shameful and criminal:
In the one, he is a sinner before he is reasonable; and the slave of the devil,
as soon as he is the subject of Jesus Christ: but in the other, he is happily
born again by the virtue of the Holy Spirit, he receives grace as an earnest of
glory, he is adopted by the Father for his son, acknowledged by Jesus Christ
for his brother, treated by the Angels as their equal, and exalted to so high a
condition, that the holy Spirit disdains not to be styled the Author and
Principle thereof. This is it that holy Scripture holds out to us, by these
words, Unless a man be born again of water and of the holy Ghost. I would
enlarge my self upon this meditation, had I not explained it already in another
passage of this Work: Neither would it be any hard matter to make it appear,
that the Regeneration of a Christian is little inferior, in this particular,
to the Birth of Jesus Christ.

The second advantage that is common to them, is, that the same spirit which is
their Principle, is also their Director; and that he that gives them life,
gives them conduct and motion. These two Things are inseparable in Nature and
in Grace; the same causes that make us live, make us act; these Stars whose
influences contribute so much to our birth, are not less conducing to our
fortune; and as they are the Principles of our Being, they are in some sort the
Guides of our life; if they have no dominion over our spirit, they have over
our humor; and if they force not our liberty, they many times solicit our
inclinations. But not to rest in second Causes; it is plain, the creature
depends as well upon God in his motion as in his Being; he governs men whom he
has created, he guides Princes whom he has raised to the Throne; and he as
absolutely has their wills in his hands as their Scepter. By the same reason,
the Holy Spirit which is the Principle of Jesus Christ, is his Director; he
undertakes nothing but by his conduct; and as he received his being from his
goodness, he submits all his actions to his power: The Scriptures furnish us
with a thousand proofs of so important a Truth; all the Evangelists are the
faithful Witnesses thereof; neither do they ever take notice of the designs
of the Son of God, Ductus est Jesus a Spiritu, quia Humanitas Christi erat
organum Divinitatis; and ideo ad omnia movebatur instinctu Spiritus sancti, hoc
igitur motu ivit in desertum locum aptum or ationi? Glossa. ordin.
but they make it appear at the same time, that the Holy Spirit is the first
mover of them. For if he retire into the deserts to converse with beasts, if he
enter the list wherein he seems to injure his glory to assure our salvation;
if he spend days and nights there in prayers and fasting, if he suffer his
slave to tempt him, and if he refuse not to combat him upon Earth, that he had
driven out of Heaven, it is because the Holy Spirit engages him in the
conflict, and lays an obligation upon him to bear the punishment of our sins,
to deliver us therefrom: if he pass from one Province to another, if he leave
a rebellious City to instruct another more obedient to his divine sermons, it is
by the direction of his guide. Jesus returned into Galile in the power of the
Spirit: If he work Miracles in Judea, it is not so much to magnify his power,
In Spiritu Dei ejicio Daemonia.
as to comply with the motions of the Holy Spirit; and though these signal
wonders cost him but a few words or desires, he never wrought them, but his
divine Principle obliged him thereto by some secret inspiration; if he unfolds
the Mysteries of our Religion, if he declare to his Disciples the will of his
Father, and discover to them those grand designs contrived from all Eternity,
In ipsa hora exultavit Spiritu Sancto, and dixit, confiteor tibi Pater Domine
caeli and terrae, quod abscondisti haec a sapientibus and prudentibus, and
revelasti ca parvucis. Luke 10.
and which were not to be executed but in time; it is the Holy Spirit that
animates him to this discourse, and obliges him to manifest that to men, which
till then he would not impart to the Angels: If finally, the Son of God offer
himself up upon the Cross for our salvation, if he drown our sins in his
blood, if he reconcile us to his Father by his death, and satisfy him with the
loss of life and honor; it is the holy Spirit that engages him in this Agony,
and who inspires him with love enough to vanquish the ignomy and pain thereof:
He offered himselse without spot to God by the Holy Ghost; so that the life of
the Son of God was spent in a continued obedience to the Holy Spirit; he
undertook nothing but by his orders, executed nothing but by his advice; and
he that at first was his Principle, proceeds still to be his counselor and
director.

The Christian enjoyes this advantage with Jesus Christ; whatsoever design he
conceives, whatsoever resolution he takes, whatsoever enterprise he brings to
pass, he is always bound to call upon the holy Ghost: He that has given him
his Being, ought to give him motion; he that has begotten him in Baptism,
ought to govern him in the Church, and if he will not be wanting to his
obligations, nor renounce his privileges, the same Spirit that inanimates him
while he lives, must move and lead him in all his operations: This is it that
S. Paul so highly magnifies, when he says, Those only deserve to be called
the children of God, who are acted by the Spirit of God. Qui Spiritu Dei
aguntur hi sunt filii Dei: Whereupon Ergo agimur and non agimus? respondeo; imo
and agis and ageris, and tunc been agis si a bono agaris: Spiritus enim Dei qui
te agit adjutor est tibi agenti: ipsum nomen adjutoris praescribit tibi, quia
and tu ipse aliquod agis: sed ne te extolleret humanus spiritus. and ad hoc
opus se idoneum jactaret, ideo subjecit quotquot Spiritu Dei aguntur hi snut
filii Dei. Aug. Ser. 13. de verb. Apost.
S. Augustine preventing two contrary objections which might be made against
this truth, says, That Christians are not only lead by the Spirit, but
driven, to the end they may know that He is rather the Principle of their
actions, then themselves, and that in the way of salvation, they are rather
sufferers then doers: But because this answer might sooth men up in idleness,
and give them an occasion to neglect good works, expecting the enthusiasmes of
the Spirit, he adds, They are moved, that they might move; they receive the
impression of grace, that they may act; and that the Apostle expressly made use
of this manner of speech, at once to make them shake off idleness and
presumption.

From this Privilege is derived a third, not so peculiar to Christ, as not to
be common to Christians; For the holy Spirit is their Master; he instructs them
both in his school; and they have the glory to be his disciples as well as his
workmanship. The Son of God has two schools, as he has two births; the first
is Eternity, where his Father is his Master, and where he teaches him his
learning, in communicating to him his Essence: There by a strange Prodigy, the
Master is not more knowing then the Scholar, nor the Scholar junior to his
Master; the science is learnt in a moment, but that moment endures for ever;
and though it have no parts, it includes nevertheless all the differences of
time; this science, though but one, comprehends in it all sorts of truth; the
Master hides nothing from his Scholar, he instructs him at the same instant he
begets him; the birth of this Son, to speak properly, is his instruction: as he
is born for ever, so he learns for ever: and he that conceived him in his
bosom, is eternally his Father, and his Master: This Son has in time another
school, and a new Master; he that produces him, teaches him; and the same
Principle that forms his body, fashions his understanding from the very first
moment of his Conception. He imitates the Father that teaches him from all
eternity, he instills all things into him without succession or labor, and
conveying light into his soul, Vir erat Jesus necdum etiam natus, sed
sapientia, non aetate animi virtute non viribus corporis. Bern.
he has no need of the mediation of the senses to render him learned. This
Pupil discourses before he speaks, he conceives truth before he beholds the
light, and his understanding is informed of all the secrets of his Father,
before he could pronounce the name of his Mother: His knowledge grows not up
with time, because it had its just proportion and measure at the very moment of
his Generation; Experience has not made it more evident, nor age more assured;
and if he pronounced no Oracles in his Infancy, it is because he had a mind to
conceal his Wisdom, as he had concealed his Divinity. Finally, this Divine
Master taught him a science, which Politicians seek for and cannot find; for
he discovers to him the secrets of the heart, the motions of the will, and all
those thoughts and imaginations, which though they never brake forth in words
nor actions, cease not to render men guilty: So that should Jesus Christ
neither be united to the Person of the Word, nor illuminated with the light of
Glory, he would nevertheless have an infused knowledge, whereby he would be
acquainted with whatever is most secret in Nature, and in Grace, in Time, and
in Eternity. The holy Scripture also teaches us that the holy Spirit that
abides not always in others, rests upon Jesus Christ; Requievit super eum
Spiritus Domini. Isa.
and he that distributes his Graces to others by measure, communicates them to
his Masterpeece without weight or limitation: But this is no hinderance from
his being the Master also of all other Christians, from teaching them the
science of salvation, discovering to them the mysteries of Theology, the
secrets of Nature, and the maxims of the Politikes: In effect, it is the holy
Spirit that made the Apostles learned, that spoke with their mouths, that
confounded Emperors and Philosophers with their answers, and made them
understand those Oracles which were nothing but Riddles to them, whilst Jesus
Christ conversed with them upon the earth; It Is lastly, the self same Spirit,
which to this day teaches the faithful what they are to believe in Religion,
what they are to do or leave undone in the practice of their life, and what
they ought to hope or fear after death: He cannot deceive them, because he is
the Spirit of Truth; he cannot engage them in evil, because he is the Spirit
of Holiness; neither can he suffer them to wander in Error, or languish in
infirmities, because he is the Spirit of Counsel and of Strength; Therefore is
he the Master whom the faithful consult with in their occasions, it is in his
School that they commence in virtue, it is under his Conduct that they grow up
to perfection, and by his advice that they defend themselves against error and
falsehood. Vbi Deus Magister quam cito discitur quod docetur. Leo Sermon. 1. de
Pente.
Though this Science be so deep, yet is it learnt in a moment; his Disciples
become Masters without pains; Truth distills into their understandings without
passing through their eyes or ears; sleeping and waking, they are equally
capable of attention; and this Doctor is so dexterously exact, that bestowing
the Spirit upon his scholars, he repaires by Grace the defects of Nature.

But to conclude all these resemblances, we affirm that the holy Spirit is the
witness of Jesus Christ, and of the faithful; and having deposed for the
Divinity of him, deposes daily for the Innocence of these. For we know by
Scripture, that the same Spirit that spoke heretofore by the Prophets, has
since spoken by the Apostles; and having foretold the Ages past, the wonders
that Jesus ought to do, revealed them to the generations to come, that all men
might be fully informed of the Mysteries concerning him to whom they were
beholding for their salvation. This Spirit is the testimony of Jesus and of the
faithful, because he has formed them, and knows all their thoughts, whereof
he is the first Principle and Author: This also was he that descended upon the
head of the Son of God in the form of a Dove during the ceremonies of his
Baptism; 'twas he that discovered to S. John Baptist his Innocence, and taught
him without speaking that he was that Lamb of God that was to take away the
sins of the world. And he it is that daily performs the same office to
Christians: For having been their Master, he vouchsafes to be their witness;
he speaks to the eternal Father in their behalf; having pleaded their cause,
he gives them assurance of their salvation; The Rest that calmes the waves of
their conscience, is an effect of his testimony; those sighs and groans he
draws from the bottom of their heart, those desires he inspires them with for
everlasting good things, those scorns he furnishes them with for perishable
ones, are so many Earnests which the Elect have of his love, and their
salvation: if there be some remainders now and then of Fear amidst their Hope,
it is to preserve them from Negligence, or from Pride; and to make them profess
that they find in him a Divine Principle, a wise Director, a knowing Master,
and a faithful Witness.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. That the presence of the Holy Spirit gives life to the
Christian, and his absence causes his death.
ONe of the chiefest advantages we shall partake of in Glory, is, that God will
be to us in stead of all things; and that finding in him the accomplishment of
all our desires, we shall there meet with our perfect felicity: He will be the
Temple of the Blessed, because they shall lodge in his Divine Essence: He will
be for a garment to them, because they shall be clothed with his light: He
will be their nourishment, because he gives them eternal life; and, according
to the language of S. Paul, he will be All in all to these blessed inhabitants.
The Holy Spirit seems to have a mind to make us taste upon Earth the Happiness
of Heaven, inasmuch as he is all things to us in the Church; that he informs us
in our doubts, comforts us in our afflictions, assists us in our conflicts,
teaches us in our prayers. For Christians owe all that they are, and all that
they do, to the holy Spirit: They live by his presence, act by his power,
understand by his light, and love by his charity: All their advantages flow
from him. If they are Saints, it is he that sanctifies them: if they are free,
it is he that sets them at liberty: if they are generous, it is he that
encourages them: and if they be wise, it is he that enlightens them. In the
mean time, the most part of the Faithful are ungrateful to the holy Spirit:
Liberalitem Dei servitutem faciunt. Tert.
They attribute that to their own power, which they derive from his; and
turning his grace into a slavery, they would pass for the Authors of a work
whereof they are at most but the Ministers. Therefore will I spend this
Discourse to let them see, that the holy Spirit inanimates them; and that as by
his presence he makes them live, so by his withdrawing himself he makes them
die.

A Man and a Christian have some resemblance in their difference; they live
both of them by the Spirit; and their life is rather spiritual then animal: For
though Man have a body composed of the Elements, which has need of the Air to
breathe, of the Earth to bear it, of Food to nourish it, and of Light to make
it see; yet is his soul the principle of his life; This Form inanimates the
heart, giving it motion, whereby all the other parts live. The absence of the
soul, is the death of the body; its presence, the life: and when grief or
weakness separates them, Man cease to be a living creature. Inasmuch as a
Christian is more excellent then a Man, by so much is his life more sublime,
and he has a nobler principle of his Being: For the holy Spirit is his Soul;
and paring off whatever defects that name may include, he is the Form that
inanimates the Believer. Though he have an Understanding that reasons, a
Memory that preserves his conceptions, and a Will free and absolute; yet does
he live by the holy Spirit, and receive from him a supernatural life, which
makes him capable of God. As long as he is united to this Spirit, he is alive;
as soon as he is parted from him, he is dead: And it is a miracle, says S.
Augustine, that the soul, dead by sin, does nevertheless enliven the body; and
that notwithstanding that imperfection, Aliud est in anima unde corpus
vivificatur, aliud unde ipsa anima vivificatur. Melius quippe anima quam
corpus, sed melius quam ipsa est Deus; est ergo ipsa etiamsi sit insipiens,
injusta and impia vita corporis. Aug. Tract. 19. in Joan.
it have wherewithal still to reason in the finding out of Sciences, and to
manage it self in its affairs and negotiations. It is true therefore, that the
absence of the holy Spirit greatly impaireth the vigor and clearness of Man:
for the life of Man as a Reasonable creature, and as a Christian, are so
intimately united together, that the one cannot be separated from the other
without an extreme detriment, and enfeebling of the creature. The Christian
merits not, till he begin to reason: Grace is idle in his soul, when Reason is
not yet formed in it: and all Divines are of opinion, that children baptized
have no other merits but those of Jesus Christ: Heaven is their Inheritance,
but not their Recompense: they are in the condition of Heirs, but not of
Soldiers: and the Crown they receive is rather the Consequence of their good
Fortune, then the Reward of their Labor. Man is yet more deplorable when he
loses Grace, then when the Christian loses Reason: for besides that none of
his actions are any longer meritorious, that he does nothing pleasing to God;
and having lost the Principle of his supernatural life, he is destitute of all
recompense and desert: he has moreover contracted this misfortune, Vita
infidelium peccatum est; and nihil est bonum, sine summo bono: ubi enim deest
agnitio aeternae veritatis, falsa virtus est etiam in optimis moribus. Prosp.
sen. 106
that he is become the slave of Concupiscence, which throws Darkness over his
Understanding, Weakness into his Memory, and Malice into his Will: Under this
conduct, he confounds Error with Truth, Vice with Virtue; and having no other
end but himself, he commits as many sins, as he intends to perform good works:
Vainglory is the Primum mobile that sets him a going; he seeks for reputation
in all his actions: and when he assists his Country, stands for the Laws, and
fights for Liberty, he obeys a Tyrant which inspires him with wicked
intentions, even then when he seems to counsel him to the best and most upright
undertakings. Thus Man becomes Wretched, when he cease to be Faithful: the
loss of Grace, causes the enfeebling of his Liberty; and the removal of the
holy Spirit involves him in a death so much the more dangerous, by how much it
is less sensible, and more concealed.

The Natural death makes a strange havoc in the body of Man: as soon as he
seizes upon the face, he banisheth Beauty; horror and fear always attend him;
nor does he ever enter upon a body, but it is accompanied with stench and
putrefaction. These sad effects render him ghastly; nor can the most confident
behold him without some sense of terror and affrightment: But the spiritual
death causes indeed no amazement, because it leaves no visible characters of
its malignity: The holy Spirit quits the sinner with small noise: his
departure, which causes so much misfortune, makes no buzzle at all: and when
he withdraws his Grace from a soul, she is no whit affected with it, because
the loss is insensible. A Monarch thinks he is deprived of nothing, because he
still exercises absolute command over his subjects; nor sees that he is a
slave to as many masters as there are sins that reign in his soul. A
Philosopher never conceits himself less happy, because he is not more
ignorant: the Light that remains in him, suffers him not to see his Blindness;
and he imagines he is still virtuous, because he still retains his knowledge.
An immodest woman is never troubled at the loss of Grace, because it no ways
impairs her good complexion: she has much ado to believe that sin has
polluted her Soul, because it has stamped no deformity upon her Face: and
beholding her self in her glass as handsome after her fault as before, she
cannot persuade her self that she is less amiable in Gods eyes, because she is
not in her own. In the mean time, the loss of Grace is the loss of Life; the
absence of the holy Spirit, is the death of the Soul; and from the very instant
he deserts us, all Virtues bid us farewell: Whiles he keeps his residence in our
hearts, those glorious habits that render men virtuous, accompany them: and as
the presence of the Sun produces Lilies and Roses in our Gardens, the presence
of the holy Spirit produces Hope and Charity in our Souls. It Is true, this
Spirit is so good, that after he has left us, he still hovers about us: if he
dwell not in our hearts, he forbears not to move and stir them; and if he
Quicken us no longer by his, Grace, he incites us by his Power.

But to understand this Truth, which is one of the most important in Religion,
we must know, there is this difference between the Soul and the Spirit: That
moves no more, when once it cease to inanimate; Spiritus ubi vult spirat; and
quod fatendum est, aliter adjuvat nondum inhabitans aliter inhabitans: nordum
inhabitans adjuvat, ut sint fideles inhabitans adjuvat jam fidebes. Aug. Epist.
ad Sixth.
it gives no Impulse, when it gives no Life; and there must be some
supernatural power, to reunite it to the body which it has once bidden adieu
to: But the holy Spirit, which is a Form not depending upon the Matter, free in
his operations, and like the wind blows where it lists, is not subject to
these laws; he quits the sinner, when his Crime obliges him to do it; he
abandons the Temple he consecrated with his presence; and together with
habitual grace, he takes away all virtues that served him for ornament or for
defense: But his goodness reserves the means still to solicit this unfaithful
soul by holy motions, to touch this rebel by his inspirations, and by his
allurements to court this adultress who has falsified the faith. she promised
in the Sacrament of Baptism, or that of Repentance; he knocks at the door of
his heart to get admittance, he sheds light into his understanding, to dispel
the darkness; he carries pleasure into his will to gain its content; and
without doing it any violence, triumphs over his obstinacy, when he constrains
him to taste more sweetness in virtue then in vice.

The love men have to liberty, makes them wish that these motions of the Spirit
were continual, that at every moment he should offer grace to the sinner, that
he could use it at pleasure; and that in the state of sin, enjoying the
privileges of the state of innocene, his salvation might depend absolutely
upon his own will. Those that make this objection, know not in my opinion,
neither the greatness of our crime, nor the power of the Holy Spirit; God
deals with the sinner, much after another fashion then he does with the
Innocent; Natura hominis primitus inculpata, and sine ullo vitio creata est;
natura vero ista hominis qua unusquisque ex Adam nascitur, jam medico indiget,
quia sana non est. Aug. de nature. and grac. c. 3.
it is easier to preserve a just man, then to convert a guilty one; there needs
much more endeavor to subdue a will rooted, consummated in evil, then to
entertame one grounded, established in good. Innocent man had no bad
inclinations, Grace found no resistance in his person; and his liberty being
not captivated by concupiscence, there was no need that the Holy Ghost should
gain mastery thereby to purchase his deliverance: It was sufficient gently to
excite a man who needed but a little support to walk, to raise him by his
Inspirations, who was cumbred with no disorders, and to dart a small beam of
light into his eyes, who needed indeed to be cleared, not to be cured. But
sinful man must be dealt with after another manner, the motion of the Spirit
must be more vigorous, because he undertakes an enemy; Grace must have more
allurements, because it meets with more impediments; must raise it self above
the will, because the will stoopes beneath self-love; and God must be the
Author of man's salvation, because man was the Author of his fall. If the Holy
Spirit did not act more vigorously then in the state of Innocence, sinners
would remain obstinate in their obliquity; if Grace were but a flash, their
will would never be changed; and if this victorious sweetness did not imprint
force with pleasure, they would live and die in their sins.

But at last, say they, Grace ought to be as common as it is vigorous, it must
be offered to us every moment; Pro nihilo salvos facies illos; nuila ergo
hujus bona merita praecesseraut de quibus salvaretur imo talia praecesserant de
quibus damnaretur. Aug. in psalm. 55.
and since the goodness of God is so jealous of our salvation, it should of
necessity furnish us with assistance upon all occasions. There were some color
for this objection, were Grace a debt; but since it is an Alms which God is no
way bound to bestow upon any body, I know not what pretense they have to
complain against its want of universality, since in strictness of justice it
might be refused to all the world. The Holy Spirit is the Lord and Master of
Grace, he disposes of it as pleases him; and if sometimes he deny it, there
is none that can complain. The children of Adam lost it by the sin of their
Father, and the members of Jesus Christ lose it by their own: The former are
excluded by their birth, the second by their infidelity: The former are
unfortunate, the latter criminal; and both of them living or dying in sin, may
justly expect nothing but condemnation.

But they reply, it is necessary that the holy Spirit acting in and by free
creatures, depend in his motions upon their will, and concur so gently with
their free will, that they be rather the Authors then the Instruments of their
salvation: For we cannot conceive this dominion of the holy Spirit over men's
hearts, but withal we must apprehend some violence which diminishes their
merit, and weakens their liberty. Nature, Reason, and Faith, furnish us with
answers to satisfy these difficulties. For when nature unites the soul and
body together, she intends that the Noblest should be the most powerful; that
all the Authority appertains to him, and that he shou ld be the Master of that
part which is inferior to him in dignity. When morality united man with the
Angel, and gave Geniusse's to Philosophers and Emperors, she was not afraid to
injure the Liberty of Pupils, by advancing the power of their Tutelary Angels;
nor did she never believe that Nocrates was a slave, because obedient to his
Familiar; This Spirit whether good or bad, indifferently applied him to all
things; he was his Councellor in his highest enterprises; and the will of this
Philosopher was so plyant to the motions of his genius, that himself confesses
in Plato, that he was rather Passive then Active. Movebatur Socrates a Genio
suo; and ut quaedam ageret, a quibusdam abstineret, saepe compellebatur. Plut.
de Socra. daem.
In the mean time he complains not that he was forced, he found pleasure in
servitude; and because his submission was voluntary, he believed, and that not
without reason, that obedience is no prejudice to liberty. Faith persuades the
same truth upon much stronger arguments: for when it unites the holy Spirit
with man, it gives all the advantage to the Creator, without supposing the
least injury done to the creature; it knows that God is more intimate with man,
then man with himself, that he flows in upon the very essence of his will, that
he can change all his inclinations; and being the Master of his workmanship,
can dispose of it as he pleases, without the least umbrage of constraint.

His Providence leads men to their end with as much force as sweetness; his
force hurts not their liberty, because accompanied with sweetness; and his
sweetness wrongs not his Majesty, because attended with force: whatever he
does, he always acts like a Sovereign; his will finds no opposition that it
surmounts not; and when he intends to execute his designs, he knows as well
how to prepare the heart of the guilty, as of the innocent. The first motions
of Grace require no predispositions in the soul; the second beget a consent
without constraint, and both of them bear away man with so much force and
sweetness, that he is never more free then when he is most powerfully drawn.
Sweetness so well tempers force, that it is never violent; and force so fully
encourages sweetness, that it meets with no impediment it overcomes not. Thus
God is absolutely obeyed, man sweetly born away; the one finds his glory in
his power, the other his salvation in his obedience; and both of them after a
diverse manner finish one and the same work. This conduct is so distant from
compulsion, that the stronger it is, the more gentle is it, the more subject
man is to it, the freer his condition; the less opposition he has, the more
happy is he and perfect. Jesus Christ owes one part of his Sanctity to the
obedience he rendered to the Holy Spirit; the happy impotency he was endued
with not to resist him, diminished neither his merit nor his liberty; and he
blotted out our transgressions, because he was as necessarily, as freely
subject to his ordinances: The nearer Christians approach to this state, the
more perfect are they; the more powerful their grace is, the stronger is their
liberty; the more effectual the inspirations of the Spirit are, the easier and
more acceptable is there conversion.

The sixth DISCOURSE. That the Holy Spirit teaches the Christian to pray.
NAture, whose providence cannot be sufficiently admired, has been pleased
that those things that are most necessary should be most common; and that as it
were preventing the desires of men, they should of their own accord offer
themselves to those that enquire not after them. There is nothing more
necessary then light; for besides that it is the channel whereby the Sun sheds
his Influences upon the Earth, it serves for a guide to them that walk,
discovers all the beauties of the world, and happily expresses those of its
Creator: So is there nothing more common in nature; it is communicated to all
people, it suffers no partition; and covetousness and ambition which have
divided Sea and Land, have found no way how to canton the light. As the Air is
more necessary then this, so is it also more common; it enters into prisons
where day never dawns; it entertains those wretches with life, who have lost
their liberty; it steals into the depths of the Sea, and the bowels of the
Earth; neither is there any creature that is not refreshed by its acceptable
humidity. Grace imitates nature; it is prodigal of its Treasures, the more
Christians stand in need of them, the more frequently are they dispensed unto
them; and out of the care it takes of their salvation, its good pleasure is,
that the most useful favors are also the easiest to be obtained.

Prayer is an excellent proof of this truth; for in the condition we are,
there is no believer that stands not in need thereof: the daily miseries they
suffer, obliges them to make use of it; and amongst so many enemies that set
upon them, they have no weapon but this wherewith to defend themselves: It Is
the portion of the Church Militant, and being still in conflict, she cannot
implore succor from heaven, but by the mediation of Prayer: Angeli and beati
de Salute sua sunt securi and de nostra solliciti. Greg. Mag.
The Church Triumphant is wholly taken up with Allelujahs, being freed from
miseries she makes no vows but for us; and she has no other business, but
eternally to bless him that is the Fountain of her blessedness. But the
Church Militant, who lives in a strange Country, who has as many enemies as
neighbors, and who is well assured that the very name she bears obliges her to
combat, importunes Heaven by her prayers, sends up sighs to her Well-beloved,
and calls upon him for help by the frequency of supplications. If Prayer be thus
necessary, it is yet more common; for the Son of God tells us that blessings cost
us only the pains to ask for them: Ask and ye shall receive; Saint Paul will
have us use this remedy in all our distresses, offering up this sacrifice in
all places, Volo vos orare omni loco: and Saint Augustine the faithful
Interpreter of this great Apostle, assures us that to pray well, there is
nothing required but to desire well; that our intercession continues as long as
our desires do; and that in keeping silence we speak to God when we address
our wishes to him; but though this remedy be so necessary and so common, yet is
it nevertheless of difficult performance; and to know well how to use it, the
holy Spirit must instruct us.

The Scripture whose words are Oracles, conferres this Elogie upon him
particularly; it teaches us that he it is that animates our prayers by his
calentures, that inspires us with this confidence, which gives us boldness to
call God our Father; which draws tears from our eyes, sighs from our hearts,
and with groans that cannot be expressed, whereof he is the Author, blots out
our sins, and comforts our miseries. In a word, if we believe the great
Apostle, we know not the art to pray, if we have not learnt it in the School of
the holy Spirit; the evils that oppress us, may indeed inspire us with
eloquence, but not indite our prayer; and whatever need we feel, if Grace
prevent us not, we cannot obtain a remedy. Self-love so blindes us, that if we
be led by it, we shall rather beg our ruin then our salvation. Man is in so
profound an ignorance, that he knows not what is profitable or prejudicial to
him; he many times conceives designs, the accomplishments whereof are sad and
dismal to him; and Seneca had reason to say, that God was incensed, when he
granted our requests. If the ambitious give the reins to his passion that
possesses him, he will never ask any thing but honors, and not consulting
whether Glory stain his humility, all his vows will have no other aim but the
increase of his Fortune. If the Covetous take council of his Interest, his
prayers serve only his covetousness, even to the injuring of his Creator,
whom he will never strive to gain, but that he may be the Minister of his
unjust desires: If the Lascivious pursue the motion of wantonness that
tyranniseth over him, perhaps he will grow insolent enough to demand of God the
glutting of his brutish passion; so that according to the language of the
Scripture, his prayer will be turned into sin; and the more Petitions he puts
up, the more offenses will he commit. If a man who breathes nothing but
revenge, implore the aid of Heaven in that wretched condition, his inclination
stronger then his reason, will oblige him to interesse the Son of God in his
injuries, and out of an impudence worthy to be punished, endeavor to engage
him in his quarrel, who died upon the Cross for the salvation of his enemies:
Finally, the prayer of every sinner will be a high sacrilege, and he will draw
down upon his head the thunder of heaven, even then when he thinks to appease
its anger. But when the Christian suffers himself to be guided by the Spirit,
he entreats nothing of God but what is well-pleasing to him; all his
conceptions are not less beneficial to himself, then glorious for Jesus
Christ; and as the Principle that quickens him is Divine, all the Prayers that
flow thence are Divine and Heavenly too. The glory of God is always dearer to
him then his salvation; he never separates the public good from his own
private interest, he prays for his Family when he petitions for the State; and
knowing very well that he is a living member of the mystical body of Jesus
Christ, he never makes any supplications that are prejudicial to the Church.

The second Advantage we draw from the assistance of the holy Spirit in Prayer,
is, that he makes known to us the secrets to come, and carrying us beyond the
present time, marks out all those disasters the injustice of our desires
threaten us with. Our ignorance is one of the chiefest causes of our
misfortunes; if we could read in those eternal Annals, where men's adventures
are imprinted, we should perceive that the greatest part of our desires are
more disadvantageous to us, then the imprecations of our enemies; we are
inquisitive after the causes of our disgrace in the night of futurity; we
hasten our ruin by our impatience, and Heaven may easily plead excuse for our
mischances, since they are very often the effects of our own prayers: God never
takes greater vengeance on us, then when he grants us what we so earnestly
importune him for; nor is he ever more opposite to our salvation, then when he
shows himself most favorable to our requests; our Fathers and Mothers
contribute to our damnation, their wishes make us miserable, and we need not
wonder that calamities overwhelm us, seeing we live amongst the Anathema's of
our nearest relations.

The holy Spirit happily remedies this disorder; for knowing the full extent of
Eternity, he sees all the events that are to happen in the sequel of
succeeding generations; so that he never inspires us with meditations that are
not profitable to us; he diverts us from those wishes which are prejudicial to
our salvation; he will not suffer us to ask a Curse instead of a Blessing; and
when he breathes in our heart, or speaks by our mouth, our prayers always carry
their reward with them; the very denial of them is useful, and when he
forbears to grant what we besought him for, it is to exercise our patience, and
crown our humility.

If he have so much respect to our interest, he has no less to the Glory of
Jesus Christ; and he so well sorts his honor and our good together, that
whatsoever is helpful to us, is honorable to him. The greatest part of
sinners entreat of God those things that are opposite to his will, or unworthy
of his greatness; For whether passion transport them, or ignorance blind them,
they require honors of him that was born in a Stable, and died upon a Cross;
they expect pleasures from him who spent his whole life in sorrow, and whom the
Scriptures by way of Excellency style a Man of Griefs; they hope for riches
from him who lived in poverty, nor would receive any Disciples into his School,
that had not sold their goods, and distributed them to the poor; they demand
Earth of him that reigns in Heaven, the establishment of their welfare in this
world from him who is the Father of that which is to come; and taking no notice
of their Creed, they beg time of him who promises eternity. But the holy
Spirit disabuseth Christians, when he either enlightens or instructs them: For
being the Spirit of the Son, and knowing his intentions, he never puts them
upon those requests that are offensive to him. When their hearts are encouraged
with his Grace, they prefer Conscience before Honor; Virtue before Interest;
Grief before Pleasure, and the will of God before their own inclinations; If
sometimes they petition for perishable goods, it is as far as necessity
obliges them; and knowing that all such demands are dangerous, it is with fear
that they always commence such suits, with reservation that they continue them,
and with submission that they conclude them. All their prayers are terminated
with those words of our blessed Savior to his Father in the Garden: Not as I
will, but as thou will.

Finally, the same Spirit teaches them innocent Stratagems, which they ought
to make use of to pacify the indignation of their Heavenly Father, and to
obtain those Graces they become Petitioners for. Men are so little acquainted
with God, Quid oremus sicut oportet nescimus. Romans 8.
that they know neither his mind nor his will; his greatness exalts him so
far above us, that we cannot approach unto him; his designs are concealed
from us, and the Eternal Decrees he has conceived in his breast are not to be
penetrated by us; It Is with fear that we address our selves before him, and
being ignorant of his designs and resolutions, we have an apprehension that
our desires may bid him defiance. We have certain secrets to gain men, we know
by what arts we may insinuate into their fair opinion; we have dexterity enough
to take them with their interests; and Rhetoric supplies us with inventions to
triumph over their liberty, without doing them the least violence: But we know
not how we are to treat with God; his Majesty astonisheth us, his Splendor
dazles us; and if his Mercy assure us, his Justice confounds us, because if we
are miserable, we are besides more guilty. The Holy Spirit assists us in this
disorder whereto our sin has reduced us: Qui autem scrutatur corda scit quid
desideret spiritus, quia secundum Deum postulat pro Sanctis. Romans 8.
For residing in the heart of the Father and of the Son, he knows their most
intimate cogitations; he sounds those abysses which the Angels cannot descend
into; he sees their secretest intentions, and teaches us innocent artifices to
appease them when provoked against us. He spoke no doubt by the mouth of Moses,
when that Prophet disarmed the Almighty, and reduced to a loving impotency him
whose power has no other bounds but his will: It was the Holy Spirit who
fettered him by the hands of Moses, and obliged him to demand leave to be
avenged of his enemies: Let me alone that my fury may wax hot. It Is the same
Spirit that daily disarms our God, that pulls the Thunder out of his hands,
and which gently forcing him willingly to be overcome by the prayers he
dictates to us, triumphs over his fury by our perseverance.

It Is he finally, that teaches us to desire that life that is known only by
Faith, Est in nobis quaedam ut ita dicam docta ignorantia sed docta Spiritu Dei
qui adjuvat infirmitatem nostram. Aug.
and possessed only by Charity: It Is he says Saint Augustine, that inspires
us with that learned Ignorance whereby we confess that the happiness that is
promised us surpasses our imagination; we know only that his greatness
exceeds all those Ideas we can fashion of him, so that we reject all that
are offered to our understanding, knowing very well that faculty cannot
conceive the good it is bound to hope for; It Is the Holy Spirit that mingles
his light with our darkness, and leaving us in the ignorance of our felicity,
gives as much knowledge of it as is requisite to desire it: For as Saint
Augustine wisely observes, if it were absolutely unknown of us, it could never
stir up any desire in us; but besides were it fully revealed, it could not
provoke our hopes, since according to the Maxim of the Apostle, what a man
sees he hopes not for, nor wishes that which he possesses.

But the last and most admirable Stratagem of this Divine Spirit, In quo
clamamus Abba pater, postulat pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus. Romans 8.
is, that he accompanies our prayers with his groans, that without disturbing
his own happiness, he partakes of our distresses, rendering himself in a sort
miserable with us, to make us happy with him: for it is by his motion that we
send forth sighs, by his grace that we groan, and he so fully works these
things in us, that the Apostle attributing them to him is not afraid to say,
that he intercedes for us with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. In a
word, it is this Spirit that teaches us to mourn in the world, that informs us
that the Earth is our Banishment, Heaven our Country; that the one is to be
endured, the other to be hoped for. Whoever knows how to profit by this
instruction, spends all his life in the doleful tone of the Turtle; he sighs
always when he considers that he is separated from JESUS; and that living here
below, Nec parva res est, quod docet nos Spiritus sanctus gemere: insinuat
enim nobis quia peregrinamur, and docet nos in Patriam suspirare, and ipso
desiderio gemimus. Aug.
he has only the Earnest of that happiness which is promised him: he weeps in
these just desires, and sheds tears much different from those of sinners: They
groan indeed, burdened with Misfortunes, the inseparable companions of Life;
they complain when they have lost their Liberty; they sigh when they are
oppressed with any Sorrow; they murmr when they are betrayed by their
friends, or persecuted by their enemies: But these Lamentations savor nothing
of those mournful Accents of the Dove: It Is not Charity, but Interest, that
fans this Passion; it is the spirit of the World, and not that of God, that
makes them thus breathe out their souls in Sadness: For, as this last is
Eternal, so he sighs only for Eternity; as he proceeds from the Father and the
Son, he returns thither again, and leads us with him; and being the Spirit of
Truth, he occasions us to wish none but solid Goods, nor to grieve for any but
true Evils.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. That the Holy Spirit remits the Sins of the Christian.
REpentance is one of the greatest advantages Christian Grace can possibly have
above Original Righteousness: Poenitentia a poena nomen accepit, quia anima
cruciatur, and caro mortificatur. Aug.
For though it presuppose sin, and that Man cannot repent if he have not done
amiss; yet is it a very present help against his Infirmity, and an admirable
Invention of Mercy, to deliver him from his Transgression. In the mean time,
the state of Innocence was deprived of it: and whether these two privileges
were incompatible; neither would God grant this favor to men who had no excuse
for their sin, because it was absolutely in their power not to commit it; we
see not that they had this Prerogative, nor that Adam recovered from his Fall
by the assistance of Original Justice. His Conversion is an effect of the Grace
of JESUS CHRIST: If he bewailed his sin, he is beholding to the merits of the
Son of God: Nullus hominum transit ad Christum ut incipiat esse quod non erat,
nisi cum poeniteat fuisse quod erat. Homil. 50.
and if he repented, 'twas not till he became Christian. For the Divine
Providence, which turns our Evils into Remedies, is pleased to make use of our
weakness in the business of Repentance; and fortifying our Liberty by the
virtue of Grace, settles us in a condition more humble indeed, but more sure
then that of Innocence: Therefore is it not founded so much upon the Will, as
upon Grace, drawing its force much less from Man then from Jesus Christ: He it
is that has instituted the remedy in his Church by a Sacrament, wherein the
holy Spirit raises up sinners, after he has regenerated them by Baptism. For
as he is the Principle of our new life, so is he the Restorer thereof; as he
gives it by his Grace, so he repairs it by his Goodness: he presides in this
sacred Pool; and working stranger Miracles then the Angel did at the pool of
Jerusalem, he convinces the Obstinate, enlightens the Blind, instructs the
Ignorant.

Indeed, this Sacrament has always been looked upon by Christians as a chanel
through which the holy Spirit pours forth his graces into the souls of sinners.
There it is that he works those prodigies which astonish all Christians; there
it is that he acts as God, and by a victorious sweetness triumphs over the
liberty of Criminals; there it is that he changes Persecutors into Apostles,
Wolves into Lambs, Libertines into Believers, and Lascivious persons into
Continent. In the Old Testament, this Spirit changed men externally, endued
them with new strength, made use of Samsons to tame Lions, take Cities, and
defeat Armies: The Spirit of the Lord came upon Samson, aad he slew a thousand
men. He changed the mind of those that he lifted up to the Throne; and putting
the Scepter into their hands, inspired the Politics into their soul, and
taught them that Science whereby Sovereigns govern States and Kingdoms: The
Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall be changed into another
man. But now he changes the hearts; he causes a Metamorphosis less
glittering, but more useful, inspiring into the soul Repentance, and Sorrow for
Sin.

This Change is attributed to the holy Spirit, because being the personal Love,
Est Spiritus sanctus in confitente; jam ad donum Spiritus sancti pertinet, quia
tibi displicet quod fecisti; immundo spiritui peccata placent, sancto
displicent. Aug.
all the effects which design any goodness, are particularly applied to him:
and our Religion knows none greater then that wherein God receives his enemy
into favor; where, not considering his Greatness, he prevents him by his
Mercy; nor minding the many sins he has committed, treats with him not as a
Rebellious Slave, but as an obedient Son. This belongs to the holy Spirit,
because, being that sacred Bond that unites the Father with the Son from all
Eternity, it concerns him to reconcile sinners to God, who are separated from
him by their offenses, according to the language of the Prophet; Your sins have
separated between you and your God. Finally, this effect is so honorable to
him, that he is pleased to take it for his Name: For the Church in her Oraisons
calls it the Remission of Sins: And as to flatter the ambition of Conquerours,
they bestow upon them the names of those Provinces they have reduced under
their obedience, the Church is of opinion, that worthily to praise the holy
Spirit, to his Divine Qualities, this glorious Title must be added; and to
specify the victories he gains over sinners, to name him, by way of
excellence, The Remission of sins. This Maxim is so true, and the pardon of
our offenses so particularly attributed to the holy Ghost, that the Ministers
who are employed in this Sacrament, must be quickened with his virtue to blot
out sins. For, as Saint Augustine judiciously observes, the Apostles received
not the power to absolve the Guilty, till they had received the holy Ghost; nor
did the Son of God say unto them, Remit sins, till he had before said unto
them, Receive the holy Ghost; that they might know it was through his Name that
they wrought this Miracle, and that they were only his Organs, when they
dispensed Grace in the State of their Sovereign.

This will not seem strange to those that shall consider, there is no greater
power in the Church then to forgive sins: For it is in a manner to act upon a
Nonentity; it is to imitate the power of God, and to extract Grace out of Sin,
as the World out of Nothing. Besides, if we believe Saint Ambrose, the
Conversion of sinners has something more difficult in it then the Creation of
men. For though in both these works God act upon nothing, David telling us,
that to change a heart, is to create it: Create in me, O God, a clean heart;
and Saint Paul assuring us, that our soul is created in good works, when we are
converted: Creati in bonis operibus; It seems God meets with more resistance in
Conversion, then in Creation. Nothing obeys God, when it hears his Word; if it
contribute not to his designs, neither does it oppose them; and no sooner has
God made known his desire, but it thrusts forth out of its barren womb, The
Heaven with its Stars, the Earth with its Fields, and the Sea with its Rocks:
He spoke, and they were made; he commanded, and they were created. But Sin is a
Nonentity, rebellious against God; it knows his mind, and contemns it; sets
up parties in his State, deboists his subjects; and intrenching it self in
their heart, as in a Fort, disputes the victory with their Sovereign.

Moreover, there is no body but knows that God acts far more absolutely in the
Creation of Men, then in the Conversion of Sinners. For when he drew man out of
Nothing, he advised with none but Himself; he had no respect to his Liberty,
because he handled him as a Slave; and speaking imperiously to him, obliged him
to appear before his Creator. But when he Converts him, he uses some kind of
respect toward him; he puts on rather the deportment of a Lover, then of a
Sovereign; he gains his will without forcing it; and though he knows the secret
whereby to be obeyed, it is always with so much sweetness, that he that suffers
himself to be overcome, has reason to believe he gets the Victory. Therefore
does the Scripture never speak of this Change, but as of a work common to God
with Man: And when Saint Augustine observes the differences between Conversion
and Creation, he bears witness to this truth, in these words, Qui creavit te
sine te, non salvabit te sine te. But not to enter into Disputes more Curious
then Profitable, Si conversio peccatoris non est majoris potentiae quam creatio
universi, saltem est majoris miscricordiae. Aug.
let us be content to conclude with the same Saint Augustine, that if the
Conversion of a sinner require not more Power, it supposes at least more Mercy
then Creation; because if in This God obliges the Miserable, in That he
obliges the Criminal, showing Favor to those that could expect nothing but
severity of Punishments. Therefore is it that the Conversion of a sinner
belongs to the Holy Spirit: and a work that bears the Character of Goodness,
must needs have no other Principle but he to whom this Divine Perfection is
attributed in the Scripture.

It Is true, that after he has showed mercy to sinners, he performs a piece of
most exemplary Justice; and animating them against themselves, he obliges them
to take revenge and punishment upon themselves: For, one of the most admirable
effects of the Spirit of Love, is, to produce hatred in the spirit of
Penitents, Quia ergo non potest esse confessio and punitio peccati in homine a
seipso, cum quisque sibi irascitur, and sibi displicet, sine dono Spiritus
sancti non est. Aug. in Psalm. 50.
and to satisfy the Majesty of God by the excess of their Austerities toward
themselves. They look upon themselves as guilty of Treason against the Divine
Majesty: they stay not till his Justice punish them; they prevent his
Sentence, by their own Resolutions; and invent more tortures to wrack
themselves, then the Executioners have been witty in to torment Martyrs with.
This is that Divine Spirit which has driven the Anchorites into the deserts,
made the Antonines go down into caves and holes of the earth, made the Stilites
fix upon the top of Pillars; which found out sackcloth and discipline to make
as many Wretches as he had made Penitents. All the Austerity that is in
Christianity, takes its birth from the love he inspires into the Faithful:
Their Rigor is proportionable to their Charity: the more the holy Spirit
possesses them, the more are they set against Themselves: and we may affirm
with reason, that as much as they grow in his Love, so much do they grow in the
Hatred of their Sin.

This is it, perhaps, that our Savior would have us understand, when he told
us that the holy Spirit should judge the world, and should oblige sinners to
punish themselves for the offenses they have committed: He shall convince the
world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. We cannot understand this
Truth, if we conceive not that the Father has judged all men in his Son; and
having charged him with their iniquities, has charged him also with the
punishments due for them. From this moment they have no engagements to sue out
with the Father; and the Father, satisfied with the Passion of his Son,
protests that he has signed over to him all the right of judging the world:
The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. The Son,
by virtue of this resignation, shall judge all men at the end of the world, and
being become their Judge and their Party, will pronounce the definitive
sentence of their Eternity. In expectation of this day of Doom, the holy Spirit
judges men that are converted; and mixing meekness with severity in these
determinations, he obliges them to undergo a scrutiny upon earth, to be
delivered from the torments of hell. Nor are we to think it strange, that he
that is so gentle, is withal so rigorous, since the Poets have bestowed these
two qualities upon Love; For these pleasant Tel-tales have feigned, that he was
the severest of all the Gods, that he bathed himself in tears, lived upon
blood, and (more cruel then Tyrants) took pleasure in the torments of his
subjects. But Christian Religion, that conceals Truth under the shadow of our
Mysteries, teaches us, that the love of God is severe, that he exacts
chastisements from those he inanimates, that he engages his Lovers in penance,
and (more strong then death, which parts soul and body) he divides between the
soul and the spirit, and exercises a Tyranny over whole entire man.

True it is, the torments he inflicts are always mixed with pleasures; he makes
Roses grow among Thorns, and amidst such a throng of Penitents that bid him
battle, there is not one complains of his sufferings: It Is enough, that
persecuting themselves, Haec tristitia quae poenitcutiam ad salutem stabilem
operatur, laeta est, ac spe profectus sui vegetata, cunctam affabilitatis
retinet suavitatem. Cassian. l. 9. c. 11.
they are persuaded they satisfy him whom they have offended; the same
consideration that afflicts them comforts them; and when they meditate that God
that loves them is infinite, they meet with no pain that is not short, nor any
torment that is not joyous. They are better accompanied in the Deserts, then
the Monarchs in their Palaces; their humiliations are more glorious then the
Triumphs of Conquerors, their poverty is more happy then abundance of riches,
and their ascetick life more full of charms then the pleasures of the world.

Though the holy Spirit be thus favorable to Penitents, yet fails he not to be
very severe against sinners: if he pardon the offenses committed against the
Father and the Son, he never pardons those that are committed against his own
Person; and the holy Scriptures teach us, Blasphemia in Spiritum sanctum non
remittetur in hoc seculo, nec in futuro. Mat. 12.
that of all the sins in the world, none are irremissible, but those which do
despite to the Holy Ghost. This passage leaves all our Expositors at a loss;
every one forgeth new Principles to resolve the difficulties thereof, and there
are few but strive to invent something upon a subject so often handled, and so
little cleared. Some divide sins into three Orders, according to the
perfections which are commonly applied to the three Divine Persons: The first
comprehends sins of infirmity, which seem to clash against the Person of the
Father, Peccata alia sunt infirmitatis, quae Patri, cujus est potentia,
adversantur; alia ignorantiae, quae Filio, cujus est sapientia; alia malitiae,
quae Spiritui sancto, cujus est bonitas. D. Thom. in Paulum.
to whom power belongs: The second includes sins of ignorance, which seem to
injure the Person of the Son, to whom Wisdom is attributed; The third
comprehends sins of malice, which seem to malign the Person of the Holy Ghost,
to whom Goodness belongs. Following this division, they suppose that the first
and second sort of sins deserve some pardon, because the weakness and ignorance
wherewith they are accompanied may plead somewhat in their excuse; but the last
are altogether unworthy of pardon, because malice is the very soul of them, and
that those that have committed them had strength and light enough not to fall
into them. But if this Maxim were true, there were not any Christian that
would hope for the pardon of his sins, since being enlightened by Faith, and
assisted by Grace, they need neither eyes to see them, nor hands to withstand
them: Nay, all the world knows, there is not any sinner in whose soul Malice,
Weakness, and Ignorance are not blended together: Concupiscence, which blinds
their Understanding, enfeebles their Will; and sin reigning in both of them,
inspires them with Malice. Thus every sinner would grow desperate, and having
offended the holy Spirit, could not expect the remission of his sins.

Others explain this passage of Heretics, who knowing the Truth, do
notwithstanding contradict it; who persecute the Church because she is the
Spouse of Jesus Christ; and serving for Ministers to the Devil, do their utmost
to ruin the workmanship of the Son of God: But we have seen Heretics
converted, who have stood for the defense of the Truth, having quitted that of
a Lie; and who have gained subjects to Jesus Christ, after they had procured
slaves for his Enemy. Some others understand it with St Augustine, of that sin
that accompanies men till death, and which always resisting Grace, cannot be
expiated but by the pains of hell: Pro quibus jam non est hostia, sed
terribilis quaedam expectatio judicii. This Explication doubtless is the most
assured, for that the sin wherein any one dies is certainly irremissible; but I
do not know whether this Interpretation be the truest: For it seems, the Son of
God would plainly and simply insinuate unto us the difference between sinners
that oppose the designs of the Father and the Son, and those who resist the
designs of the Holy Ghost; Ad hoc Mediator est Christus, ut eos qui
recesserant a Patre per se reconciliet, and suo sanguine eorum peccata
solveret. Aug. in Psalm. 93. ser. 2.
for though the first be culpable, and have done very ill to neglect the
Father, speaking to them by the mouth of the Prophets, yet might they hope for
some impunity in their crimes, and promise themselves, that the Son coming upon
the earth, would reconcile them to his Father: Though the second were more to
blame then the first, and deserve a severer punishment for not hearing the Son,
who taught them by his examples, instructed them by his discourse, and ravished
them with his miracles: They might yet persuade themselves, that the Holy Ghost
descending down amongst them, would convert them, and that submitting to his
Graces, and yielding obedience to his Councels, would change their bad life
into a better: But the last, who resist the Holy Ghost, can have no more hope,
their sin, considering the disposition of the Orders of God, is irremissible of
its own nature; for they no longer expect a divine Person that may reconcile
them with the others: The mission of the Holy Ghost is the last, and the
Scripture holds forth nothing more to be expected, but the coming of Jesus
Christ to judge both the quick and the dead. Thus their sin who resist the Holy
Ghost, Contra Spiritum sanctum quo peccata omnia dimittuntur verbum valde malum
and nimis impium dicit, quem patientia Dei, cum ad paenitentiam adducat, ipse
secundum duritiam cordis sui, and cor impaenitens, thesaurizat sibi iram in die
judicii Dei, qui reddet unicuique juxta opera ejus. Aug. de verbis Dom. Ser. 12.
is not only inexcusable, but irremissible; if they submit not to his
inspirations, their salvation is desperate; if they suffer not themselves to be
swayed by his motions, it is in vain that they pretend to glory; and if they
make not good use of his graces, it is rashness to promise that the Father or
the Son will descend upon the earth to work their conversion: for the holy
Spirit consummates the work of the Father and of the Son, he is the economy of
our salvation; he that always resists him cannot be converted, and he that will
not give ear to his counsels cannot avoid the judgment of the Son of God. Thus
to conclude in a few words all that we have delivered in this discourse; The
Holy Ghost remits the sins of the world, reconciles sinners to God, animates
them against themselves to give him satisfaction; but acting after another
manner with obstinate perverse transgressors, he gives them up to their
impiety, and justly refuses them that grace which they have insolently
despised.

The Eighth DISCOURSE. That the CHRISTIAN in his Infirmities is assisted by the
strength of the Holy SPIRIT.
Weakness is so natural to the Creature, that he has need of Grace in the
state of innocence, as well as in that of sin. Nothing, Natura humana etiamsi
in illa integritate in qua condita est permaneret, nullo modo seipsam Creatore
suo non adjuvante permaneret. Aug. Epist. 109. ad Bonif.
from whence he came forth, engages him in this necessity; and all Divines
confess with St Augustine, That Man in Paradise could not raise himself up to
God, nor defend himself against the Devil without the assistance of Grace. But
his task is much harder since he became a Delinquent: the infirmity he has
contracted from sin is far greater then that he drew out of Nothing, and he is
much weaker because he is a sinner, then because he is a Creature: The one is
common to him with Angels, who though of never so noble an extraction, stood
nevertheless in need of Grace whereby to persevere in that good they were
instated in; the other is proper and particular, and takes it is original from
all those devastations sin has made in nature. For there remains nothing in
man since his disobedience, which is not wholly impaired. His Understanding
has scarce any light to discern truth from falsehood; his Memory has no more
that force to retain the several Species of things committed to it is trust,
and his Will is so enfeebled, that it scarce meets with any enemies that
triumph not over his liberty: ever since it became captive, it drooped and
languish'd; the devil that possesses it, tyrannizeth over it; and if grace
come not in to the rescue, it cannot hold out against his solicitations.

Sin is yet more absolute then Satan; he has only a borrowed power; he
reigns not over the hearts, but because he domineers over the senses; he is
not master of the mind, but because he is of the body; nor has he any command
over the will of man, but because it is in his power to mutiny his passions.
But sin reigns in all the faculties of man; his darkness clouds the
Understanding, his malice depraves the Will, his ingratitude weakens the
Memory; he enters where ever grace can, and penetrating the very essence of the
soul, builds a Palace, where the holy Spirit had erected a Temple. When he is
forced to quit the hold where he had entrenched himself, and yielding to grace
is constrained to leave the sinner at liberty, he sets on foot by his
Ministers, that violence he could not act by himself: Concupiscence, which is
his daughter, and his mother, endeavors to execute his designs; she takes
pains in his directions, and like a soldier that disputes the victory after
the death of his General, she does her utmost to enthrone him after his
defeat: For all the motions of this concupiscence favor sin; all the streams
that issue from this fountain, are unclean; all the counsels that proceed from
this Minister are suspected; and all the assaults this Enemy makes against us
are prejudicial to our salvation: she is not innocent in the greatest Saints;
Concupiscentia causa est peccati, vel defectione consentientis, vel contagione
nascentis. Aug. lib. 6. Con. Jul. c. 19.
she preserves her malignity in the very Empire of Grace; she resists the Holy
Spirit in the Temple he is adored in; and as Divines confess, that as the Tree
is enclosed in the kernel, sin is wrapped up in concupiscence.

This was the evil the Apostle of the Gentiles complains of, writing to the
Romans; 'twas that disorder he would, but could not reform; 'twas that
rebellion he felt in his members, and was not able to appease; 'twas that law
of the flesh warring against that of God, which he could not abrogate; 'twas
finally that Monster that drew complaints from his mouth, made him confess his
weakness, and obliged him to wish for death, that he might be delivered from
his Tyranny. For as Saint Non quod volo ago, sed quod nolo hoc ago; quod odi
concupiscere, odi concupiscere, and tamen illud ago ex carne, non ex mente; non
implet legem infirmitas mea, sed legem laudat voluntas mea. Aug. in Romans
Augustine observes very well, 'twas not in the power of the Apostle to cure
that malady which depended not upon his Will, because it passed on in despite
of him; and his complaints, which were marks of his piety, were proofs also of
his infirmity. We must not say with the Pelagians, that Saint Paul in his
person represents that of a sinner, whose bad Habit having weakened his
liberty, left him nothing but sighs and regrets, for being thrown into a
condition, out of which 'twas not in his power to come forth: For though this
interpretation be true, and some Fathers, who were very tender of the holiness
of the Apostle of the Gentiles, have imagined that he could not be subject to
these disorders: Nevertheless, Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine (who knew
very well that Grace does not destroy Concupiscence) were not troubled to
acknowledge this in Saint Paul, and to confess, That the Liberty of the
greatest Saints is not so entire, but it experienceth rebellions which it
cannot master, and that it is only in Eternity where Grace obtains a full
triumphant victory over sin, Si autem (sicut melius sentit Ambrosius) hoc etiam
de seipso dicit Apostolus, nec justorum est in hac vita tanta libertas propriae
voluntatis, quanta erit in illa vita ubi non dicitur, Non quod volo ago. Aug.
lib. 6. cont. Julian.
when the Saints shall no more say with Saint Paul, I do that which I would
not. Indeed, this complaint is an evident proof of the weakness that remains in
man after he has received the pardon of his sin: Though he be in Grace, he is
not freed from pain; though he be assisted by God, he cannot choose but tremble;
and though his Will be straight, yet is it not so steadfast and constant, as to
overcome all that combats his good resolutions. The experience he has of his
infirmity, obliges him to implore the succors of Heaven, knowing very well,
that victory is never complete upon earth; he entreats an end of his life, to
obtain that of his conflict; and being not ignorant that his vigor is abated
by this Inmate, which he can neither defeat nor divorce, he implores an Aid
that supplies his impotency, and renders him strong enough not to be worsted.
This is the Reason St Augustine made use of against the Pelagians: For whereas
they affirmed, that Man had always a full freedom to correct himself, nor that
there was any state wherein Concupiscence held so great a command over the
Will, that he could not easily defend himself, he confronted them with this
passage of St Paul, saying with that vigor of spirit that accompanies all his
argumentations, "Confess that all those that have a mind to mend, cannot do it,
since he that speaks in these terms, It Is not I that work, gives a sufficient
demonstration, that his desire is strong, but his power weak. Say not, that he
can subdue sin by the mere abilities of his Will, since he discovers his
infirmity by his complaints; and were he vigorous enough to bring all his
forces into the field, he would never utter those words, Non quod volo ago.
Suffer him at least in whom you see the activity of free will weakened, to have
recourse to the assistance of Grace, and to seek for that out of himself, which
he cannot find in himself.

But this misfortune is yet much greater in sinners newly converted, then in
the just, who have a long time persevered in this virtue: For if these last
have not destroyed sin, they have debilitated him; and if they have not
obtained a full victory, they have gained some advantage over this Enemy; if
they have not quite obstructed his motions, they have greatly checked them; and
if they have not strength to be delivered, they have courage enough to stand
upon their guard and defend themselves: But the others have increased his power
by their own cowardice, they have added the tyranny of Habit to that of
Concupiscence; they are reduced to a wretched impotency to withstand, since
they have not crushed him in his conception; and their liberty is so small to
defeat him, that their slavery degenerates for the most part into downright
necessity. Thence it came to pass, that St Augustine being fallen into that
deplorable condition, complained that his bad Habit had fettered his Will, that
he groaned under the weight of his irons, that he could not break them though
he had hammered them himself, and having voluntarily thrown himself into the
net, he was necessarily held fast in it. My Will (says he admirably in his
Confessions) was in the hands of mine Enemy, he had cast a chain about me,
which manacled me so fast I could not disengage my self, but was forced to
follow him: for of my bad inclinations he formed bad desires, which basely
obeying, I contracted a bad habit; and not timely resisted, was presently
changed into a troublesome necessity. I call this slavery a Chain, because it
was composed of my own inclinations as of so many links, which the Grace that
prepared me for my Conversion was not strong enough to break asunder. He made
vain attempts to be disengaged; his Will encouraged with Grace, stoutly opposed
his Will seconded with Concupiscence; himself was the Theater of this Combat,
he was the Victor and the vanquished; but the advantage was more prejudicial
then the defeat, since the worse party was the strongest, and his Will yielding
obedience to the Tyranny of Concupiscence, resisted the Command of Charity: He
pleasantly complains to God of the greatness of this Evil in the same place of
his Confessions. In vain did I take pleasure in Your Law concerning the inward
man, because there was another law in the rebelling against Yours, and which
against my will made me subject to the law of sin that was in my members: For
the law of sin is nothing else but the Tyranny of Custom, which engages the
mind of man with a kind of constraint, but not without some color of
Justice, because he willingly procured this Thraldom.

But he never more happily expressed the nature of this Evil, then when he
compares a bad Habit to the imperious complacency of sleep: For it seems, there
is nothing more sweet then those drowsy vapors; in the mean time there is
nothing more violent; and of all things that set upon a man, there is none from
which he can less defend himself; This evil takes force from it is
sweetness, the more pleasant the fumes are it exhaleth, the stronger are they;
the more pain they inflict the more is their pleasure, the less liberty they
indulge us, the more is the love they express toward us. It Is by this example,
that this great Saint illustrates the agreeable violence of a bad habit. Ita
sarcina seculi veluti somno assolet dulciter premebar, and cogitationes quibus
meditabar in te similes erant conatibus expergisci volentium qui tamen superati
soporis altitudine, remerguntur. Aug.
"I was overwhelmed with the love of the world (says he) as with a deep sleep,
and the meditations I lifted up to heaven, were like the vain endeavors of
men, striving to awake, who beaten down with the weight of drowsiness, fall
asleep again at the very instant they awake. True it is, as there is no man
that would always sleep, and in the judgment of all wise men, watchings are
better then sleep, I also was of the same opinion, that 'twas more advantageous
for me to submit to thy grace (O Lord) then to yield to my passion: But as the
most part of men suffered themselves to be more sweetly charmed with sleep when
their hour to awake approaches, so did I more enticingly embrace my bad habit,
when the time of my conversion seemed nearest at hand". It is but too evident
by this comparison, that man's weakness passes even to impotency, when he
suffers himself to be swallowed up by sin, and in his infirmities stands in
need of a mighty arm to deliver him from the Tyrant that keeps him under.

Now the holy Spirit performs this good office to all sinners, it is he that
breaks their irons when they are fettered by concupiscence, or by custom,
The Spirit helps our infirmity, says great Saint Paul, he not only clarifies
the Christians, but fortifies them; and the same grace he sheds abroad in their
souls, at once fills them with light and strength; he joins himself with the
soul to subdue the rebellions of the flesh; he inspires their liberty with a
new vigor, knocking off it is fetters, he arms the faculty, whereby it takes
vengeance of it is enemies: for as Saint Augustine excellently observes, it is
not the Spirit of man, but of God that fights against the flesh; Spiritus
concupiscit adversus carnem in hominibus bonis, non in malis, qui Spiritum Dei
non habent, contra quem caro concupiscat. Aug.
these two parts almost continually agree in unbelievers and wicked men, if
they practice hostility for their particular interests concupiscence unites
them to serve her designs. She masters wantonness with pride, tames pleasure
with avarice; but in all these contestations the soul and body are subject to
sin, and these two are reconciled together to further the intentions of their
Sovereign. But when the soul fights against the flesh; in the faithful, it is
always by the motion of the spirit, it is this divine Protection that gives her
courage, and delivering her from the bondage of her slave establishes her in
the possession of her lawful authority.

Let us explain this Truth in the words of Saint Augustine: the flesh did not
lust against the spirit in Paradise, there was no war in so profound a peace,
nor did man see himself divided by the conflict of two parts, whereof he was
made: But when once he had violated the Law of God, and had refused obedience
to his Sovereign. he was given over to himself, upon condition too that he
should never be his own Master, but be wholly at his devotion that had deceived
him. Then was it that the flesh began to revolt against the spirit; but this
happens not but in the person of good men; for in that of wicked men the flesh
has nothing to rebel against, because the soul being become carnal, has no
other feelings but those of the flesh. And when the Apostle says, That the
spirit warreth against the flesh, we are not to imagine that he speaks of the
spirit of man, but of that of God, that fights in us against our selves; or to
speak more soundly, it is he that combats that in us that is prejudicial to
us; and when he makes war upon us, it is to procure peace within us. It Is in
this sense that the same Apostle has said further to the faithful, that if by
the virtue of the spirit they did mortify the deeds of the flesh, they should
live. For least man should grow proud in hearing those words, and persuade
himself that it was by his own spirit that he ought to tame the flesh, the
Apostle presently explains himself, that they are the Children of God that are
led by the Spirit, to the end we may know that it is he that mortifies our
flesh, quickens our soul, and gives us victory in the Conslict.

It Is for this cause that he is called in Scripture the Spirit of strength, and
of counsel, to teach us, that the same that guides does also assist us; that
having enlightened us, he warmes us too, inspiring us with courage to execute
our designs, after he has endued us with wisdom to devise and contrive them.
But Saint Augustine informs us, that he acts otherwise with sinners, then with
the godly; and that he carries himself after another fashion with those he
moves only, Aliter adjuvat nondum inhabitans, aliter habitans: nam nondum
inhabitans adjuvat ut sint fideles, inhabitans adjuvat jam fideles. Aug. Epist.
ad Sixtum.
then with those whom he inanimates. He assists the former that they may be
converted, he helps the second that they may persevere; in the former he
inspires faith, in the later charity; to the one he opens the door of the
Church, to the other the gate of Heaven. But finally, it is one and the same
Spirit that aids all Christians in their different conversations: It Is he that
triumphs over the Executioners in the Martyrs, that combats Heretics in the
Doctors, that subdues the flesh in the Continent, that despises the pleasures
of the world in the Anchorites, that conquers sin in the Penitents, and that
leads all the Elect from the Camp of the Church Militant into the bosom of the
Church Triumphant.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. That the HOLYSPIRIT is the CHRISTIANS Comforter.
SIn and Misery were borne into the world both upon a day, as soon as ever man
became criminal, he became miserable; Peccavit anima, and ideo misera est;
liberum arbitrium accepit quo usa est quemadmodum voluit; lapsa est, ejecta
est, de beatitudine, implicata est misertis. Aug. contra Fortu. Disp. 2.
punishment followed transgression so close upon the heels, that he lost his
happiness as soon as he had lost his innocence. Ever since this fatal moment
his life has been but a continued Train of miseries insensibly leading him to
the Chambers of death.

The Hydra of the Poets never was so fruitfully pregnant, and Fiction with all
it is inventions, could never yet represent the story of our misfortunes. Nor
Age, nor Sex, nor Condition give any person a dispensation. Infants are
wretched in the Cradle; that innocent Age that has no other sin then that of
Adam, is sensible of pains as sharp as those that accompany old age. Women, who
sometimes shake off obedience to their Husbands, cannot escape the pangs of
grief; and Kings, who are so absolute in their State, have no Guards that can
stop sickness and sadness from entering into their Palaces: These two enemies
of mankind creep every where, their dominion knows no bounds; where ever
there are men, they find subjects, and create miserable.

Indeed Christians meet with a great deal of consolation in these distresses;
for besides that the hope of futurity sweetens their present evils; that the
example of Jesus Christ gives them encouragement; that the constancy of Martyrs
bear up their spirits, they have received the Holy Spirit that comforts them in
their troubles, and supplies them with as many remedies, as misfortune takes
upon it shapes to assault them. Let us reduce both of them to four heads, and
make it appear in their discourses, that it is not in vain that man bears the
name of miserable, and the Holy Spirit that of a Comforter.

One of the fearfullest torments of man a sinner, is, that the two parts
whereof he is made, cannot agree: In te ex teipso est flagellum tuum, fit rixa
tua tecum, lucta est in illo corpore; quamdiu vivimus pugnamus, quamdiu
pugnamus periclitamur. Aug.
The body and the soul are always upon bad terms; their love is turned into
hate, and if there be any agreement between them, it is always to the
disadvantage of the nobler part: All is out of order in the masterpiece of the
Creation; Earth is higher then Heaven; the Beast domineers over the Angel; the
Spirit stoops to the Body, and Passions are the Mistresses of Reason. The
Saints groan under this disorder; they invoke death to be freed from this
Tyranny, and they entreat an end of their life that they may see an end of a
Combat whose event is so doubtful. The Holy Spirit accommodates this
difference by his grace; for he takes part with the soul against the body; he
subjects the soul to God, thereby to subject the body to the soul; he sets
things in the state they were in during the time of Innocence, and so
suppresseth the revolts of the flesh, that if the Spirit be not absolute, it is
at least the strongest in the Saints. It Is the grace of our heavenly Comforter,
say the Fathers of the Church, that sweetens our discontents, that quenches
the impure flames that concupiscence kindles in our hearts, that subdues those
violent passions whose first motions are of so difficult coercion; It Is it that
charms those deceitful hopes and desires that promise us felicity in the
World, and which finally following the Inclinations of this Spirit, whereof it
is the Image inables the Christian to be revenged of those rebels that disturb
the quiet of his person.

The second punishment of guilty man, is to see himself exiled from heaven,
and constrained to endure a banishment as long as life: Indeed he undergoes
here all the miseries of an exterminated person; he is deprived of his goods,
and lives not but upon borrowing or alms; he is driven out of Paradise, fallen
from all those honors that equaled his condition, to that of Angels and
reduced to a deplorarable state, Homo cum in honor esset non intellexit, ideo
comparatus est jumentis insipientibus. Psalm. 48.
rendering his fortune little different from that of beasts. He never looks up
to heaven, but if there be any spark of piety remaining, he bewailes his
offense, and is afflicted at his banishment: Grief puts these complaints in
his mouth: Woe is me because my habitation is prolonged. He is afraid least the
snares that are scattered in the place of his residence, entangle him; if he
suffer any calamity, he presently reflects upon the happiness he has lost;
and if he taste any pleasures, he misstrusts, lest they engage him in the
world. For Christians are threatened with this double evil; and if they take
not good heed, they are in danger to love their exile, and forget their
Country; they settle their fortune upon earth, they build as if they never
meant to remove; they are strongly taken up with the present world, and they
lose all belief of the future; and a man has much ado to persuade them, that
so delightful an Abode is the place of their Banishment, and the Theater of
their Torment; They must be made feel their miseries, that they may have some
desire toward another life; and we think we have gained much upon their
Spirit, when they will be persuaded to look with an indifferent eye upon the
place of their birth. Therefore is it that Richardus de Sancto Victore, divides
men into three ranks; the first is those that are fastened to their Country,
whom he calls Delicate; Delicatus est cui patria dulcis; fortis, cui omne solum
patria, perf^ctus, cui omnis terra exilium est; primus amorem fixit, secundus
sparsit, tertius extinxit. Richar. de Sanct. Vict.
the second those that look upon the whole earth as their Country, whom he
calls Courageous; the third those that look upon the World as the place of
their banishment, whom he calls Perfect. To speak truth, the first are sordid,
because they have confined their love to a corner of the world; the others are
generous because intending it over all, they have weakened it; and the third
are accomplished, because having wholly stifled it, their hopes are altogether
taken up with heaven; they long for this eternal habitation: the moments that
stop them here below seem ages; the diversions, illusions; the pleasures,
torments; the happiness of the World, a dangerous temptation. Now the Holy
Spirit comforts them in this reasonable disgust; he inspires them with the
desire of heaven, points out the glory of the blessed; fills them with hope of
the shortening of their exile; and makes them say with David, I was glad when
they said unto me we will go into the house of the Lord. But the most
substantial Comfort he makes use of to mitigate, and sweeten their troubles,
is, to give them an Antepast of felicity, to render them happy in the midst of
their miseries; and to shed his graces into their spirit with so much
complacency, that conversing with men, they may relish the bliss of Angels.
For he is the earnest of our blessedness, the Assurance of our salvation, the
Caution of the promise of Jesus Christ; and if we may say so, he is a portion
of the felicity which is promised us in Glory.

The third grievance of Man a Sinner is, That the Earth is not only a place of
Banishment, but a Country of Enemies, where all creatures, serving as
Instruments of the Divine Justice, make war upon him, which ends not till he
dies. For though he boast himself the Lord of the Universe, though the sin
of his father persuade him into this error, though Concupiscence that reigns
in his soul, heightens the desire thereof, nor can all the miseries he
endures, shake him out of this hope; yet is he dealt with as a Criminal. Every
Element threatens him with a thousand dangers, and into what ever corner of his
State he retires, he finds either Executioners, or Rebels. Poisons are mixed
with nourishment upon the earth; rocks lie in ambush for him upon the Sea; the
fire inflames thunder to destroy him, Qui in cunctis delinquimus, in cunctis
ferimur, ut impleatur quod dicitur; Et pugnabit pro co contra infensatos orbis
terrarum. Greg. Mag. hom. 35. in Evan.
and the air scatters contagions to infect him. There is no part of the world
that conspires not against him; heaven punishes his iniquities as well as
earth: the Sun which is the fountain of life, makes him dye; the Aspects of the
heavenly bodies are fatal to him; nor is there any Star in the Firmament,
which has not some power to infest him.

But that which redoubles these displeasures is, That all these Creatures are
in the hands of his Enemy to afflict him; for the devil is the Prince of the
world; The Scripture that designs him this Quality, teaches us, that he
disposes of the Elements under the good pleasure of God, to persecute man:
sometimes he darts down Thunderbolts; and though he execute the determinations
of Heaven, he fails not to content his own malice; he raises Tempests upon the
Sea, and Storms upon the Land, forms Lightnings in the air, and successively
makes use of wet and drought to produce barrenness.

Admit this Stratagem succeed not, he tries another so much more dangerous, in
that it appears more taking; for he imployes the creatures to seduce us; he
discovers beauties to make us Idolaters, spreads nets to catch us, Creaturae
Dei in odium factae sunt et in tentationem animabus hominum, et in muscipulam
pedibus insipientium. Sapient. cap. 14.
and of every creature makes a Lure to engage us into sin. Greatness serves to
swell us with vanity, riches to nuzzle us in covetousness, beauties to awaken
our wantonness, and food (which is necessary for our life) to plunge us into
sensuality. He makes weapons of all the parts of our body; deals with our
senses to corrupt us; nor is he ever more terrible, then when he arms our
selves against our selves.

Finally, To leave nothing unattempted, he perverts whatever is most necessary
in the world, and mixes disorders in those actions that cannot be dispensed
with, to the end, that thinking to preserve our lives, we may be isntrumental
to his malice, and our ruin. Marriage is the nursery of the world, Posuit in
comestione gulam, in generatione luxuriam, in dominatione supcrbiam, in
correctione iram, in conversatione invidiam. Aug.
it is that Sacrament that repairs the havoc death makes, that entertains
families, supplies Kingdoms with Ministers of State and Soldiers, peoples
heaven, replenisheth the orders of Angels, and consummates the number of the
Elect: In the mean time, our Enemy has rendered it dangerous, in rendering it
unchaste; he turns the remedy into a poison; and making sinners licentious, of
a married couple makes many times a pair of Adulterers. Eating is the
subsistence of life, it is that to man that Marriage is to the world, it
protects us from famine, that tends to death, it repairs our strength with
pleasure, and if it be the most necessary of our remedies, it is also the most
delightful: But the Devil has tempred it with gluttony and excess, thereby
to corrupt it; he occasions debauchments at feasts; and we vitiously please our
palate, when we think only to supply our necessity. Government is one of the
usefullest inventions of the Politic, or rather of Providence; The power of
Kings preserves justice in States, their Scepter is a terror to the wicked,
and a support to the good; God shows himself visible in their person, and we
look upon them with as much respect as Infidels did heretofore upon their false
Deities: In the mean time, the pride that steals into Greatness through the
malice of the Devil, dimms their luster, makes their power odious, and many
times makes their lawful Authority degenerate into a most insupportable
Tyranny. Correction and Conversation are equally necessary; the one entertains
society, the other eliminates offenses; the one polisheth our manners, the
other perfects them; the one renders us civil, the other virtuous: mean while
the subtilty of the malignant spirit scatters anger into Correction, envy into
Conversation, and corrupting the fruits and effects of each, hinders us from
profiting by the advice and entertainments of our friends.

Who would not lose all patience amidst such a throng of miseries, did not the
holy Spirit give us strength to vanquish the fury of our Enemies; prudence, to
defend us against their plots and subtilties; Spiritus adjuvat infirmitatem
nostram. Romans 8.
and consolation, to support us against the bitterness of our afflictions? For
he it is that fortifies our weakness when we are set upon, that dissipates our
darkness when we are blinded, and sweetens our discontents when we are
troubled. He weeps with us, without interessing his felicity, he shares in our
infirmities without prejudicing his Almightinesse, he is sadded with our
miseries, without disquieting his own contentedness; he puts sighs into our
hearts, words into our mouths, reasons into our understandings, to express
our wretchedness; and to pacify our Judge, Postulat pro nobis gemitibus
inenarrabilibus. The union he contracts with us is so strict, that the
Scripture attributes to him what it would have us do, and by a strange liberty
makes him partakers of our miseries, as we are made partakers of his happiness.

The last torment of man a sinner, is the doubt he has of his salvation: Death
is troublesome, because the hour thereof is uncertain, neither has he that
pronounced sentence upon us, expressed the time of its execution. All moments
are to be suspected by us, every day may be our last; and the accidents that
cause our dissolution are so involved in futurity, that they daily seize us
before we are provided for them: Nescit homo, utrum amore an odio dignus sit,
sed omnia in futuru^ servantur incerta, Eccl. 9.
But our salvation is much more concealed then our death; Predestination is
much more secret, and more important then the end of our life; and the alarms
so just an apprehension strikes us with, are much more lawful and amazing.
There is no man that has read in the Book of the living, nor that knows
whether his name be written there; the whole world trembles at the thought of
that irrevocable judgment; the Character of Baptism, the vocation into the
Church, the power of working Miracles, the love of Enemies, the forgetting of
Injuries, and whatever is most glorious and most difficult in Religion, are no
certain proofs of our predestination; Fear is always mixed with hope in our
souls; the Grace that quickens us may forsake us; the example of the Reprobate
strikes us with astonishment; and after the Treason and Despair of Judas, there
is no Saint but trembles. This is the greatest pain that afflicts Christians,
Vae miseris nobis, qui de electione nostra nullam adhuc Dei vocem cognovimus,
and jam in otio torpemus; vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum si remota pictate
judicemur. Greg.
the cruellest punishment that exercises their patience, the rudest torment
that proves their charity. Thus would it be an insupportable vexation, did not
the holy Spirit sweeten it by the inward testimony he witnesses to our
Conscience: But he moreover gives us assurances of our salvation, he makes us
obscurely read over the Book of Life; he takes us into that privie-Chamber
where the definitive sentence of our Eternity is pronounced, Ipse Spiritus
testimonium reddit spiritui nostro, quod sumus filii Dei. Romans 8.
he applies to us the merits of Jesus Christ, and interposes himself the
caution of his promises; he blots out those mortal discontents which labor to
cast us into despair, he heightens our hope by a prelibation of glory, and
handles us with so much tenderness, that we have much ado to believe that we
can be miserable in the other world, having been so happy in this.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. Of the CHRISTIAN's Ingratitude toward the Holy SPIRIT.
IF that Philosopher had reason to say, Nibil in rerum natura tam sacrum, quod
sacrilegum non inveniat. Sen.
There was nothing so sacred in Nature, that meets not with some sacrilegious
person to profane it; Divines may with greater justice affirm, There is
nothing so holy in Religion, that wicked and ungodly men do not dishonor, and
by their malice desecrate its holiest mysteries. The divine Mercy is the source
of all Graces; were not God merciful, we should be eternally miserable; did
not he remit the injuries done against him, the first offense would cast us
into despair, and having once lost his grace, we could expect nothing but
punishments: in the mean time, his Mercy makes sinners presumptuous in their
crimes; that which should convert them, hardens them; and that which promises
them impunity, carries them for the most part to impenitency. The death of
Jesus Christ is the last testimony of his love, his wounds are so many bleeding
mouths breathing forth this Truth; and when we begin to doubt of it, we need
but consider the streams of blood that issued from his veins: In the mean time,
Positus est in ruinam, and in resurrectionem mul^orum. Luc. 7.
his death is often the occasion of our fall; we persuade our selves, that he
that could find in his heart to die for us, is too much concerned in our
salvation, to destroy us: upon this vain hope we abandon our selves to all
wickedness, and turn our Antidote into a poison. The holy Sacrament is the
highest invention the charity of the Son of God could find out; none but an
infinite Wisdom could design it, nor could any but an absolute uncontrolled
Power put it in execution; both of them are drained in this Mystery; and when
the Son of God is incarnated upon our Altars to enter into our hearts, there is
no other favor to be wished for upon earth: Nevertheless, experience teaches
us, that this Grace is not only unprofitable, Sumunt boni, sumunt mali, sort
tamen inaequali vitae vel interitus. D. Thom.
but pernicious to sinners; that it conveighes death instead of life, mixeth a
sacrilege with a sacrifice; and makes the devil enter into their souls, by
admitting Jesus Christ unworthily. But not to stand upon the proof of so known
a Truth, we need but represent the Grace of the Holy Spirit, and the
ingratitude of wicked men, to be fully persuaded thereof. He is the fruitful
source of all the blessings we receive from heaven; he is the dispenser of all
the merits of the Son of God; nor can we expect any thing of the one, but by
the mediation of the other: In the mean time we profane his Graces, cast off
his Inspirations: his goodness serves only to set an edge upon our malice:
the more favorable he is to us, the more rebellious are we against him; and
the more arts he uses to convert us, the more bars do we oppose to resist
him: we may judge of this by the names he bears; and by the attempts he makes
to gain us, he gives testimony of his love and affection toward us.

The Holy Spirit is the Principle of our supernatural life. Spiritus Domini
ferebatur super aquas ad Creationem pertinet; nisi quis renatus fuerit ad
regen^rationem.
Faith instructs us that it is he that frees us from the state of sin, to level
us a passage to Grace; and if we are the effects of his power in the world, we
are the works of his mercy in the Church; so high a favor would challenge as
high an acknowledgment; so that being his Creatures under a double Title, and
he our Principle in Nature, and in Grace, there is no body but believes we have
all the reason in the world to set up his Kingdom in our hearts, and carefully
to preserve charity whereby he lives in our souls. Nevertheless the Great
Apostle of the Gentiles complains that the faithful of his time made him dye;
that they put out the candle of their life; and by an ingratitude as great as
their blindness, committed a double murder in one and the same crime: He begs
their favor toward the holy Spirit; and having presented them with the
Obligations they owe his infinite goodness, he conjures them not to choke him
in their souls: Quench not the Spirit. This passage is diversely explained,
Nolite Spiritum extinguere. 1 These. 5.
but equally weak'nd by our Interpreters. For some are of opinion, that Saint
Paul made use of this word to quench, because the Holy Ghost coming down upon
the Apostles in the likeness of Fire, might be put out as fire by our
negligence: And if the vestall Virgins were guilty of death, Vesta nihil aliud
quam ignis cui virgins solent servire, quod sicut ex virgin ita nihil ex igne
nascatur. Aug.
for suffering the profane fire committed to their charge to go out; the
Christians were certainly much more criminal to suffer this holy Fire to dye,
that kindled all virtues in their hearts, and purged out all defects and inward
defilements. Others think it a kind of figurative speech, the Apostle makes use
of to aggravate the hainousness of the sin they commit, who do all that they
can to extinguish the Holy Spirit, and endeavor to imitate the cruelty of the
Jews, will sign their malice by a detestable parricide: It seems Saint
Augustine was entered into this opinion, accusing not the sinner for the death
of the holy Spirit, but because of the will he had to do it; and endeavoring
all that was in his power to stifle him, that lives and reigns with the Father
and the Son from all Eternity. But I conceive, without doing violence to the
words of Saint Paul, or at all prejudicing the holy Spirit, we may say, He
suffers death by sin, and loses life when we lose charity. For the same
Apostle teaches us, Nescitis quia templum Dei estis, and Spiritus Dei habitat
in v^bis. 1 Cor. 3.
that the holy Ghost dwells in us by Grace, that he erects an Altar in our
heart, makes himself a Temple in our soul, and lives in us by his virtues. All
his Epistles speak this language; and as often as he treats of the residence of
the holy Spirit in our hearts, he speaks of it as of a Divine life, whereof he
is the first Principle; so that he lives in us after the same manner as we live
in him; and these two lives are so closely combined together, that one cannot
be destroyed without the other: Thus the holy Spirit cease to live in the
sinner, when the sinner cease to live by the holy Spirit; As they have one
and the same life, so they endure one and the same death; and as the sinner
loses life, because he loses Grace that united him to Jesus Christ; so the
holy Spirit in some sort loses that life that united him to the Christian by
Charity, and receives death from him that inflicts it upon himself by sin.
Therefore is it that the Apostle uses such high terms to make us comprehend
the heinousness of our crime, and describes the death of our soul, under that
of the holy Spirit, to the end, that if we are not afraid to commit a simple
Murder, we may at least be startled from committing a Parricide.

The second Quality of the holy Spirit, is, that having been our Principle, he
will also be our Director, and give us motion after he has endued us with
life. I will not enlarge this Truth, because I have already spoken sufficiently
of it, and discovered those advantages the Christian may draw from thence. It
shall suffice to add, that Christians are exalted as far above Philosophers, as
Philosophers are above Beasts: For Beasts are led merely by sense, the pleasure
that tickles them transports them, and whatever flatters their appetite,
either in taste or sight, overpowers them, if they are not withheld by fear or
grief: Sinners are in no better condition then the Brutes, they consult only
their sense when they act, Homo comparatus est jumentis; Considerate vos factos
ad Dei imaginem. Imago Dei intus est, non est in corpore, non est in auribus
istis and eculis, sed est factus ubi est intellectus, ubi men's, ubi ratio
investigandae veritatis. Aug. in Psa. 48.
their soul is always the slave of their body; neither do they perceive, when
they engage themselves in the love of pleasure or glory, how they do no more
then Bulls, that foam and fight for the enjoyment of a Heifer, or to be leaders
of the Herd. Philosophers are a degree higher then Sinners, and taking Reason
for their Guide, they think they cannot err; Rationalc animal est homo;
consummatur itaque ejus bonum si id adimplevit cui nascitur: quid est autem
quod ab illo ratio exigit? rem facillimam, secundum naturam suam vivere. Senec.
Epist. 41.
they fancy proud ostentous designs, they frame noble Ideas of felicity; they
call in the Virtues to their aid to compass it; and assisted with Prudence,
Justice and Fortitude, they count themselves as happy, and as perfect as God
himself. Illi Philosophi seculi vitium vitio, peccatumque peccato medicantur:
nos amore virtutum vitia superemus. Hieron. Epist. ad Rust.
These blind Opinators see not that their Reason is a slave to their
Concupiscence, that Vainglory is the foul of their Virtue, that thinking to
avoid Sensuaality, they fall into Arrogance; and flying the sins of Men, are
taken with those of Devils. But Christians humbly soaring above Philosophers,
take the holy Spirit for their Guide, they subject their reason to his
Inspirations: and knowing very well, that they cannot be the children of God,
unless they be the organs of his Spirit, they undertake nothing but by the
motion of his Grace. Though this favor make up one of their greatest
advantages, they fail not sometimes to neglect it, and to resist the Conduct of
their divine Director: They relapse into the condition of Beasts, when they
obey their senses; are restored to that of Philosophers, Haec est iniquitas
cujus non miseretur Deus, cum homo defendit quod Deus odit, and pec^atum
justitiam asserit, ut omnipotenti resistat and omnipotens illi. Bern. de Conse.
when they are led by their judgment, and become sinners when they resist
Grace. It Is from this impiety that all others are derived; there is no
wickedness a soul is uncapble of, when it rejects the impulses of the Spirit;
neither were the Jews cast off, but because they stopped their ears against his
Oracles. It Is the crime St Stephen accused them of when they stoned him; Ye
always resist the Holy Ghost: and it is the punishment the Son of God threatens
all those with, that persevere in their sins.

The Third Quality of the holy Spirit is that of a Comforter; for if our Body
revolt against reason, he supplies us with strength to subdue this Rebel: if
Passions trouble our rest, he lays the storms: if we are in doubt of our
Salvation, he gives us assurances; and whatever affliction exercises our
Patience, he is our Consolation and our Joy: But as concerning the
acknowledgment of this Grace, we daily afflict him by our insolence, and we
compel the Successors of the Apostles to reprove us, as Saint Paul did;
Grieve not the holy Spirit. This advice which the Doctor of the Gentiles gives
us, is expressed in terms not easy to be understood: For the holy Spirit being
God with the Father and the Son, is not capable of sadness, he enjoyes a
happiness that cannot be disturbed; the rebellion of his Subjects can neither
shake his Empire, nor diminish his felicity; whatever design is undertaken
against him, he still remains absolute; and his Power, which equals his
Wisdom, makes the malice of his enemies serviceable to the execution of his
Will. Therefore is it, Ira Dei non est ut hominis; id est, perturbatio
concitati animi; sed tranquilla justi supplicii constitutio. Aug. Trac. 124. in
Joan.
that Divines cannot comprehend the language of St Paul, nor conceive how the
holy Spirit, that is the source of joy, can be grieved by sinners: Some explain
it, following the common Rule, which places the effects of the Passions in
God, and excludes the imperfections; for his Anger takes not away his
Tranquillity; he punishes the Rebels of his State without the least commotion;
nor is he less calm when he punishes the Devils, then when he rewards the
Angels. But though he act with so much stayedness, he makes his thunder roar
over the heads of the guilty, he makes the earth open under their feet; and if
these two Elements are not enough to destroy them, he obliges the Sea to drown
them by his Inundations. Others conceive, that Saint Paul attributes Grief to
the holy Spirit, after the same manner he attributes Groans; that he more
respects his Figure then his Person; and considering him in that Dove, Gemitus
Columbae, gemitus Spiritus sancti, quia in figura columbae descendit Spiritus
in Dominum.
in the shape whereof he descended upon Jesus Christ, he applies to him the
properties of that innocent Bird: For every one knows that the Dove mourns,
that she has no other note but sighs; and when she is once separated from her
mate, her lamentation lasts as long as her life. But St Augustine, resolves
this difficulty by the strict union between the Faithful and the holy Spirit;
he attributes to him the grief he inspires into them; and because the pity they
express for the lost estate of sinners is an effect of his Grace, he ascends
to the cause, and attributes that to the holy Spirit, that he produces in
Christians. But how-ever it is, we afflict him that comforts us; and not
acknowledging the good he has done us, we grieve the holy Spirit, because we
sad the Church whom he inanimates.

Finally, to conclude this Discourse; One of the most eminent Qualities of the
holy Spirit is that of the Remission of sins; his Spouse making his Panegyric,
honors him with this Elogie: and Divinity teaches us, that he it is that
prepares the Will of the ungodly, that manageth their Consent by the
endearments of his Grace, and reconciles them to the Father by the merits of
the Son, which he applies to them: Thence is it that he presides in the work of
Repentance; that the Priests who absolve the guilty, are his Ministers; and the
sorrow that blots out sin is an effect of his Mercy. Ad ipsum pertinet
societas, qua efficimur unum corpus unici Filii Dei. Aug. in Ser. de Blasph.
Spir.
In the mean time, we offend him that pardons us, his indulgence makes us
insolent, and the easiness wherewith he receives Penitents increases the
number of Delinquents. All the sins we commit check these Divine perfections,
and by the least of our offenses we violate all his personal Proprieties. He
is the Unity of the Father and of the Son, because he is that sacred bond that
joins them eternally together; and Sin is an unhappy division that divorceth
Man from God, the body from the soul, Peccatum origo mali, nec sine peccato
aliquid in natura malum est. Aug.
the Husband from the Wife. The holy Spirit is Goodness, because he proceeds by
the way of Love, and all the effects that bear the mark of that divine
perfection, are particularly attributed to him. Sin is nothing but malice in
the essence of it; the Creature may be weak and ignorant by nature, Sanctitas
est ab omni inquinatione libera, incontaminatissema et perfectissima puritas,
quae fine Spiritu saucto intelligi non potest in creatura. S. Dyonis.
but he cannot be bad but by sin: whatever bears that shameful character takes
its origination thence; and men and Angels would be exempt from Malice, were
they exempt from Sin. The holy Spirit is styled Holy, not only because he
sanctifies all Creatures, but because being the Spirit of the Father, and of
the Son, who are both holy, it concerned him to bear a name common to both, and
which may delineate forth the admirable secrets of his eternal Procession: Sin
is so opposite to Holiness, that we cannot better define it, then by its
contrariety to this divine Perfection: For sanctity separates us from the
Creatures, and unites us so mightily to the Creator, that nothing can disjoyn
us: on the contrary, Sin is nothing else but a being wedded to the Creatures,
and an unhappy separation from the Creator; so that it thwarts all the personal
Proprieties of the holy Spirit, and renders men unworthy of all the Favors
they have received from him.

Let us therefore combat this Enemy of Grace, Quicquid fecit Christus, ut
destrueret peccatum fecit: ita debet facere Christianus, cui nullus hostis est
praeter peccatum. Chrysostom.
make war against him, that makes it against God: let us shake off the yoke of
this Tyrant, that flatters only to destroy us; and acknowledging the
obligations we have to the holy Spirit, submit our selves to his divine
qualities. Seeing he gives us Life by Grace, let not us make him die together
with it; seeing he is our Director, let us yield obedience to his Ordinances;
since he is our Consolation in our discontents, let us not grieve him in his
just Ones; and seeing he is the Remission of sins, let us bewail those we have
committed, to give him satisfaction; and commit no new ones further to provoke
him.

The Third TREATISE. Of the Christians Head.
The first DISCOURSE. That the CHRISTIAN has two Heads, ADAM, and JESUS CHRIST.
IF Bodies with two Heads pass for Monsters, humane Nature may very well pass
for a Prodigy, in that it has two Chiefes, upon which it depends; and that as
Adam communicates his Sin to it by Generation, making it guilty and miserable;
Jesus Christ communicates his Grace to it by Baptism, making it innocent and
happy. It Is true, Nature might have expected great advantages from this first
Head, had he kept his original Righteousness: for our Divines confess, that
Adam being Chief of all men, received Grace not only for himself, but for
all his Posterity; that as his sin passes into his children by Generation,
Grace had passed into them by the same conveyance; and that then they had been
borne innocent, as now they are borne criminal, Together with grace he had
communicated to them all the Privileges he had received from God in the
Creation; Their bodies had been freed from those troublesome maladies that
exercise our patience; and original righteousness had knit the body so close
to the soul, that their peace had never been disturbed by these intestine
divisions that set them so much at distance. Nourishment had repaired the
radical moisture that the natural heat had consumed; and the fruit of the
Tree of Life retaining something of our Sacraments, had imparted to them a new
vigor, that had secured them against old Age and Death. Their soul had not
been worse provided for then their body; for with Grace they had received all
virtues; and according to Saint Augustine, either they had had the use of
reason for their service, or they had learned with so much easiness, that
Ignorance had never been their Torment.

In this happy condition the Will had been more free then now it is; the
passions were so subject to reason that they had never been up, but by his
order: Concupiscence, that tyrannizeth over the children of Adam, Summa in
carne sanitas, in anima tota tranquilitas. Aug. lib. 14. de Civ. c. 26.
had not enslaved the soul to the body; and though the inferior part had felt
it is natural inclinations; Grace had so well moderated them, that they had
never undertaken any thing either against justice, or honesty. Thence it comes
to pass that these austere virtues, that have nothing else to do, but to
combat the motions of the flesh, had served rather for his ornament, then for
his defense. Thence it follows that Grace had not been the Mistress of the
Will, because having no bad inclinations, she might have guided her self,
provided she were but supported; nor had there been any danger that she that
was not yet a Captive to sin, should have the chief disposal of his
salvation: we are not certain that if Adam had preserved his innocence, his
children had been impeccable; neither know we if the sin of other men had
injured their posterity; and if having lost the advantages of original
righteousness in their own behalf, they had lost them also as concerning
their successors: This condition is so concealed that we have nothing but weak
conjectures of it; every one extolls or debaseth it according to his humor;
and having neither Scripture nor Tradition for their rule, all the world may
diminish or add something to their happiness.

It Is certain nevertheless, Sicut in Paradiso nullus aestus aut frigus, sic in
ejus habitatione, nulla ex cupiditate vel timore, bonae voluntatis offensio.
Aug. lib. 14. de Civ. c. 26.
that all the torments that came into the world with sin had never
discomposed his quiet: The Seasons had not been irregular, the Elements had not
bid him battle, the Earth had been fruitful without tilling, and thorns, that
are the fruits of sin, had not dishonored the face thereof; Deluges that
drowned the world, Drought that makes the fields barren, Pestilence that
depopulates Cities, and mows down the Inhabitants, having no other cause but
sin, had made no devastations in an innocent State; and men being upon good
terms with God, had found their happiness under the protection of his Grace:
having lived some Ages upon the earth, Proinde, si non peccasset Adam, non erat
expoliandus corpore, sed supervestiendus immortalitate. Aug.
they had been translated into heaven, where Glory consuming what they had of
perishable, had made them perfectly immortal, without passing them through the
pangs of immortality. The two parts that compose man had not been separated,
the Masterpiece of the Creation had not been ruined; and the soul reigning
with Angels had not beheld her body devoured by worms, in the Sepulcher. See
here a rude draught of the state of Innocence, and a slight shadow of the
glorious advantages children had derived from their father, had he kept
original righteousness; but the evils he procured them, surpass the
privileges in number and quality.

For his sin is the source and fountain of all misfortunes: we are not guilty
but because we are his Members, we sinned by his will, because we lived in his
person; and the offense of one man is become the obliquity of whole Nature,
because it was included in him as the Tree in the Kernel, or as a River in the
Head. Quia vero per liberum arbitrium Deum deseruit, justum Dei judicium
expertus est, ut cum tota sua stirpe quae in illo adhuc posita tota cum illo
peccaverat damnaretur. Aug.
This is it that Saint Augustine teaches us, in those no less handsome then
solid expressions. Adam felt the just judgment of God, because abusing his
free will, he was unjustly separated from him, and punishment was inflicted
upon him with his whole race, because being in him as in the stock, they had
wholly transgressed with him. The same also he delivers with as much or more
eloquence in his Enchiridion; for searching out the cause of so many evils that
assault us, he concludes that the sin of our first father is the original
thereof, and that we are therefore criminal and miserable, because we are a
part of him. Thence it comes to pass, says he, that being banished out of
Paradise after his transgression, he was condemned to death with all his
Posterity, who living in him as in their Principle, were infected with his
prevarication, as the branches wither in their stock, and die in their root.
Thence it comes to pass that all children that descend from him, and from his
wife, the Complice of his offense and of his punishment, are the heirs of his
corruption. This sin passes into them by the channel of concupiscence, and
makes them sensible of a torment which seems the image of their disobedience,
since one part of themselves is revolted against the other: This revolt
engaging their soul in vanity, and their body in pain; leads them insensibly
with the rebellious Angels to that last Judgment which will never have an end.

Let us give a little light to this Speculation, let us amplify in this
discourse what Saint Augustine has wrapped up in this passage; and unfolding all
the evils derived from sin, discover the malignant influences of this
Delinquent in chief upon his wretched members. Ignorance seems to be one of
the prime calamities of man; It Is born with him ever since he was born with
sin; it sinks so deep into his soul, that it cannot be expelled thence but
with labor and pain. Children know neither their Creator, nor their Father;
they live some years in this sad condition: we must expect till Nature ripen
their senses, and make them capable of the instructions of their Nurses or
Masters, that knowledge and truth may pass into their souls by the mediation
of their eyes and ears. Those that are born among infidels, thinking to
deliver themselves from ignorance, are plunged into falsehood, and fall into a
mischief more grievous then that they labor to avoid; when these two evils
are associated together, they heighten the bad inclinations of the Will; of an
offender they make an Opinator, and adding obstinacy to malice, throw him into
a necessity of sinning.

If it have not this unhappy consequence in the faithful, who are instructed
in the School of Truth, it occasions another, whose effects are no whit less
tragical. For the Will feels a wretched impotency toward all those good
things, the combat of vices, and the conquest of virtues, makes him apprehend;
she complains that what ever is enjoined is harsh and difficult; what ever is
forbidden, easy and delightful; and having no strength to secure her self
against grief and pleasure, Languorem istum culpa meruit, natura non habuit,
quam sane culpam per lavacrum regenerationis Dei gratia fidelibus jam remisit,
sed sub ejusdem medici manibus adhuc natura cum suo languore confligit. Aug.
she loses as many victories as she fights battles. In the mean time all the
children of Adam live in this misery, what ever habitual goodness they
acquire, they never lose all that weakness they extracted from their Father;
as soon as Grace forsakes them, they relapse into their former infirmity, and
being members of Adam, they are always feeble and languishing.

But that which is most deplorable, Concupiscence that so disables for good,
raises their appetite with so strong a propensity to evil, that nothing seems
difficult that appears under that notion. The ambitious suffer with pleasure
those great anxieties that accompany Glory; this vain Idol makes them so
courageous that they are true to it to the last gasp; their constancy imitates
that of Martyrs, and they endure more hardships to conquer a Province, then
those generous Champions have to purchase Heaven. The Covetous make our
Penitentiaries blush; their Interest costs them more then our Salvation;
Passion that swallows them up, exercises so cruel a Tyranny over their wills,
that it obliges them to all the painful severities the love of Jesus Christ
disciplined the Anchorites to. They fast to save charges, they watch for lucre,
they leave their Country to traffic, they venture their lives to assure
their gains, and lose their conscience to enrich their house. Finally, Haec
cupiditas vana, ac per hoc prava vincit in eis ac fraenat alias cupiditates.
Aug.
Concupiscence works as many disorders in sinners, as Charity does good in
Martyrs; it inspires them with vigor in tickling them with love; it sheds a
poison into their souls, which blending weakness with strength, makes them so
unable for any good, that the least difficulty that accompanies it astonisheth
them; and so valiant for evil, that the greatest oppositions that attend it,
raise their courage to compass it. To all these mischiefs might be added the
division of the soul and body, the revolt of the passions against reason, the
treachery of the senses in respect of the understanding, and all the distempers
that arise from the unseasonablenesse of the weather, or the strife of the
Elements, had I not largely described them in discovering the miseries of man a
Criminal: But not to fall upon tedious repetitions, it is more useful to
consider the Head from whence we have derived our Benedictions; and confront
him against the other, from whom we have received our Anathemaes.

Jesus Christ is that glorious CHIEF whom the Eternal Father is pleased to
engraffe upon our Nature, to deliver it from those miseries it groans under;
it is from Him that all our advantages flow; and as we are made guilty by
descending from Adam, we become innocent by being planted into JESUS CHRIST:
Our Redemption holds some proportion with our Fall; the Mercy of God is
regulated by his Justice, and the Grace he bestows upon us is a copy of our
chastisement. The first Man (says Saint Augustine) received a Liberty void of
all servitude; God presented him with Fire and Water, and gave him leave to
choose; Man took Fire, and rejected the Water; God, who is just, let him grasp
what he had chosen, so that he was therefore unhappy because he would be so:
See here an Express of the Justice of God; Turn the Table, and behold one of
his Mercy: For seeing that Man, by the bad use of his Free Will, had corrupted
all Mankind in his Person, He came down from heaven, not tarrying for his
prayers, and healed him by his Humility, who had lost himself by his Pride; he
rectified the wanderers, and put them into the right way; he called home the
Banished, and instated them in their Country, that they might no longer glory
in themselves, but in that immaculate CHIEF from whom they derived their
salvation. This Verity is the Foundation of our Religion; The belief of two
Adams acquaints us with our Fall, and with our Recovery: We cannot know what
we owe JESUS CHRIST, unless we know what we lost in Adam; nor can we ever
worthily comprehend the obligations we have to our Redeemer, unless we fully
understand all the misfortunes accru'd to us by him that was our Parricide, at
the same instant that he was our Parent. Therefore is it that the great Apostle
never separates ADAM from JESUS CHRIST; he always opposes Grace against Sin;
be heightens the greatness of the Remedy, by that of the Disease: and that we
may have a right estimate of the children of God, he minds us, that they were
the children of wrath, and vessels of dishonor. Saint Augustine (the faithful
Interpreter of Saint Paul) admirably explains this Mystery, in commenting upon
the words of this Apostle. As none (says he) enters into the kingdom of Death,
that passes not by Adam; Si^^t in regno Mortis nemo sine Adam; ita in regno
Vitaenomo sine Christo: sicur per Adam omnes peccatores, ita per Christum omnes
justi homines: sicut per Adam omnes mortales in poena facti sunt filii seculi;
ita per Christu^ omnes immortales, in gratia sunt filii Dei. August. ad Optat.
so none enters into the kingdom of Life, but by Jesus Christ: As all that are
born of Adam are sinners, all that are born again of Jesus Christ are
justified; and as all the sons and daughters of Adam are the children of the
earth and death, all the children of Jesus Christ are the children of heaven
and of life.

This Maxim is so true, that man makes no more progress in perfection, then
according as he does in alliance with Jesus Christ: The more Faith he has, the
less has he of Error and Falsehood; the more hope he conceives in the mercy
of God, the less confidence has he in the favor of men; the more he burns
with the fire of Charity, the less is he scorched with the flames of
Concupiscence; the more he is united to this innocent and glorious Head, from
whom all grace is derived, the less is he fixed to that infamous and criminal
Head, from whom all sin takes it original; so that Christians, as we have
already proved, ought to have no other care but to make Adam die, and Jesus
Christ live in their person; if they intend to be innocent, they must be
Parricides; if they will bestow life upon the Son of God, they must inflict
death upon their first Father; if they mean to be quickened with the spirit of
humility, which raises men in debasing them, they must renounce the spirit of
vainglory, which lays men low in lifting them up, and under a color of making
Gods of them, makes them nothing but Devils or Beasts. Finally, man's
unhappiness flows from the shameful alliance he contracted with Adam in his
Birth, Ex transgressione primi hominis, universum genus humanum natum cum
obligatione peccati victor Diabolus possidebat; si enim sub captivitate non
teneremur, redemptore non indigeremus; venit ad captivos non captus, venit ad
captivos redimendos nihil in se captivitatis ha bens, sed carne mortali pretium
nostrum portans. Aug. de Verb. Apo. Ser. 22.
and the Christians happiness proceeds from the glorious alliance he
contracted with Jesus Christ in Baptism. Thus the quality of a Chief in Adam
is the source of all our Evils; and the quality of a Chief in Jesus Christ, is
the Original of all our Good; and as Adam did not so much destroy us in being
our Father, as in being our Head: neither does Jesus Christ save us so much for
being his Brethren or his Children, as because we are his members; because it is
in effect, this quality that procures us all the rest; neither is God our
Father, but because Jesus Christ is our Head.

The Second DISCOURSE. Of the Excellencies of the Christians Head, and the
advantages they draw from thence.
THough all the alliances Jesus Christ has contracted with men, be as
beneficial to them as they are honorable; yet must we confess, that the
relation that unites him to them as their Head, is the strictest and most
advantageous. It Is much that he would be their King, and giving them Laws had
owned them for his Subjects; It Is more yet that he condescended to be their
Brother, and sharing his Eternal Inheritance with them, made them Coheirs
together with Himself; it is more yet that he made them his Children, and
conceiving them in his wounds, suffered death to give them life; But it is yet a
more signal favor, that he vouchsafed to make them his Members, and joining
them to Himself in one body, he is constituted the Head from whence they
receive all those indearing influences which communicate to them the life of
Grace, and merit for them that of Glory. Therefore also does Saint Augustine,
when he examines the favors we have received from the Father, prefer this
before all others, Nullum majus donum prast^re posset hominibus quam ut verbum
suum per quod condidit omni^ faccret illis caput, and illos ei tanquam membra
coaptaret, ut esset filius Dei and silius hominis unus Deus cum patre, unus
homo cum hominibus. Aug. in Psalm. 36. Ser. 3.
and confesses he never more sensibly obliged us then when he gave us his
only Son to be our Head. God says he, could bestow no higher honor upon men
then by uniting them with his Word, by whom he created all things, as the
Members with their Head; that he that was the Son of God, might be the Son of
Man; and that by reason of his Divine Person subsisting in the Humane Nature,
he might be God with his Father, and Man with his Brethren. It Is in effect from
this glorious co-habitation that all our blessings are derived: If the Father
look upon us, it is because we are the Members of his only Son; If he hear
our prayers, it is because Jesus Christ speaks by our mouth; if he receive us
into Glory, it is because he sees us clothed with the merits of our Head; if he
admit us into his bosom, it is because the quality we bear renders us
inseparable from his Word; But if this alliance be beneficial to Christians,
it is honorable to Jesus Christ; For though nothing can be added to his
Grandeur, who is equal to his Father, and all the Privileges he received from
his Incarnation, may pass for so many Humiliations: Nevertheless the dignity
of being Head of the Church is so eminent, that after that of the Son of God,
there is none so Venerable and August. It gives Jesus Christ the same advantage
over the Faithful, that the Head has over the Members; and to conceive what
he is in the Church, we must observe what this is in the Body.

The Head is the noblest seat of the Soul, it is that part of the Body where she
acts her highest operations; it is there that she debates those subjects that
are presented to her, that she deliberates upon the accidents that happen: it is
there that the memory preserves the species, which may be called the treasures
of wisdom, and the riches of the Intellectual faculty; it is there that the
understanding conceives truths, and the will pronounces determinations: In a
word, it is there that the affairs concerning Peace and War, Salvation or
Damnation, Time or Eternity, are treated of; Thus also is it in Jesus Christ,
that all those lights reside that govern the Church; it is in him that are shut
up all the treasures of wisdom: and from him that all Oracles proceed whereby
the Faithful are instructed.

The Head is the most eminent part of the Body; Nature was willing that as it
is the noblest, so it should be placed nearest Heaven; and the very situation
should oblige all the other parts to show it reverence: It is the most exalted,
that it may more easily dispense its orders, and that the spirits which convey
sense and motion by the nerves, may descend with more facility into all the
parts of the body. Jesus Christ also is in the highest place of his State, he
reigns in Heaven with his Father, from thence he views all the necessities of
his Body, he sends those influences that are needful to every particular
member, distributing light and heat according to his own designs and their
necessities.

The Head is the most illustrious throne of the Soul; she has all the senses
for ornament or for defense; The Ears serve as Scouts which exactly report
whatever the confusion of noises, or distinction of voices can inform either
doubtful or certain: The Eyes are faithful Guides, discovering the Essence of
things, by discovering the accidents under which they are veiled; The Palate is
the taster of meats, judges of good and bad, and following the orders of his
Sovereign, receives the one and rejects the other; The Nose is not only the
unloader of the Brain, and the ornament of the Face, but the seat of smelling,
and discerns of sents; that as the Head is the Queen Regent of the Body, she
may have all things necessary for the preservation of her Subjects. Thus may we
say that the Son of God possesses all the Graces that are dispersed amongst the
Faithful; that he has all the gifts of the holy Ghost, which are as the senses
of the Mystical Body, and includes all the virtues that serve either for the
ornament or defense of his members. Omnia fere dona nostra habent adjunctam
imperfectionem: unde continentia est hostis and testis concupis^entiae. Aug.
He has moreover some advantages which others enjoy not; and as he is the Head
of the Church, his Father was pleased that he should be happy in his mortal
passage; that his light should have no shadow of darkness; that he should
preserve his Innocence in the midst of our sins, whereof he was the pledge;
that he should have the gift of Prophecy without obscurity, and that all his
Graces should be free from those imperfections in men they are accompanied with.

If this wonderful Chief have some privileges common with the Head, he has
others that are particular, and which force us to confess that he is much
nobler then that goodly part that commands all the rest: For the Head can
neither be younger nor elder then the Body; Nature forms them both together,
and at the same time that she lengthens the arm, extends the Shoulders, fastens
the Legs, she opens the Eyes, boars the Ears, fashions the Nose and pefects the
Head: But Jesus Christ is Independent of his Members; he was born at the very
instant he chose with his Father; and as he quickens his Body before his Birth,
so does he after his Death: All the Faithful that were before him, lived by
the Grace they drew from him; and all that come after him, live now by the
influences they receive from his Sacred Person: He acted in the world, before
he came into the world; He sanctified the Patriarchs, of whom he was to be
born; He inanimated those Kings that were his Ancestors; and contrary to all
the orders of Nature, he gave life to those from whom he was to receive it. We
cannot deny but his Grace was more powerful in this particular, then the sin
of Adam; for this wretched Parent communicated not his poison but to those that
descended from him; he made none but his children heirs of his misfortune; and
whoever sprang not from that unfortunate stock, may boast himself innocent. But
the Son of God acts indifferently upon all men; his power is not bounded by
Ages; the Future depends upon him as well as the Past; and the Saints that saw
the Deluge of the world, owe their grace to him, as well as those that shall
see the Conflagration of it: He has this advantage common to him with those
causes which act before they are; and being the last in execution, cease not to
operate, because they are the first in intention. Thus the Son of God produces
wonders at the birth and at the dissolution of Ages, though he were not born
till the fullness of time, because he is the first in the intention of his
Father: the Faithful are but for him; and all the Elect are the Members which
make up that Body whereof he is the Head. Vicerunt sancti in sanguine Agni.
Apoc. Agnus est occisus ab origin mundi: caput nostrii Christus est; Corpus
capitis illius nos sumus: nunquid soli nos, and non etiam illi qui fuerunt ante
nos? Omnes qui ab inicio saeculi fuerunt justi, caput Christu^ habent. Aug.
Sermon. 3. in Psalm. 36.
This is the truth that S. John teaches us, when he says that the Saints
overcame by the blood of the Lamb that was slain from the beginning of the
world. For though he died not till the reign of Tiberius, his blood failed not
to produce effects in all the differences of time: and as the Martyrs of the
Old Testament were not less his Members then those of the New, they owed their
conflicts, their victories, their triumphs, to his virtue.

This circumstance greatly magnifies the power of Jesus Christ, and makes us
see that the treasures of his merits are infinite, in that he is not only
unable to be exhausted by all the Faithful that are enriched by him, but
because his liberality was laid open from the beginning of the world. The Kings
of the earth act not but during their life; if they exercise some desires in
the hearts of their Subjects before their death, they are blind velleities,
which are many times attended with repentance and sorrow: if they leave some
regret after their death, it is quickly buried by the vices or virtues of their
Successors: and when we no longer feel the benefit of their Protection, we are
no longer mindful of their Persons. But Jesus, more powerful and more necessary
then Monarchs, acted before his Birth, and after his Resurrection: Christus
ante profuit quam fuit. Bern.
he governed his Kingdom, before he was conceived in the womb of the Virgin: he
won battles, before he had any hands to fight: he maintained the Faithful,
before he had a Soul; and gave life to his Members, before he received it from
his Mother: he lived not as yet in Himself, and was alive and already in
Others: he acted not in his Natural body, and yet he acted in his Mystical
body: not being able to express himself by his own mouth, he spoke by that of
the Prophets, and gave Laws to all the Jews in the person of Moses.

His Power was increased by his Death: that which ruins the dominion of
Princes, served only to establish his Kingdom: he was never more absolute then
upon the Cross; and that head crowned with thorns, was never more active then
when he stood at bay: This Sun never darted forth more rays, then when he was
in an eclipse; nor did the Son of God ever so gloriously triumph over his
enemies, as when they upbraided him with his weakness, and rejoiced at his
sufferings. Then was it that he conceived the Church in his wounds, that he
gave his children life by his own death, that he encouraged his Apostles to
Martyrdom; and providing Graces for all his Members, inspired them with
strength to vanquish pleasure, and subdue grief. For though the Son of God be
the Head of men in all the conditions of life, because he was so before his
birth; nevertheless he exercises this Office in a time when others cannot:
Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso: Excedit humanum conditionem ista promissio, nec
tam de ligno Crucis quam de Throno editur potestatis. Leo.
He founded his Church in dying; he acted like a Sovereign, when they deprived
him of life: he pardoned offenders, when they handled him as a delinquent: he
disposed of the kingdom of heaven, when they disputed his kingdom upon earth;
and making his power appear in his weakness, his innocence in his execution,
and his grandeur in his affronts, he takes pleasure to confound the pride of
his enemies.

But me thinks there is no quality makes him shine forth with so much pomp upon
the Cross, as that of being the Head: For besides that it was in this place
that he offered up himself for his Elect, and by bonds as strong as they are
secret, united them to his Person, that neither sin nor death can ever separate
them from him; it was there that he made that wonderful Bargain with them,
where charging himself with their sins, he invested them with his merits; and
taking upon him the quality of a sinner, communicated to them that of
innocents. There it was that he espoused the Church; and accomplishing that
Figure which preceded in the person of Adam and Eve, he was willing to die,
that his Spouse might live. For the holy Scripture, not without a Mystery,
observes that Eve was taken from the side of Adam whilst he was asleep, that
all the world might know that the Church must proceed from the side of Christ
when he hung dead upon the Cross. God could, says S. Augustine, have formed
the woman of her husband whilst he was awake, had there not been some Mystery
couched under that Ceremony; for if we say God chose that time to rid man from
all sense of pain, it was too violent not to awaken him: and if we say man felt
it not, because God wrought the work, he could as easily have taken away the
rib when he was awake, as when he lay asleep: But he had a mind to express
that in Paradise, which was to be acted upon mount Calvary; and teach us, that
as Eve issued from the side of her sleeping husband, the Church should issue
from the side of dying Jesus.

If this Mystery heightens the love and power of Jesus Christ, we must confess
it augments withal the obligations Christians have to death and sufferings. For
Christ conceived us in the midst of his wounds; we are the children of his
sorrows; and his Church cost him much more pain and trouble then Eve did the
first Adam: Sicut dormienti Adae costa detrabitur, ut conjux efficiatur; ita
and Christo morienti de latere sanguis effunditur, ut Ecclesia construatur:
communicantes namque corpori and sanguini efficimur Ecclesia Christi conjux.
Aug.
His spouse never broke his sleep; she rose from his side without any pang or
violence; he found himself happily married when he awoke; and he judged her a
piece of himself, more from his inclination then his grief. But Jesus lost his
life, to bestow it upon the Church; his body must be opened, and his heart
pierced, to form his Bride: this Maid was to be sought for in the bowels of her
Father; and an incision made into the side of the Parent, to be the Midwife to
this Posthuma. As this Quality was dear bought, and like David he was fain to
mingle his own blood with that of the Philistims, to purchase his Church, his
mind is, that the children of so dolorous a Marriage breathe nothing but
sufferings; and remembering that they are the babes of a God dying upon the
Cross, they should pass their whole life in sorrow and tribulations: For, what
likelihood is there, that, being born in pain and anguish, they should seek
after delights and pleasure? That they should be crowned with Roses, when their
Head was encircled with Thorns? That they should be ambitious after the glory
of the world, since he that gave them being, died amongst ignominy and
reproaches; or that they should seek revenge for their injuries, when he from
whom they descend, begged, as a favor, the pardon of his enemies? Let us
imitate our Chief, because he is our Example: let us remember that all our
happiness depends upon our union and conformity with him. Let us often meditate
that the Father loves none but his only Son, That none can have a part in his
Inheritance that is not united to Jesus Christ, That he only can ascend up
into heaven that came down from thence, That as there is but one Guilty man, so
there is but one Innocent; and as all the Reprobate are involved in the sin of
Adam, all the Predestinate are wrapped up in the grace of Jesus Christ.

The Third DISCOURSE. Of the strict Union of the Head with the Members, and of
that of Jesus Christ with Christians.
ALl Politicians acknowledge that the Sovereign, being the Head of the State,
is united with his Subjects; and that their union is so near, that their
interests are in common: He that offends the Prince, wrongs the State: he that
attempts any thing against his sacred Person, wounds all those that live in his
Kingdom: and as Nature teaches all members to expose themselves for the
preservation of their head, the Politics teach all Subjects to venture
themselves for the defense of their Sovereign. But forasmuch as the obligations
are mutual and reciprocal, the same Politics read a Lecture to Kings, that
they are bound to preserve their Subjects, to spare their blood, and to handle
offenders as corrupted members, which are never cut off from the body but with
sorrow and necessity. The Prince must be sensible of every part of his State
that perishes; every blow that lights upon it, pierces his heart: and his
love toward it must be such, that he be ready to lay down his life for them,
when he shall judge their safety to depend upon his death. This is the reason
Seneca sometimes made use of to sweeten the cruel humor of Nero, and to instill
clemency into the heart of that bloody Parricide. Thou, said he, art the head
of the Commonwealth; whence thou may ghess how necessary Clemency is to
thee, since in pardoning others, thou art pitiful to thy self; and favoring
thy subjects, art kind to him that lives in them as in his members. If we
believe this Philosopher, there was a time when Nero profited by this advice;
and this Truth had so powerful an impression upon his spirit, that he was witty
to find out pretenses to spare the blood of delinquents: For, to use Seneca's
own words; When there came an offender before him who was yet in the flower of
his age, he pardoned his youth, Alterius aetate prima motus sum, alterius
ultima; alium dignitati donavi, alium humilitati; queties nullam inveneram
misericordiae causam mihi peperci. Sen. lib. 1. de Clem. c. 1.
and that extravagancy which ever accompanies it: when he was stricken in
years, he pardoned his gray hairs, and left death the charge of the execution:
when he was of a good House, he respected his birth; and balancing the good
services of his Ancestors with his crimes, conceived he did justice to them in
showing mercy to him: when he was of an obscure mean Family, he contemned an
offender whose example could not any way prejudice the Commonwealth: But when
there was a prisoner presented whose crimes seemed to obstruct his Clemency,
and command his Severity, he used an innocent stratagem; and remembering that he
was the Head of that transgressing Member, he pardoned him in consideration of
that Alliance, and spared himself in the person of that delinquent.

Though all this Discourse make it evident, that there is no stricter relation
then that between Kings and their Subjects; yet must we confess it is rather
Imaginary then Veritable: For, besides that experience teaches us, that Kings,
who live in pleasure, seldom think of the miseries of their People; Reason
instructs us, that there is nothing but Nature or Grace that can unite men to
one another. All those Alliances that are founded only upon Inclinations or
Duty, stamp no Character; and if Religion second not the Politics, they can
neither oblige Subjects to expose their lives for the safety of their Prince,
nor Princes for that of their Subjects. Whatever Oracles Morality pronounces
upon this occasion, whatever Colors Eloquence adorns the actions of Soldiers
with who have spilt their blood for the honor of their Sovereigns, they never
looked upon them as their Head: and if they set upon their enemies in spite of
the thunder of the Canon, 'twas not so much for the preservation of their
Person, as out of a hope of Glory, or expectation of a Reward. There is no true
Alliance, but that which is established upon the Flesh, or upon the Spirit: and
among so many Chiefs that govern their States, there is none but Jesus Christ
that is really united with his Subjects: He lives in them by Grace; and as
Faith and Charity are able to make him present in all his members, it is
sufficient to be Faithful or Charitable, to make up one part of his Mystical
Body.

Thence it comes to pass, that he shares with his members in all the Good or
Evil they receive; that his Glory hinders him not from having a fellow-feeling
of their miseries; and though in Heaven, yet cease not to suffer with them
upon Earth. The distance of place disjoyns him not from his Mystical Body; he
is with men, though among the Angels; and this Bridegroom that reigns with the
Church Triumphant, fights yet with the Militant. These two Churches make up his
Spouse; he loves them both as one; he gives himself to both of them, not
imitating the Saints who leaving their ashes to the Church Militant, translate
their souls to the Church Triumphant; he imparts himself to both without being
divided to either; and to take away all shadow of jealousy, resides as truly
among the Faithful, Caput nostrum est in coelo and nos in illo ibi sursum:
Ecce jam pignus habomus unde nos fide and spe and charitate cum capite no^^ro
sumus in coelo in aeternu^, quia and ipsum bonitate, divinitate, unitate
nobiscum est in terra atque ad consummatione saeculi. Aug. in Psalm. 26. Ser. 2.
as among the Beatificall. He respects only the difference of their conditions
in the favors he confers upon them; For the Church Triumphant being in
possession, he discovers to them his beauties, declares to them his secrets,
and gives them a portion of his felicity; But the Church Militant being still
in hope, he hides his face to increase her love; he speaks to her darkly in
Aenigma's to exercise her faith; he takes her into his sufferings, to increase
her merits; nor does he show himself to her, but under the vailes and
curtains of our Sacraments, to put an edge upon her desires; But he is equally
united with both of them by that charity which makes him their Bridegroom and
their Head.

We see also in the Scripture, that he is sensible of all the outrages that are
done to his members; and that from Heaven above where he reigns, with the
Angels, he suffers with the Faithful upon the earth. When Saul persecuted the
Infant Church, endeavoring to stiffle it in the Cradle; when rage in his
heart, threats in his mouth, arms in his hands, sent him to make inquisition
after her tender ones from Jerusalem as far as Damascus; the Son of God
complains of this violence, as if done against his own Person; and the near
relation he has contracted with them, obliged him to profess that in
offending them, they wounded him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Jesus
Christ had sufficiently honored the Faithful, says Saint Augustine, had he
been contented to call them his Friends or his Brethren, and one so glorious a
condition had shrouded them from the rage and fury of so cruel a persecutor;
but he had prejudiced his love and his veracity, had he used other terms: Being
the Head of the Christians, and happily affianced to them, he must of necessity
mingle their injuries with his; and to aggravate the greatness of this
outrage, he informed him that was the Author, that no man could offend the
Christians, but he must wound him; nor hurt men, but he must injure the only
Son of God. Let us hear Saint Augustine upon this Subject, and see how he
handles this mystery of Unity. Jesus Christ was in Heaven when he converted
Saint Paul, and of a Persecutor made him an Apostle: Whence comes it then that
in reproaching him with his Crime, he says, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
This furious Assasinate, had he climbd up to Heaven to declare War against
Jesus Christ? Meant he to imitate the pride of those ambitious Angels, that set
upon him in the midst of his Glory? Saul persecuced the Christians, and not
Jesus Christ that reigned with his Father in Heaven: But because he lived in
the Faithful, he suffered with his members, and established that Maxim which
this Apostle was one day to preach; If one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it: he uses this language to Saul, and speaks to him with an
Emphasis, Why do thou persecute me? The glory wherewith I am surrounded,
renders thy attempts fruitless; and whatever hatred thou have conceived
against me, thou can not injure my Greatness: Know neverthesse, that I live
still in my Faithful ones; that they are my members; that I am their Head; and
that in persecuting them, thou persecutest me in their person. Ought not this
my Brethren to astonish you? goes on Saint Augustine: seeing the same thing
happens to us every day, and an ordinary and familiar example evidenceth the
same truth; For when ye are in the throng of an Assembly, and some body treads
upon your foot, your tongue presently complains: and though no body touched it,
cries out, you have hurt me; what means it by that expression? Might it not be
replied, you are in safety; the place you have in the body, secures you from
danger: and if any part be offended, it is the foot, not you. In the mean time
Truth and Charity require this language; for being in the same body with the
foot, their good and bad are common; he that hurts one, hurts the other; the
society that unites them, and the compassion that grows from their society,
constraines it to utter the^e complaints, as just as they are true. Let us
apply this comparison, and say, though Jesus Christ suffer not in his Person,
he suffers in that of the Faithful; that making up one body with them, he is
sensible of their pains; and taking part in their wrongs, is offended when any
one offends them.

By the same consequence, a Christian can do no good to other Christians, but
the Son or God is beholding to him for it: For the Felicity he enjoys,
exempts him from all want; nothing can be added to his riches by desires, and
he is so great and so happy, that there is nothing he can either hope or fear:
yet is he indigent in the faithful, and he may be assisted in the person of
the miserable; he protests that in that terrible day when he will examine the
good and bad works of his Subjects, he will recompense the good offices done to
the poor, as done to himself; nor will make any difference between the good
usage he received in his natural body, and that he shall have received in his
mystical body; he will equally pronounce sentence upon these different
actions, and every where confounding the Head with the Members, will punish
with as much severity, those that have persecuted him in the poor, as those
that nailed him to the Cross: That which ye did to one of the least of mine,
ye did unto me. This truth ought to comfort the good, and strike terror into
the wicked: For if Jesus Christ live still in the distressed; if the condition
of a Head, which he preserves in Glory, make him languish in the poor, we must
needs conclude that those that oppress them, are as guilty as the Pharisees
that oppressed Jesus Christ; Though his Innocence was clouded under the
likeness of sinful flesh, and the luster of his Majesty obscured by the
humility of his person; his enemies did despite to a God when they thought only
to injure a Man, they committed a Parricide when they imagined they acted only
a murder; and the Father punishes them as guilty of Treason against the Divine
Majesty, because the miracles of his Son took away all pretense from their
zeal, and all excuse from their offense: The same judgment threatens those
that persecute the poor; For though nothing of worth shine forth in them that
can render them considerable; though Jesus be hid under the misery of their
condition, and reason cannot discover a happy man under an unfortunate one; nor
a Son of God under a child of Adam; he will not fail to punish them as severely
as those that knew him not in Judea, because his words which are to be
respected as Oracles, suffer us not to doubt of this verity which makes up one
of the chiefest Articles of our Faith.

But if it be an argument of terror to the wicked, it is a ground of comfort
and consolation to the godly; For they may still succor the Son of God in
wretched and distressed people; they may imitate the piety of Martha and Mary
Magdalen; they may enjoy the privileges which make up the glory of those
blessed women; they may still be the entertainers of Jesus Christ; and
receiving him in the person of the poor and strangers, Ne quis vestrum dicat,
(...) beati qui Christum suscipere in propriam domii meruerunt, noli dolere,
noli murmurare quia temporibus natus es quando jam dominum non vides in carne:
non tibi abstulit istam dignationem, cum uni inquit ex minimis meis fecistis,
mibi fecistis. Aug. Sermon. 27. de Verb. Dom.
participate in their merits who received him himself into their houses. The
Son of God will not have us make any difference between his natural and his
mystical body; his hands and his feet are not dearer to him then the poor: and
all that is done to these may expect the same reward as that which was done to
them. If we believe S. Chrysostom, there is more advantage by serving Christ
in his afflicted members, then there was to wait upon him in his own Person,
because there is more trouble in it; and as our senses meet with nothing that
can flatter them in that exercise, our love is more pure, and more
disinteressed. There was as much pleasure, as honor to perform acts of service
to the Son of God, whilst he lived upon earth; the Majesty of his Countenance,
the graciousnesse of his Aspect, the Charms of his Conversation, the Power of
his Words, were recompense enough to them that received him into their houses;
they had a certain adhaesion to his person, from whence they were to be
separated by death. That visible presence which charmed their eyes, diminished
their merit; and the love they bare to that body that was the workmanship of
the Holy Ghost, had imperfections which were to be purified by elongation. But
the Faithful who serve the Son of God in the poor, are free from this danger;
they behold nothing in these sad objects that can please their sense; they must
consult their faith to find Jesus Christ there; they must do violence to
themselves, to pay their homage at those shrines; and that Image having no
allurements, all their devotion betakes it self purely to seek after Jesus
Christ in Heaven; But not to determine this difference, it is sufficient to know
for our comfort, that Jesus Christ is in the Christians; that the glories of
the one, and the miseries of the other, separate them not; that he suffers in
us without any abatement of his Felicity; that we reign in him, without any
prejudice to our merit; that he is upon the Earth, though clothed with the
Glories of Immortality; that we are in Heaven, though shrouded in the rags of
misery; that in the difference of our conditions, Quoties ergo videmus aliquem
indigentem, agnoscamus Christu^ in illo, quia and ipse indigens membrum Christi
est. Bern. de Pass. Domi. cap. 32.
there is a perfect communication of good and bad things between him and us;
that his Grace is ours, our sins are his; with this difference only, that his
Grace cancels our sins, and our sins despoile not him of his Innocence.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. That the Union of Christians with their Head is an
Imitation of the Hypostaticall Union.
CHristian Religion acknowledges three wonderful Unities which exercise her
Faith, inflame her Love, and entertain her Piety: The first is the Unity of
Essence which is found in the Trinity: For the same Faith that ^eacheth us
there are three Persons in one God, teaches us also that he subsists in one
and the same Essence; and that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but one
God. This Truth soars so high above Humane Understanding, that it cannot be
conceived otherwise then by the light of Faith. Reason would deceive, should
she be consulted with in this mystery; Man would not be more faithful,
Considera quod voceris fidelis, non rationalis; si dicas hoc non est exponcre
sed expositione fugere, respondeo in die judicii non damnor quia dicam nescivi
naturam Dei mei; si a^tem aliquid temere dixero, temeritas poenam habas,
ignorantia veuiam meretur. Aug. Ser. 1. de Trinitate.
should he labor to be more rational in this subject; and he will fall into
the Heresy of the Arrians, or into that of the Sabellians, did he not subject
his Reason to his Faith. The second is the Unity of Person in Jesus Christ,
which honors the Unity of Essence in the Trinity, though it be in some sort
opposite thereto: For as there are three Persons in God, which preserve their
differences in the Unity of their Nature, that the Trinity is neither
confounded by the Unity, Decuit and cum summa qu^ in Deo est, unitate
congruere, ut quomo o ibi tres personae, una essentia; it a hic
convenientissima quadam contrarietate tres essentiae fint una persona. Bern.
lib. 5. de Consider. cap. 9.
nor the Unity divided by the Trinity: There are three Natures in Jesus Christ,
that subsist in one and the same Person, and which, without losing their
proprieties, make one composition, which is called God-Man. There, by a strange
prodigy, Flesh and Spirit agree with Divinity; neither are the two Others
swallowed up in This: Each Nature preserves its rights; and as the soul is not
debased by being engaged in the Flesh, the Divinity is not disparaged by being
associated to both: This shines forth by Miracles, the Other Two are obscured
by Injuries: In a word, the Son of God never loses his Equality with his
Father, nor the Son of Man his Equality with his Mother. The third Unity is
that of the Body, which is found between Christ and his Church: for though
there be so much difference between these two Persons, Love has combined them
so near together, that not confounding their properties, he has made there of
but one Body whereof Jesus Christ is the Head, and the Faithful the Members:
They live of one and the same Spirit; their Interests are common: though one
reign triumphantly in heaven, the other suffer miserably upon earth, they fail
not to be so perfectly knit together, that the Body is happy in the Head, and
the Head is afflicted in the Members. Of these Three admirable Unities, the
Second adores the First, and the Third the Second: For the principal design of
the Word in his Incarnation, is, to honor the Trinity of the Divine Persons by
the Trinity of his Natures, and to pay homage to the Unity of the Divine
Essence, by the Unity of his Person. This Divine Compound is an Image of the
Trinity: it declares the wonders thereof by its constitution; neither did he
take pleasure to unite the Flesh and the Spirit with the Divinity, but to
express to the Faithful the ineffable Unity between the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, in the difference of their personal proprieties. Indeed this
incomprehensible Mystery was not preached among the children of men, till the
Word became Incarnate; and their Understanding clarified with the light of
Faith, began not to conceive the Trinity of the Persons in the Unity of the
Divine Essence, till it conceived the Trinity of the Natures in the Unity of
the Person of the Word. Finally, the Third Unity renders honor to the Second,
seeing Jesus Christ entered not into society with his Church, but in pursuance
of the affinity he had contracted with Humane Nature. It seems he was willing
to extend the mystery of the Incarnation, in that he made all men his Members,
to make them the children of God; and not being able, or not vouchsafing to
unite himself personally with every Christian, he became united to them in the
unity of the Spirit and of the Body. The First of these Marriages is the
example of the Second; and we cannot well express the Union of Jesus Christ
with his Church, but by that of the Word with our Nature. The Resemblances are
so wonderful, that they justly deserve this Discourse, to see if we can clear
them.

The chiefest secret of this mystery, is, that the Plurality of Nature destroys
not the Unity of the Person: Verbum caro factum unus est Christus, ubi nihil
est alterius naturae^quod sit utriusque. D. Leo. Sermon. 10. de not. Dom.
For though the Flesh have its weaknesses, and the Divinity its perfections in
Jesus Christ; it is nevertheless an admirable Compound, that preserves its unity
in the difference of its Natures: he acts sometimes as God, sometimes as Man;
receives the adorations of Angels, and the injuries of Men; that obeys his
Father, and commands with him; suffers upon the Cross, and reigns in Glory;
that is buried with the dead in the Grave, and triumphs over the devil in hell.
But in these different conditions he cease not to be one and the same
subject, who accommodating himself to the proprieties of his Natures, mixes
Greatness with Humility, Joy with Sorrow, Repentance with Innocence, without
interessing his Person. The same wonder is met with in the Marriage of Christ
with his Church: they are different in their qualities; and it is a strange
effect of Love, that was able to find out a means to unite together two
subjects whose conditions are so dissonant: The one is Sovereign, because God;
the other a slave, because redeemed: the one innocent, the other guilty; the
one reigns in Eternity, the other sighs and groans in Time: nevertheless their
Union is so strict, that, without confounding their properties, they compose
one and the same Body, and both together make up but one only Jesus Christ.
Whence it comes to pass, that S. Augustine, who after S. Paul has best
understood this Mystery, Totus Christus secundum Ecclesiam and caput and corpus
est, non quia sinc corpore non est integer, sed quia and nobiscu^ integer esse
dignatus est, qui and sine nobis semper est integer. Veruntamen fratres quomodo
corpus ejus nos, si non and nobiscum unum Christus? Aug. in Sermon. Quod
tribusmodis Christus intelligitur.
delivers these words: One only Jesus Christ, is the Body and the Head of the
Church; not that he is not entire without this Body; but he that is entire
without us as Man and God, was pleased to be entire with us as Head: For how
shall we be one Body with him, if he were not one Christ with us? and how shall
he speak in our person, if he give us not the liberty to speak in his? Jesus
Christ, then, and the Church, make up but one Body; and both of them together
make that admirable Compound, which, by reason of the difference of its parts,
bears sometimes the name of Jesus Christ, and sometimes the name of the Church.

This leads us to the second Resemblance between the Union of the Humanity with
the Divinity, and that of Jesus Christ with the Faithful: For the former is so
perfect, that without offending the two Natures that subsist in the Word, all
that may be said of the one, which is said of the other. The Communication of
Properties, produces that of Idiomes; and, without uttering blasphemies, we
attribute to Man all that may be attributed to God. Thus, without doing any
violence to Truth, we say, that God is Man, and that Man is God; that Man
commands over Death, that God is subject to the dominion thereof; that Man
contains the whole world in his Innocence, and that God is enclosed in the
chaste womb of a Virgin; that Man bears rule with his Father, and that God
obeys with his Mother. All these manners of speech, which else had been
blasphemies, are now great Verities: and as if the Word had been willing to
satisfy the unjust passion of Man that desired to be God, he has exalted him
to his Greatness, in uniting him to his Person; and by privilege has
conferred that upon him by Grace, which by Nature he was no ways able to attain
unto. Such is the Union of Jesus Christ with his Church: the communication of
their Goods, has produced the communication of Dialects: we speak of them so
confusedly, that there are no Elogies given to Jesus Christ, which may not be
given to his Spouse: he loads himself with her sins, and clothes her with his
merits; he gives her part of his innocence, and covers himself with her
unrighteousness: so that without prejudicing the Greatness of Jesus Christ, and
the Modesty of the Church, we may say, The Church is perfect in her Head, and
the Head imperfect in his Members; the Church knows all things in her Head, and
Jesus Christ learns in his Members; the Church is innocent in her Head, and
Jesus Christ guilty in his Members. Thus is it that S. Augustine interprets the
words of the Prophet, Deus, Deus meus, ut quid me dereliquisti? Quare hoc
dicitur, nifi quia nos ibi eramus, nisi quia corpus Christi Ecclesia? quomodo
dicit delictorum meorum, nisi quia pro delictis nostris ipse precatur, and
delict a nostra sua fecit ut juftitiam nostram suam faceret? Aug. in Psalm. 24.
Expos. 2.
Long a salute mea ve^ba delictorum meorum; and finds that this language that
so happily expresses the love of the Son of God, does no way prejudice his
innocence. Indeed because he is the Head of the Church, and this quality unites
him with his Members, it obliges him to speak of their sins as of his own, to
pay those debts for them he never contracted, and in their name to satisfy the
justice of his Father he had no ways offended. How, says the same S.
Augustine, could Jesus Christ make this discourse without wounding his
Innocence and Truth it self? How could he attribute sins to himself, that never
committed any? How can we believe him true, when he made his confession upon
the Cross, were it not that we acknowledge he applied our offenses to himself,
that he might communicate our righteousness to him; and by the communication
between the Head and the Members, he is charged with our Crimes, to enrich us
with his Merits?

This will not seem strange to those that shall consider another parallel
between the Marriage of the Humanity with the Divinity, and that of Jesus
Christ with the Church: For though Joy and Sorrow be as incompatible as Sin and
Innocence, since, according to the doctrine of S. Augustine, man became not
miserable, till he became criminal; we observe nevertheless both of them in the
Person of the Son of God, from the very moment of his Incarnation: he joined
pain with pleasure during the course of his whole life: he tasted the felicity
of Angels, and resented the miseries of men: he is happy and afflicted; and,
contrary to all the laws of Nature and Grace, a glorious soul informs a passive
body; and that which beholds the Divine Essence, Tristis est anima mea usque ad
mortem.
is obliged to make complaints and shed tears. Therefore is it that I have
always reverenced that Ancient who called Jesus Christ a Paradox, because his
composition startles Humane Reason, associating in his Person Joy and Grief,
Innocence and Guilt; in a word, the Majesty of a God, with the Weakness of a
Man. But inasmuch as this Mystery was unconceiveable, because hid, Jesus Christ
was willing to manifest it by the union he contracted with the Church: For
there may be seen an Image or Representation of that which passed heretofore in
the person of the Son of God: pleasure may be observed with pain; and by a
strange wonder, Jam in caelo est, and hic laborat, quamdiu laborat Ec^lesia;
his Christus esuris, hic sitit, nudus est, hespes est; quicquid enim patitur
corpus ejus se dixit paet^. Aug.
the condition of the Blessed twisted with that of the Miserable one; and the
same Jesus is still a Sufferer, and still Glorious; he reigns with his Father
in heaven, and suffers with his People upon earth: he triumphs in the Angels,
and sighs in the Martyrs: he is rich in Eternity, and poor in Time: he makes
liberal largesses in his Glory, and receives presents in his Poverty: and he
that possesses all things in Himself, has need of all things in his Members.

Finally, to conclude these Resemblances, the Word uniting it self to the
Humanity, stoops to exalt it; and enters into its Imperfections, to give it
admittance into his Power. For though the Manhood remain in its natural
condition, yet was it adorned with so many Graces by this sacred Marriage, that
it became happily acceptable, and found it self in a free necessity to love
God, without being able to offend him; it appeared sanctified as soon as
conceived, glorious as soon as reasonable; and by a privilege which neither
Men nor Angels shall ever enjoy, it was no sooner drawn out of Nothing, but was
united to the Eternal Word. These Miracles would remain without an Example, did
we not perceive some shadows thereof in the conjunction of Jesus Christ with
the Church: For, in choosing her for his Spouse, he has endowed her with all
the advantages so noble an Alliance could exact: he has made her worthy of his
Love, from the very first moment he began to love her; and more powerful then
those Bridegrooms who can only advantage those they love in riches or honors,
he has adorned her with all the graces her dignity could require, or her
condition suffer: For if she be not yet glorious in all her Members, if she
sigh in the Poor, be a captive in the Prisoner, it is because the Land of dying
mortals where she lives, is not capable of all the privileges of her
Bridegroom; yet may she boast, that she possesses in her Head what she wants
in her Body; tastes that in the Blessed, which she cannot taste in the
Faithful; and if she be Militant upon Earth, is Triumphant in Heaven. But
nothing so much advances the Graces she has received from Jesus Christ, as
the offenses she committed during her Infidelity. For she broke her word in the
first of her children; she listened to the promises of the Serpent by the ear
of our first mother; she erected Altars to devils by the hands of Idolaters;
she uttered blasphemies by the mouth of Libertines; she had committed as many
Adulteries, as she had adored False Deities; and her crimes embossed one upon
another, had branded her with the ignominious titles of Perfidiousness,
Adultery, and Impudence. In the mean time, her Beloved forgave her all these
faults, wiped away all her spots in the Laver of Baptism; and making her a Bath
of his own Blood, returned her at the same time Holiness, Innocence, and
Beauty. But as his Power is equal to his Love, he undertook a thing that Nature
never durst attempt: For finding her, says S. Augustine, in her prostitution,
he restored her her Purity; of an Adultress, he made her a Virgin; and
repeating that miracle which he never wrought for any but his Mother and his
Spouse; Nuptiae Spirituales in quibus nobis magna castitate vivendum est sunt
Christi and Ecclesiae, quia Ecclesiae concessit Deus in Spiritu quod matter ejus
habuit in corpore ut Matter and Virgo sit. Aug.
he bestowed Virginity with Pregnancy, that being pure she might not complain
that she was barren; and being fruitful, she might not be reproached as
impure. Thus the Church is treated by Christ her Beloved, as he treated Humane
Nature; he has honored her with all the privileges he bestowed upon his own
Body; and letting us see an Image of the Hypostaticall Union in the Mystical
Union he contracted with his Spouse, he has showed us the dignity of a
Christian, that being a member of Jesus Christ he may aspire to the Glory of
his Head, and promise himself that having suffered with him upon Earth, he
shall one day reign with him in the Heavens.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. That Jesus Christ treats his Mystical Body with as much
Charity as his Natural Body.
THere is no Christian so little acquainted with the Mysteries of our Religion,
but knows that the Son of God has two Bodies; the one Natural, the other
Mystical; the former he had from his Mother, who yielding her consent to the
Angel, furnished blood, whereof the Holy Chost formed the Body of her only Son:
The second he has from the Church, which springing from his wounds upon Mount
Calvary, gives him as many Members as she bears Believers in her chaste Bosom;
Nonne in figura Mariae typum videmus Sanctae Ecclefiae? ad hanc utique ^^scen
lit Sanctus Sp^ritus, huic virtus altissimi obumbravit; binc Christus potens vi
tute egr^ditur: Ecclesia viro immaculata concubitu, foecunda partu conc pit non
viro sed Spiritu. Aug. ser. 10. de Temp.
and makes him Head of all that acknowledge her for their Mother, and whom she
owns for her Children. These two Bodies have so much affinity, that it is hard
to judge which of them Jesus Christ loves best; and their privileges so like,
that it is easily perceived they belong both to one God. For besides that they
are both formed by the Holy Ghost, and the Mothers that conceived them, cease
not to be pure; notwithstanding they are pregnant, they enjoy the same favors,
and are equally precious to the Son of God: His Natural Body by time received
its full growth, though he were perfect at the moment of conception; he was so
little, that nothing but Faith could comprehend him to be the Temple of the
Eternal Word; his Members were fashioned in the space of nine months; the
natural heat enlarged and fortified them, and the nourishment they received,
gave them that just proportion Children ought to have at their Birth. It was no
small proof of the Humility of Jesus Christ, says Saint Augustine, that he was
willing to condescend to the Laws of Nature, and waving his absolute power,
expect with patience till his members were fashioned to be born in the fullness
of time. Statim lucem lacrymis auspicatus, molestus uberibus, diu infans, vix
puer, tarde homo. Tert.
He handles his Mystical Body after the same manner, expects its perfection
with gracious tenderness, waits for those members his Father pleases to add
in the continuance of years; he sees his Spouse grow up with joy, and from
heaven above is ravished when the Church by Baptism, or by Repentance, bestows
upon him new Subjects to the compleatment of this Mystical Body. Sometimes he
sees the Saul's become part of that whole they have endeavored to destroy;
Sometimes he receives Augustines, and drawing them from Error to Truth, makes
them his Disciples and his Members; Sometimes he converts other sinners, and
associating them to his Person with himself, compleats his Church. It Is true,
as this Body is much greater then the Natural, there is required much more
time to give it its ultimate perfection: The Natural was accomplished in
twenty five years; it had all its bigness when 'rwas nailed to the Cross,
neither was any thing wanting to that Masterpiece of the Holy Ghost, but
Glory, which was deferred till the Resurrection, because it had hindered the
work of our Salvation: But the Mystical commenced with the world; nor shall
end but with that Fabric: Adam and Abel were the first parts; the Patriarchs
and Prophets, the Apostles and the Faithful continue it; and the last
predestined, shall accomplish it at the end of the world. Its full measure
shall not be till the general Resurrection, and there will something still be
wanting to its perfection, till the number of the Elect be completed.

The Natural Body could not grow, but all the members must grow with it: For
there is such a Harmony in man's body, that nature travels at the same time to
perfect the whole Compositum: The nourishment turned into blood, passes
through the veins to the remotest parts; one and the same matter takes a
thousand different forms; and the same aliment changes the qualities, that it
may equally supply the needs of all the members. Jesus Christ was subject to
these Laws whilst he lived among men; the meat he eat, assimilated into his
substance; every part took what was needful for it; and whilst his hands that
were to work so many miracles were strengthened, his legs that were to bear him
over all Palestine, were alike fixed and consolidated. It Is so with his
Mystical Body; the parts that compose it, grow according to their employments;
they take their bulk and nourishment from his Word, and from his Grace; nothing
remains useless in that great Body; every particular hastens to perfection,
and in the difference of conditions, all the members receive their growth and
dimension. This is it that the Apostle had a mind to acquaint us with by those
words, which being well understood, will greatly serve to the clearing of this
mystery: Speaking the truth in love, let us grow in him thorough all things,
who is the Head Christ; From whence we learn, that we grow not in our selves,
but as much as we grow in Jesus Christ; and that it is from the union we
contract with him, that our greatness and perfection is derived.

Both these Bodies were a Sacrifice to God; as soon as Jesus Christ was
Incarnate, he immolated himself to his Father in the Womb of his Mother; he
made it appear by the thoughts of his heart, that he respects his body as a
Holocaust, and he testifies by the language of his Prophets, reported by his
Apostles, that he was clothed with our flesh only to make an oblation of it.
Sacrifice would thou not, but a body have thou prepared me. His design is to
supply the unprofitablenesse of the Law, to offer to his Father a Victime
well-pleasing to him, and meritorious for us, that finding our salvation in his
loss, we might be reconciled to God by his Death; Id Sacrificium succedit
omnibus illis sacrificiis veteris Testamenti quae immolabantur in umbra futuri,
propter quod dicit Oblatione^ noluisti, corpus autem aptasti mihi, quia pro
illis omnibus sacrificiis, and oblationibus corpus ejus offertur, and
participantibus ministratur. Aug. lib. 16. de Civ. Dei.
His mother who was as well acquainted with his designs, offered him in the
Temple in that Spirit; and Simeon answering her thought, speaks to her only of
her sorrows; A Sword shall pass through thy Soul. Jesus Christ exhibited
himself as a Sacrifice during his life; he entertains his Disciples with this
Discourse, and testifies he was not at rest till he should be offered up for an
oblation: He finished in the arms of the Cross what he had begun in the Womb
of his Mother; he was immolated to his Father by the hands of the Executioners;
he made their fury serviceable to his piety; and of a Gibbet erected an Altar;
of a Sacrilege, a Sacrifice; of a Patient, a Holocaust; he fully satisfied the
Justice of his Father; Thus his Mystical Body is a Victime which he daily
offers for the glory of the same Father; He will have every believer immolated,
that the members imitating their Head, may have the honor to lose their life
in the holy severity of an acceptable sacrifice. Therefore does Saint Paul so
often invite us to discharge this duty; he speaks to us of nothing but
Oblations and Altars; he exhorts us to offer our selves to God in a sweet
smelling savor, and he would have us looking upon our selves as reasonable and
living sacrifices; our whole life should be but one continued Oblation. Saint
Augustine treading in the steps of his Master, teaches us the same Truth, and
far differing from their judgment, who would mingle Roses with Thorns in
Christianity, tells us, that the life of the Faithful, if it be ordered
according to the Maxims of the Gospel, is but a languishing and a painful
Martyrdom.

This Circumstance discovers another; and the Sacrifice of these two Bodies,
leads me insensibly to their persecution: For the Natural Body of the Son of
God was not exempted from sorrow, because innocent; his Trials began with his
Life; he had Enemies as soon as he had Subjects; and if he saw Kings at his
Cradle paying their Homages, Positus est in signum cui contradicetur. Luc. 2.
he saw others conspiring his Death: He was forced to commit his Safety to his
Flight; to seek an Asylum in Egypt, and to pass his minority in a Country
where his people spent the years of their Infancy; the continuance of his life
was not much different from his beginning; he lived not in security, but
whilst he lived unknown, he purchased his quiet with the loss of his Glory;
nor did he see himself without Enemies, but during the time he got his living
by the sweat of his brows. As Soon as ever he began to appear, he began to be
persecuted; Passionem aute^ Christi non illu^ diem solum appellamus quo mortuus
f it, sed totam vitam ejus. Tota enim vita Chri^i crux fuit and Martyrium.
Bernard.
The Preaching of the Gospel drew upon him the hatred of the Pharisees; the
luster of his miracles made an end of him; they plotted his death when he had
raised Luzarus from the grave; and the rage of these cruel men ended not with
this life; for they made war upon him after his death; they endeavored to
destroy his Mystical Body, having destroyed his Natural Body; and God
suffered them to have successors in their malice, that the condition of these
two Bodies might be alike. Indeed the Church never wanted persecutors, she has
seen all the Princes of the Earth armed against her Children; Three full Ages
have exercised her patience; she has watered the whole Earth with her blood;
neither is there any corner in the world, wherein she has not given testimony
of her courage. The conversion of Heathen Princes has not been the end of her
persecutions; Sinners have succeeded Tyrants; the good have found tormentors in
the person of the wicked; Every believer has found by experience, that the
Maxim of Saint Paul is true, and that it is impossible to live piously, and
not to be persecuted: All those that will live godlily in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution.

Indeed their persecution has appeared glorious, and it is in this particular,
that they have another resemblance to the Natural Body of the Son of God: For
his Father glorified him upon the Cross; he would have his Innocence known at
his Death, that his Executioners should be the first witnesses of it; that to
the confusion of the Jews the Judge that condemned him should make his Apology;
that the Thieves that suffered with him should publish his Royalty; and the
Soldiers that nailed him to the Cross, become his Adorers. But as if so many
miracles had not sufficiently magnified his only Son, he would have whole
Nature wear mourning for him; The Sun must bewail his Death, and the Earth
tremble with amazement; the rocks cleave asunder with pangs of sorrow, and all
creatures celebrate the obsequies of a dying God. Indeed there never was a more
doleful and more august solemnity then what appeared at the Death of Jesus
Christ. Men lament the death of their Sovereigns; they express some sadness,
though for the most part it is either counterfeit, or interessed; Those that
expected their liberality, are afflicted at their death; those that feared
their power or their displeasure, rejoice: But were they so generally beloved,
that the regret was universal, at least we must confess that Nature would not
weep over their Funerals, she would be insensible of their death, nor would she
disorder her Course to witness her Lamentation. This honor was reserved for
Jesus Christ; There was never any King but he, registered by quick and dead.
None but this Innocent drew tears from the Stars; and the Son of God is the
only Sovereign, whose obsequies all creatures solemnly attended. It Is true his
Mystical Body partakes of this honor with him: Nature has many times wrought
miracles to publish the Innocence of Martyrs; the fire has lost his heat, that
it might not be isntrumental to their punishment; wild Beasts have waxed tame
at their feet, Omnes Martyrs Deus Spiritualiter liberavit, neminem
Spritualiter deseruit, visibiliter tame^ quosda^ deseruisse visus est, and
quosdam eripuisse, sed ideo quosdam eripuit, neputes illum non potuisse
eripere; ubi non cripuit secretiorem intelligas voluntatem. Aug. Tract. 8. in
Epist. 10.
and acknowledging in them a Grace more powerful then that of Original
Righteousness, they have many times forgot that fierceness the sin of man
endued them with. The Sea has suffered violence to preserve them; has gently
transported them upon his waves, or suspending his waters as it were into Walls
and Arches, has erected them Temples in his lowest Abysses. But the Scripture
whose every word is an Oracle, teaches us, that the death of the Mystical
Body of Christ shall receive the same honors at the end of the world, that his
Natural Body received in Mount Calvary: For when the number of the Elect shall
be perfect, when Jesus Christ coming to judge the quick and the dead, shall cut
off the corrupted members from his Mystical Body, and remove those from his
person that were united to it only by a vain Character, and an unprofitable
Faith, the same prodigies that appeared at his death, shall appear at this
Judgment; and according to the language of the Fathers, Nature that bewailed
Jesus Christ in his Natural Body, shall bewail him again in his Mystical
Body: and all creatures shall put on mourning for the death of their Sovereign.

Finally, these two Bodies shall have the same destiny after their
Resurrection, as they had the same during their Life; for the one shall be
glorified as the other, and they shall both receive the recompense due to their
labors: The Son of God rose gloriously out of his Tomb after he had given
assurance to his Apostles; he was taken up into Heaven, to reign there
eternally with his Father; The Angels made a part of his Triumph; the Captives
he delivered from the Lymbo's waited upon him; those gates of Brass and Steel
that had been shut since the sin of Man, opened at his word; and his Body that
was pierced with the nails, rent with stripes, torn with thorns, was set at the
right hand of his Father upon a Throne, whose ornament was Justice, and the
foundation Mercy: His Mystical Body shall always receive the same glorious
entertainment; the Faithful are admitted into the company of the Blessed; the
Saints shall reign in Heaven with the Angels; they shall be mingled in their
Hierarchies according to their merits; and as heretofore of the Jew and
Gentile, was made one Church Militant, of Men and Angels is daily made one
Church Triumphant; The bodies of the Faithful shall accompany their souls in
glory in the general Resurrection; those members that have suffered in the
quarrel of Jesus Christ, shall be freed from all miseries; the Divine
Providence shall rouse them out of their dormitories by the clattering sound of
a miraculous trumpet; it will find in spite of the flames, those that have been
burnt to ashes; in spite of the waters those that have been swallowed up in the
deep; and working as many miracles as there shall be diversities of death to
overcome, shall treat the Faithful as it has already treated Jesus Christ; so
that we may say of both the Bodies of the Son of God, those glorious words of
the Apostle, Great is the Mystery of Godliness: Indeed it is a Sacrament of
Piety, that the Word was pleased to be allied to our nature, and to the Church,
to have a Natural Body, and a Mystical Body, Which was manifested in the
flesh; both of them were manifested in the flesh, because it was requisite that
the Word should be made Incarnate to Espouse his Church: Justified in the
Spirit; Both of them were justified in the Spirit, because they are purely his
work, and the Regeneration of Believers is an Image of the Birth of Jesus
Christ: Seen of Angels; Both of them appeared to Angels, in that the same
Spirits that waited upon the Son of God, assisted his Spouse, and extend their
care over all her children: Preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world.
Both of them were preached to the Gentiles by the Apostles, and the mystery of
the Incarnation joined to that of their Vocation, has made up the best part of
the Gospel. Both of them were believed on in the world, nor has any thing more
persuaded us of our future greatenesse, then the condescension of the Eternal
world; Received up into Glory: Finally, both of them were exalted into Glory,
there to reign everlastingly, that the blessedness of Jesus Christ may have its
accomplishment, and he be as happy in his Members as in his Person.

The Sixth DISCOURSE. That the Church is the Spouse of Jesus Christ, because she
is his Body, and of the Community of their Marriage.
ONe of the ancientest qualities of Jesus Christ, is that of a Bridegroom;
Tanquam sponsus procedens de thalamo suo Psalm. 18.
the Prophets have honored him with this title in the Old Testament; David in
the forty fifth Psalm, has made his Epithalamium, and Saint John, who was the
end of Types and Figures, and the Silence of the Prophets, gave out that he was
the Friend of the Bridegroom: But Adam is the first that descovered to us this
mystery, and by his marriage represented to us that of Jesus Christ with his
Church: For besides that his wife was taken out of his side whilst he lay
asleep, as the Church was out of the side of the Son of God, when he was dead;
we know that the Laws of that marriage more respected the second Adam then the
first: He having neither Father nor Mother, was not obliged to forsake them to
cleave unto his wife; But Jesus Christ at his Incarnation, left his Father when
he took upon him the form of a Servant, and his Mother at his Passion, when he
suffered death for Sinners; All his Actions testify that he considers his
Church as his Spouse, and the Faithful as his Children, because he was willing
to enter into their humiliations, and to exalt them to his Greatnesses; For
though the Church be not Jesus Christ, nor Jesus Christ the Church, yet their
union is so strict, that they are two in one flesh; two in one voice, two in
one passion, and two in one rest. Indeed if we examine these words well, we
shall find that they contain the chiefest conditions of the marriage of Jesus
Christ with his Church; and that they clearly explain the privileges which
the quality of being members of the Son of God, bestows upon the Faithful.
They are both in one flesh, because the Church is born of Jesus Christ upon the
Cross, and that the Sacraments which produce and preserve her issued from the
wounds of her Beloved; They are two in the same flesh, because in the Eucharist
he nourishes her with his Body and Blood; and in that mystery tries to
transform her into himself, as he was transformed into her in the Incarnation,
when he was made Man to become her Beloved. Wherefore Saint Augustine has very
well observed, Ut noveritis quia unus dicitur Christus, caput and corpus suum
ipse dicit cum de conjugio loqueretur; sunt duo in carne una; ergo jam non duo
sed caro una; sed forte hoc dicit de quocunque conjugio: Auli Paulum, Ego autem
dico in Christo and Ecclesia: fit ergo ex duobus una quaeda^ persona, ex capite
and corpore, ex sponso and sponsa. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
that the Church was all things to Jesus Christ, and that Jesus Christ was all
things to his Church; She is his Mother, because she conceived him in the womb
of the Virgin; she is his Daughter, because she was born of his death, and
proceeding from his wounds, honors as her Father him whom she loves as her
Bridegroom; she is his Sister, because she fulfils the will of the Father, and
obtains that quality by her obedience. Thus Jesus Christ and his Church are
truly allied by flesh, and may upon a better title then other conjugall parties
say in the difference of their conditions they are but one Body.

They have also but one voice, because they always speak together; the Church
is the Organ of her Beloved, and Jesus Christ is the interpreter of his Church;
He expressed himself by her mouth before he was born upon Earth; he speaks yet
by her now that he is ascended up into Heaven: and as their interests are
inseparable, their prayers are common, and their language is equally
entertained by the Father. Thence it comes to pass that Saint Augustine
unfolding this profound mystery, teaches us, that the Son of God carries
himself diversely toward the Faithful, according to the different qualities
that separate, or unite him to them. He intercedes for them as their Chief
Priest, whose principal Office is to offer up men's prayers, and to draw down
blessings from Heaven upon their heads: He hears their supplications with his
Father, to whom he is equal in Majesty; he is willingly overcome by the tears
of the distressed, and having prayed for them as their Priest, he hears them as
their God: Finally, he prays in them as their Head, he delivers the Word in the
name of his Body; he defends the interests of his members; he pleads his own
cause in pleading theirs, and asks a Grace for himself, in begging mercy for
them. Thence it comes to pass that the Father giving way to the Prayers of his
Son, so easily lends an ear to the Petitions of the Church, because he ownes
the voice of Jesus Christ in that of his Spouse, and grants that to the merits
of the one, which he might justly refuse to the demerits of the other. He might
answer us as David sometimes did that widow that made so eloquent a speech to
him in behalf of Absalom, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in this? Loquatur
Christus in nobis, ut quem gerimus iu pectore babeamus in cre. Cypr.
For when he understands the innocent voice of his Son mingled with ours, and
sees that we make use of the merits and arguments of Jesus Christ to persuade
him, he may say to every sinner, Is not the hand of Christ with thee in this?
Or beholding the accomplishment of that Figurative History acted heretofore in
the family of Isaac, where the Cadet got the blessing of his father by a
mysterious surprise, he might say, The hands are Esau's, but the voice is
Jacob's, because it is true that the voice of the Son of God covers many times
our bad actions, and his innocent mouth obtains Graces for us in stead of
punishments our guilty hands would deservedly draw down upon us.

Oftentimes, out of an excess of love, he loads himself with our sins; and,
forgetting his Greatness, appears before his Father as a Delinquent; he puts on
the habit of a servant, takes the place of rebels; and making a change
advantageous for them, takes their Offenses, and puts upon them his Merits.
Thence it comes to past, that on the Cross, where he stands the Caution of
Sinners, he complains that his Father forsakes, though he be inseparable from
him; and beholding himself as the Victim of Sin, uses language unworthy of his
Innocence, but worthy of his Love, Orator ergo in forma Det orat in forma
servi; ibi creator, hic creatus, creaturam mutandam non mutatus assumens, and
secum nos faciens unum hominem caput and corpus; oramus ergo ad illum, per
illum, in illo, and dicimus cum illo, and dicit nobiscum long a salute mea
verb a delictorum. Aug. praef. in Ps. 85.
and the condition he was in. This is it that S. Augustine acquaints us with in
that discourse that comprebends as many Mysteries as Words. If we consider
Jesus Christ as equal to his Father, he hears our prayers with him: if we
consider him in the form of a servant, as like to sinenrs, he presents his
prayers with them: there he is the Creator, here he is created; but remaining
unchangeable, is united to his Creature, to change him; and makes himself one
man with him, whereof they are jointly the Head and Body. Thus sometimes we
pray to him, and sometimes also we pray in him, and he prays with us; he speaks
by our mouth, we by his; and living in one and the same Body, we many times use
the same language. It Is in the view of this Mystery that S. Augustine has
discovered a Secret to explain all those passages that seem to concern the
Innocence of Jesus Christ: For, as by consequence of the Marriage contracted
with the Church, he is included in her obligations, he speaks many times in the
person of the Church: and, that we mistake not, we must have this alliance
always before our eyes, and not be astonished that the Son of God, who has
vouchsafed to bear our miseries, has been pleased to speak our language. The
Church, says that great Doctor, is made up of all the Faithful, Quia ergo
totus Christus caput est and corpus Ecclesiae, prepter a in omnibus Psalmis sic
audiamus voces capitis, ut audiamus voces corporis. Aug. in Psalm. 56.
because all the Faithful are the Members of Jesus Christ: Though her Head be
in heaven, he fails not to guide her upon earth; and though separated by the
distance of places, cease not to be united to her by charity. Wherefore
Christ making the Head and the Body, we ought not in the Psalms to separate the
voice of the Head from that of the Body, nor think it strange that he that
never deserted the Church, never held other language then his Spouse did. This
it it that he treats of elsewhere, in clearer and fuller terms: If Jesus be our
Head, and we his Body, the Head and the Body compose whole Jesus Christ; nor is
Jesus Christ entire, if he comprehend not both. This Maxim must serve us as a
light to explain the Scripture by; with which if we are not always enlightened,
we are in danger to mistake: For sometimes we meet with words that cannot be
applied to the Head, and which would involve us in an error, or in doubt, did
we apply them to the body; there are others that cannot be appropriated to the
Body, and yet are uttered by Jesus Christ: To unravel these difficulties, we
need but attribute to the Head what cannot agree to the Body; remembering that
Jesus Christ speaks sometimes in his own person, and sometimes in the person of
the Church: He spoke certainly in her name, when he complained that his Father
had forsaken him; because we know very well, the Son was never abandoned by the
Father, were it not when he sustained the person of Adam, who was forsaken of
God as soon as he became guilty.

But because this Truth is but too evident, let us pass to the Third condition
of the Marriage of Jesus Christ with his Church, and see how they are two in
one and the same passion. One of the chiefest effects of Love, is, Anima est
magis ubi amat quam ubi animat.
to make us Live where we Love, and to make us Suffer where we Live: Experience
better persuades us of this Maxim then Reason; and it is needless to prove a
Truth which every man may evidence in himself. A father knows he is more
affected with the sorrows of his children then with his own: a husband is not
ignorant that he sufters less in his own person then in that of his wife: and
all Lovers proclaim, that the injuries or discontents of their Mistresses wound
them deeper then those that fall upon themselves. Siqua sides vulnus quod feci
non dolet inquit; Sed quod in facies hoc mihi Paetc dolet. Mart.
That generous gallant wife was well acquainted with this Axiom, who protested
she felt not the blow the Poniard gave her self, but only that which her
husband was resolved to receive. As Charity, which unites Jesus Christ to the
Church, is stronger then Conjugal love, so does it more advantageously produce
this effect in them; Their sufferings are common; the Son of God suffers no
sorrows which the Church resents not, and the Church endures no torments which
the Son of God complains not of: Therefore has S. Augustine said, that the
Church suffered in Jesus Christ, when jesus Christ suffered for the salvation
of the Church; and that Jesus Christ suffered in the Church, when the Church
was persecuted for the glory of Jesus Christ: their complaints were proofs of
their sufferings: and as the Church complained in Jesus Christ, when he cried
out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Jesus complained
in behalf of his Church, when from the midst of his glory he said, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? But as Saint Paul had learnt this truth from the mouth
of the Son of God himself, by whom he was informed that a man could not
persecute the Church, but he must persecute Jesus Christ; there was not any of
the Apostles who so highly exalted his labors as he did: For knowing very well
that he was a Member of the Church, in which condition he could not suffer, but
Jesus Christ must suffer with him, he speaks of his own sufferings, as of those
of his Master; and out of a confidence which could arise from nothing but his
love, he boasts, that in suffering he finished the Passion of Jesus Christ;
Adimpleo ea quae desunt passionum Christi. He knew very well, that nothing was
wanting to the sorrows of the Son of God, that the rage of the executioners was
glutted upon his person, that the Truth of Figures was accomplished in his
death, and that himself, before he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost, had
said aloud, Consummatum est: But he knew also that Jesus Christ had two Bodies;
that he suffered in one, what he could not suffer in the other; and that
honoring his Father in both, he sacrificed himself in his Members, after he
had sacrificed himself in his Person. S. Augustine happily expresses the
meaning of S. Paul, in these words: Jesus Christ suffers no more in that flesh
he carried into heaven; but he suffers in mine that is still persecuted upon
the earth: nor are we to wonder at it, because it is no more I that live, but
he that lives in me. And if this Maxim were not true, Jesus Christ had never
complained of the persecution of Saul, nor ever Saul have been so bold as to
say he had filled up what was wanting in the sufferings of Christ.

But a little to clear this passage, we must say, that the Son of God being the
Pledge and Surety of sinners, was willing to satisfy the justice of his
Father, and bear all the pains their sins deserved: Passio Domini usque ad
finem mun^i producitur; and sicut in Sanctis suis ipse honoratur, ipse
diligitur, and in pauperibus ipse pascitur, ipse vestitur; ita and in omnibus
qui pro justitia adversae tolerant ipse compatitur. Leo. de pass. Dom. Ser. 19.
Death being one of the severest; and the sentence that designs us to it,
expresses no one kind, that we might fear all, the Son will have them undergo
all; and by that stratagem of Love, change all our Chastisements into Oblations
of piety. But because the Body his mother gave him could not suffer all these
deaths, their different kinds being incompatible, and that one and the same man
could not be nailed to the Cross, devoured by wild beasts, choked in the
waters, consumed by the flames, he was pleased to associate a mystical Body,
which being compounded of different Members, might undergo diverse punishments;
and, to satisfy the excess of his Charity, might honor his Father by as many
sacrifices as there were kinds of death in Nature. Thus was he torn in pieces
by lions in the person of S. Ignatius, devoured by flames in that of S.
Laurence, stoned in that of S. Stephen, beheaded in that of S. Paul: and this
great Apostle, that knew the desires of Jesus Christ, rejoiced to accomplish
them by his sufferings, and to be one of those Victims, whereby he adored the
Justice and the Sovereignty of his Father.

But, not to urge this conceit any further, it is enough that we learn from it,
that Jesus and the Church are united in their sufferings upon earth, and by a
necessary consequence assures us they shall be so one day in their rest in
heaven. For though the Church sigh here below, she knows her Beloved will keep
his word, that having had a part in his sorrows, she shall have a share in his
triumphs; and having been two in one Flesh, they shall be two in one and the
same Felicity. She has the promises of Jesus Christ for caution of her hope;
and when she remembers the prayer her Beloved made to his Father in her behalf,
she expects the performance, with constancy of assurance: Father, I will that
where I am, there also my servants be. Whenever Jesus Christ speaks to his
Father, it is with so much respect, that he seems rather a Servant then a Son;
when he asks that his Church may reign with him in his glory, it is with so much
freedom of speech, that he seems equal to his Father, and that his demand is
rather a determination then a prayer; Volo Pater: so that the Church, who has
passed through all the degrees of unity with her Beloved, expects this last with
confidence, and makes no more doubt of the Eternity of her rest, then of the
Verity of the words of her Beloved. She believes that the union he has
contracted with her, puts her in possession of her hopes, that she enjoys in
him, what she hopes for in her self; that she is glorious in her Body, because
she is so in her Head; and that during the evils she suffers, Ubi portio mea
regnat. ibi, me regnare puto; ubi caput meum dominatur, ibi me dominari sentio.
D. Max. Sermon. 3.
she may boast her self happy, because nothing is wanting to the felicity of
her Beloved: She has now in Christ, what she hopes for in her self: and
according to the judgment of S. Maxim, she believes to reign there already,
where the most illustrious part of her Body reigns; and conceives her self
exalted above the Angels, in the person of him that considers her as his
Spouse, and looks upon them as his Subjects.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. That the quality of the Members of Jesus Christ is no
more advantageous to Christians, then that of the Brethren of Jesus Christ.
IT is not without great reason, Unigenitus Dei factus est hominis filius, ut
qui Creator mundi erat, fieret and Redemptor. Aug.
that the same God that created us by his Power, has redeemed us by his Mercy:
For these two favors being extreme, we should have had much ado equally to
have acknowledged them: Having but one heart to love with, we must of necessity
have divided our affections; and the benefit of Redemption surpassing that of
Creation, we had been constrained to prefer our Redeemer before our Creator.
But the Divine Providence, says S. Bernard, has delivered us from this
perplexity: for he that drew us out of Nothing, has drawn us out of Sin; and
he that Created us, is the same that Redeemed us: so that without any fear of
Jealousy, we may compare these two benefits, and give one the pre-eminence,
without injuring him of whom we have received them. Me thinks I may say the
same concerning the subject I am in hand with; and free from any apprehension,
confront the quality of Brethren with that of Members, because we hold them
both of Jesus Christ, and that the same who was pleased to be our Brother,
disdained not to be our Head. Nature has found out no alliance nearer then
that of Brothers and Members; and, though she be so ingenious, she has not
been able to link men in a stronger bond of relation, then in giving them one
and the same Father, or one and the same Head. Brothers are Slips of the same
Stock: if they ascend one degree, they will find, that before their
conception, they made one portion of their Father; and that before their birth,
they were a part of the bowels of their mother. Friendship, which is so much
esteemed of in the world, is but a Copy of this Alliance: Friends are Brethren
that our Will bestows upon us; and Brethren are Friends that Nature stores us
with: but as that which is voluntary never equals that which is natural, it is
very hard for Friends to love so tenderly as Brothers do. Nevertheless, if the
affinity of these begin by Unity, it insensibly tends to Division: Brothers
children are but Cousins; their Grandchildren are yet at a farther distance;
and it falls out in time, that those that issued from one father, become, by
continuance of Generations, strangers and enemies.

I know very well that Christians have privileges that raise them above the
condition of Men; and that Grace, more powerful then Nature, has given them a
Father and Mother from whom they are never divided: For the Son of God unites
us to his Person in begetting us; of children he makes us members; and as if
the Alliance of Father were not strict enough, he becomes our Head; that
subsisting in him, our life may be inseparable from his. The Church imitates
the charity of her Beloved; she is so tenderly affected toward her children,
that she brings them up in the same bosom where she conceived them: There are
none but Heretics that go out from her; and they, as Vipers, must tear her
bowels, and offer violence to her Love, in making a breach in her Unity. Though
other Mothers bear their children Nine months, with an affection that solaceth
their travel, yet do they long to be eased of that painful load, and the Infant
desires to quit that troublesome prison: Both of them do their utmost for a
separation; and if the children seek their liberty, the mothers are as earnest
after their delivery. But the Church is so good a Mother, she is never rid of
her burden; they always make a part of her inwards, as they always are a part
of the body of their Father; they are born in the same place they are formed;
and as their Regeneration divides them not from Jesus Christ, their Generation
divorces them not from the Church.

But who sees not, that, to entertain this Union, the quality of Members comes
in to the assistance of that of Children; and that the Faithful are much more
knit together for being Members of the same Head, then for being Children of
the same Father? We make up one Body with him: Time, that divides Brothers,
cannot divide Christians; and as nothing but death can disjoyn the members of
the same Body: Non est Judaeus neque Graecus, non estliber neque servus, non
est masulus neque foemina, omnes enim vos unum estis in Christo Jesu. Gal. 3.
nothing but sin can separate Believers. As long as they remain in the Church,
they keep their alliance; though removed by distance of place, they are always
united in the person of their Head; though they speak diverse tongues, they have
but one faith; though they live under diverse Sovereigns, they have no law but
charity; and making up the parts of the same body, they have this advantage
that they are quickened with the same Spirit.

This is the second difference I observe between brethren and members: for
though brothers have tumbled in the same belly, issued from the same Father,
have been nursed with the same milk, and brought up in the same family; yet
many times their minds are as different as their bodies; and nature that takes
pleasure in the variety of her works, or sin that travels to divide them, puts
so little correspondence in their wills, that those that have lived in the same
womb, cannot live in the same house. The Scripture tells us that in the Infancy
of the world, Cain and Abel were more different in their humors then in their
conditions; that envy stealing into the heart of the elder, defaced all the
feelings of nature, and counseled him to commit a Parricide: The same
Scripture instructs us, that Jacob and Esau could not agree in their mothers
belly, that their being twins hindered them not from being enemies, that their
hatred preceded their knowledge, their inclinations set them more at variance
then their interests, that being not yet in the world, they disputed the right
of Primogeniture, and already fought for the inheritance of their Father:
Collidebantur in utero ejus parvuli. Bonorum and malorum in Ecclesia simul
pugnantium figura fueruut Jacob and Esau in sinu matris sese collidentes. Aug.
I know very well their division was mysterious, that these two brothers
represented two people, and that this Mother being a Type of the Church, bore
in her womb an Elect with a Reprobate; but before Grace had sanctified Jacob,
the hatred he bore his brother Esau, was founded in nature; nor were they
disaffected so much from the difference of their destiny, as from the
contrariety of their humors. Now this mischief is never found amongst the
members of the same body, jealousy has no dominion in so near an alliance,
and being quickened by one and the same Spirit, they never have any contestation
or quarrel: Folly or madness must needs have infatuated that man, who uses
one hand to cut off the other, or divides those parts whose preservation
consists in their mutual correspondence; What therefore never falls out among
members, happens many times among brethren; notwithstanding all the care nature
takes to unite them, hatred divides their hearts, and experience teaches us
there is no more deadly nor bloody fewd then between persons of so near a
relation: The most memorable revenges Antiquity mentions, are such as men have
taken upon their own blood; their rage was never more violent, then when it
succeeded fraternall love; and Tyrants may go to school to those that have
executed their fury by taking vengeance on their brethren: If the story of
Eteocles and Polynices pass for a fable, that of Romulus and Remus is reckond
for a truth; and if we can hardly believe what the Poets tell us of Thyestes and
Atreus, we dare not question what the Prophets write of Jacob and Esau.

But should Nature be so much mistress as to preserve amity among Brethren,
there is one mischief she can no ways remedy, which proves the ground of wars
among Princes, and of Lawsuits among private persons. For the division of
goods occasions that of hearts; the parting of portions sets men at enmity; and
as they know their inheritances cannot be divided, but they must be diminished,
they are unwilling to have brothers, lest they should be troubled with
coheirs; This was the reason Tertullian sometimes made use of, to let the
Heathens see the Christians much better deserved the name of brothers, then
those that came from the same Father, because the sharing of goods divided the
affections of these, and covetousness which admits of no companions, made them
contrive the death of their brothers after they had longd for that of their
Fathers. Indeed the Son of God has remedied this disorder in his Church,
because the Inheritance of Christians being infinite cannot be divided; They
enjoy one and the same good in common; they spoil not others of what they
possess themselves, and as light communicates it self entirely to every
person, felicity is wholly imparted to every Believer. Nevertheless, we must
acknowledge that the quality of members adds something in this point to that
of brethren: for whatever good intelligence there is between these, it never
equals what is between those. Brothers always study their own advantage: as
they are separated by birth, so are they parted by interests; neither can
charity well regulate their desires, that the one do not many times enrich
themselves with the loss of the other: Qui enim non est Christo contrarius in
corpore ipsius haret and membrum computatur; nunquam sibi sunt membra
contraria; corporis integritas universis membris constat. August.
But the members are so closely combind that the good fortune of the one
contributes to that of the other; the unity of the body they compose, gives
them not leave to have divided interests; whatever difference nature puts in
their functions, they live always in community, and whilst they are united in
the same body, they enjoy a common felicity.

But to make this conception a little clearer, we must repeat what we said in
the beginning of this Discourse, and take notice that the alliance we have with
Jesus Christ, is much different from that we have from Adam: That of Adam
commenceth in unity, and terminates in division; we are all descended from one
Father; we were but one and the same thing in his Person, but the succession of
time has so divided us, that of brethren we are become strangers and unknown:
For the family of Adam multiplying by the birth of his children, made Towns
which by their number grew into Provinces, Provinces formd Kingdoms, and
Kingdoms at last peopled the Universe; Thus men who were brothers at their
birth, were estranged by distance of place, divided by languages, parted by
interests, and opposite to each other by the contrariety of their humors.

The Son of God finding us in this deplorable condition, makes us return to
unity by all the degrees that tumbled us from it; His love assisted with his
power has placed us in the same Kingdom, given us the same Sovereign, under
whose Laws we breath an acceptable liberty, Fecisti nos Deo nostroregnu^: But
because all the Subjects of a Kingdom know not one another, the distance of
places estrangeth their hearts; he has brought us into one City, that being
shut up within her Lines of Communication, we may the easier converse together,
and of fellow Subjects may become fellow Citizens: Vos estis Cives Sanctorum.
But forasmuch as this alliance is not the strictest, there are factions many
times in Cities which sow discord in men's minds: all the inhabitants steer not
one way, the diversity of quarters hinders their familiarity; he has adopted
us into one family, that being the Domestics of one Master, our amity may be
the closer by how much our condition is more equal: Vos estis Domestici Dei.
Had he left us in this state, he had taken pains enough for our good; but as
Domestics have different designs, jealousy steals into their souls, and the
hope of profit which is the end of base and mercenary souls, suffers them not
to taste the sweets of true Friendship; he has raised them to the quality of
children, and giving them their Sovereign for their Father, will have them love
one another as brethren; Vos omnes fratres estis. Morality and Politics have
nothing to wish for after this favor, seeing all the Subjects of a State linkd
together by the bonds of so indissoluble an alliance believe nothing can be
added to their happiness. But God who is pleased to outgoe our hopes, has
reduced us to the perfection of unity in making us members of the same body,
and giving us our Father for our Head; So that all the Faithful make up but
one Man; all their conditions are happily confounded together, and all of them
making up one part of Jesus Christ, they are quickened with his Spirit,
clarified with his Light, warmd with his Love, till they be taken up into his
Immensities, and consummated in his Glory.

The Eight DISCOURSE. That Jesus Christ has taken all the infirmities of his
Members, and his Members have drawn all their strength from him.
IF it be a Truth, that whatever is glorious as relating to Jesus Christ, is
profitable to Christians: it is not true on the other side, that whatever is
beneficial to Christians, is honorable to Jesus Christ; For the dignity of
Head whence all their advantages are derived, is the source of all those evils
Jesus Christ underwent; and had he not been the Head of sinners, he had not
been obliged to be their Surety. He has as Saint Augustine says, made a
compact with men extremely advantageous for them, but very prejudicial to
himself. For as the union which Nature or Grace puts between the members of the
same body makes their good and bad common, we find that the Son of God imparts
his privileges to us, and assumes our miseries to himself. He enters into our
lowness, and we are admitted into his Greatness; he is burdend with our
transgressions, and we are invested with his merits; he is made the Son of
Man, and makes us the Children of God. This important Verity requires a full
Discourse, and it is just that in acknowledgement of the obligations we have to
Jesus Christ, we take notice of what he drew from us, and of what we have
received from him.

Innocence is one of the Apennages of the Word Incarnate; Inde nascimur, sic
nascimur, in carne peccati nascimur, quam sola sanat similitudo carnis peccati,
inde mifit Deus filium suum in fimilitudine carnis peccati: Inde venit, sed non
fic venit, non enim virgo libidine sed fide concepit. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser.
10.
were he not God by his Person, he would be innocent by his Conception, and
having the Holy Ghost for his Principle, and the Virgin for his Mother, it is
impossible he should have contracted the sin of Adam: Wherefore when the Angel
expounded to the Virgin the Grandeurs of her only Son, he expressly observes
that his Sanctity was derived from his Birth, and being the work of the Holy
Ghost, must therefore be exempt from all impurity: Spiritus Sanctus superveniet
in te, ideoque quod nascetur ex te Sanctum vocabitur filius Dei. In the mean
time the quality of Head obliges him to stoop under the load of our offenses:
He that is innocent by nature, becomes guilty by love; and when he united
himself to his members, he became their Surety, and engaged himself to
satisfy for them. Thence it is that the Prophets speak not of him only as a
man of sorrows, but as a man who stands Hostage for the children of Adam, and
who is voluntarily boundto bear all the punishments their sins are obnoxious
to. This made the Father say by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias, Percussi eum
propter scelera populi mei; Ipse vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras,
attritus est proterscelera nostra; posuit Dominus in eo iniquitate^ omniu^
nostrum. Isa. 53.
This made Saint John say, That he was the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world; and this made Jesus Christ himself upon the Cross say, that
his sins condemned him to death, Long a salute mea verba delictorum meorum;
For he died not that ignominious death, but because he stood in the place of
men, and being their pledge, because he is their Head, he was bound to satisfy
for them the Justice of his Father.

Therefore the sentence that obliges the Son of God to death, is the justest
and unjustest sentence in the world: It Is unjust if we consider it as
proceeding from the mouth of Pilate, because all the crimes Jesus Christ was
accused of, were forged by his enemies; It Is just, if we consider it as
proceeding from the mouth of the Eternal Father, because his Son appeared
before him as the Head of all men; and he beholds him as an innocent Victime,
whose charity has made him a Delinquent. Indeed our sins are not remitted, but
because the Son of God is charged with them; the fury of God the Father is not
appeased, but because Jesus Christ has satisfied it; nor do we live securely
in the world, but because our Head has restored us our Innocence. This is the
compact he made with us; he has taken our evils to confer upon us his merits:
he has made a change of qualities; and to procure us that of the children of
God, has voluntarily accepted of that of Surety for sinners. This is it that
Saint Augustine confirms to us in explaining those words of the Prophet, which
he supposes spoken by Jesus Christ: Domine Deus meus clamavi ad te, and sanasti
me. The Son of God says he prayed to his Father in the mount of Olives before
his death, and his Father heald him after his death; but how could he heal him
that never was wounded? did he heal his Word who was God equal with himself?
No certainly, but he heald us in his Person, because this Word being made our
Head, was laden with our wounds, and had changed them into remedies to cure us
of our scars: He heald him then when he raised him from the dead, and the Cure
was perfect when coming forth from the bosom of death, he entered into that of
Immortality, and passd into that happy state where death losing the victory,
had now no more dominion over him.

As Jesus Christ has communicated to us his innocence, taking upon himself our
sins, so has he made us partakers of his strength by taking part of our
infirmities* For though the Word was as well the Power as the Wisdom of his
Father, and by condition of his Eternal Generation he was as well his Arm as
his Idea; In vera natura hominis verus natus est Deus, totus in suis, totus in
nostris: nostra autem dicimus quae in nobis ab initio creator con ^dit and qu^
reparanda suscepit. Leo Epist. ad Flaviam.
yet all Scripture teaches us that in clothing himself with our nature, he
took upon him our infirmities, and was pleased to ascertain us of his
infirmities, to assure us of his love. In all his actions he mixed weakness with
power; he never wrought a miracle wherein he gave not some proof that he was a
man, and in the masterpiece of his miracles, the raising of Lazarus from the
dead, he shed tears to testify this truth; He trembled in the Garden; he gave
fear and sadness leave to seize upon his heart, and appear in his countenance;
he gave witness that death and sin had made an impression of sorrow upon his
soul; and he that was happier and stronger then the Angels, appeard as weak and
wretched as men. This wonderful proceeding was neither without design nor
justice; For seeing the Son of God was our Head, he must of necessity be
charged with our infirmities: seeing that quality obliged him to make a change
with us, he must needs assume our weakness and indue us with his courage.
Thence it came to pass that the Martyrs braved their tortures with such
magnanimity; that Virgins contemnd death, and ran to execution as to a
recreation; that Christian Philosophers more constant and more humble then
Stoics, without any other succor then that of Grace laughd at Grief, and
preservd the tranquillity of mind amidst the sharpest gripes of an ingenious
torment. This is it that Saint Augustine so happily expresses in his eloquent
discourses: As Jesus Christ took flesh without sin, so was he made partaker of
our infirmities without partaking our unrighteousness; that assuming the one,
and delivering us from the other, it might appear he was therefore made our
Head, that he might be our Redeemer. Prosecuting the same meditation, he adds,
that we are more beholding to the Weakness of Jesus Christ, then to his Power:
Fortitudo Christi te creavit, infirmitas Christi te recreavit: fortit do Chri,
ti feeit ut quod non erat esset, infirmitas Christi fecit ut quod erat non
periret: con idit nos fortitudine sua, quaesivit nos in. firmitate sua. Aug.
Tract. 15 in Joan.
For his Power Created us, his Infirmity Redeemed us; his Omnipotency Formed
us, his Weakness Reformed us; his Power made that which was Not begin to be,
and his Weakness has kept that which Was from perishing; that being obliged
for life and salvation to one and the same Jesus Christ, we may publicly
confess what we owe his Power, and what we owe his weakness. Forasmuch as this
Grace is rare and precious, it had its Types and Figures in the infancy of the
world; and Adam, who was the form or mould of him that was to come, according
to the language of the Apostle, discovered this mystery to us in his person:
for, besides that his wife came forth of his side whilst he lay asleep, as the
Church did out of Christ's during his death, she was made of his Bone, and not
of his Flesh, and that vacuity was filled up with Flesh, and not with Bone:
What was intended, says S. Augustine, to be hinted to us in this Ceremony,
where the woman taken from the bone appeared the stronger, and the man formed
of the flesh appeared the weaker, but that Jesus Christ took his infirmity from
the Church, and the Church took her strength from Jesus Christ? Indeed, his
Weakness is our Power, because we acknowledge our selves strong, in that we are
his Members; and that separated from him, we are so impotent, that there is no
enemy but may overcome us, nor any temptation but may prevail against us.

This Mystery would be unconceiveable, if a greater did not give it credit in
our minds: For we know the Son of God would be tempted, to deliver us from
temptation; and not content to vanquish, thereby to gain us the victory, he was
pleased, out of an excess of love, to subject himself to the lowest proof an
Innocent could receive. Though all Pains are the tokens of Sin, and the
creature is not Miserable, but since he became Griminal, Religion teaches us
there are Afflictions that may consist with Innocence; a man may be Wretched,
and not Guilty; and suffer for the glory of his God, and the safety of his
Brethren, without prejudicing his honor. Death was not ignominious to Jesus
Christ, though 'twas the first punishment of sin; the motive made it
honorable: and undergoing it to satisfy his Fathers justice, it was not so
much a Punishment as a Sacrifice: But Temptation is always infamous: though it
be a step to Victory, yet is it a way that leads to Sin: and we may say, If he
that is tempted be not Guilty, neither is he perfectly Innocent; because he
that manageth the Temptation, is persuaded that he can make him a Criminal: So
that of all the afflictions the Son of God labored under, there is none more
shameful, in my opinion, then Temptation; because the devil that set upon him,
promised himself success in perverting him; and looking upon him as a Man,
hoped to make him a Sinner. Upon the Cross he attempted only his Life, in the
Wilderness he attempted his Innocence: upon the Cross he pretended only to
render him Miserable, but in the Defart he tried to make him a Delinquent: so
that we may say, he was more humbled in the Solitude of the Desert, then in the
Agony of the Cross; and that Temptation carried more infamy and torment with it
then Death did. Now he endured not this affront, but because he was our Head;
he stoopt not to this punishment, but to deliver his Members; nor did he give
the devils leave to set upon him, but to facilitate their defeat, and open the
way to our victory. This is it that S. Augustine glosseth admirably well upon
the Sixtieth Psalm. Prorsus Christus tentabatur a diabolo: in Christo enim tu
tentab aris, quia Christus de te fibi habebat carnem, de se tibi salutem; de te
sibi mortem, de se tibi vita^; de te sibi contumel as, de se tibi honores: ergo
de te sibi tentatione^, de se tibi victoria^: agnosce ^e in ipso tentatum, and
te in illo agnosce vincentem. Aug.
Jesus Christ, says he, was tempted by the evil spirit in the desert, or
rather, we were tempted in him: for it is from us that he took Flesh, from him
that we derive Salvation; it is from us that he receives his Death, from him
that we receive our Life; it is from us that he had these affronts cast upon
him, from him that we have Honors conferred upon us: It Is therefore for our
sakes that he suffered Temptation, and for his sake that we carry away the
victory. Or, to say the same thing in other words; If we were tempted in him,
it is in him also that we overcame the devil our enemy: He certainly could have
difcarded him from his person, and, using him like a rebellious slave, have
punished his rash boldness, by commanding him to hell: but, had he not been
willing to be tempted, he had not taught us to overcome by his example, nor had
the combat he fought in the wilderness procured us the honor of a Triumph.
Thus the quality of Head is injurious to Jesus Christ, and honorable to
Christians, because in that exchange it obliged him to make with them, he
endured the shame of the Temptation, and purchased for them the advantage of
the Victory.

Finally, to conclude this Discourse, The Son of God was willing to bear the
reproaches of the Cross, and to merit for us the privileges of Glory: For,
being charged with our iniquities, he suffered death, the punishment of them,
permitted Shame to be added to Cruelty; that spoiling him of Life, Si moriamur,
saltem cum liberate moriamur. Cicero in Ver^em, de Crucis supplicio agens.
they might withal rob him of his Honor, and he might give up the ghost as an
Offender and a Slave together. In the mean time, his Punishment purchased our
Glory, his Death merited our Immortality; and in stead of taking vengeance of
our crimes, he procures us his own advantages. It seems, says S. Augustine,
the Father mistook himself; he treats his only Son as a Delinquent, and
handles Men as Innocents; he crowns him with Thorns, these with Glory; and,
confounding the Sinner with the Just, confounds Chastisements with Rewards. But
if we consider that the Son of God took our place, and we his; that he is our
Head, and we his Members, we shall find that his Father had reason to punish
him, and to reward us, because, having made a change with us, he is become
Guilty, we Innocent. Let us therefore be thankful to Jesus Christ, who
disdained not a quality, which, investing him with our Nature, charge him
with our sins and our infirmities; and uniting him to us, as to his Members,
obliges him to be tempted, to make us victorious; Ille quippe Christianorum
caput, in omnibus tentari voluit, quia tentamur; sic and morivoluit, quiae
morimur; sic resurgere, quiae resurrecturi sumus. Aug. in Psalm. 9. Sermon. 2.
and to suffer the death of the Cross, to obtain for us the glory of
Immortality.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. Of the duties of Christians as Members, toward Jesus
Christ as their Head.
THough the duties of the Head and of the Members are reciprocal, and that,
composing one Body, they are obliged to a mutual correspondence, arising from
Necessity as well as Love: yet there is no man but will acknowledge, that as
the Members receive more assistance from the Head, ten the Head from the
Members; so are they tied to greater expressions of dependence. Nature, which
is an excellent mistress in this matter, instructs us, that the life of the
Members depends upon the Head; and their very preservation obliges them to
three or four duties, without which they can no ways subsist.

Their Interest requires that they be inseparably fastened to that from whence
they receive their life, lest their division, with their death, deprive them of
all those advantages which spring from the union they have with their Head.
Thus we see that the Hand, which is one of the most ingenious parts of the
body, and which may be called the Mother of all Arts, and the faithfullest
Minister of the Soul, loses its dexterity and comeliness as soon as separated
from the Head that enlivens it: The Feet, though not so noble as the Hands are
yet as necessary, being the moveable Foundations of this living building, are
destitute of all strength when they have no commerce with the Head: This indeed
cease not to act and move, though provided neither of Hands nor Feet; when
Nature fails, it has recourse to Art; and being the throne of the Soul,
ransacks all her treasures of Invention, to execute that by it Self, Omnis
salus, omnis vita a capite in caeterae membra derivatur. Galen.
was wont to be put in execution by its Members. But though the hands are so
industriously subtle, and the legs so vigorously strong, they are absolutely
useless, because their separation deprives them of the influences of their
head. This Maxim, so notorious in Nature, is much more evident in Grace: For
the Son of God has no need of his Members; it is Mercy, and not Necessity,
obliges him to make use of them: He is not at all more powerful when united to
them, nor more feeble when separated from them: Faith tells us he can do all
things without them, whereas they can do nothing without him: Therefore is he
compared to the Vine, and they to the Branch, to acquaint them that all their
virtue flows from his; and being plucked from his Body, can, as the Branch,
expect nothing but the fire. Therefore the first obligation of Christians, is
to unite themselves to Jesus Christ; to seek their life in this union, and to
believe that their death is the infallible consequence of their division.

This is it that Saint Augustine represents us in this Discourse, which though
long, cannot be tedious, because there is nothing in it that is not delightful
and necessary. As the Body has many members, which though different in number,
make up but one body: so Jesus Christ has many members, which in the diversity
of their conditions, constitute also but one body; so that we are always with
him as with our Head, and drawing from him our strength as well as our life, we
can neither act nor live without him: We with him make up a fruitful Vine, that
bears more Grapes then Leaves; but divided from him, we are like those Branches
which being good for nothing, are destined to the slames, when stripped off from
the Vine. Therefore does the Son of God so earnestly affirm it in the Gospel,
that without him we can do nothing, that our interests as well as our love,
Domine si fine te nihil, totum in te possumus. Etenim quicquid ille operatur
per nos, videmur nos operari: potest ille multum and totum sine nobis, nos
nihil sine ipso. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
may engage us to be united to his Person; For if it be true Lord, adds Saint
Augustine, that we can do nothing without thee, it is in thee only that we
effect all that we bring to pass; all our ability is from thee, it is thou that
workest what we seem to work; and being convinced by these Truths, we are
obliged to say, that thou can do all things without us; but we can do
nothing without thee. These words happily express all the obligations of the
Faithful, and make them clearly discern, that liberty can do nothing without
grace; and that the members divided from their Head, with all their natural
endowments and advantages, are good for nothing but to be eternally burnt in
Hell.

From this first obligation is derived a second no whit less considerable: For
seeing the members draw life from their Head, and their division causes their
ruin, they are bound absolutely to depend upon him, nor to have any other
designs then his: As they live by a borrowed life, they ought to act by a
forain virtue, and to abandon themselves so fully to him that inanimates them,
as to have no other conduct but his. Thence it comes to pass that self-denial
is the first virtue recommended to a Christian, that renouncing himself he may
obey Jesus Christ, and conceiving himself in a strange body, may act by his
motions who is the Head thereof. Philosophy has laid down this position, that
man ought to purchase his liberty with the expense of his riches; that it is
better be poor, then be a slave; and that 'twas a gainful bargain, where
parting with the goods of fortune, we purchased the quietness of mind: she has
also judged very well, that the body is to be tamed when it grows rebellious
against reason; that nourishment is to be retrencht as provender from an unruly
wanton horse; and his stomach taken down by the ascetick discipline of Fasts
and Watchings: But it never enterd into her Theorems, that to be happy, a man
must renounce his understanding, unlord his reason to become learned, condemn
his judgment to become wise. Indeed Philosophy knew not that we are the
members of a Body whereof the Eternal Word is the Head; and that this
condition that raises us as high as the light of Faith, forbids us the pure
use of Reason, commanding us to soar above our own thoughts to search into his
mind who will be the Principle of our Life; For there is no body but sees that
this obligation is as just as honorable; that since Christians are rather Gods
then men, because of the union they have contracted with the Word Incarnate,
they ought to act rather by his motion then their own reason; and remember that
seeing he is the Head that quickens them, he ought to be the Principle that
guides them. The whole drift of the Gospel labors to persuade us this Truth;
all its commands and counsels insinuate this obligation into us; and when the
Son of God gives order to us to renounce our own will, to combat our
inclinations, to love our enemies, and to hate our friends, it is only to teach
us that being no longer at our own disposal we ought to have no other mind but
what he inspires into us by his Grace.

A Third Obligation slows from this which is to be conformable to our Head: to
imitate his actions, having followed his motions, and to be made so like him,
that he may not be ashamed to own us for his members. Nature exacts not this
condition from the parts that compose man's body; she will not have them
resemble their Head, because there would be insolence and impossibility in the
very desire; It Is enough that they receive his influences, that they obey his
motions, and that their whole imitation consist in their mere subjection. But
Morality and the Politics will have the members that make up a Mystical Body,
add imitation to their other duties, that they be regulated by their Head as
by their model; that they study his inclinations, and be the perfect copies of
this first Original. Thus we see that Kings are the inanimate examples of
their subjects, the living Laws of their States, and the prime Masters of their
people: Every one makes it his glory to imitate them, they are persuaded that
whatever they do is lawful, and that those that are the Images of God, may
very well be the Examplars of men. Though this Maxim be true, yet it is
dangerous; For as Greatness does not always inspire Goodness, Quid est aliud
vitia incendere, quam authors illos Deos vel reges inscribere, and dare morbo
exemplo Divinitatis aut Majestatis excusatam lieentiam? Senec.
nor are Sovereigns the most perfect; and those that may do what they will,
do not always what they should, it falls out many times that the greatest are
the most vicious; and the readiest way to corrupt a whole State is to set
before it the Examples of the Governors. Therefore has Philosophy invented
Ideas of Wisdom, and despairing to find among men models which may be
securely transcribed, has made a Romance of Princes, by the same artifice
discovering their irregularity and her own impotency. But the Eternal Father
giving us Jesus Christ for our Head, has withal propounded him for our
Example; he will have our life fully conformable to his; that his actions be
our documents; that we be admitted into his School when we are united to his
Body; that we seek for perfection where we found life, and that we be as well
his Images as his Members. This is it that Saint Bernard acquaints us with: Our
Head shall not reign in glory without his Members, provided they be one with
him by Faith, and conformable to him in their Manners: Both these conditions
are necessary; Union without Conformity is but mere hypocrisy, and Conformity
without Union is pure vanity: He that is united to Christ and imitates him not,
cannot escape a fearful separation one day, by an Eternal Anathema; and he
that imitates him without believing, will perceive in time that his imitation
was but counterfeit, and that he was so much more opposite to Jesus Christ, the
more he appeard only conformable to him. We must therefore join these two
duties together, if we will have them useful; and having been united to our
Head by Faith, conform to him by good works, that we be not reproached to have
despised him whom we cannot find in our hearts to imitate.

But the chiefest obligation the quality of being Members of the Son of God
exacts from us, is to expose our life for his Glory, as he exposed his for our
salvation. Nature and Politics teach us the justice of this duty, and we need
only consider how the members carry themselves toward the Head, and subjects
demean themselves toward their Sovereigns, to understand what is our duty
toward Jesus Christ. Though every part of the body love its own preservation,
carefully avoiding whatever is contrary thereto, and by a natural providence
abominates whatever may any way annoy it; yet from a higher principle it is
informed that its life depends upon the Head, and that it is obliged to expose
its self in his defense. Thence it comes to pass that the hands ward the blow
which is aimd at the Head; that they readily oppose themselves to the danger
that threatens it, and forgetting their proper interests sacrifice themselves
for the preservation of this Chief. Thence it is that soldiers jeopard their
lives in the quarrel of their Sovereign, slighting the hail of Muskets, the
brunt of Pikes, and the Thunder of Canons to augment his Glory or widen his
State: They are never more valiant then when his Person is in danger; the
greatness of the hazard heightens their courage, and opinion or nature
persuades them that living more in him then in themselves, their death is less
considerable then his. Many times it falls out that he for whom they sacrifice
themselves is some old Dotard, spent with labor and age, and has but a few
moments to live; In the mean time, because they know he is the soul of the
State, and the Head of his subjects, they are persuaded they preserve
themselves in dying in his defense; and imagine that as Fathers live again in
their children, the members receive a new being in their Head. This Paradox
finds belief amongst all complexions; there is not the meanest soldier but
ventures his life upon this Maxim, and I rather conceive their courage
quickened by this consideration, then by the hope of profit and reputation,
because all men are neither ambitious nor covetous: but all being members of
the State, are instructed by nature to die for the defense of their Head.

Forasmuch as Grace is much more powerful then Nature, Vivificati sunt
Martyrs ne amando vitam, negarent vita^, and negando vitam amitterent vitam;
ac fic qui pro vita veritatem deserere noluerunt, moriendo pro veritate vixe
unt. Aug. Council. 20. in Psalm. 118.
it has so strongly imprinted this Maxim in the soul of the subjects of Jesus
Christ, that there are no torments can wear it our; For the Grace that makes
them Christians, secretly disciplines them that they are parts of the Mystical
Body of the Son of God; that their condition obliges them to expose themselves
for his Glory; that they ought to be his Victimes, because they are his
Members, and that they are bound to imitate the Wisdom of the Serpent that
hides his Head with his whole Body, knowing very well that it is the Fountain of
Life; and provided he may secure that, can receive no wound that is mortal. The
Martyrs animated with this Faith, defended Jesus Christ who lived in them; they
sufferd death, says Saint Augustine, to secure themselves from death; they
parted with that life they had received from Adam, to guard that they had
received from the Son of God: so that it happily fell out, that those who would
not relinquish Truth to save their lives, recoverd that in Heaven which they
lost upon Earth; and lived above eternally, being content for the profession of
the Truth, to die here below miserably: They laughed at all the threats of
Tyrants, and whilst they were covered with obloquies, loaded with irons, and
burnt with flames, they drew strength from him for whose sake they suffered;
and lifting up their now-expiring voice, said, If God be for us, who can be
against us? When they were told, as Saint Augustine says, how all the world
was banded against them, they answered courageously, why should we fear the
world, who die for the glory of him that made the world? What hurt can this
hatred do us, who are environed with the love of God? And why should we
trouble our selves, if our enemies spoil us of our bodies, seeing he that
defends our souls will restore our bodies in glory, where being united to our
Head, we shall triumph over griefs and executioners? Though persecution do not
exercise the courage of the Martyrs, and the peace the Church enjoys suffer not
the Faithful to expose their lives for the quarrel of Jesus Christ, they cease
not to be obliged to this duty in a thousand opportunities; if occasion present
not it self, they must preserve a will to it; if they cannot suffer death, they
must suffer shame and confusion for his glory; and when the world shall
overturn the maxims of the Gospel to set up the maxims of Libertinisme or
Impiety, then is it that Christians must call to mind that they are the Members
of Jesus Christ; that they must prefer his interests before their own honor,
and if they be so happy as to sacrifice their lives for the defense of their
Head, they must be so stout as to sacrifice their reputation, who requires this
duty of them as the surest testimony of their love.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. That all is common among Christians as among Members of
the same Body.
AS Man's Body is the perfectest Image of the Church: the Members that compose
it are also the liveliest representatives of Christians: Both of them live in
unity, depend of the same Head, and are informed with the same Spirit; Both of
them preserve their differences in their Unity, and exhibit in their mutual
correspondence that agreeable variety that sets an estimate upon all the works
of Nature. Though these Mystical and Natural members conspire altogether for
the public good, they cease not to have their different employments; Each
particular acts according to its capacity: they never trespass one upon
another, and as there are none useless they have all their several functions
which they exercise without confusion and jealousy; their faculties are
answerable to their employments: Nature gives every one what is necessary for
them to act according to her orders, and Grace never refuses the others what
they stand in need of to operate according to its motions; But the most
wonderful resemblance I find between the members of these two Bodies, is, that
their good and bad occurrences are common, and that living in a perfect
society, no sad disaster happens to one but all the rest are affected with it:
One sole blow makes a thousand wounds at once; and though there be but one part
set upon, all the rest testify their compassion. The foot seems to be in the
body what the foundation is in the building; it is not the noblest part though
one of the necessariest, and it seems by the distance it is a^ from others, it
should have less communication with them: In the mean time, if it be pricked
with a thorn, the pain is dispersed through all the body; Every member affords
it some good office, and the care they have to assist it, testifies what share
they have in the misfortune: The Tongue complains for it; this faithful
Interpreter gives advice to all the rest; to show how much the evil concerns
her, she speaks of it as her own, and to hear her talk, one would think she had
been hurt too: The Eyes being more delicate and more sensible, express more
regret; they are not content only to look upon the offended part, but they shed
tears to comfort it, and many times cure it by that innocent remedy: The Head
which is seated in the most eminent place of the body, stoops to succor this
poor afflicted; he forgets his condition to satisfy his love, and giving a
fair example to Sovereigns, instructs them they ought to be sensible of all the
miseries of the meanest of their subjects: the Heart, Nemo regi tam vilis sit,
ut illum perire non sentiat qualiscunque pars imperii sit. Senec.
which from the center where it is lodged, equally enlivens all the parts,
discovers its sense of pain by its regrets; and mixing its sighs with the tears
of the eyes, and the complaints of the mouth, gives a loud testimony it cannot
be at quiet, when the members it inanimates are afflicted: The Hands, that are
the faithful ministers of the body, discover their sorrow, by their quickness
of dispatch; being more active then the rest, they presently visit the
distressed part; they sound the malady, apply remedies to it, and evidence,
that if they be not so tender, they are more serviceable then the Eyes or
Tongue.

If all things were well regulated in the Church, if the Faithful acted
according to the motions of Grace, and if Charity, that combines them together,
were as lively in their Hearts, as in those of the primitive Christians, we
should see in the mystical Body of Jesus Christ, what we behold every day in
the natural body of Man: The affliction of one of these quickened Members would
equally touch all the rest; every one would do his office according to his
power; and imitating the good intelligence of parts composing the same body,
some would weep as the eyes, others complain as the mouth, and others assist as
the hands. This certainly was the consideration that wrought so much upon S.
Paul's affections, Docet utique Paulus save veritatem, patitur sua and aliorum
simul mala, infirmitates tolerat and solatur, simul de communisalute, and de
toto orb sollicitus. Ansel.
and obliged him to pronounce those words flowing from the greatness of his
love: Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? For as
he came nearer Jesus Christ then other Christians did, being closer united to
this Head, he sunk deeper into his mind; and remembering the complaints he
himself had drawn from his mouth, when he persecuted the Church, he endeavored
to repair that offense by compassion; and in Mercy to imitate him, whom he
represented in Authority. All Christians are bound to live in this disposition;
if they mean to satisfy their duty, they must be afflicted with the miserable,
weep with those that weep; and calling to mind that they are the Members of
the same Body, they must see no Innocents persecuted, no Godly distressed, but
they must do their utmost to comfort them, by condoling their misfortunes. It Is
perhaps for this reason, that the Church is called a Dove, because sighs are as
natural to her, as to that Bird, who having lost her mate, spends her life in
grief and solitude: The Church is a widow, and consequently solitary: her
Husband left her, when he ascended up to heaven: and though she be honored
with his presence, being deprived of his sight, she cannot secure her self from
that anxiety her love works in her, but she mourns as the Dove, because, being
made up of as many Members as she has Believers, she is constrained to give
her self over to Sorrow, when she sees them in Calamity or in Danger.

Having considered the Afflictions of the Church, let us consider the subject
of her Joy, and behold the community of Goods she has set up among her
children, in that which Nature has erected among members of the same body. The
union of these later is so great, that though they have different offices, yet
cease they not to take pains one for the other. The eyes see, and hear not,
says S. Augustine; the ears hear, and see not; the hands act, and hear not;
the feet walk, and act not: nevertheless their correspondence is so good, that
the eyes hear by the ears, the ears see by the eyes, the hands walk by the
feet, and the feet act by the hands: so that if we ask the ears, Can they judge
of Colors? they would answer, Being in the unity of the body, they are always
with the eyes; and if they see not themselves, they are inseparable from those
whose office it is to see for them: Thus, continues S. Augustine, as the eyes
say we hear by the ears, and the ears, We see by the eyes, and both of them, We
act by the hands; all is common among these parts; their difference destroys
not their unity; and though their employments be diverse, they live in so
perfect a society, that the advantages of the one part, make up the riches of
all the rest.

If Christians be Members of Jesus Christ, they enjoy the same privileges; all
their goods are common; and, if envy divide them not from their Head, they
possess in Him, whatever is wanting in Themselves: The Alliance they have with
his Body, enriches them with another's good, without any injustice; and like
the members of a man, which act in one another behalf, they foretell things to
come, by the mouth of the Prophets; they are understood of all Nations, by
those that have the gift of Tongues; they work miracles, by the hands of the
Apostles; and they attribute to themselves, without vanity, whatever the Saints
are able to do in the mystical Body of Jesus Christ: For one of the secrets of
the Natural body, says S. Augustine, is, that the relation of the members is
so perfect, that each particular labors not so much for it self as for others.
The eye is the only part that can see; but it sees not for it self alone; it
is the candle of the feet in their walking, of the hands in working, and of all
the other members in their employments: Indeed, if it discover any danger
threatening the foot, it endeavors to protect it; and gives notice, that it may
be avoided. The hand acts only, but not for it self alone; it defends the face
if stricken at, courageously opposes any enemy that braves it; and knowing
that their interests are common, valiantly suffers the evil, to deliver the
body from it. All the members are silent; there is none but the tongue that
speaks; but she is their interpreter, and furnishes them with words to express
their like or dislike, their sorrow or joy. Thus must we confess, in the
mystical body of Jesus Christ, the Faithful receive no benefit which is not
reckoned as pertaining to the rest: If they be prudent, it is to counsel the
simple; if they work miracles, it is to convert Infidels, or to confirm weak
Believers; if they have the spirit of Prophecy, it is to instruct the ignorant;
if they have the gift of Tongues, it is to make strangers understand them, and
to gather up the children of God that are dispersed through all the world.

But that which exceeds all belief, is, that the particular graces that
sanctify men's souls, are common among the Faithful. For of these Theology
acknowledges two sorts; one, which are given us for the service of others, and
respect more the benefit of the Church then our own sanctification; such are
all those graces that are called Gratuities, whose principal end is the glory
of Jesus Christ, and the conversion of Infidels; such is the gift of Miracles,
which does not so much profit him that has received it, as those who see the
effects of it; because we know very well, that this privilege, though
extraordinary and rare, may consist with sin, and, if it be not accompanied
with much humility, is as dangerous as splendid: The other sort of Graces are
those that make us acceptable to God, blot out our offenses, look more to our
own salvation, then that of our neighbor; and being not so glittering as the
other, are incomparably more holy and useful. Now though these last kind of
graces be our own, yet also are they common in the Church; and those that are
united to us by charity, may in some sort make use of them. It Is certainly upon
this ground, that the great Apostle calls this virtue the bond of perfection,
because it not only associates all Christians, but renders their graces
common, and enricheth every particular with the advantages of the whole
fraternity: Therefore was David bold to entitle himself to all the good works
they did that kept the commandments of God: Particeps ego sum omnium timentium
te, and custodientium mandata tua: For though he knew very well his condition
would not suffer him to be always at the Altar, that the cares that accompany
Royalty agree not with the sweet retirements of solitude, and the bloody
exercises of war gave him not leave to attend the service of the Ark; he hoped
nevertheless that Charity, which united him to the Faithful, would make him
partaker of their merits; and being a Member of that mystical body, he should
enjoy their Graces, that made it up with him: Thus this great Prince, ruling in
his Palace, or fighting in his Armies, promised himself a share in the
Sacrifices of the Priests, in the Tears of the Widows, in the Illuminations of
the Prophets, in the Crowns of the Martyrs; and that Love supplying the defect
of his condition, enriched him with their virtues, without impoverishing them.

This also was the counsel S. Augustine gave the Faithful of his time: for
knowing that every Christian could not have all graces, Noli dicere in animo
tuo ego si Christianus essem utique, and ad Deum pertinerem, possem facere quod
alius facit; talis enim est acsi diceret auris, ego si ad corpus pertinere^
possem videre luna^ and sole^, and non habet illud tamen, nec auris nec manus,
sed faciunt fingula quod possunt, and cum concordia serviunt sibi invice^ omnia
membra. Aug. Hom. 15. Ex. 50.
that variety is one of the beauties of the Church, and that diversity of
conditions contributes no less to her profit then to her ornament, persuaded
them to have recourse to Charity, and to employ the credit of this virtue, to
purchase all others without labor. His words are too handsome to be omitted.
Envy not, said he, to the whole company of the Faithful the advantages your
neighbor possesses, but holily rejoice in them, and ye shall enjoy them with
him. Say not in your heart, Were I indeed a Christian, and had I the honor to
belong to Jesus Christ, I could do that which others do, and instead of being
engaged in the bonds of Marriage, I would live a holy Celibate: For, it is just
as if the ear should say, I am not of the body, because I cannot see the light
of the Sun: in the mean time, the hand has not that privilege, no more then
the ear; and yet they are parts of the body as well as the eyes; because,
though every member cannot do that by it self which all the others do, they
cease not mutually to assist each other, and to possess that in common, which
they call their own properly. After their example, be glad of that grace God
has conferred upon any of the Faithful; and you may do that in him, which you
are not able to perform in your selves. He keeps his Virginity; love him, and
you are continent with him: you have the gift of Patience, by learning to
suffer; let him love you, and your patience shall become his: He can fast, and
your constitution will not give you leave; love him, and his fasting shall be
yours. If you ask me how this can be: it is because he lives in you, and you in
him, and you are both members of the same body: for though ye be different in
condition and in person, by charity ye are but one and the same thing.

The Abbot Guerric certainly grounded himself upon this Maxim, when he said
that all virtues were common among Believers; that the treasure of the Church
was open to all her children; and that when our condition or our weakness did
not permit us to practice one virtue, we fail not to practice it in another:
Caeteras virtutes etsi omnes non habent, ^iligant illum qui habet quod in se
non inveniunt, and in illo habent quod in se non vident; sicut Petrus in Joanne
virginitatis habet meritum, sic Joannes in Petro habet Martyris praemi m.
Gueri. in festo pu.
Thus, says this great man, Saint Peter and Saint John lived in a community of
goods; one found that in the other, which he could not find in himself;
joining their merits together, they mutually enriched one another; and as Saint
Peter was a virgin in the person of Saint John, that beloved disciple was a
Martyr in the person of Saint Peter: So that the unity of Members, which they
had in Jesus Christ, bestowed upon them privileges they had not in their own
person; and Charity, that united these two Apostles, in despite of their
condition, twisted the Crown of Martyrdom with that of Virginity: Martyrdom
cost Saint John only a little love; without enduring the pain, he had the
merit of patience; he triumphed without fighting, because he lived in him whom
grace made victorious. Virginity cost Saint Peter no more; his love procured
him purity; he was a virgin, because he loved a virgin-disciple; and enjoying
the goods of Saint John as his own, he found the merit of continence in the
engagements of Marriage. Quod tuum est per laborem, menm est per amorem. Greg.
Mag.
To give this truth a fuller expression, we must make use of the words of S.
Gregory the Great, and say, that in the unity of the Church one Believer gains
that by love, that another does by labor; and is master of that with
complacency, which another cannot reach to but with much sweat of anxiety. Thus
the courage of the Martyrs supplies our weakness, the knowledge of Doctors our
ignorance, the purity of virgins is in stead of continence in Marriage, and the
solitude of Anchorites is a supplement to the employments of those that are
conversant in the world. Hence it is evident, that he that is in the Body of the
Church, partakes of all the merits of the Faithful; that, without admitting
himself into Religious Orders, he shares in their travels, if he be associated
to them by charity; without wearing their habit, he participates of their
virtues; and that in an ordinary Secular condition, he preaches with the
Dominicans, sacrifices with the Priests, is in the desert with the solitary,
and is chaste in the highest degree of continency with the virgins.

But in this prerogative, the Christian must defend himself from two mischiefs
which strongly threaten him: the first is Pride; receiving with humility what
he possesses not but by right of Charity, lest his own sufficiency make him
lose the benefit of the Churches community. The second is Idleness; not to
neglect the practice of virtues, under a pretense of enjoying them in others;
but going forward with the highest industry in the way of perfection, to store
the Church with his pious endeavors, and to add new merits to the treasures
of this charitable mother.

The Fourth TREATISE. Of the Grace of a Christian.
The first DISCOURSE. That Predestination upon which Grace depends is a hidden
Mystery.
INasmuch as men are the children of Adam, they are as curious as they are
proud: and as the haughtiness of their Father has made them lose the
remembrance of their misery: his curiosity has made them forget their
ignorance; They aspire to reign, although they be slaves; they would be masters
of knowledge, although they are born ignorant; and these two unjust desires
have made so deep an impression in their souls, that all the punishments
inflicted upon sin have not been able to suppress them.

I could pardon this imperfection of man, had it any bounds; nor would I find
fault with an ignorant person desiring to be learned, could he content himself
with the knowledge of what might be known without danger or sin: But the
difficulty sets an edge upon his appetite; there are no truths he is more
eagerly inquisitive of, then those God has pleased to leave in the dark; He
mounts up to the Heavens to know their motions and influences; he seeks his
destiny in the Conjunction of the Planets, and studies a Book whose Characters
have abused all Astrologers, and means to find that in Stars, which God has
locked up in his own Bosom: He descends into the Abysses of the Earth out of
Curiosity as much as Avarice; he thinks knowledge is retired to the Center of
the world, and that he must confer with the spirit of lies to be acquainted
with truth. His Insolence has passed as far as Religion; he would fain
penetrate its mysteries; nor does God bring any thing to pass in the world, the
Causes and motives w^ereof he endeavors not to discover.

It Is a crime in the State to comment upon the intentions of the Ministers
thereof; Sicut inquirere in vitam Principis ita in arcana ejus nefas est. Taci.
Annal.
Their prudence draws a curtain over the wheels they work by, and they believe
that he that shall sound the secrets of the Prince, is not less guilty then he
that would know the end of his life. In the mean time we commit this crime
against the mysteries of Faith; we would make Religion a Science, and we daily
search for evidence and certitude in the region of ignorance and obscurity. The
desire we have to fathom the depths of Predestination, is a certain proof of
this Insolence: For though there be nothing in the world more bid, more in the
dark, there is not any thing man has more curiously examined, and made the
employment of his busy undertakings, seeking his fall in the fountain of
salvation; I should account my self very happy, could I cure him of this
malady; and if describing the mystery hidden in eternity, could make him see,
it is an impiety to pretend to know more then God has been willing to reveal.

Predestination is as certain as it is secret, it makes up one part of
Providence, and if God have any care of his creatures, he must needs lead them
to their end. There are none but the Epicures, who fearing to trouble his rest,
have denied him the knowledge of humane affairs: The best of Philosophers have
believed our fortune is in his hands, and that having given us our being, he
must also give us our felicity.

Christian Religion has confirmed us in this Creed, and Faith persuading us
that God has regulated all things from Eternity, obliges us to believe that
he has ordained necessary means to ascertain our salvation: Sufficiat eis
scire quod non sit in quitas apud Deum cum cuim nulla merita invenisset
Apostolus quibus Jacob apud Deum praecederet fratrem dicit, Numquid apud Deu^
est iniquitas? absit. Aug. lib. 4. contra duas Episto. Pelag.
She teaches us that he beheld all his works before they proceeded out of
Nothing; that he has drawn forth what he pleased, not all that he was able:
That he created Men and Angels, elected some out of Mercy, rejected others out
of Justice: and that in these two contrary judgments, he has carried himself
with so much evenness, that no person has any cause to complain.

Reason together with Faith instructs us, that God loves all his creatures;
that his being Absolute, makes him not unjust, and acting according to the
knowledge of the Cause, he punishes none that have not deserved it; If he be
no more liberal in his recompenses, then severe in his corrections, he fails
not to be very observant of Justice; if we be not sure that he has respect to
our merits, we know at least that he has to his own favors: and that when he
crowns our good works, he crowns his own benefits and endowments.

The Scripture that knows very well that men are in love with their salvation,
and jealous of their liberty, represents them often that God is absolute in his
State; that he is not to give account of his actions; that his judgments being
equitable in themselves, have no need of our approbation; nor are therefore
less just, because not conformable to our weak reasonings. This divine Register
insinuates to us, that God is the master of his creature; that he disposes
thereof as he pleases, and that if Nothing whence he had his Being give him
right enough to destroy him; sin which he is guilty of gives him title enough
to punish him. But delivering all these reasons in different passages, we are
not permitted to deduce thence infallible consequences; nay, we may easily
perceive the whole drift is rather to humble then inform us.

In the mean time though Scripture use so many cautions when it speaks of so
concealed a mystery, and the Elogies bestowed upon itoblige us to confess,
that it is not to be penetrated by creatures; necessity notwithstanding has put
us upon the search of it, Nihil aliud est Praedestinatio sauctoru^ quam
praescientia and praeparatio beneficiorum Dei, quibus certissime liberantur
quicunque liberantur: caeteri autem, ubi, nisi in massa perditionis justo
divino judicio relinquuntur. Aug. lib. 2. de praed. c. 14.
and the Fathers of the Church have been constrained sometimes to unveil the
wonders thereof, to crush Heresies in their conception. S. Augustine who has
writ whole Treatises of this Subject, never had other design then to debase the
pride of the Pelagians, and make them see that the will of man being corrupted
by sin, could now no longer hope for happiness by his own merits. We may say
this great Doctor would not sound the depths of the mystery of Predestination,
that he entrenched himself in the fall of the children of Adam, as in an
impregnable fort; that considering men but since they were criminal and
beholding them in that state wherein the justice of God owes them nothing but
punishments, he has spoken more severely in this point then others. He informs
not at all what God ordained concerning his creature before the sin of Adam;
and though he knew all things were unchangeably decreed before that fatal
accident, he would not dive into them lest he might lose the advantages
Original sin gave him over the Pelagians.

Saint Thomas has outgone Saint Augustine, and though he glories to be his
Disciple, Cum Deus mu^dum pro luxit propter suam gloriam, convenieus fuit quod
in illo esset diversitas creaturarum, quarum aliae justitiam ejus, aliae
misericordiam ejus declararent.
he saw nevertheles that before the fall of Man, God must have deliberated of
his salvation: and that he knew from that unceivable moment, what was to happen
to Jesus Christ and to Adam. Therefore taking the thing higher, he believed
that God in the Creation of the world, had a design to manifest his Divine
perfections; and as he made his mercy shine forth in his Elect, so would he
make his justice appear in the Reprobate; that he destined Graces to the former
out of pure goodness, and refused them to the second out of a just severity,
whom abandoning to their own free will, he was neither guilty of their crime,
nor responsible for their loss. Though this opinion has seemed so severe to
all the School, that it has no Abettors but the faithful Disciples of Saint
Thomas, and the conformity it seems to have with the Error of Calvin, Nunquid
dicit figmentu^ ei qui se finxit, quid me fecisti sic? an non habet potestatem
sigulus luti ex eadem massa facere aliud quidem vas in honorem, aliud vero in
contumelia^? To. 9.
has made it suspected by the Catholics, yet is it not without its grounds
in Scripture; The example of the Potter, who does what he will with his clay,
and of the same matter makes vessels of Honor and Dishonor, seems to favor
it; and those that believe that God owes nothing to his creature, what state
soever he look upon him in, are not troubled to embrace this sense: It appears
more sublime then that of Saint Augustine, in that it disposes of man before
sin, settles his salvation before his fall, and leaves not the mind in suspense
what God intended to do with man before the Devil had seduced him. It appears
also more severe in that it lays Gods refusing Grace not upon sin, but upon
Nothing; nor grounds this sentence so much upon the Justice of God, as upon his
Sovereignty: For it is some comfort to the creature to know that God reprobated
him not, but by consequence of Adams transgression; that he is not out of his
favor, but because he is the issue of his enemy: nor that he is interdicted
Heaven, but because his Father shut the door against him.

There are other Divines who taking things another way, are persuaded that God
since the fall of Adam has a mind to save all Men: but having created them
free, has given them sufficient graces, the use whereof depends upon their own
will: This opinion has more assertors then both the others, and if it were
lawful to reason in Religion, I should say, it is of all the most reasonable;
But neither condemning nor approving it, me thinks it has no such ground in
Scripture, giving God rather a mere naked prescience, then an entire disposal
over his creature; that it exalts Liberty above Grace; making man the Author
of his salvation, it takes not sufficient notice of the devastations sin has
made in our nature, and judges as favorable concerning a Criminal as an
Innocent: It makes me question Grace in rend^ing it so common; it weakens
^alvation intending to establishing it, and having too much care of Insidels,
seems not to have enough of Christians. Finally, to speak in few words, it
entertains not man sufficiently within the decencies of humility; and making
him the master of his salvation, me thinks it darkens the glory, and weakens
the power of Grace: Had it not these blemishes, it cannot be denied, but it is
contrary to the judgments of Saint Augustine and Saint Thomas, and has
forsaken the two greatest Masters Theology ever yet was honored with.

Were I permitted to discourse of this Mystery, I should take something of
these three opinions, and of them make a fourth, which yet would not want
Assertors, being common in the Schools; Praedestinatio est aeterna praeparatio
gratiae. in pr^senti, and gloriae in futuro. Aug. and Tho^. abstrahendo a
peccato Adae.
and with Saint Augustine and Saint Thomas would say, that Predestination is a
Decree whereby God looking upon all men in Nothing, or in Sin, resolves to save
a certain number, which can neither receive diminution nor addition: But with
others I would say, that the Reprobation of Christians is not founded upon
Original Sin, because being regenerated in Jesus Christ by Baptism, the
sentence of Condemnation must include those other sins which are superadded to
this former: But forasmuch as which way soever I turn my self, I meet with
difficulties which I cannot resolve, Nihil ergonunc damnationis est ils qui
sunt in Christo Jesu. Romans 8.
I had rather confess my ignorance, and acknowledge that it is not lawful to
penetrate a design God has been pleased to conceal in his Eternal Council and
Decree.

The Church which is the Spouse of Christ has not yet perhaps light enough to
make a full discovery of this Truth. The Apostles her Masters have spoken but
sparingly thereof; they have been content to insinuate the power and the justice
of God, that we should not be so rashly insolent as to ascribe our salvation to
our selves, and impute our fall to him: When they foresaw our objections and
our doubts, they answered them only with admiration; and paying us with that
solution Saint Augustine so often returned the Pelagians that urged him close,
they have taught us this lesson, that there is more to be adored then to be
known in this ineffable mystery; That in this occasion a man may boast his
ignorance, nor know which side to take without running the hazard of being
accounted rash and unadvised; Finally, that the ways we take to discover the
will and mind of God, are in some sort injurious to his Majesty.

For we limit the knowledge of the Almighty, and set down Instances wherein he
sees some things, and not others; we make him reason according to our manner,
and we prescribe him principles, whence we oblige him to draw consequences that
please us; we constrain him to save and destroy men according to the motions of
severity or pity which sway us; and not knowing that his justice is
transcendently above all our Laws, we go about to reduce him to the conditions
of Judges or Sovereigns.

I honor the Fathers of the Church, who to quel Heresies, have advanced
certain Maxims upon this subject of Predestination: I reverence whatever the
Church obliges me to believe of the Justice or Mercy of God; I adore with the
Scripture all the judgments of my Creator; and whether he founds his refusal
of Grace or Glory upon my Nonentity, or upon my Sin, I bless his justice; if
he choose me upon sight of his own favors, or my merits, which are but the
effects of his favors, I will magnify his mercy; and not examining either his
motives, or questioning his power in the disposal of his creatures, I will
patiently submit to the Eternal determination of his Divine Providence.

Upon the consideration of these verities the Christian must live between hope
and fear, that seeing himself suspended between Heaven and Hell, he may sigh out
after his Redeemer; and finding no firmer assurance then in submission to his
grace, may yield full obedience to it, earnestly longing that it may grow more
vigorous, that so it may exercise an absolute dominion over his will; never
fearing to lose his liberty by yiedling subjection thereto; but instructed by
the language of the Church, beg of God that grace may become Mistress of his
heart, that it may vanquish his resistance; and making strength succeed
sweetness, may triumph over a rebel that disputes the victory with him.

I know very well this subject causes much bandying in the Schools, that it
divides the Masters of Divinity, and troubles the peace and fair intelligence
with which they ought to inquire after Truth. But for me, I find them agreed in
the most material circumstances; and that in the diversity of their opinions,
they can neither be suspected of Error nor Rashness. For seeing those who vary
a little from the Doctrine of Saint Augustine, confess that grace always
prevents the will, that with its light it sheds forth heat and warmth into the
soul of man, choosing those ery moments in which it infallibly produces its
effects; they are at a great distance from the error of the Pelagians, who
ascribed all to Liberty, and judged not Grace necessary to act absolutely, but
easily: Semper est ante in nobis voluntas libera, sed non est semper bona; aut
enim a justitia libera est, quando servit peccato; and tunc est mala; aut a
peccato libera est, quando servit justitiae, and tunc est bona. Aug. de Great.
and Lib. arb. c. 15.
and seeing those that boast themselves the disciples of Saint Augustine,
acknowledge that Grace takes not away the Liberty, though it leave it not
wholly in an indifferency, me thinks they are very far from the dreams of the
Manichees, and the impiety of the Calvinists; particularly, that following
their Master, they acknowledge that Man is always free in good and evil; only
with this difference, that his Liberty is the only cause of his Perdition, and
Grace the principal cause of his Salvation.

It Is upon these two Principles, as upon two immovable Poles, that I make this
whole Treatise roll; wherein I profess to take S. Augustine for my guide; but
protest withal, that in seeking after Truth, I have always endeavored to
preserve Charity; and am so far from blaming those Opinions I do not hold, that
I am ready to relinquish mine own, when the Church shall condemn them, or when
her Governors shall oblige me to change them. Hitherto, both Opinions have
seemed Orthodox: The Council of Trent has authorized them, leaving them in the
Church; and has suffered the Faithful to embrace that which they shall judge
most conformable to Scripture, and the holy Fathers. The Canons of this
Assembly are composed with so much prudence, that, condemning the Heresies that
divided the unity of the Church, it has determined nothing concerning the
Controversies of the Divines: It has so judiciously explained it self, that
each party alleges it for themselves; and by the carriage of the business
has made us see, that tacitly it gave approbation to both these Opinions,
which for twelve Ages have busied the best Wits of the School. For though
something be added to that which seems least consonant to the doctrine of S.
Augustine, there is no change in the substance; and it is the same that so many
Bishops and Doctors have taught heretofore in the Pulpit and in the Chair.

After the example of this great Council, I honor both the Opinions; and
expecting till the Church shall further explain her self upon these matters,
which produce so many gallant Pieces on one side and the other, I will content
my self in saying, that in each party there is something to be done, and
something to be left undone. For, those who will not that Grace have so
absolute a dominion over the Will, ought to labor hard, because believing
their liberty not so maimed, but that it may with a little aid practice
Christian virtues, they are obliged to produce notable effects, and to carry
heaven by violence, and the assiduity of an uncessant endeavor: But they must
withal carefully avoid Pride, which accompanies bold undertakings: They must
remember, all their pains will be fruitless, if they be not quickened with
Grace; they must be ever mindful of those words of Jesus Christ, who
confounding the vanity of men, has obliged his disciples to confess, that
after all their travels, they are unprofitable servants: They must consider,
that whatever share their liberty may pretend in the business of their
salvation, they can do nothing without his grace who said to all his disciples
in the person of his Apostles, Sine me nihil potest is facere. The disciples of
S. Augustine, who acknowledge the weakness of Nature, and the power of Grace,
are engaged to pray much, to depend upon the mercy of God, and to cry aloud
with the Psalmist to their Divine Redeemer, In manibus tua sorts meae; but
lest the fear of their Infirmity should lull them asleep in the lap of
Idleness, they are bound to join Action to their Prayers, good Works to their
Sighs; remembering that Charity is active, and that she never has recourse to
Desires and Wishings, but when she is destitute of occasions to suffer or do
for the glory of him whom she so passionately affects.

The Second DISCOURSE. Of the Necessity of Grace in the state of Innocence; and
of Sin.
A Man must be an enemy to his Salvation, that is an enemy to the Grace of
Jesus Christ; because, in whatever state the creature is considered, he has
need of some supernatural assistance to attain to glory. His weakness is so
great, and his end so high, that he can neither master the first, nor compass
the second, if he be not assisted with an extraordinary succor. Original
righteousness that furnished him with so many advantages, gave no dispensation
from this necessity; and though he had neither Passions to combat, nor
disorders to regulate, Grace was still necessary for him to overcome
Temptations, and to persevere in Innocence: Had Humane nature continued, says
S. Augustine, in that happy condition God at first created it in, it had been
unable to preserve it self, had it not been upheld by the power of its Creator.

The state of Grace is more delicate then that of Nature; and if all
Philosophers confess that the Creatures have need of the support of the
Almighty, that they return not to their Nothing, all Divines acknowledge they
have need of his help, lest they fall into Sin. Weakness, which is inseparable
from the Creature, puts him in this necessity; and notwithstanding those many
privileges his production was honored with, he cannot want that succor which
supports and fortifies him. Adam remained but a small time in his original
righteousness; his first conflict was followed with his overthrow; and we know
not whether his Creation and his Fall happened not on the same day: but this we
know, that his Fall had been speedier, had not Grace seconded his Liberty; and
that he had wandered from his End as soon as ever he had known it, had he not
been supplied with supernatural Means to tend thereunto. And me thinks we may
apply the words of the Scripture in the state of Innocence as well as of Sin,
and say with that excellent Doctor of Grace, Let him that glories, glory in
the Lord. For as there is no Creature can begin any good without Grace, neither
is there any that can perfect that good beginning without it.

The Necessity of Grace is so great, Non talis facta est Natura, ut sine Divino
adjutorio posset manner. Aug.
that it is common to all sorts of conditions: Angels can no more be without it
then Men; the nobleness of their Creation dispenses not with them: and if it
be true that the dignity of their nature, being higher then that of Men, makes
them more indigent of the assistance of God, I conceive their elevation in
Grace renders them more necessitous of its support. The Greatness of the
Creatures serves only to abase them; their excellence is a glorious servitude;
the more they have received from God, the more do they depend upon him; and the
grace that would preserve an Angel, would not be sufficient to preserve a
Seraphim. Thus the dignity of the Creature is as well a proof of the Necessity
of Grace, as his weakness: and till he be admitted into Glory, where he finds
his confirmation in Good, he stands in need of Grace to preserve those
advantages he has received from his Creator.

If Innocence could not free us from this happy Necessity, we may say it is
increased upon us by sin; and, that to give us a release, we have need of some
more vigorous and active Grace: For, it is not enough now, that it show us the
Good, and enable us to attain unto it, but it must withal inspire us with a
Will unto it; it must lead us by the hand, support our weakness, order our
doings, correct our imperfections, break our chains, and master concupiscence
that takes possession of our Will: It must assault this Tyrant, to set us at
liberty; that dealing skilfully with us, and valiantly against it, we may be
delivered from servitude, without any violence to our nature. For Free Will is
so weakened by sin, that it cannot so much as will the Good, if Grace cure it
not: it must change its inclinations, to elevate its desires; and imprint upon
him the love of virtue, hereby to abhor vice. Indeed, says S. Augustine, how
should a man live justly, if he be not justified? how should he live holily, if
he be not sanctfied? and how should he live truly, if he be not quickened with
Grace, which is the true life of the soul? The Cure of man, and his Disease,
depend not equally upon his Will: there needs nothing but a small excess, to
contract a Fever: hot and cold are able to debois our constitution: Fruits
eaten unseasonably, or excessively, may cause a Flux: nor is there any man so
well, but may be sick when he will: But the Cure depends upon Physic; we must
recover that by the help of another, which we have lost by our own fault; and
experience teaches us, that the end of evil is not in our power, as its birth
is. We may reason thus concerning Man a Sinner, because sickness is as well the
Image as the Punishment of his crime: he may sin when he will; he has liberty
enough to become a delinquent; there needs no temptation to make him swerve
from his duty; and he is dextrous enough, by his sole power, to render himself
miserable. But having lost Grace, he cannot recover it by his own proper Will:
notwithstanding all the abilities still remain with him, there will never be
enough to raise him from his Fall; nor can he be justified by any other then by
him that is the fountain of all the Justice in the world. The Law that was
given to Instruct him, is not sufficient to Cure him: though it be one step to
arrive to virtue, and the knowledge of sin be necessary for the avoiding
thereof, nevertheless the Law, without Grace, cannot convert the sinner; its
light serves only to dazzle him, its defense only to irritate his desires;
and when this feeble succor is not seconded by Grace, it makes a man but more
guilty. It Is Charity that inspires a love toward the Law, that surmounts its
difficulties, changes its pains into pleasures; and of slaves making children,
renders that easy and agreeable, that seemed burdensome and impossible.

But when, by the mediation of Grace, a man passes from the Law to the Gospel,
he ought not to think this guide useless, nor that he can without its aid
preserve, what without its light he could not attain. Grace is not less
necessary to finish then to begin; and the new state whereto the Christian it
raised, depends so absolutely upon its influences, that he cease to act, when
this cease to operate.

For the right understanding of this Truth, we must remember, that though the
Christian and the Man be one and the same person, yet have they their
oppositions and their differences: Man believes himself perfect, when he is
free and reasonable; these two faculties are his principal advantages; and the
vanity of Philosophy persuades him, that as long as he acts according to
Reason, he cannot fail of attaining felicity: To keep himself in this state, he
is careful that the Senses pervert not his Understanding, that the Passions
trouble not his Rest, and an inordinate Love deprive him of his Liberty: But
this blind Opiniator sees not that he carries his enemy in his own bosom, that
Concupiscence orders all the motions of his soul, that Reason is but her slave,
and that he is never more wedded to himself, then when he thinks to hang loose
from all things else.

As the Christian is a new man, he acts by other principles: for he renounceth
Reason, to give himself over to Grace; he quits the light of his Understanding,
to submit to the obscurity of Faith; and his endeavor is to quench the flames
of Self-love, that he may burn only with the fire of Charity: He learns in the
School of Christianity, that Reason is a bad guide, because she lets
Concupiscence lead her; he knows that the Understanding is prevented with a
thousand errors; and having lost the better part of his light, he many times
confounds Virtue with Vice: He is not ignorant that the Will is the most
depraved, as it is the most guilty of all his faculties; and being engaged in
the love of the creatures, finds nothing that charms the affection, but what is
corruptible and perishable; Therefore is his greatest care to get assistance
against these domestic enemies, and wholly to surrender himself to grace, that
it may be to him for a guide and a defense. Thus Faith becomes his Light, Hope
his Supporter, Charity his Love, and if we may speak so, Grace is made his
second Nature. To the vain errors of Science, he opposes the solid lights of
Faith; to the false promises of the world, the true promises of Jesus Christ;
to self-love, divine love; and to the corruption of Nature, the purity of
Grace. Then is it that soaring above himself, he learns by a happy experience,
that he was never more free then since he became a slave; and that Grace is so
far from robbing him of his liberty, that it has delivered him from a bondage
as cruel as it was ignominious. For as Saint Augustine says, Free Will finds
its perfection in Charity; he that was in darkness becomes enlightened; from
weakness he passes to strength; from disorder, to good government; and he that
was sullied with the love of the creatures, recovers his purity in the love of
the Creator.

But nothing more obliges the Christian to renounce his reason, that so he may
become the subject of Grace, then to know that his last end is supernatural,
and that he cannot attain it by forces solely natural. For though man have
some knowledge of God, though he observe his perfections in the creatures,
though he judge of his greatness by the beauty of his works, and recoiling into
himself, sees there some shadows of him whose image he is; yet he knows very
well that God is so great, that he cannot be perceived but by his own light.
Indeed he must shed abroad some rays into our soul, that the soul may have some
glympse of him; he must clarify and strengthen her, that she may look up unto
him, and mounting above her self, may render her partaker of that light,
whereby he is made visible to the blessed in glory. Thus though the will have
some affection for the Supreme Good, though she cannot fix upon any objects
that have not some appearance of Goodness in them, and that in the midst of her
greatest disorders there still remains some inclination toward her Creator;
yet the Christian knows that God cannot be worthily embraced but by that love
he works in us; that charity must be poured into our hearts; and that without
the assistance of this Divine gift, we can neither love him nor hate our selves
as we should. The inclination Nature stamped upon us in her purity, was too
weak to effect this; and that which Nature has left us since her corruption,
is too inordinate to lead us to it. Thus Grace is necessary in both conditions,
and the actions that proceed not from this Principle, are to be suspected,
because according to the Maxims of Saint Augustine, those that flow not from
Charity, flow most commonly from Concupiscence. These two Sovereigns possess
the will successively: as the first works nothing but good, the second is only
active in evil; and to be disingaged from the tyranny of the one, there is no
other way but to submit to the lawful dominion of the other. Thence it comes to
pass that the same Doctor declaring his full judgment in that Epistle he writ
to Vitalius, informs us, that Grace depends upon Gods pure Liberality; that
it is due neither to Men nor Infants, though it be necessary to all the actions
of the former; that God who is the Author of it, respects neither their works
nor their dispositions; that men may know when he bestows it, it is an emanation
of his mercy; and when he denies it, it is an act of his justice: He that shall
well weigh the sense of these words, as profound as the depths he treats of,
will not have much ado to acknowledge the indigence of the creature, the need
he has of Grace, and the Liberty God reserves to himself of dispensing it to
whom he will.

The Third DISCOURSE. That the Grace of a Christian ought to be more powerful
then that of Adam.
IT is strange, but withal very true, that nothing so much hinders a man from
valuing the remedies that cure him, as the opinion he has that he was not very
sick. This is it that to this day abuses the greatest part of Christians, and
lessens the obligation they have to the Grace of Jesus Christ: For they are
persuaded that the fault of our first Father has scarce made any devastations
in our Nature; that the greatest part of our evils spring not so much from our
will, as from our imagination; and that there is little difference between the
state of sin, and the state of original righteousness. Pride insensibly
confirms us in this belief; we make our weakness pass for cowardice, nor can we
be brought to acknowledge that our passions are the punishment of our
disobedience. From this first Error is derived a second more troublesome then
the former: For believing our disease light, we think the remedy extreme easy;
and judging Concupiscence not so strong, we judge the Grace of Jesus Christ
nothing so powerful. Indeed those that imagine that man's liberty is yet
vigorous enough to resist sin, acknowledge only a sufficient grace, adding
little to that of Adam, depending upon our will, as well as that did upon his:
They make us the masters of our salvation; and not considering the terrible
enemies we have to combat, they think our weapons need be no better furnished
then those of the first Man. Therefore I cannot establish the necessity of
efficacious Grace, but I must describe the irregularity of our nature, that the
greatness of our disease may make us apprehend the excellency of the remedy.
And indeed it is one of the chiefest reasons Saint Augustine made use of, to
make the Semi-Pelagians understand that the succors which were sufficient for
man an Innocent, could not be sufficient for man a Sinner: He handles these two
subjects without dividing them; he opposes Concupiscence to Charity, and
founds the strength of Grace upon the weakness of corrupted Nature.

Man in the state of Innocence was well with himself, because he was so with
God; his flesh was obedient to his spirit, because his spirit was obedient to
him that created it; Original righteousness was a sacred chain which linked
the body to the soul, and the soul to God: so that having no domestic enemies,
he had but forainers to combat; But when sin had despoiled him of grace, he
saw himself swallowed up by his own passions, and justly condemned to suffer
the eternal pain of his disobedience: From that hour he began to be criminal
and miserable; the parts that composed him were divided; and Original
righteousness the bond of their amity, having abandoned them, their love was
changed into hatred: 'Twas in this sad moment that Nature lost her primitive
purity; that she that was subject to Grace, became captive to Concupiscence;
from which incestuous mixture, those monsters received birth that bid us
battle. Man attempted diverse means to recover the good he had lost; Reason
promised him the victory over his passions; Data est Lex (...) agrum de morbe
convinceret qui sibi sanus videbatur, ut peccata demonstrare^tur, non ut
auferrentur. Aug. in Psalm. 83.
Liberty undertook the reconciliation of the soul and body; and both of them
assisted by a vain Philosophy, put him in hopes of a happy tranquillity: For
awhile he suffered himself to be cousened with their promises; and his vanity
which could not be cured by his misery, persuaded him that reason could supply
the want of grace: But the Law undeceived him, which seems to have commanded
the good, and forbidden the evil, for no other end, but to make us sensible of
our weakness, and to oblige us to run to Grace.

It Is true, that as sin has corrupted nature, whereby she is at a great
distance from this acceptable condition, wherein soul and body conspired
together to make man happy; The Grace of Jesus Christ must of necessity be far
different from that of Adam; it must have more light, because it is to
enlighten one blind; more force, because it is to cure one diseased; In the
state of Innocence it was subject to the will of man; he made use of it
according to his pleasure, because having as yet no bad inclinations, there was
no inconvenience but his salvation might depend upon his liberty; and he be in
some sort the master of his happiness. Heaven never refused him relief; he
found assistance in all his designs, and being not yet criminal, Grace was
offered to him at every moment: As it was always present with, so was it always
at his devotion; he might accept or refuse it, and in this happy condition he
was so free, that his salvation and his fall depended upon his will: Weakness
which is so natural to the creature, had nothing to do to disquiet him,
because having no disorders in his soul nor in his body, there were no
intestine seditions that could surprise him: But now that the disease is sunk
down into the very Essence of his Being, that all the faculties of his soul
are disabled, that the will seized upon by concupiscence, has no inclination
but toward evil; and the understanding dazzled with false lights, or obscured
by real darkness, can hardly discern truth from falsehood; Man has need of
some more vigorous active Grace, then that of Innocence; such as may render it
self Mistress of his Liberty without forcing it; apply his will to good,
without constraining it: withdraw it from evil, without offering it violence;
and being the principle of all his actions, defend him from the subtle
treachery of the senses, the open revolt of the passions, and the bold fury of
concupiscence.

Though habitual grace that resides in the innermost recesses of the soul,
seems to have re-instated man in his first condition, and that by virtue of
Baptism or Repentance, he is reconciled with God; yet does he groan still under
the tyranny of concupiscence; This monster makes war upon him after his death,
Concupiscentia tanquam lex peccati cum parvulis nascitur, in baptizatis a reatu
solvitur, ad agonem relinquitur. Aug.
employs the malice of his daughter to ruin him, and endeavoring to re-enter
upon a place where he holds so much intelligence, admits of no truce nor minute
of rest. If among so many rebels that favor the party of sin, Grace did still
depend upon man's liberty, I know not if he could make use of it with profit;
and whether self-love that lives still in his will, would not endeavor to
employ Grace it self to the advantage of this selfish passion. For what can be
hoped for from a creature that more follows the motions of concupiscence, then
the impulses of charity, were there not some commanding Grace that became the
Mistress of his heart, and carrying him to good with as much force as
sweetness, gained him a sure victory over his enemies?

Therefore is it that the Great Saint Augustine, to whom all the secrets of
Grace were known, represents it to us under the name of a Victorious Suavity,
which gently masters the will by its affectionate allurements, leading her so
securely amidst the throng of precipices, that she runs less hazard in the
world, then our first Father did in Paradise: For though he had nothing to fear
but his weakness, experience made him see 'twas enough to destroy him; and that
'twas easy for him to tumble into a misfortune, whence an Angel that was more
vigorous, knew not how to defend himself: But though in the state of sin,
rebellion share the forces of man, though Concupiscence divide his will, he
knows very well that when Grace clears up his understanding, he cannot mistake;
and when it inanimates him, he cannot be worsted.

We must not imagine for all this, that Grace renders man impeccable, nor that
when it carries him out of himself he has lost the power of resisting it; he
is too potent toward his loss; he feels too often that the actual love that
moves him Godward, takes not away that unhappie inclination he has to turn his
back upon him; he hears that cruel enemy in the deepest recesses of his soul,
that murmures even whilst Grace triumphs over his Liberty; he has a sense of
Passions that divide his Will, and hinder Charity from taking a full possession
of that superior faculty; he is convinced, even to his damage, that as a
Needle between two Loadstones, though drawn away by the strongest, turns
notwithstanding toward the weakest; so he, though mastered by Grace, cease
not to be tempted by Concupiscence; and by woeful experience learns, that as
soon as Charity suspends her virtue, and moderates that sweet violence
wherewith she so pleasingly ravisheth the heart, he is presently trail'd on by
the weight of self-love, that bends him toward the Creatures.

I know there are a sort of new Divines that seem to place Concupiscence in man
an Innocent, not exempting him from that intestine war whereof the Saints
complain; who are persuaded that original righteousness did not accord the two
parts that compose man; and that their division contributing to his glory,
ought also to contribute to his merit. But besides that I suspect this Opinion
as maintained by the Pelagians; Haec quae ab impudentibus impudenter laudata
pudenda Concupiscentia, nulla esset nisi homo ante peccasset. Aug.
and S. Augustine has laid it on the ground, as the foundation of their
Heresy; those that defend it are at least obliged to confess, that if
Concupiscence were in man in the state of Innocence, it was not there with
those disorders the Apostle of the Gentiles groaned under; but that original
sin giving it a new vigor, there is requisite a new grace to contest against
it: Otherwise he had done very unmanly to complain of a revolt which was
nothing but an effect of Nature, and which he might easily suppress by his
Will, animated with as much Grace as Jesus Christ refuses not even to his
enemies: And the Church, guided by the holy Spirit, would do amiss to entreat
so often for her childrens deliverance from an insurrection which cannot be
bad, if it were born with man in his Innocence. If they answer, She requests
not that the Faithful be delivered from it because bad, but because dangerous;
by the same reason they must desire that they had neither eyes nor hands,
because both these parts are of sad consequence to sinners. If they say they
pray not for the full ruin of it, but for its diminution; they must confess,
that if what they would pare away be hurtful, it ought not to be in Adam, nor
could now be cured by his grace. For, as S. Augustine says excellently well,
the grace of Adam was the grace of a man sound and free, and the grace of Jesus
Christ of a man a captive and diseased: this produces two effects in his
person; it restores his health, before it give him strength; it breaks his
fetters, before it makes him walk; and suppresseth his disorders, before it
makes him act.

This Truth will be better conceived, if we compare the Liberty of Adam with
the Servitude of Man a sinner; that by the difference of these two states, we
may judge more easily of the difference of their graces. Adam was as Free as
Innocent; nothing resisted his Will in his person; and the Passions having not
as yet shook off the yoke of Reason, troubled not his Rest: he acted with
tranquillity of mind; he found his pleasure in his duty; nor was he sensible
of any internal rebellion impeaching his liberty. Thence it came to pass that
his grace was subject to his Will, that he used it according to his desires and
his occasions, either to obey his Sovereign, to command his Subjects, or to
resist his Enemies. But the sinner fallen from this glorious condition, is the
slave of him that has conquered him; he serves as many Masters as he has
Passions; and he finds to his cost, that to punish his disobedience, all his
subjects rebel against him. The grace of Adam would be useless in this
condition; being not fully free, he could not make use of it; and being the
slave of sin, in whose possession he is, he would employ it rather to his own
ruin, then to his salvation: Grace must set him free, before he can work; must
break his chains, before he can fight; and restore him his liberty, before he
can form one good design. This is it that S. Augustine teaches us in that
Chapter where making the Antithesis of Man a Sinner, and Man an Innocent, he
says, This had a grace great indeed, but much different from ours: For he
lived in the advantages he had received from his Creator, and of his goodness
held that happy condition that exempted him from all our evils: But the
Faithful, to whom this grace appertains that delivers Captives, languish in
misfortunes that make them seek after Liberty: Adam in the midst of the
innocent delights he tasted, had no need of the death of Jesus Christ; but the
Christians cannot be washed from their hereditary or acquired sins, but by the
blood of the Lamb slain for their salvation: Adam stood not in need of that
assistance his children require, when experiencing the revolt of the Flesh
against the Spirit, they complain of the Law of Sin that opposes the Law of
God; and by the mediation of Jesus Christ, beg strength to combat, and ability
to overcome an enemy whose assaults Adam was never sensible of: For he was not
divided in Paradise; but enjoying a profound peace, he saw not his body warring
against his soul, nor one part of himself unjustly lifting up the heel against
the other. Proinde etsi non interim laetiore, nunc verunrate^ potentiore gratia
indigent isti. Aug.
Let us say then with that great Doctor, that the grace of Adam was happier
then ours, and ours more powerful then his; he might, if he would, have
overcome amidst his delights; and we triumph among our sorrows: his grace gave
him a Power to act, ours a Will: his was subject to his Will, ours is her
mistress; and, by a happy occasion, we are the conquerors of Devils, because
the slaves of Jesus Christ.

It seems our Redeemer would be revenged of us, in avenging us of our enemy;
that he disposed all things so, that our victory should depend upon our
overthrow, and our liberty should be grounded upon our servitude; because Grace
tames our Will, to make it victorious over sin; and subjects her to it self, to
give her command over the Passions; and in this humble submission, procures us
those advantages we never had possessed in the Empire of Innocence. For,
whatever arts we use to exalt the happy condition of Adam, we must confess his
grace was weak, because it could not maintain the freedom of his Will; and,
leaving him to himself, suffered his enemy to foil him: But the grace of Jesus
Christ makes us victorious in the midst of our infirmities, assures our
salvation among the many stormings of Temptations, and seizing upon our heart,
makes us triumph over the world.

When I consider the deplorable condition of a sinner, me thinks Jesus Christ
had a mind to humble him by lifting him up; and that he might profit by his
loss, to make him find his greatness in his abasement: For it is indeed to take
man down, to subject him to grace, to deprive him of the disposal of his Will,
and to use him as a slave, who is no longer master of his own person: But it is
also to lift him up, to endow him with a victorious grace, which confirms his
liberty, makes him constant in good, and in despite of all his weaknesses,
gives him so much vigor and strength, that he meets no enemies he does not
vanquish, nor any temptations he does not overcome.

But admit all these reasons did not clearly conclude for the necessity of
Grace, I conceive Predestination would always be a most evident proof: For
seeing it is true that God is immutable in his Decrees, that the designs he
has laid from all Eternity, are not changed in Time, Praedestinare Deum nihil
aliud quicquam est quam in illasua quae falli mutarique non potest praescientia
sua opera. futuradisponere. Aug. de Perse.
nor can all the powers of earth hinder the execution of his will; we must
confess that Predestination being the first of his Decrees, must of necessity
be irrevocable: He himself says it, that he knows all his sheep, that no man
can take them out of his hands, that they cannot be blotted out of the book of
Life, and that all the malice of the devils cannot destroy those he has a
mind to save. If this Maxim be true, we must infallibly conclude that the
salvation of the Elect is not grounded upon their Liberty, but upon Grace; and
that their perseverance in the ways of goodness, depends not absolutely upon
their Free Will, but upon the assistance of Jesus Christ. For if it be true
that there is nothing more changeable then the Will of Man, and that the state
of Innocence set him upon a rock, Must we not confess that Predestination would
be very uncertain, had it no surer foundation? and that the salvation of the
Elect would run a great hazard, did it rely only upon a sufficient grace
depending merely upon their Liberty? Let us confess therefore, with S.
Augustine, that since the Fall of man, there is a grace whose effect is
infallible; that it changes our Will, to convert it; gives us strength to
combat, inspires us with constancy to persevere; and securing us from the
malice of Satan, happily conducts us out of this miserable Banishment, to our
desired Country.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. Different Opinions of the Power of the Christians Grace.
THough Man have very many proofs of his Weakness, yet has he more of his
Ignorance: he knows not that which he sees, and that which he touches: his
Senses are better sighted then his Understanding; and they judge more surely of
their objects, then the Intellect does of his. The Qualities of things cloud
their Essences; every Accident is a veil cast over the eyes of the Soul; and he
undergoes all the troubles in the world, to find the Sun of Truth amidst the
Shadows that cover it: But his Ignorance is never more evident then when he
seeks for the last differences of things; he changes upon all occasions; the
more he goes on, the more he wanders; and finding no tracks that may steer him
in an unknown path, he many times takes Falsehood for Truth. Thence it comes to
pass that we are acquainted with nothing but the Accidents or Proprieties of
things, and that we fall into Error as often as we intend to judge of their
Essences. There is nothing more known to Christians then Grace; a man must be a
Pelagian, to doubt of its virtue: all our prayers are testimonies of its
necessity; and when we entreat of God to enable us to perform what he commands
us to do, we ask Grace ^^thout naming it. In the mean time, Inctinantur ecram
corda ut boc velint, eo scilicet inclinante qui in nobis mirabili modo and
ineffabili operatur ut velit. Aug. de praed. cap. 20.
there is nothing more hid then its Essence: These twelve Ages men have
disputed its power; nor is it yet resolved wherein corsists that virtue that
makes it efficacious. Every one confesses, there are two kinds of Graces in
Christianity: One Habitual, that gives the Christian his supernatural being;
that lifts him up to the participation of the Divine Nature; and making him an
Image of Jesus Christ, makes him Man and God together: The other Actual, which
elevates him in his operations, makes him act heavenwards, and renders his
works holy and acceptable before God: But few know wherein consists the power
of this Grace, what that is, which, without forcing our Liberty, makes it
irresistible in its designs.

The disciples of S. Thomas believe Grace effectual because it is an impulse of
God, raising and determining the Will as often as he moves and applies it.
Primum agens in agendo omnia agentia alia praevenit, perficit and conservat, co
quod ipsum omnibus dat esse, unde dabit perfectiones concomitantes and
sequentes ad ipsum esso. D. Thom.
They ground themselves upon the power of the First cause, which ought to
regulate his state and guide his subjects according to their inclinations, and
according to their desires. Thence it comes to pass, that he inlightens with
the Sun, burns with the Fire, reasons with Man, acts necessarily with necessary
Causes, and freely with free Causes; Thence it comes to pass also, that he is
free in the world, that nothing is done contrary to his directions, and that
applying the creatures in their operations, sees all his designs infallibly
succeed. For these Divines believe not that any thing is to be permitted to
Fortune in the Kingdom of Providence; nor that the knowledge of God is to be
submitted to the capricious fancies of his creatures. Therefore do they put
into his hands the reins of his whole Empire: they will have him give motion to
all his subjects; to apply them in their operations, and without offering them
any violence, execute his will by their inclinations. If he abandons necessary
Causes, they produce Monsters; if free Causes, they commit sins; and when he
guides both of them in order of Nature or of Grace, they are regular in their
motions, and happy in their productions: But being the Principle, the Glory
belongs to him; and the effects they produce ought rather to be ascribed to his
Influence, then to their Virtue. This Predetermination of the creature in a
supernatural order, is called Effectual Grace among the Disciples of Saint
Thomas: and they are so wedded to this opinion, that they believe a man cannot
dissent from it, without renouncing the meaning of Saint Paul, overturning the
order of Nature, robbing God of his Sovereignty, and taking from him the
infallible knowledge of all events that happen in his State: They never think
to weaken the liberty of man by establishing the Providence of God, because
they know his concurrence has no less sweetness then force; and that he
cease not to act winningly, notwithstanding he acts absolutely. They believe
also God no ways injures the creature, if he leave him to his infirmity,
because owing him nothing, he may let him fall when he will; and that it is
mercy and not justice when he vouchsafes to uphold or lift him up. Adjuvat no^
Deus per Doctrinam and revelationem sua^ dum cordis nostri oculos aperit, dum
nobis ne praesentibus occupemur futura demo^strat, dum Diaboli pandit infidias,
dum nos m^liformi and inoffabili dono gratiae caelestis illuminat. Pelag. in
Aug. ^^ 1. de Gra. Christi. ca. 7.


Some other Divines to whom this opinion seems too severe, place the power of
Grace in the consent of the creature; and will have, that God more tender of
our salvation then of his own glory, presents Grace to all men: and that it
depends only upon their liberty to receive or reject it. This assistance has
no more virtue then the law; it shows the evil, but cures it not; it forbids
sin, but gives no strength to avoid it; it clears the understanding, but
changes not the will; it solicits not this, but because it illuminates that;
and as if men had kept all their liberty since their fall, it tries to
dissipate their darkness, without taking the pains to break their fetters. This
Grace thus conceived, is but a weak light, because it leaves all Infidels in
their Errors; and a vain persuasion, because it leaves so many Christians in
their sins: Nevertheless according to their Creed, it is sufficient to save all
men, provided they will; and as if their liberty had not been infeebled at all
by Original sin, they can make use of this Universal Grace, work out their
salvation with it, draw themselves out of the number of the Reprobate, and pass
into that of Elect. It seems this Grace is not much different from that which
Saint Augustine opposed, when he said these words to the Pelagians: If we have
the power to consent, why does the Apostle teach us that it is God that works in
us to will? I know ye will answer, he works in us by his Law: in obeying which,
we make it efficacious; and in resisting, render it useless and unprofitable.
But if all be as you say, you condemn all the Prayers of the Faithful, you
blame the custom of the Church: For seeing it is in our power to consent when
we list, it is to no purpose to pray that we may do it; and since having the
knowledge of good, it is in our own power to perform it, it is in vain that Saint
Paul requested Grace for the Faithful, who were already enlightened. In the
mean time, knowing that it is of God to prepare the will, he adds Prayer to the
Command; having exhorted them to depart from sin, he endeavors to divert them
by his supplications, and to obtain that for them, which he had formerly taught
them.

But as I write not so much to confute the opinion of others, as to establish
my own, I leave every man the freedom to follow his own sense in this
particular; and content my self to make it appear, that Saint Augustine was
never of this judgment concerning Grace. And indeed there are few Divines that
embrace the opinion I am about to deliver; it was stifled in the very Birth as
Monsters are; and though it flatter liberty, making it the Mistress of
salvation, it must be sweetened to give it some credit among the Faithful.

Behold therefore the temperament the new Divines have reduced it to, thereby
to give more to Grace and less to Free Will. Neque tacendu^ est Dlum
pracedenter velle omnes homines salvari; non enim ad puniendum nos plasmavit,
sed ut efficiat nos bonitatis suae participes ut bonus, peccantes autem puniri
vult ut justus. Damas. de fide.
They say then that God is willing to save all men: that this is a design
worthy his goodness, who would not create men to damn them; that in
consideration of the merits of Jesus Christ that are infinite, he offers Grace
to all sinners, which being well husbanded, is able to procure them salvation:
But forasmuch as the weakness of man is great, his inclination to evil
powerful, and his will so free, that no Laws can be imposed upon it; they say
that God, as if he distrusted his forces, or would not incroach upon the
Liberty, accommodates himself to the inclinations of the sinner whom he means
to convert; that he studies his humors, feels the pulse of his affections, and
taking the moments he judges most proper for the execution of his designs,
sets upon him when he scarce knows how to defend himself: For the Graces God
offers, are so fitted to his spirit, so agreeable to his Will, so conformable
to his Temperament, that he accepts on this occasion what he would have refused
in another. Gratia congrna est qua tali tempore and loco datur quo per
scieutiam conditionatam Deus praevidet voluntatem hominis ei consensum
praebituram, quamvis potest pro naturali sua indifferentia dissentire. Suarez.
lib. 3. de Concurs. Less. lib. de Great. Efficaci.
These Divines describe God as a timorous Lover, and the soul of man as a
stately Mistress: God speaks to her by his inspirations, and she gives no
ear; he discovers her his Beauties, and she contemns them; he presents her his
Favors, and she minds them not: Seeing her rebellious to his will, deaf to
his entreaties, as if he could not be obeyed without offering her violence; and
conveying heat into the will, as well as light into the understanding, he has
recourse to Stratagems; he endeavors to surprise her that he cannot overcome;
he wins her heart by her ears, nor triumphs over her liberty, but by her humors
or her inclinations. But certainly Love never made the Almighty lose his
Majesty, but in the Mystery of the Incarnation; when he deals with his
creature, he always keeps his State; his being a Lover, makes him not forget
that he is a Sovereign; and when he intends to deliver a soul from the slavery
of sin, he employs graces so sweet and so strong, that as he no ways wrongs the
liberty of his creature, so neither does he prejudice his absolute Power. He
knows very well that sin gives him a new right over men; that he may refuse
them grace without any injustice; that he saves a Delinquent when he saves a
Saint: and that the merits of his Son being not applied to men but according to
his good pleasure, take not from him the power absolutely to dispose of his
subjects.

To give my judgment therefore of these three opinions; Me thinks the first
more respects the Majesty of God, then the Liberty of Man; prescribes Laws to
him which in truth are not unjust, but seems a little too severe; lifts him not
high enough above the rest of creatures, and though it leave him his liberty,
considers not sufficiently the dignity of his extraction: For it seems God
deals with Men as with the Elements, that he makes scarce any difference
between Angels and Beasts; and that this Sovereign governs so absolutely in his
State, that he much more regards his own glory then the welfare of his
subjects: He determines also free creatures as well as necessary; if he
oppress not their liberty, he takes no pains to gain it; and more solicitous
to make himself obeyed, then loved, he masters the will rather by force then
sweetness. The second passes into another extreme, and seems to be so
careful of the salvation of man, that it neglects the glory of God, makes his
grace a bondage, opens heaven to all the world: makes Mercy sparkle abroad to
the detriment of Justice; ascribes more to liberty then to grace; renders man
insolent since his Fall; will have him as familiar with God since his
rebellion, as during his innocence: Imagines that nature received no blemishes
by sin, and that the will under the thraldom of Concupiscence, is as vigorous
as under the Empire of Original righteousness. The third handles Grace a
little more respectfully then the second; it is me thinks a bold opinion, but
not impudent, it covers self-love under honorable pretenses; it bestows that
upon the Mercy of God, that it takes from his Justice; it intitles not liberty
so absolutely to salvation, but it preserves the rights of Grace; which if it
make not victorious, it makes at least weldisposed; if it reign not over the
will, it does over the inclinations: and if it offers a sufficient grace to all
men, it confesses nevertheless the effect is not produced, but when it agrees
with the constitution or humor of Man. But after all this, it seems to
overturn the order of Predestination: gives more to merits then to grace,
imposes Laws upon its Sovereign, and obliges him when he means to save a
sinner, to consult rather their dispositions then his own will and pleasure.
Let us see what Saint Augustine has most constantly believed concerning this
Subject: and lest we mistake our way, take him for a guide that has so
generously defended its Cause against the Impiety of Heretics.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. Wherein precisely consists the power of Effectual Grace.
THere is no man but may observe that the Loadstone draws iron to it: but there
is no Philosopher can discover wherein this virtue consists. We need but open
our eyes to see how this stone, which may be called one of the miracles of
Nature, lifts up the iron as soon as moved toward it: that it gives a kind of
feeling to this senseless metal, and in despite of its hardness, softens it
into a tenderness of affection: We behold with astonishment, that it leaps
from the Earth to follow that which draws it; that it steals from it self to
embrace it, Quid ferri duritia pugnatius? sed cedit and patitur amores;
trahitur namque a magnete lapi^e domitrix illa rerum omnium materia; ad inane
nescio quid currit, atque ut propius venit assistit teneturque and complexu
haeret. Pli. lib. 36. cap. 16.
and clings so strongly to it, that violence must be used to part them. But
certainly, it is very difficult to comprehend what is that secret virtue that
imprints this power in the Loadstone: The whole Body of Philosophers have
troubled themselves to no purpose to discover it, whatever pains they have
taken; and whatever watchings they have spent in this study, they have not to
this day been able to find out the occult cause of so evident an effect; they
are ignorant whence this sympathy between the Loadstone and the Iron grows, nor
can they render a reason why this stone attracts this metal and not others;
they know not whether this attraction have more of sweetness or of force,
whether it draw the Iron by affecting it, or by forcing it, and whether it
complies with its inclination, or over-bears its weight and obstinacy.

What I have said of the Loadstone, may as truly be verified of Grace: Its
power is so public, and its attempts so common, that there is no body but
knows and admires them; It triumphs daily over the liberty of sinners, lifts
these wretches from the Earth, enlightens the blind, softens the obdurate,
converts the obstinate, and subdues these rebels: But though all the Faithful
acknowledge a virtue whose effects they resent, they know not precisely wherein
it consists; they are divided in their opinions: and though they all take S.
Augustine for their Master, they express themselves in such different terms,
that though taught in the same School, it seems they have not all learnt the
same Lesson.

Inasmuch as this incomparable Doctor is pleased in all his Works to break
forth in commendations of Grace, consacring all his Labors to the glory of
that which drew him out of his sin; he sometimes admires its Force, and seems
to place all its virtue in its invincible puissance: he will have it the
mistress of hearts, strongly overruling the Will of sinners; and like a
Soverain, more respecting her own Majesty, then the Inclination of her
subjects: Sometimes he changes his language; and meditating rather to preserve
the Liberty of Man, then the Power of Grace, he seems to place its virtue in
its compliance, he represents it to us as a sweet persuasion; flattering man,
to gain him; setting upon him where he is weakest, to overcome him; studying
his inclinations, to make him in love; entering into his meaning, to accommodate
it to that of its own; and like Lovers, who become complacent only to become
absolute, stoops to the liberty of the sinner, to triumph over it; nor is his
slave, but to become his mistress.

Sometimes he walks between these two Extremes; and joining force with
sweetness, he speaks of Grace as of a victorious complacency: he describes her
as a Queen displaying her Beauty as well as her Power, to keep her subjects in
obedience: and knowing that Nature has given her as many Allurements as she
has done Forces, unites both together, to tame the rebels of her State: She
imitates the conduct of Providence, whereof she is an emanation; and mingling
Sweetness with Authority, executes her designs, leading men whither she
pleases. These three manners whereby S. Augustine expresses himself in his
Writings, have produced three Opinions in the Church, which acknowledge him for
Master, boasting to be of his mind, and to stand to his Doctrine.

The first is that which is ascribed to S. Thomas; which delivering it self in
terms very significant, but somewhat barbarous, places the power of Grace in
Predetermination. Those that hold this Opinion, will have God always preserve
his Sovereignty when he deals with the Creature, Voluntas Dei est prima and
summa omnium causa. Aug. lib. 3. de Trin.
applying him as he will; and using rather compulsion then fair means,
discovers a desire rather to be obeyed then loved. He acts so powerfully, that
all his designs are accomplished: he touches the Will of Man with so much
energie, that he masters it; and makes that blind faculty so sensible of his
Authority, that acknowledging him for her lawful Sovereign that seizes her,
she loses all desire of resistance, and accounts it her happiness to yield
obedience. These Divines borrow the terms of S. Augustine to explain
themselves; and taking advantage of whatever he has said in behalf of the
power of Grace, say that she is invincible in her designs; that she finds no
opposition in her subjects; that she manageth the hearts of men as she lists,
bending their Wills without constraining them; that she acts so absolutely,
that she changes their resolutions, and of rebels makes them loyal and
obedient subjects. They stick to all those expressions S. Augustine makes use
of to set an estimate upon the power of Grace; and they are so afraid lest
gentle usage bring some prejudice to the Sovereignty of God, that they seem to
have neglected the liberty of Man.

Nothing more detains them in these manners of speech, then a belief they have
that no operation of God, though never so strong, does ever oppress the liberty
of the Creature: In a word, though he act so powerfully, he still preserves the
interest of his workmanship; he never deprives him of those perfections he once
endowed him with; and as he necessarily moves necessary causes, so he also
freely moves free causes: whatever impression he makes upon them, he never
storms them; and as there is nothing more natural to the Creature then to obey
his Creator, so is there nothing less violent. Cujuscunque rci natura Dei
voluntas. Aug. de civ. Dei.
This made S. Augustine utter that learned and gallant speech, That the will of
God was the nature of every thing, That the Fire was as much disposed to cool
as to burn; the Sea to contain it self, as to overflow; the Earth to move, as
to stand fixed upon its center, when they received order from their Sovereign.
The same may be said some way proportionably of Man; as his inclinations are
not more natural to him, then these qualities to the Elements, God may change
them without doing him any violence, and ravish his heart without interesting
his liberty. Si ergo cum voluerit reges in terra Deus constituere, magis habet
in potestate voluntates hominum quam ipsi suas; quis alius facit ut salubris
sit correptio, and fiat in correpti cord correctio, ut caelesti constituatur
in regno? Aug.
Thus we see that S. Augustine says so often, That Grace works in us to
will, That it gains our consent, overcomes our standing out, and, by a
wonderful effect of its power, makes us hate those things we loved, and love
those things we hated; That, finally, its impulses are so strong, that when
they are received into our heart, we must infallibly obey; and yielding to his
omnipotence that drew us out of nothing, we voluntarily pass from Death to
Life, from Rebellion to Obedience. Though this Opinion ascribe so much to the
Grace of Jesus Christ, it takes from it the principal advantage; and speaking
nothing of its Sweetness, the better to establish its power, greatly
diminishes the esteem due unto it: For Men being passionate of their Liberty,
cannot relish that which seems to weaken it; the shadow of bondage checks
them; and this absolute Empire of the Creator over his Creature, inspires them
rather with Rebellion then Obedience.

Therefore some other, willing to preserve Man's Liberty, have lessened the
power of Grace: they place its virtue in its accommodation; and rendering it
rather compliant then victorious, make it not reign so much by power as by
stratagem: They will have Jesus Christ, when he undertakes the conversion of a
sinner, choose the most opportune moments, consult the inclinations of his
enemy, search among his treasures of Graces those that are most suitable to this
rebels humor; and, that he may not force his Will fit himself to his condition
and temper: They are afraid lest giving too much authority to Grace, they ruin
the Liberty of Man; and, to avoid this misfortune, they reconcile them so well
together, that it is hard to judge which of the two is mistress.

S. Augustine furnishes them with words and reasons for their defense; his
first Writings are much in their favor; and before he was to cope with the
Pelagians, said very much in their behalf. For as this great Doctor has
combated all the Heretics of his time, has buckled with the Manichees and the
Donatists, he has changed his Batteries according as he changed his Enemies,
and seems to employ other Principles against the Manichees then against the
Pelagians. When he deals with the first, he attributes much to the liberty of
man; he makes it not only the source of sin, but of good works; and to hear
him speak against these Heretics, Grace seems not so much the handmaid, as the
mistress of the Will. Before he was advanced to a Bishopric, he had opinions
which afterward he retracted; and being as humble as he was learned, he knew
that he had attributed too much to the Will, and too little to Grace: But also
we must confess that he writ some things in those times that he never recanted;
and though he spoke afterward more stoutly, he seems to have left his
disciples the liberty of choosing in his Writings those opinions that seem most
reasonable: For this great man would never tyrannize over the spirits, never
would he make himself Head of a party; and excepting those things he believed
matter of Faith, he never forced any man to follow his Judgment.

Though therefore he quitted this opinion, he condemned it not; and those that
embrace it may boast themselves the disciples of this great Doctor: besides
that in his last Works he uses some terms that seem to favor it: For he makes
as if he placed the victory of Grace in its aptness, acknowledging it
victorious as far as it is agreeable, and agreeable as far as suitable to the
sinner: He compares it sometimes to those Potions that are bitter to a sick
person, because their mouths are out of taste, and which must be dulcorated by
some artisice, that they may be taken: He confesses, writing against Faustus,
that the sweet elapses of Grace consist in this agreement, which makes it
entertained by the sinner; and that, to produce its effect, it must have some
resemblance with the inclination of him that it would master. Procul dubio,
says he, suavitatem ipsa congruentia facit.

But as in this Opinion Liberty seems still the mistress of Grace, and that she
reserves a right to use it at pleasure: There is a Third Opinion made up of the
two former, taking and leaving somewhat of both. From the first it takes that
Force it acknowledges in Grace, and rejects that imperious power that converts
the Will in whatever disposition it finds her: For those that fully dived into
the meaning of S. Augustine, have observed that the Grace of Jesus Christ,
though always effectual, is not always victorious; and though it never fail to
produce some holy desires or good motions in the soul of a sinner, yet it
surmounts not always the illigitimate pleasure that holds her captive; so that
its manner of acting differs very much from Physical predetermination, which
ever tames the will, notwithstanding all the resistance she can make. Finally,
this third opinion takes and leaves something of the second; it takes that
sweetness that charms the will of man, and confesses all the force of grace to
consist in that suavity that accompanies it: but it rejects that lazy
compliance that subjects grace to liberty, making man in some sort the master
of his salvation; it cannot allow that our consent should more depend upon our
selves then upon grace: and that acting in the state of sin, as if we had acted
in the state of innocence, we should rather dispose of grace, then grace of us.

To explain therefore the power of this Divine influence according to the most
common opinion and most constant with S. Augustine; it consists me thinks in a
certain sweet elapse, shedding it self into the will, charming it so agreeably,
that it is transported by it, doing nothing but by the motion of this suavity,
which becomes infallibly victorious, surmounting the delectation that
captivated the will. If it produce not always this last effect, it fails not to
produce some others. For if it disingage not the sinners soul, it breathes into
him some desire of his liberty, imprints some motions into him that make him
sigh; if it breaks not his chains, it eases the weight of them, and enables
him to form some good designs, or conceive some good wishes. But whatever man
does, it is grace still that makes him do it; it is more the principle of his
action then himself: and seeing it produces in him according to the language
of the great Apostle, both to will and to do, he is obliged to say with the
same Apostle, that he owes all that he is, and all that he does to Grace, and
that the glory he expects, is rather the reward of grace, then of his merits.

From all this Discourse it is easy to judge that this last opinion comprehends
the two other; that it unites force with sweetness in grace; that it may
prevail upon man without wiolence: It respects the Majesty of God, because it
gives him the absolute disposal of his creature: it spares the liberty of man,
Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus bonum; certum est
nos facere cum facimus, sed ille facit ut faciamus praebendo vires
efficacissimas voluntati. Aug.
because it subjects it only to pleasure, which is never more welcome then when
forced: and gives it a share in the work of salvation, because it confesses
with Saint Augustine, that he acts with the grace that makes him act: Ageris ut
agas, and been agis si a bono agaris

There remains one difficulty which I am content to propound without resolving:
To wit, whether Grace always mingle force with sweetness to convert a sinner,
or to guide a just person; for it seems there are some souls that God deals
roughly with, which taste no inward sweetness at all: and destitute of all
delectation, act only by the strength and faithfulness of their grace. They are
continually plunged in grief and sorrow; they may bespeak God as Job did in the
midst of his afflictions, Mutatus es mihi in crudelem; and they may boast with
the Apostle, that all their strength consists in their weakness: Tunc potens
sum cum infirmor. I know very well that Saint Augustine never separates force
from sweetness in grace, and that where ever he describes it victorious, he
describes it agreeable. But may we not say also, that this great Doctor has
spoken of Grace, as he had experience of it himself; and being disingaged from
sinful pleasures by innocent ones, believed all graces sweet: and that the
particular conduct God had observed toward his soul, was his general
proceeding with all others. In a word, Mystical Divines and Spiritual Guides
seem to acknowledge ways wherein God separates light from force, and force from
sweetness, though in both these he fail not to promote souls in piety. But
because Saint Augustine has given no notice of them in his works, let us hold
our selves to his conceptions, and say, that if there are graces where light
and force are more sensible then sweetness, there are none where sweetness is
not mixed with force and light, and the sweetness so much more effectual, that
being more intimate, it is less known to the understanding and more remote from
sense.

The Sixth DISCOURSE. That the names Saint Augustine gives Christian Grace, bear
witness it is effectual.
MAn is so free that he cannot endure any thing that checks his liberty; he is
more afraid of servitude, then of death; he had rather die a Freeman then live
a Slave; and if liberty were not to be found in Heaven, I question whether he
could find in his heart to be happy: It Is the love he has to this advantage,
which serves him for excuse of his greatest crimes. If he repine to live in a
Monarchy, it is because he conceives the absolute power of Sovereigns
inconsistent with the liberty of their subjects: If he cannot submit to Laws,
it is because he is persuaded they entrench upon his will; and that they will
fetter a creature, over whom God will not reign by compulsion; If finally,
Christians cannot suffer effectual grace; if the name be distasteful or
suspected; and if instead thereof they introduce sufficient grace, it is because
they believe it reduces man to a troublesome bondage, excluding merit, and
prejudicing liberty: But because there are unjust pannick fears, and evils that
more hurt the imagination then the body; I design this Discourse to discover
the unreasonableness of this apprehension, and to let those that are in love
with liberty see that it is not incompatible with effectual grace, because this
according to Saint Augustine, is a victorious pleasure charming our soul; a
triumphant love, predominant over our will, and a powerful persuasion
captivating our understanding.

Forasmuch as God has made man free, never taking that from him which once he
has bestowed upon him; he could not have employed a more gracious, nor more
effectual way to gain him, then pleasure: All creatures are taken with it, and
the Poet had reason to say, There is nothing that is not sweetly mastered by
pleasure. The Ambitious seek not so much the reputation in honors, as the
pleasure, because they contemn them as soon as they cease to be agreeable. The
Covetous is not so much provoked with profit, as pleasure in the desire of
wealth, because he spends many times prodigally to procure other things that
more delight him; Nay, the Lascivious wanton, is not so much in love with
beauty as with pleasure, because he places his affection sometimes upon
objects that have no appearance of beauty, and many times forsakes a handsome
woman to court a deformed one; Thus pleasure is a powerful charm, that masters
all hearts, plunders liberties, and makes slaves that never complain of their
bondage, because they are voluntary. Lovers that seek the secret of purchasing
affection, study nothing but complacency, being assured they shall produce love
in that heart where they have begot pleasure. Flatterers never insinuate into
the minds of great men, but by rendering themselves acceptable; nor do their
false Commendations steal in at the ears, but because pleasure takes up the
place of truth. The very Devils, though our mortal enemies seduce us not, but
because they please us; and had they not found out the art of mixing pleasure
with sin, all their temptations would be fruitless. But the will of man, though
never so free, has such an inclination toward pleasure, that did she never so
strongly barracado her self, she could not possibly resist it: she holds out
against truth, because she is blind and sees not the beauties it is adorned
with; she secures her self against violence, because she is free, and naturally
opposes whatever seems to incroach upon her liberty; she does not acquiesce in
reason, because she is deaf; nor hears any discourse but such as charms the
understanding by convincing it; But pleasure has allurements which she can no
ways withstand: she trembles when ever it sets upon her, she is afraid to lose
her liberty in his presence; and knowing the power it has over her
inclinations, she calls in sorrow to her succor to guard her against this
pleasing enemy.

If it be true, that pleasure reigns absolutely over the will, we need not
think it strange that grace which is nothing else but a victorious suavity,
has such advantage over her; for besides, that this Heavenly influence
surpasses all the delights in the world that charm us, having more allurements
then glory and beauty that makes so many Lovers and Martyrs, it insinuates much
deeper into the will then whatever ravisheth us mortals. Tunc enim bonum
concupisci incipit cum dulcescere incipit: ergo benedictio dulcedinis est
gratia Dei qua fit in nobis ut nos delectet and cupiamus, hoc est amemus quod
praecipit nobis. Aug.
Being in the hands of Jesus Christ, whom nothing can resist, it glides into
the very Center of our heart, making impressions there that are never more
strong then when they are most agreeable; thence it cashieres all pleasures
that have unjustly usurpt upon us, and knowing all the weaknesses of the place
it sets upon, we need not wonder if she make her self mistress. Other
pleasures enter not into the will, but at the gate of the senses; they have
lost half their strength before they can make their approach; and her
inclinations being unknown to them, they many times cause aversion intending to
procure love: But grace wooes the heart without the mediation of the senses,
and more powerful then pleasures that act not upon all the faculties of the
soul, carries light into the understanding, faithfulness into the memory, and
pleasure into the will; so that we need not wonder if the sinner suffer himself
to be overcome by a Divine quality that sheds delight into all the powers and
faculties of the soul.

That which Grace effects thus agreeably by pleasure, it brings to pass more
powerfully by Love: For according to the judgment of S. Augustine, Amor
imperiu babet super omnes animae vires, propter hoc quod ejus objectum est
bonum. Aristo. and Di. Tho.
and when God means to convert a sinner, his sole design is to make him his
Lover. Love is the Master of all hearts; There is no impossibility this passion
undertakes not; Miracles are his sports, and all the prodigies Antiquity has
teemed with, are nothing but the effects of this Sovereign. Scripture is never
more eloquent then when it intends to express the force thereof: nothing
satisfies it in this design; all words seem too weak to express its
conceptions, and finding no comparisons that answer the dignity of the subject,
it descends to the Tombs, where having considered the Trophies of death, is
forced to confess that his power equals not that of Love: it passes to the
very Center of the Earth, observes the unrelenting hardness of Hell, and
comparing the pains of the damned with the anxiety of lovers, leaves us in
doubt whether Hell or Love be more pitiless.

But not to aggravate his power by such strange comparisons, let it suffice to
judge of him by his effects: Though he be the son of the Will, yet is he the
Master; he disposes so absolutely of his Mother, that she has no motions but
what her Son inspires her with: she undertakes nothing but by his orders; it is
the weight that sets her a going; the Loadstone that attracts her; the King
that governs her; and she so absolutely depends upon his power, that nothing
but another love can dis-engage her: she is so fierce or so free, that neither
violence nor fear can tame her; she laughs at tortures, preserves her liberty
in the midst of fetters, and many times torments make her but more wilful:
Only Love mollifies her hardness, his charms gain upon her what sorrow cannot,
and experience teaches us, there is no surer Command then that which is
founded upon Love.

In the mean time Vanity, which is almost the inseparable companion of
Greatness, persuades Kings that it is a debasement to seek the love of their
subjects; and, seduced by this false Maxim, they endeavor to make themselves
feared, not being able to make themselves beloved. But God, who has formed the
heart of man, and knows how they may be vanquished without being forced, owes
all his Conquests to his Love; he never appears more absolute, then when he
tames a rebellious Will, when of an Enemy he makes a Lover, and, changing his
inclinations, sweetly compels him to fall in love with him. Forinsecus terret
per Legem, intrinsecus delectat per Amorem. Aug.
His Power sparkles in his Corrections; he astonisheth sinners, when he loosens
the mountains from their foundations, when he makes the earth shake under their
feet, the thunder rumble over their heads, and threatens the world with an
universal Deluge, or a general Conflagration: But all these menaces convert not
the Guilty; the fear that terrifies them, reduces them not to their duty;
their heart remains criminal, when their mouths and their hands be innocent;
and if God inspire not his love into them, he punishes indeed their offense,
but changes not their Will: This prodigious Metamorphosis is reserved for his
love; it is his charity that must triumph over rebels; nor is there any thing,
but his Grace, that by its imperious sweetness can oblige a sinner to love him.

I am not afraid to injure man's Liberty in using terms so significant; because,
supposing Grace nothing but Love, it can do no violence to the Will: for, of
all the things in the world, there is none freer then Love: A man cannot
complain that he is forced, when nothing but charms of affection are employed
to gain him: and if there are some Lovers that have blamed the rigor of their
mistresses, there is none that have found fault with their love: If it be an
Evil, it is a voluntary one; it hurts none but those that willingly embrace it;
and of so many punishments that torment us, there is none more innocent,
because none more free: Crowns may be snatched from Sovereigns, Confidence may
be taken from Philosophers, Orators may be convinced, any man may lose his
life; but whatever stratagems are made use of, whatever violence men practice,
a Lover cannot be forced, nor his love extorted from him. Seeing then Grace is
nothing but Charity, and Charity nothing but a holy Love; we must not apprehend
violence, nor imagine that the assaults of this divine quality can at all
injure our Liberty, because it does not disengage us from evil, but by obliging
us to love God.

If Grace cannot force our Will because it is a victorious love, it ought less
to constrain it; because, according to the language of S. Augustine, it is a
pleasant persuasion: For this great man considering that he was to deal with
Free Will on one side, and the Power of Grace on the other; that he was to
maintain the Empire of God, and the Liberty of Man; he has always expressed
himself so happily, that he never prejudiced either: and as indeed Grace never
forces Man, but persuades him, it holds something of Eloquence or of Reason
that triumphs over Liberty without compelling it. Rhetoric is an Art that
teaches us to persuade Truth; Orators are agreeable Sovereigns that bear rule
over the minds of their Auditors, that calm their Passions, change their
Designs, Quid enim inter Pisistratum and Periclem interfuit, nisi quod ille
armatus, hic sine armis tyrannidem gess^^ Cicer.
and gently force their Wills: Therefore was it unhandsomely done of that
Ancient to compare Pericles with Pisistratus, because this Tyrant domineered
but over men's Bodies, that Orator exercised a dominion over their Souls: the
one made use of Violence, the other employed nothing but Sweetness: the one
procured the hatred of his Subjects, the other the love of his Auditors: For no
man could complain of Pericles, because he used nothing but Eloquence to
persuade; his Command was founded upon Reason, his chief Force consisted in
Truth, he subjected no Understandings but by clearing them, nor changed any
men's Wills but in taking them by their interests or their inclinations.

In a word, Eloquence may boast her self a Sovereign that reigns without arms,
subdues people by her word, convinces Philosophers by her reasons, and
subjects Monarchs by her power: She protects the Innocent, comforts the
Distressed, condemns or absolves the Guilty; and as she animates the Advocates
or the Judges, produces different miracles in their souls. Whether she inchant
the Ears by the harmonious cadencies of her Periods, whether she excite love
and hatred by her gestures, her principal design is to master the Liberty of
Man. She sets not upon the Understanding, but to gain the Will; she appears
complacent, that she may be persuasive; nor does she require the attention or
her auditors, but that she may get their consent: It Is true, never any man
complains of her violence, because she is sweet; and he that has changed his
mind at the hearing of an Orator, never accused him of Tyranny. It Is certainly
upon this ground that S. Augustine calls Grace a powerful persuasion; because,
imitating Eloquence, it clears our Spirits, calms our Passions, and gains our
Consent: It has this advantage over Eloquence, that it has no need of our
Ears to win our Hearts; it transmits it self, by it self, into the inmost
recesses of the soul; finds out Reason in her Throne, without employing the
Senses; carries Light into the Understanding, and kindles Love in the Will.
Thus she persuades what she will to the obstinate, subdues rebels without arms,
makes her Subjects will what she desires they should; and when she displays all
her forces, she works the conversion of a sinner in a moment. This certainly
was the power Jesus Christ made use of, when he laid Saint Paul flat at his
feet, when he converted that Persecutor into an Apostle, changed his heart and
his tongue, and made him that breathed nothing but murder, say, Lord, what will thou have me to do? He lost not his Liberty, for having lost his Fury; he
changed not his Nature, for having changed his Judgment; nor can we say that
the persuasion that gained his consent, was less free or more violent for being
so sudden. Grace knows how to be obeyed, without making us slaves; she can
persuade without compelling, and, more powerful then Eloquence, is able to make
us love what we hated before. That great Orator that guided the Roman
Commonwealth with his Tongue, and made his opinion so dexterously pass into
the soul of his Auditors: that gallant man, I say, has wrought miracles by his
Eloquence, which we have much ado to allow the grace of Jesus Christ to effect.
He could boast that he altered the resolution of Caesar, defending the cause of
Ligarius; that he shook the papers out of the hands, and the hatred out of the
heart of that Conqueror; that he made him recall the sentence he had already
pronounced in his soul; that he overcame him by his Reasons, that fubdued all
by his Arms; and trampled upon the pride of a Tyrant that had triumphed over
the Liberty of Rome. In the mean time, we have much ado to believe that Grace
can work miracles; we weaken its Virtue, to preserve our own Free Will: we are
not content that Jesus Christ should be as powerful as an Orator: and when we
hear of these victorious Graces, and of these invincible persuasions, we
imagine as if there were a design to oppress the public Liberty: Let us
ascribe that to Grace, which we grant to Eloquence: let us confess that the Son
of God knows how to imprint Truth in our spirit, and Love in our heart, to
persuade us infallibly: let us acknowledge that he is not to seek by what
stratagems to gain our inclinations; that his Grace, more intimate then
Concupiscence, is able to become the mistress of our Wills; and whatever
command she exercises over us, she never destroys our Liberty, because she
has no other design then to enfranchise it out of servitude.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. That we may judge of the power of Grace over the
Christian, by that of Concupiscence over the Sinner.
FOrasmuch as the things of the world never appear with greater luster then
when they are set in opposition against their contraries, I conceive in this
Discourse I shall not do amiss to confront Concupiscence with Grace, and
discover the excellency of the Remedy, by the greatness of the Disease: For
it is very true, that a man cannot comprehend the dominion of Grace, if he
conceive not rightly of the tyranny of Concupiscence over the Will. These two
Sovereigns have so much resemblance in their contrariety, that they make use of
the same arms, and employ the same means to execute their designs: they
subject men by ways altogether alike, and deal with policy and power, fair
means and foul, to make themselves mistresses. For, if we believe S. Augustine,
a man no less skilled in the state of Sin then of Grace, he will acquaint us
that Concupiscence is the law of the sinner, acting impetuously over his Will,
Concupiscentia lex peccati est; sequentes duxit nos, and postca renitentes
traxi^ nos. Aug. in Psalm. 64.
applying it in all his actions, so that he undertakes nothing but by the
orders of this proud and domineering usurper: she has gained such a power over
his Liberty, that he acts only by her impulses: if he speak, she moves his
tongue; if he looks about, she opent his eyes; if he act, she manageth his
hands; and so absolutely commands all that belongs unto him, that Concupiscence
seems to inform and quicken him. Though she exercise so absolute a power over
his person, she so well tempers sweetness with force, that he never complains
of his bondage: he loves the Tyrant that devours him, he loses his liberty
with pleasure, he finds content in his vassalage, and, what is more
unconceiveable, he makes haste to a precipice, and embraces death with
satisfaction, whenever this cruel Sovereign commands him. It Is in effect
Concupiscence that obliges the Covetous to pass the Seas, to descend into the
depths, and to surmount all dangers that accompany the search of riches: It Is
she that engages the Ambitious in such desperate designs, where death is
always mixed with glory, and where a man must resolve to kill or be killed, to
purchase reputation: It Is she that imbarks the lascivious in their infamous
pursuits, where shame is the inseparable attendant of pleasure, where a man
must lose his own liberty to attain that of another, and become a slave, that
he may be a master. In the mean time, if we ask all these Martyrs of
Concupiscence, we shall see by their answers, there is not one of them that
groans under his irons, that is troubled for the loss of his honor or liberty,
nor makes the least attempt to break those chains that fetter him: Had Tyrants
but found this artifice, they would reign more absolutely then Kings; and
making Love succeed Hatred, they would be the delight of their Subjects: But
nothing but Concupiscence has discovered this Secret, which according
Sweetness with Violence, knows how to make her self beloved and obeyed by
sinners.

Nevertheless we must confess that Grace is as absolute over Christians; and
taking pattern from the proceeding of Concupiscence, reigns over them with as
much power as love. For, to express in a few words the Sovereign power of
Grace, we must say with S. Augustine, that it is she that makes us act, that
masters our Undestanding, possesses our Will, Facit utvelimus bonum gratia,
facit ut faciamus, operatu^ velle and perficere, praebet vires efficacissimas
voluntati. Aug. de Gra. and Lib. arb. c. 16.
and is the principle of all our good works: She acts with the Just, as
Concupiscence does with Sinners; she is the mistress of their Actions; and, if
we believe the great Apostle, it is Grace that works in us to will and to do.
For, as the Sinner loses not his Liberty for being the slave of Concupiscence;
cease not to act by himself, though guided by another; nor does this external
principle, because the first mover that sets him awork, exempt him from sin: so
the Believer is not constrained for being subject to Grace; he cease not to
operate, though moved by the holy Spirit; and, for having another principle of
his actions then his Will, fails not to merit eternal life. But as
Concupiscence is imperious, carrying the heart by her assaults, prescribing
Laws which he inviolably keeps; Grace produces the same effects in the
Faithful; her orders are religiously observed; she makes those act she
enlivens, and, seizing upon their Wills, causes them exactly to put in
execution whatever she commands.

S. Augustine will explain these Truths to us better then another: Let us make
up this Discourse with his Reasons, Deus est qui operatur in nobis and velle
and oprari: non sicut isti sentiunt tantummodo Scientiam revelando, ut
novetimus quod faciamus; sed etiam inspirando charitatem, ut ea quae discenso
novimus, etiam diligendo faciamus. Aug.
and respectfully hear the learned Doctor of the Church. Grace is not only a
Light that clears the Understanding, as Faith or Doctrine does; her Charity is
accompanied with Force; she produces two effects at the same time: For having
taught us the good, she gives us power to perform it; and he that knows it, and
does it not, cannot boast that he has received it of Grace, but from the Law:
Therefore is it that our Lord Jesus Christ says in S. John, that he that is
taught of his Father, fails not to come unto him. Omnis qui audivit a Patre,
and didicit, venit ad me. Whence S. Augustine concludes, that he that is
instructed in this School, always goes to Jesus Christ; and he that goes not,
never had the Father for his Master. For Grace warms the Will, at the same time
it enlightens the Understanding; it conveys light and heat both together; and
working two miracles at one moment, fortifies our Weakness, and warms our
Coldness. Her manner of acting is much more excellent then that of Precept, or
of the Law: For these two Mistresses strike only the ears or the eyes; they
inform not our judgment but by the mediation of our Senses; and though they
enlighten the Understanding, they change not the Will: But Grace works by an
occult power in the hearts of men, producing there not only true
illuminations, but good and constant resolutions. And because the Pelagians
always confound Doctrine with Grace, to weaken her virtue, S. Augustine answers
them, that, would they christen her with that name, they must represent a
wonderful Doctrine that God sheds abroad internally in the soul with an
ineffable sweetness, which taught not only Truth, but infused Charity into its
disciples.

He more strongly establishes this Maxim, in explaining that passage where S.
Paul tells us God works in us to will and to do: we will, says this great
Doctor; for we are not liveless trunks, or senseless rocks; but God produces in
us this will: we act; for we ought not to be unprofitable; but God produces in
us this action, according to his good pleasure: we are bound to say it, and to
believe it; it is piety to promote it, that we may with all humility confess
that all we do is rather of God then of our selves. He says the same thing
again, speaking of Perseverance, and persuades all the Faithful that their
salvation ought to be founded upon their humility, because God has endued them
with Graces whereby they are made acquainted with his power and their own
weakness: For he will not have the Saints glorify themselves for their
perseverance in good out of their own abilities, but from the assistance of his
Grace; neither has he given them a succor equal to that he bestowed upon the
first man, whereby he might have persevered if he would; because foreseeing
that they would not persevere, had they not from him the power and the will, he
has given them both out of his pure mercy.

Indeed their will is so effectually warmed by the holy Spirit, that they are
able to do the good, because they will, and they will it, because God has
inspired them with a will to it: For did God abandon them to themselves in this
infirmity, which serves as a remedy against their pride, and did he give them
no other assistance but that by which Adam might have persevered if he would,
they would stoop to the assaults of temptations in the frailty of their flesh;
nor would they ever persevere, because the weakness of their will would not
suffer them to will the good at all, or to will it so strongly as to do it.
Therefore God desiring to succor their misery, has given them a grace that so
moves this rational faculty, that she never resists it; that in her weakness
she may be vigorous enough to surmount all the adversities of life. But because
these manners of speeches might persuade the ignorant, that a grace that acts
so energetically would destroy liberty, Saint Augustine instructs us, that her
force consists in her sweetness, that she works upon the will only by the
pleasure she there produces; nor that she is victorious, but because she is
agreeable.

This is the second truth that remains to be proved, to satisfy my promise,
and to manifest the last resemblance between Concupiscence and Charity: Though
the former be sometimes so violent that she hardly leaves the sinner any
liberty to resist, she never employs force to extort his consent: she is not of
the humor of those tyrants, which make use of nothing but torments to reduce
their subjects to their designs, and knowing that Empires are preserved by the
same means they are acquired, endeavor to keep that by cruelty they have
gotten by violence: But she corrupts the will by pleasure, proposing nothing but
what is delightful; she dexterously mixeth smiles with frowns, profit with
loss, glory with shame, and so artificially disguiseth the objects she
presents sinners with, that they complain not even in the midst of their
torments: It Is she that sweetens the laborious travels of Conquerors, charms
the discontents of the Covetous, comforts the Lascivious in the tortures that
accompany their wantonness: she gilds the chains of al lthe slaves that follow
her, makes them acceptable, when she cannot make them glorious, sowing pleasure
where she cannot sow profit nor reputation: Thence it comes to pass that her
Empire is so firmly established among finners, that to destroy it, grace must
change their wills, subduing the vanity of their criminal pleasures by the
truth of her innocent delights.

For she walks in the steps of her enemy; she imitates her she intends to
ruin, and benefiting by her wiles, she never sets upon the will of a sinner,
but she is seconded with pleasure; her chief Stratagem is to render virtue
agreeable, to take off that austerity that suffers her not to be accosted, and
to lay all her Stoicall morosity upon the face of sin. This is it that Saint
Augustine declares by those words, where he exhorts a sinner to be converted:
Confess your selves says he in the presence of? Almighty God, and you shall
obtain from his bounty, that the virtue which seemed so stern, will seem sweet
and easy: When he has wrought this first miracle, you shall find that facil
which now you apprehend as impossible; you shall have as much satisfaction in
justice as formerly you had in iniquity; Sobriety will relish better then
drunkenness, you will discern more charms in Alms then in Robbery, and taste a
far richer pleasure in giving your own, then in taking that of your
neighbor. Prayer will outvie the Pastimes of the Theater; Psalms and Hymns
will entertain you better then amorous Sonnets, or the Aires of the Court: you
will go to Church more cheerfully then ever you went to a Play, and reflecting
upon the change of your heart, you will acknowledge Grace the cause thereof;
and that the barren ground of your soul bare no fruits, but because the Lord
has been pleased to water it with the perfumes of his Divine Influences: For
it is an undoubted Maxim, that Good though never so excellent, begins not to be
desired, till it begin to be pleasurable; Though it have more charms then
beauty, more luster then glory, more invitations then profit: if it convey not
pleasure into the will, it knows not how to beget love; Pleasure is the
Lodestone that draws all hearts that are capable of love; it is the poison that
distills into the heart of all sinners, and the only answer they return those
that condemn them: They oppose nothing but pleasure against all reproaches; and
when truth it self accuses them, they have but one reason wherewith to defend
themselves; they cannot forsooth leave that they take so much delight in.
Indeed they would never sin, did not pleasure solicit them; nor would the Devil
ever master their will, did he not make use of pleasure to gain their consent:
He employs the same devices against them, he did against our first Father; he
makes use of the flesh to gain the spirit, as he dealt with the woman to seduce
the man; he tries by suggestion to produce pleasure in his heart, that pleasure
may quicken sin: He knows that this Commander is too free to be compelled, but
he knows also that he is too amorous to hold out, if he call not in another to
his aid whereby he may be defended.

This also is the way God deals with souls to gain them; he uses not his
power, but his sweetness; he employs not his threats, but his promises; and
when he intends to vanquish a creature, he makes not use of pain, but of
pleasure; he combats sensual delights with spiritual ones; he opposes the
charms of virtue against the allurements of sin; he inspires thoughts so sweet
and so powerful, that they blot out all those of the Earth: and knowing very
well that the Will always complies with the more predominant delectation that
solicits her; he is content to be liked, that he may be victorious: For if
Concupiscence contest with Grace about the conquest of a heart, she that
promises the highest pleasure shall prevail; and though never so free, the
Helen will be overcome by the temptation if it appear more agreeable then the
Law of God. Therefore when Jesus Christ undertakes our Conversion, he infuses
into our souls innocent pleasures, which are more prevalent then those of sin;
he unmasks the beauties of virtue, he charms us with her allurements, and
ravisheth our hearts by holy delights that make his Grace victorious.

Then is it that we resist the temptations of Satan, that we contemn the
revolts of the flesh, and raised above our selves are amazed that such weak
enemies have been able heretofore to worst us: Then is it that the Martyrs
run to the Faggot, that enchaunted with this pleasure that overcomes their
spirit, they triumph over Devils and Executioners, trample upon flames and
wild Beasts, and turn the cruelty of tyrants into wonder and admiration. Must
not the pleasure that charms them be exceeding powerful, when they tumble upon
hot burning coals as upon a bed of roses? When they swallow down melted lead,
as most delicious liquours? Receive wounds a favors? Prefer Prisons before
Palaces, Gibbets before Thrones, and Crowns of Thorns before those of Diamonds?
Is not this that victorious pleasure that transports maids out of the dwellings
of their parents, burying them alive in cloisters, and changing their
inclinations, obliges them to quit gold and silk, to put on hair and
sackcloth? Is it not this innocent pleasure that makes them neglect the
advantages of their birth, and persuading them that virtue is the beauty of the
soul, obliges them to despise the charming comeliness of the face? Is it not
finally this Grace as imperious as agreeable, that animates the Religious
against themselves, that arms their hands to revenge the Son of God, whom they
have offended, and making a just indignation the parent of a holy love, obliges
them to persecute themselves? Let us conclude then from all this Discourse,
that Grace cannot force man, because it is so sweet; and that the most
prevalent never destroys our liberty, because its power consists in gentleness;
But withal let us confess, that she is victorious in all her designs, that she
finds no resistance in the most obstinate sinners, because she charms their
wills by pleasures, which seem the first fruits of those they shall reap in
glory, and which make the miserable taste one part of that felicity here, the
blessed feed upon in Heaven.

The Eighth DISCOURSE. That Effectual Grace destroys not Sufficient Grace.
IF it be a truth that Nature has some secrets that cannot be discovered, that
she conceals her virtue when she means to produce a wonder, and steals out of
the sight of her dearest lovers, when she deals in mysteries; we need not think
it strange that God the Author of Nature reveals not his designs to all the
world, and that there are some so profound, that his most intimate friends are
not acquainted with. The Economy of man's salvation is so involved, that all
those that go about to explain it are in danger to mistake; all foundations
their reason relies upon in this matter, are so infirm, that having well
discoursed, they are obliged to confess their ignorance, and adore the wisdom
of God that has reserved to himself the disposal of his creatures. Neither
indeed do I pretend to examine his designs, nor to penetrate his intentions,
but to search out the meaning of Saint Augustine, and to see in this Discourse
whether he believed the order established in the state of Innocence to be so
ruined, that there remained no footstep of it in the world; and whether he
judged Effectual Grace so absolutely necessary, that he held Grace sufficient
merited by Jesus Christ to be altogether useless.

Though the sin of Adam has corrupted the Nature of man, though all men are
born Delinquents, their inclinations irregular, and the faculties of their
souls weakened; yet must we confess with Saint Augustine, that this disorder
cannot deface the Characters God has stamped upon his workmanship. Reason
serves for a Law to Insidels, and teaches them what the Law of Moses taught
the Israelites: all her lights are not put out, and in the midst of that
darkness wherein infidelity has plunged her, Nulla est anima quamvis perversa
quae tamen ratiocinari potest in cujus conscientia non loquatur Deus: quis enim
legem naturale^ scripsit in cordibus hominum nisi Deus? Aug.
she retains some knowledge of her Creator; The passions that trouble her and
the senses that seduce her, cannot yet persuade her that the body ought to be
her Sovereign: neither is there any sinner so brutish, but knows that of two
parts that compose him, the noblest ought to be the most absolute.
Notwithstanding all the injustice which swarms amongst men, it cannot blot out
of their souls this maxim, that Nature has engraven there: What thou would
not have done to thy self, do not to another; and had neither Lawgivers nor
Philosophers forbidden Murders and Adulteries, there was a Judge within them
had made an Edict against both these iniquities: So that we may say in their
very infidelity they had the first Principles of Religion and Morality; and if
they discerned not in God the Trinity of Persons, they knew at least the Unity
of his Essence.

If all these advantages be the relics of Original righteousness, and the
splinters of that great shipwreck where Nature was wholly lost in one man; If
the seeds of virtues be the steps of the innocence in men, and if Conscience
that punishes Criminals, be an expression of Divine Justice, I am easily
persuaded to believe, that there remains some assistance for Infidels that
sollicites them to the practice of virtue, and gives them some thoughts of
their salvation in the midst of Paganism it self. Qui est salvator omnium
hominum, maxim fideliu^. 1 Timothy 4.
For if the Son of God died for all men, and has merited some favors for them
which Nature since her prevarication could not hope for without him; I doubt
not but the Eternal Father inspires them with some good motions to satisfy
the desires of his only Son, and that those glorious actions they have
performed, and which according to the judgment of Saint Augustine deserve some
commendations, are the price of the blood of that dying sacrifice: If they have
not faith, they had perhaps some glimmerings, which as the dawning had
something of the brightness of the day, something of the obscurity of the
night: if they wanted charity, they have had some supernatural love which was
not strong enough to defend them from self-love; and as fear though servile, is
the gift of God, this love though interessed, may be the effect of Grace; They
acted not always according to the motions of Concupiscence; Their captived will
had some release according to the assistance they received from Heaven; Their
reason illuminated with a divine light, and their will seconded with a
supernatural force, resisted some sins, and made them more innocent, or less
guilty then others. Saint Augustine acknoweldgeth their actions profitable to
the Commonwealth, that their virtue though imperfect, carried luster with it,
and though no way comparable to that of true believers, had notwithstanding
beauty enough to condemn one day bad Christians.

But admit the virtue of Infidels be false, that hinders not but they may have
some assistance from Heaven to discern good from evil, and to take from them
that excuse wherewith the pride of man shelters it self having sinned through
ignorance. This was the motive that induced God to give the Law to the Jews,
Nulli enim hominum ablatu^ est scire utiliter quaerere: Non tibi deput atur a^
culpam quod invitus ignorant, se^ quod negligis quaerere quod ignoras. Aug.
and it is the same that prevailed with him to indulge the Heathen some light,
which in my opinion cannot render them more culpable, if it did not withal
render them more capable to shake hands with sin. This is it perhaps that Saint
Augustine means in the nineteenth Chapter of his third Book of Free Will, where
he grants that God has deprived no body of the means to seek after truth: and
that the power of finding it is common to all men. If their mind may be
enlightened with some heavenly light, their will may be touched with some regret
for their offenses, they may have good thoughts and good motions which they
reject; their being in Infidelity puts them not yet in the state of
Reprobation: God makes some difference between these delinquents and the
damned; he deals not with them as with the devils: and if it be true that he
suspends the torments of these, I can easily be persuaded that he withholds the
sins of those, and that they have graces that disengage their Will for some
moments from the tyranny of Concupiscence. They act not always under the
conduct of this enemy; and though they are his slaves, yet they have a
Sovereign, who, never losing his rights, can defend them when he please.

S. Thomas, the truest Interpreter, and most knowing disciple of S. Augustine,
was of the same opinion, neither intended to dissent from his Master: He judged
right with him, that whatever is done among Infidels, and among Christians, by
the instigation of Concupiscence, is sin: but he did not believe that Mercy had
utterly forsaken the Heathen, and that she imparts no Grace unto them, which,
though leaving them in error, disengageth them many times from sin. If there
be supernatural assistances that prepare us for Faith, and make us conceive
some good thoughts, before we be made Believers, there may also be some, which,
not drawing the Heathen out of their Infidelity, may preserve them from the
committing of some offenses, and make them perform some actions which relate to
the Supreme Good imperfectly known, and imperfectly loved.

When God heretofore converted the Heathen, Concilium Tridentinum pronunciat
Anathem a in eos qui dicunt opera omnia quae ante justificationem quacunque
ratione facta sint vera esse peccata. Sess. 6. Can. 7.
he gave them not the light of Faith all at once; this virtue was ushered in by
some good dispositions; there were some moments wherein they were Infidels and
sinned not, wherein they acted by the conduct of Grace, and not by that of
Charity; and when following the inspirations of heaven, they were not actually
in sin, though habitually they still remained it. There is some Grace that is
not absolutely inconsistent with Infidelity, because there is some love that is
not altogether incompatible with sin; and as every day sinners feel
supernatural motions that lift them up toward God, and oblige them to do good
works, we may say also that Infidels receive some extraordinary supply that
rectifies their intentions, Ex quo apparet habere quosdam in ipso ingenio
divinumquodda^ naturaliter munus intelligentiae quo moveantur ad fidem si
congrua suis mentibus vel audiant verba, vel figna conspiciant. Aug. de bono
Perse. cap. 14.
and makes them act for a supernatural and divine end.

And certainly, they are not destitute of all Graces, because S. Augugustine
observes some in them, which he acknowledges not in the Jews: For, explaining
that famous and difficult passage where Jesus Christ assures us that those of
Tire and Sidon had certainly repented, had they seen the miracles he did in
Judea; this great Doctor avows, that the Tyrians were not so blind nor so
hardened as the Jews; that they had one advantage, which holding from Nature and
Grace, prepared them for Faith; A naturally-divine gift of understanding,
whereby they are moved to Faith: that they had believed the miracles of the Son
of God, had they had the honor to have seen them, Quoniam credidissent si
qualia viderunt isti, signa vidissent; and that this Grace had produced its
effect, had the circumstance whereon it depended intervened: But though it gave
them a power of being converted, 'twas as useless to them, as Christ's miracles
were to the Jews, because neither of them were of the number of the
predestined, Sed nec illis profuit quod credere poterant, quia praedestinati
non erant.

The same Doctor is not far from this opinion, when writing against Julian, he
says to that Heretic, that they were more equitable then he, who ascribed the
virtues of the Heathen to the assistance of heaven, and not to their own
Free Will; and who granted them some grace in their Infidelity, which they
acknowledged after their conversion. Perhaps the impulse of S. Dennis at the
death of the Son of God, was of this kind, That the Oracle he pronounced was
inspired into him from heaven, and that he felt the effects of the Cross before
he knew the virtue thereof. It Is to no purpose to object that S. Augustine
slights this opinion, having judged it not so bad as that of the Pelagians; and
that he condemns it, Sed absit ut sit in aliquo vera virtus nisi fuerit justus;
absit autem ut sit justus vere nisi vivat ex fide: justus enim ex. fide vivit.
when he protests that there is no solid virtue, where there is not a lively
Faith, and true Justice: For, if we take those words in the strictest
acception, we must confess that sinners whose Faith is dead, can do no good
works; and that all those that are not just, can practice no virtue: Sinners
are as arrogant as Infidels; they contemn the humility of the Son, which they
do not imitate; they are the slaves of the devil, whose motions they follow;
and that remainder of Faith, that languisheth in their soul, seems to serve
only to render them more culpable then the Heathen. When therefore S.
Augustine says that the virtue of these is not true, because not quickened by
Faith, he speaks certainly of a perfect virtue agreeable to God, profitable to
him that practifeth it, and which may merit eternal life for him. Now there is
no man but sees that the virtue of Heathens and Sinners has not these
conditions; and though it proceed from a good Principle, and respect a lawful
End, may yet be styled deficient, because, according to the Maxim of
Aristotle, Bonum ex integra Causa, malum ex quolibet defectu. Aristo.
an action is bad when it labors under any defect. After all this
Argumentation, I cannot but confess that the graces of Infidels are very rare;
and if they remain subject to their liberty, they will not deliver them from
their errors: But they are more common among Christians, and act more
powerfully over their Wills, because there they find less resistance.

This Proposition is evident according to the principles of S. Augustine,
because in a thousand places of his Writings he will have Faith teach us to
pray, and that Supplication obtain that succor that is necessary for the
subduing of Concupiscence. I know very well that Prayer supposes Grace, that a
man must be instructed in the School of the holy Ghost, to speak to the Eternal
Father; but it seems this grace is offered to all the Faithful, serving us for
a defense in our infirmity; and that as in all times our enemies may assault
us, we may in all times also defend our: selves. For if the Grace of Prayer
were not easy and common, it never had been ordained of God for the obtaining
of all others; and we should have some reason to complain of him that has
obliged us to have recourse to that Asylum, if it were not more in out disposal
then those things we entreat by means thereof. This remedy is as common as it
is easy; it is a favor which God refuses not but to some notorious offenders:
a man must often have rejected it, to be deprived of its assistance; and it
seems that the soul that is inanimated with habitual Grace, has some right and
power to flee to Prayer, when dejected with sorrow, or assaulted by temptation.

The hardening of Sinners is another proof of the Truth I endeavor to promote:
For since, according to the doctrine of S. Augustine, this punishment is
nothing else but the withdrawing of Grace, Obdurat Deus non impertiendo
gratiam; quibus enim non impertitur, nec digni sunt, nec merentur. Aug.
we must needs confess that those who are not yet hardened, have some grace
gently bearing them on to piety, which sollicites their consent, and, not using
an absolute power, as effectual Grace does, separates them withal from those
God has utterly given over, and from those God conducts to heaven by more sure
ways, and more powerful motions.

Thence it comes to pass that S. Augustine preaching to his people, and letting
them see the great danger in despising those good inspirations that come from
heaven, said, that sinners sometimes could not be converted, though they had a
will to it, because they would not do it when they had the power. Impius, says
this great Doctor, dum vult non potest, quia dum potuit noluit. I know some
Divines take that wicked one for Adam, who making no use of his grace whereby
he had power to act, lost it for himself and for all his posterity; and say
that it is he S. Augustine speaks of in that passage: But whoever shall take
good notice of his intention, will clearly perceive that he ascends not so high
as Paradise, that he complains not of the first man only, but of all his
children, who neglect the power they have to do good, and justly are deprived
of it, for not having made use thereof. Otherwise sinners would lay all their
faults upon the person of Adam, and esteeming themselves more unfortunate then
sinful, would blame S. Augustine for accusing them to have abused a power they
never had.

But nothing better confirms sufficient grace, then our refusing to obey it.
Experience teaches us, there are Divine sweetnesses which are not always
victorious: Grace triumphs not continually, when it combats sin: S. Augustine
often found that his ill habits were more prevalent then the invitations of
Grace; and that his Will, like a Needle between two Loadstones, quitted the
more feeble and innocent pleasure, to close with the stronger and more
criminal: Had Grace been effectual, she had not received this shameful repulse;
her first attempts had gained this sinner; and S. Augustine, after he had
tasted the innocent delights of holy love, would not have longed to drink of
the muddy waters of Voluptuousness. But were all their designs of Grace
followed with their effects, did this Conqueress of Hearts fight no battles
that were not accompanied with victories; the Saints, whose confessions are as
true as they are humble, would never accuse themselves for resisting her
motions, and being untrue to her inspirations. For they complain not only of
this habitual opposition which is never lost till they are received into glory,
and which still subsists in us, even then when Grace has gotten the mastery;
but they complain of an actual opposition which cannot agree with effectual
Grace: they acknowledge their resisting the holy Ghost, that their soul,
possessed with self-love, disputes with the love of God, and, resenting their
weakness, conjure heaven to redouble its batteries, and to make use of some
more powerful grace, to bring their rebellious Wills in subjection.

S. Augustine nor his Interpreters dissent from this opinion: for they confess
that there are ineffectual Graces which produce indeed some effect in the
sinner, but convert him not, and cannot be rightly styled victorious, because
they surmount not unlawful and criminal pleasure, which corrupt the Will; so
that we may say, This Grace has not done all that it pretended to do, since
fighting against her enemy, she was not able to overcome him: For though it be
usually answered, that this Grace is effectual, because it always produces its
effect, and that it is felt by the sinner in whose soul she begets a pleasure
that tickles him; but is not fully prevalent, because she cannot perfect his
conversion, nor disengage him from sin. Me thinks a man may reply, from the
principles of S. Augustine, that this Grace is not efficacious, because not
victorious; that she rights and is beaten; that she carries not the advantage
thorowout, which she pretended over her enemy; and that we cannot imagine that
having set upon him, her design was not to subdue him. It Is easy also to
prove that this Grace is sufficient, because it makes war upon sin, endeavors
his expulsion, and would certainly be accounted rash or indiscreet, had she
undertaken a design beyond her power: Moreover, every one knows, that if the
sinner had not fortified Concupiscence by his bad habits, this Grace had been
able to convert him, and by its innocent pleasure outvie that criminal
sensuality he finds in his iniquity, because he has a mind to take up his
dwelling in it.

To all this I add the testimony of S. Augustine, which ought to be so much
the less suspected, because taken from two places where he seems more strongly
to establish the necessity of effectual Grace: For all the world confesses
that this great Doctor never expressed himself more clearly then in the
Eleventh Chapter of his Book of Correction and of Grace: There it is that he
distinguishes the grace of Adam from that of Jesus Christ, that he calls the
first a grace of Possibility, and the other a grace of effect: It Is there that
he teaches that the former was sufficient for man an innocent; that the second
is necessary for man a sinner; and that in the disorders and infirmities he
daily experienceth, it would be impossible for him to continue any long time
victorious, if he had not some more powerful assistance then that of Adam. In
the mean time, when he speaks of the Grace of Possibility, he professes that
it is not lost with Innocence, that there remains one like it merited by Jesus
Christ; that if God refuse it to some, it is out of justice; if he bestow it
upon others, it is from his Goodness; and if it were in some sort due to
Innocent man, it is not at all due to man a Criminal; because that Grace which
was indulged the just in the Paradise of Eden, is not now given to sinners in
the Paradise of the Church. He says the same thing in the twenty sixth Chapter
of the Book of Nature and Grace: Non solum supernus medicus sanat vulnera ut
illa non sint, sed ut de caetero recte ambulare possimus, quod quidem etiam
sani non nisi illo adjuvante poteri^us. Aug.
For comparing the sinner with a man sick, a justified person with one that is
whole, he determines that the former has need of Grace that may cure him, the
second of grace that may support him; and as the soundest eye cannot see unless
disposed by light, the justest man cannot live if he be not assisted by Grace.
This Comparison makes those that are acquainted with the Principles of S.
Augustine judge that man perfectly justified stands not in need of a stronger
Grace then man an innocent; because, his Will being fully possessed by Charity,
it is enough that he be endued with assistance that supports him, without any
more powerful one to transport and master him.

For the clearing of this answer, we must remember that Grace in the state of
Innocence upheld man, because he was weak; and in the state of sin cured him,
because he was diseased. For as the Eye when sound, needs nothing but light to
see: but when sore, wants some Collyrium to heal it, and prepare it for sight;
So Innocent man needed but one Grace to enlighten him, but sinful man needs a
Grace that may cure him. Saint Augustine supposing this comparison says, that
Grace cures a sick man, when it converts a sinner: that being an Eye Salve and
a Light, it is withal a succor and a remedy; But he adds, when the sinner is
made whole and perfectly justified, he has no more need, as the Eye that is
sound, but of one Grace, which having more of Light then of Collyrium,
preserves him in the state he is entered into by his Conversion, and treats him
more like an Innocent then a Criminal.

Fairly to reconcile the two parties that contest about this subject, let us
say that one and the same Grace may bear two different names: That it is
sufficient, because the will may resist it; neither does it always produce the
same effects in man a sinner, as in man an Innocent: Let us say thai it is
Effectual, because never unprofitable, always prevailing by some advantage
over our liberty, that it not only clears the understanding, but warms the
heart; and being not in vain, as that Sufficient Grace which never does
nothing, nor Omnipotent, neither as that Effecutall Grace that always does what
it will: it is of a middle temper between both, and may justly bear the name of
Sufficient and Effectual. We must nevertheless acknowledge, that this last
begins and ends the work of our salvation, that it disengageth our soul from
the slavery of Satan, breaks the fetters of those that lie under the tyranny of
sin, raises up the just, when they fall foulely, and putting the last Seal to
their Predestination, obtains for them perseverance, without which they can
neither conquer upon Earth, nor triumph in Heaven.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. Answers to some Objections that are made against
Effectual Grace.
INnocence and Truth have this misfortune, that they are often assaulted; but
they have this advantage, they still return victorious: The former triumphs
over Calumny, the second over Falsehood; The former owes a piece of her beauty
to slanderers that would oppress her; The later owes much of her luster to
Heretics that would obscure her. This Maxim is clearly seen in the business
of Grace, which never seems more transparent then by doubts, nor better
established then by difficulties that oppose it. Indeed all the Objections that
have been made against her power, have served only to support her: and as all
her combats have been the midwives of her victories, all the writings of her
adversaries have erected her so many Trophies. Therefore I should stain her
glory, did I not rehearse the principal reasons humane Philosophy has made use
of to destroy her: that their weakness may heighten her force, and the vanity
of their attempts occasion one part of her triumph.

The strongest Engine has been planted against her, is the Interest of
Liberty, which it seems cannot be preserved with the Necessity attributed to
Grace: For if she be the mistress of the Will, if she always gain her consent,
if she take away her indifferency, and suffer her not to follow her bad
inclinations; How can she be free in this Necessity. This Objection is of no
force, Libertas arbitrii in admittend peccati, and abstinen^i a peccato,
possibilitate consistit, ait Julia. lib. 1. operis imper.
because we have not yet rightly conceived the true Idea of Liberty, and know
not wherein its essence consists. Some confound Voluntary with Free, and
believe that whatever we do voluntarily we do freely, though otherwise we be in
some sort necessitated to do it. These certainly are not persuaded that
Indifferency is essential to Liberty; but on the contrary, they imagine that as
Necessity is a mark of a Will fixed and determined, Indifferency is the
argument of a Will doubtful and unresolved. Seneca, who was as jealous of his
Liberty as any other Philosopher, was of opinion that Man was never more free
in Good, then when he was so strongly fastened to it, that nothing could
separate him. We shall better conceive of his meaning, if we well apprehend
the difficulty he would resolve. He propounds an Objection which has much
resemblance with those which are started against Grace; and demands if the
Stars, which he supposed inanimated, could oblige us by their Light and
Influence, because, being necessitated to give us both, it seems they could do
no otherwise, and therefore we were not beholding to them. See the Answer he
returns to these Philosophers: It Is a great argument of a firm Will, not to be
able to change; and we are not to imagine that a man will not a thing, when he
wills it so strongly that it is not in his power not to will it at all: For who
is so unadvised as to deny that the Will is free, when she is no longer in
danger to quit her resolution to embrace a contrary! nay, who ought not rather
to judge that she is never so free, as when her resolution is so firm, that it
becomes eternal? Indeed, if we believe he wills a thing who may not will it:
Must we not believe that he wills it much more, when he wills it so powerfully,
that he is past all danger of not willing it?

But he could not better resolve this Doubt, then when opposing Constraint
against Necessity, he says, The later may be found with Liberty; and if we
have no obligation to a man that does us a courtesy because he was forced to
it, we have notwithstanding to him that does it because he cannot do otherwise,
and has imposed this necessity upon himself, with which he cannot possibly
dispense. This opinion has its Reasons to back it; and, though it seem
somewhat singular, has notwithstanding Philosophers for its Protectors, whose
judgment it is that the Will is never more free then when it is less
indifferent: For if Liberty, say they, be nothing but a fixation of the Will,
we must acknowledge that she is never more free then when, by many indifferent
acts, she is so united to her object, that she cannot possibly undo her self.
Otherwise perfect Love would deprive us of Liberty; the use of that power would
destroy it; and it would follow, that to have a long time acted freely, we
should cease to be free. They confess that Indifferency, which they look upon
as a weakness of Liberty, is lessened by the power of Love; and the more
strongly a man affects a thing, the less indifferency has he to quit it. But
they believe you shall never persuade a Lover that the loss of his Indifferency
is the loss of his Liberty; that the more his Passion increases, the more his
worth diminishes; and, for being more constant, he is less acceptable to her
he loves.

There are some Divines of the opinion of these Philosophers; who, finding no
Indifferency in Jesus Christ, nor in the Blessed, cannot imagine it inseparable
from Liberty. For Jesus Christ was free, because he merited the reconciliation
of men with his Father; he was free, because he satisfied for their sins; and
all the hope of their salvation is founded as well upon the Liberty as upon the
Dignity of his actions: Etiamsi esset liberu^ arbitrium Christi determinatum ad
unum numero, sicut ad diligendum Deum quod non facere non potest; tamen ex hoc
non amittit libertatem aut rationem laudis sive meriti^nam respectu amoris, est
sempiterna and libera electio. D. Thom.
In the mean time, he had no Indifference in respect of Good and Evil; the will
of his Father determined his without constraining it; he died necessarily and
freely; and seeing his sentence noted in the thought of his Father, he
submitted to it by an obedience, which, not being indifferent, ceased not
therefore to be perfectly free. Finally, they cannot be persuaded that the
Saints have lost their Liberty in the enjoyment of Glory; for having lost their
Indifferency: They cannot believe that the Blessed are slaves, that their love
is not free because necessary, and that the firmness of their condition cancels
the perfection of their Liberty. They add further, that no man shall persuade
them that Grace, which is Glory begun, deprives us of Liberty, when it deprives
us of Indifferency; not that it reduces us to the condition of Slaves, because
it brings us near to that of the Blessed.

But as all agree not upon the same Principles; Other Divines, leaning upon
Reason and Scripture, will have Indifference inseparable from Liberty in this
world; that men may always will Good and Evil, and that they are never so
strongly determined to the one, but they may quit it to embrace the other. They
judge that Grace does not so fix the Will upon Good, that it takes away her
Indifferency, but that there remains some inclination or some capacity toward
Evil; so that even when she is determined by Grace, she has still in the
center of her Being a certain Indifferency, making her capable to change her
mind, and to depart from the Supreme Good that possesses her. According to
this Principle, we must say, that as Grace, transporting us, leaves us a power
to resist; so also determining us, an Indifferency; That as we may hold out, so
may we change if we will; and consequently, there is no moment wherein our Will
is not always Indifferent.

By this it is easy to judge that the Council of Trent opposes not this
Opinion, Siquis dixerit Liberum arbitrium a Deo motum non posse dissentire si
velit, se^velut inanime quoddam nihil omnino agere, ^nathema sit. Sess. 6. Can.
4.
when it pronounces an Anathema against those that say that Free Will, being
moved by Grace, cannot resist it when it will; because, whatever advantage we
put upon Grace, we acknowledge she never takes away the power of resisting of
God; confessing she leaves us Concupiscence, which holds our Will under her
Tyranny: For there are no Saints who at the very instant they yield obedience
to Grace, prove not internally a secret opposition to her motions; who groan
not to see themselves divided by self-love, and who sigh not with Saint Paul,
in that they feel in the recesses of their soul an irregular inclination that
combats that of Grace. This domestic sedition makes them long for Glory which
has this advantage over Grace that, destroying all the remainders of sin, and
confirming their will in Good, it lifts them to a condition which suffers them
no longer to contradict the pleasures of the Almighty. But in expectation of
this happy hour, they confess, with as much confusion of face as grief of
heart, that though they will not resist him that draws them, they can
nevertheless do it; because Grace has not so strongly rooted them in good, but
they may forsake it, should the mercy of God give them over to their own
infirmity.

It Is then easy enough to comprehend, that Grace, though effectual, takes not
away from the greatest Saints the power to resist Jesus Christ: But it is very
hard to conceive how their complaints are true, and how they can with reason
accuse themselves for having been unfaithful to him: For the accusations of
Saints ought to be sincere; humility must not make them renounce Truth, nor, to
avoid Pride, engage in a Lie: These are two extremes equally dangerous, which
all those that are led by the holy Spirit, ought carefully to avoid. In the
mean time, they accuse themselves daily before Men and Angels, that they resist
Grace, that they abuse his favors, and frustrate his designs: This sin is
constantly the first Article of their Confession; they look upon it as the
source of all the rest; and these great men, that are better acquainted with
the motions of Grace then the learned Divines, never speak thereof without
regret for having rejected them.

I profess this Objection seems one of the strongest can be formed against
Effectual Grace, because I have taken it for a proof of Grace Sufficient; and
withal, it seems to clash against the Principles of S. Augustine: for if Grace
always produces her effect, how can we resist it? if she make her self
mistress of our Will, how can she meet with rebellion there? and if she manage
that faculty with as much force as dexterity, how can we oppose her designs, or
stop the conquests of her that S. Augustine so many times calls victorious? I
know some Doctors dispatch this difficulty by an Answer that admits of no
Reply, and say, that when the Saints complain of their infidelity toward
Grace, their meaning is to speak of that which touches our Senses, or
enlightens our Understandings: and being so well instructed in the School of S.
Augustine, they are not ignorant that the true Grace of Jesus Christ infallibly
produces its effect. But this Answer never satisfied me; and I must
acknowledge the language of the Saints seems too strong to be expressed by so
weak a grace. They speak of their resistance with so much grief, that we may
judge by their complaints, that it is of the grace of Jesus Christ, which they
have abused, that they intend to speak. Some others believe it is not an actual
resistance that they accuse themselves of, because that is incompatible with
effectual grace; but of an habitual resistance that combats the design of
Grace, though it hinders not its effect. These seem better grounded then the
former, because it is true that the greatest Saint in the world has always an
opposition against Grace, as long as there is one degree of self-love; and is
contrary to Jesus Christ, as long as he is conformable in any thing to the
first Adam. The inordinate intentions which insensibly fasten him to the things
of the world, the revolt of the Passions that trouble the repose of his mind,
and Concupiscence that weakens Charity, are so many enemies heaving at Grace,
and retarding the accomplishment of her designs: But for all this we must
confess that this Answer resolves not fully the whole difficulty of the
Objection: for besides that this resistance, to speak properly, is not a sin,
because it is purely habitual, nor renders the Saints more culpable then
Concupiscence; we know very well that it impedes not the effect of Grace; and
that when God intends to make himself master of the Will, he can as well tame
bad Habits as bad Inclinations.

Therefore have I thought it necessary to add, That there are secret
oppositions against Grace, that are unknown to us; That the Will is not so
fully possessed by Charity, but Concupiscence shares with her; That there is no
inconvenience that she should be inanimated at the same time with two contrary
loves, though one be victorious over the other; seeing S. Augustine has so
often confessed, that his heart being divided between two affections, he willed
at the same time two things utterly opposite. Or we must say that Grace, though
efficacious in the beginning, languisheth in the progress; that when the motion
that carried the Will grows weak, Concupiscence awakes, and attempts a victory
when she finds least resistance. Thus Grace is worsted in her retreat;
self-love takes courage when the love of God gives ground; and this Grace that
was victorious in the onset, becomes, as all things in the world, faint and
drooping toward the end. If this Answer crosses the principles of S.
Augustine, I disavow it; and if it resolve not the difficulty propounded, I
entreat those that shall read this Work to consider, that Grace is not less
wondersul then Nature; and if the virtue of the Loadstone has left so many
Philosophers at a loss, we need not wonder if the power of Grace put the
Divines in a confusion.

A Prosecution of the same DISCOURSE; Wherein some other Objections against
Effectual Grace are answered.
Man's Understanding, since the Fall, is of the same condition as the Earth:
This is fruitful only in thorns, and bears nothing but briars, if it be not
tilled by the labor of the husbandman; and that is fertitle only in errors,
and is delivered of nothing but doubts, which rather fight against Truth then
defend it: His Ingeny serves him for no other end, but to raise difficulties;
his light is always mixed with darkness; and, as if he were of the nature of
Spiders, that distill flowers into poison, he changes truth into errors, and
extracts nothing from the fairest Maxims of Religion, but doubts and
suspicions. There is nothing more certain in Christianity, then that Grace is
the Principle of our Salvation; that she supports our Will, and gives that
faculty strength to stand out against Concupiscence. In the mean time, this
Truth is the mother of Errors; our understanding has drawn more darkness
thence then light, and the doctrine of Saint Augustine that has ruined the
Pelagians, has produced more scruples then resolutions amongst Divines: We
cannot speak of the dominion of Grace, but we are troubled to secure the
liberty of man; We are well content God should be the Master, because we dare
not dispute his Sovereignty; Non aliud intelligetis arbitrium laudabiliter
liberum nisi quod fuerit Dei Gratia liheratum. Aug.
but we are loath man should be his slave, as if we doubted of his Justice, or
questioned his Mercy; whatever depends not upon our will, casts us into a
sealousie; if Grace be not in subjection to Free Will, we cannot be quiet: The
example of Adam, who was foiled notwithstanding his Sufficient Grace, cannot
cure us of this apprehension, and the violent desire we have to be absolute in
all things, makes us seek for our safety in our Independency. The Objections
that are made against the Doctrine of Saint Augustine, are proofs of this
passion, and the number is so great, that one Discourse being not large enough
to resolve them, we must employ this supplement to the same purpose.

One of the strongest and most remarkable, is, that Baptism is a second Birth,
where the Christian being regenerated, seems to have received a new Nature. For
in that happy moment wherein his sins are remitted, he receives Habitual Grace,
which uniting him to Jesus Christ as to his Head, sets him free from the
slavery of Satan, and entitles him to the felicity of Angels. Forasmuch as this
Grace is a second nature, she has her faculties whereby she works: Faith is
her Light, Hope her Strength, Charity her Love, and these three virtues are
supernatural habits that elevate her understanding and her will. As God
refuses not his assistance to his creature to act with, pleads no dispensation
for himself from those Laws he has prescribed; nay, is helpful to his very
enemies, that he may not be wanting to his Word; It seems that in the order of
Grace, he owes the same faithfulness to Christians, that he is bound to assist
them in all their actions: and out of an obligation that no way injures his
Greatness, because worthy his Goodness he ought in some sort to concur with the
faithful in all their operations; Gratia redditur pro gratia cum Christiano
propter Christi merita id quod petit conceditur. Bernard.
For seeing they have the honor to be the Members of his Son, seeing they are
quickened with his Spirit, and bear a glorious Character, separating them from
all other creatures, why will he not at every moment indulge them a Grace
necessary for their condition, and as it were due to the dignity of their
extraction? I conceive this objection has its full weight, and I have set it
forth in all the colors, that may render it reasonable; Let us see whether
Truth will furnish us with Arms to batter it, and whether the doctrine of Saint
Augustine will warrant the Son of God from injustice when he refuses his Grace
to the Faithful.

To back our Answer, we must suppose that the order of Nature, and that of
Grace, are very different: in the first order God seems to be in some sort
responsible to his creature; he never dispenses with himself but by miracle:
when he refuses his aid to a sinner, makes the hand wither that is about to
commit a Parricide, or ties the tongue that was going to utter a blasphemy;
every one looks upon these effects as Prodigies: But he owes nothing to his
creature in the second order; he entered not into it but by Grace, nor does he
persevere in it, but by Mercy; In raising him to this state, he is not tied to
any rules: what he has once given, obliges him not to continue; and when he
receives a sinner into his Church, it is with conditions, which no ways
prejudice his Sovereignty. Inasmuch as he shows favor to whom he will, we can
plead no prescription against his Goodness; he may every moment take away that
succor he has bestowed, and he is so absolute in the order of Grace, that
when he deserts the just themselves, they have no more right to complain then
the guilty: If they look upon themselves in Adam, they are all sinners; the
sentence of their Condemnation preceded their Birth, Vnde constat magnam esse
gratiam quod plurimi liberantur, and quid sibi deberetur in iis qui non
liberantur agnoscunt, ut qui gloriantur, non in suis meritis, quae paria
videntur esse in damnatis, sed in Domino glorientur. Aug.
and when they were drawn out of the mass of perdition to be united to Jesus
Christ, it is but for a time only, if they be not written in the Book of Life in
Eternal Characters.

This Answer is taken out of the pure Doctrine of Saint Augustine, it is founded
upon his principles, and he that makes a difficulty to receive it, will not be
a Disciple of that great Master: But because it seems too severe to those that
are not instructed in his School, who consider not sufficiently the absolute
power Divine Justice has reserved to it self over the reprobate, let us add
here this temperament, and say, that Christians have some right to Grace whilst
they are united to Jesus Christ, and that they may obtain it by Prayer, when
they find too much difficulty in good, or too much engagement in evil.

But this Answer starts a new Objection, and seems to combat the power of Grace
in laboring to establish the facility of Prayer; For if by the mediation of
this virtue we can obtain every thing, our salvation is in our own hands, and
we may purchase Grace by Supplication. I acknowledge this Objection grounded
not only upon the Principles of Saint Augustine, but even upon the Principles
of Religion it self. For Scripture exhorts all sinners to prayer, proposes it
to us as a help in all our needs, Petite and dabitur vobis, quae. rite and
invenietis pulsate and aperietur vobis. Mat. 7.
and as a remedy for all our evils; it seems it is enough to be a believer to be
able to pray, and that the Son of God having taught us the Lords Prayer, has
furnished us with arms for our defense against the justice of his Father. Saint
Augustine following the steps of Jesus Christ, teaches us in a thousand places
of his writings, that the Law discovers virtue to us, and Prayer obtains it;
that it is the guard of Christians, surmounting all temptations, sweetning all
difficulties, and triumphing over Devils. If then we are able to pray, we are
able to persevere; if what is not due to our merits be granted to our prayers,
we may thereby obtain the Grace that is the Beginning and the End of our
Salvation.

I confess this Objection puzzles me, nor does the ordinary Answer made to it
at all satisfy me: For though Grace be requisite to pray, though it is the
Holy Spirit that puts the thoughts into our soul, the affections into our
heart, and words into our mouths; though a prayer that is not warmed with his
heats, is not acceptable to the Eternal Father, we must nevertheless confess,
either that Grace to pray is always offered to ns, or that we have no means to
make our addresses to God in our needs. Therefore is it that Holy Scripture
invites us every where to prayer. The Son of God tells us that it offers a
pleasing violence, that it changes his will, sweetens his severitie, and
obtains all Graces it requests of him. Si ergo vos cum sitis mali bona datis
filiis vestris; quanto magis pater vester qui in coelis est dabit bona
petentibus se? Mat. 7. Ne orationes putarentur praecedere merita quibus non
gratuita daretur gratia, sed jam nec gratia esset quia debita redderetur, etiam
ipsa oration inter gratiae munera reperitur. Aug. Epist, ad Sixtum 105.
I know indeed that Saint Paul teaches us also, that we know not how to pray
as we ought, unless the Holy Spirit teaches us, and that this Grace precedes
our prayers, as well as our good works. Saint Augustine is of the same
judgment, when explaining that passage he says in express terms, that to
secure us from vanity which may persuade us that our prayer precedes Grace, it
is ranked by the Apostle among the gifts of the Spirit.

In this perplexity I can say nothing else, but that the Grace of Prayer is
more common then other graces; that it is frequently offered to Christians; that
God refuses it none but those that undervalue it; that it is the principal
cause of our Conversion, and that if by this unhappy power which remains in us,
we resist not the Holy Ghost, it would serve us for a strong means to obtain of
God all other favors. I perceive very well this answer rather scatters the
difficulty then resolves it: But who knows not that in all Sciences there are
some Objections that cannot be answered, and in that of Salvation, which is the
profoundest and most hidden, there are a thousand, which cannot be avoided, but
by the simplicity of faith. It Is enough to know in this, that Prayer is a Grace
more easily obtained then others, and that if it be effectual in respect of
its effect, it is sufficient by reason of its facility.

But scarce are we delivered from one gulf, but we are ready to fall into
another; and provide new Arms to defend us from a new assault, which is so much
the harder to sustain in that it takes all the force from the doctrine of Saint
Augustine. For this famous man that so discreetly manageth the justice of God
with his mercy, teaches us in a hundred places of his writings, that God never
forsakes the sinner till the sinner forsakes him; that he is not of the humor
of those unfaithful friends, who loving our fortune better then our person,
leave us when we have most need: He must be provoked to punish us, and out of
an excess of bounty, as he is always the first to prevent us, so is he the
last to desert us. All the Doctrine of Saint Augustine rowls upon this Maxim;
Si omnes peccatores Deus sperneret, omnes utique sperneret, quia sine peccato
nemo est; sed spernit discedentes a se quos Apostatas vocat Aug. de Not. and
gra. cap. 62.
We must ruin his whole works to destroy it, and convince him of falsehood to
convince him of change: He never retracted this Principle, and whenever he
speaks of the desertion of a sinner, healways lays the blame upon his own
infidelity. But if Grace be effectual, if it absolutely dispose of man's will; if
Jesus Christ necessarily apply it to virtue, how can she abandon him, being in
his hands, and he is rather the principle of her motions then her self? For she
acts by power derived from him, obeys his orders, and as long as Grace has her
in possession, has no other desire then to be perfectly united to him.

The most usual Answer, and perhaps the soundest, is, that God never forsakes
the soul of sinners where he makes his residence, till they drive him away by
some mortal sin: and though he deny them Actual Grace, because he is the master
of it, and owes it no body; he never deprives them of Habitual Grace, whereby
he remains in their soul, till they have broken his Laws or profaned his
Sacraments. The Disciples of Saint Augustine will be satisfied with this
Answer; but I conceive it contents not others, who will reply with much reason,
that God takes away Habitual grace from sinners when he refuses them actual
Grace, because they cannot preserve one without the other; and so it is God
always, who, contrary to the Maxim of Saint Augustine, quits the sinner first.
For every one confesses, that as Habitual grace has no other enemy that can
destroy it, but mortal sin, neither has she any other defense but Actual
grace; and as soon as men are deprived of the assistance of the one, they are
not only in danger, but in a necessity of losing the other.

To stand so strong an Objection, we must freely confess that there is some
secret infidelity on the sinners part unknown to us; that they make not all the
use of the grace that is in their power, that some way or other they resist its
motions, and expose themselves to dangers they might easily avoid: or else we
must ingenuously acknowledge that God abandons them not for having refused them
Effectual Grace, because many times by some other less powerful assistance,
but sufficient however, he scatters the occasions that might engage them in
sin, weakens the force of temptations, rebukes the insolence of Satan, and
deals with them still as Friends, though not as Elect. Finally, we may boldly
say, that there is not a just man but wanders from God every day: for he
swerves as often as he acts by the instigation of Concupiscence; this wretched
weight bends him toward the creature, and his weakness insensibly engages him
in sin: so that we need not wonder if God, seeing so many things in him
contrary to his Grace, he deny him the assistance thereof, and abandons a
sinner that never loves him but when he is obliged to it by some forain
external affection.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. That the Christian finds more rest in placing his
Salvation in Grace, then in his Liberty.
THere is no man in the world who is not as sollicitous after his Salvation as
after his Pleasure, and would not secure his Felicity as well as his Fortune:
Sinners seek Good under the shadow of Evil; and these poor madmen believe they
approach their happiness, even then when they turn their backs upon it. Our
first father intended not to make himself miserable by his disobedience; he
hoped to find Immortality in that Fruit that was his Death; and he fancied
repose and quietness in committing the sin that occasioned all his sad
calamities. His children are not wiser then he; the same devil that deceived
him, abuses them; and his improvident offspring find every day their
torment, where they search for their contentment. The Ambitious are remarkable
witnesses of this important verity; the Passion that animates them to these
glorious enter prises, where honor cannot be purchased without the hazard of
their life, is both the Tyrant that possesses them, and the Executioner that
torments them: They seek, blind as they are, reputation in Arms, and meet many
times nothing but death: They feel themselves Men, by those very attempts they
would pass for Gods. Providence, that thwarts their designs, makes them
acknowledge that the prowess of Conquerors holds as well of his Empire, as the
prudence of Politicians.

But not to imbark into the deduction of a Truth whereof all sinners can
furnish me with testimonies, it is enough to affirm that there are Christians
themselves involved in this Error, who seek for rest where they find nothing
but vexation and discontent: For, to assure their salvation, they would have
Predestination grounded upon their Merits; that God considered their good
works, when he separated the Elect from the Reprobate; and foresaw their
Fidelity, when he destined them to Glory. They will have all Graces sufficient;
that their effects depend upon our Wills; that we be the authors of our
Fortune; and that God presenting us aids at every moment, it is in our power to
entertain or reject them. They say Jesus Christ died indifferently for all men;
that his merits are offered to us; that we can apply the virtue of them to our
selves; and that in the midst of Paganism, without Gospel or Instruction, we
may feel their effects. Finally, they will have Paradise stand open for all the
world; that, according to the saying of our Savior, ill interpreted, it may be
carried by violence; and, without passing through the Church, a man may scale
heaven. The desire of their Salvation, is the source of these unjust desires;
They choose not this side, nor embrace this opinion, but because they believe it
favors their hopes: Vanity is mixed with Interest: being the children of Adam,
they imitate the pride of their Father; they are guilty of his crime before
they are aware; nor do they consider that whilst they go about to subject Grace
to their Liberty, they follow his steps who had a mind to be god for no other
end, but that he might live an Independent in respect of his Sovereign.

But were they far enough from the vain oftentation of their first father, they
would certainly fall into his misfortune, whilst they think to avoid it. For
all Theology assures us that Men and Angels were lost, because their Grace,
being subjected to their Liberty, made them not constant in good: they made ill
use of their advantage, because they were masters of it; nor did they fall into
sin, but because their salvation was put into their own hands. Their Fall
teaches us, that we can have no weaker support then our selves; that the Grace
which relies only upon our own Will, is very frail; and that sinners that
ground their hope upon the certainty of their resolution, are very blind, or
very proud.

The Angels were much more illuminated then we; their light was much purer then
ours; their strength was not mixed with weakness: These pure spirits were not
embodied in flesh and blood; and Nature being happily united with Grace in
their person, banished all disorders that are in the creature by reason of sin.
In the mean time, all these advantages hindered them not from falling: the
first temptation shook their Liberty, because not submitted to Grace. The
beauty of Lucifer dazzled them, and struck them in love: his promises made them
forget those of God; and the hope they fancied of reigning with that proud
Angel, made them side with him in his rebellion. All these misfortunes have no
other Cause but the weakness of Liberty; and he that should ask these wretched
spirits in the midst of their torments, would receive no other answer, but that
their Grace was unprofitable, because it depended upon their Will.

Neither are you to object that the faithful Angels were saved by the same
succor the other neglected, because all Divines are not agreed; and it is
disputed in the Schools, of the assistance they received to oppose the
rebellion of Lucifer. The greatest part of the Fathers were of opinion that the
mystery of the Incarnation was revealed to them at that instant; that they drew
force from Jesus Christ; that they fought under his banner; that they overcame
by the blood of the Lamb; and that they owe their triumphs to the Sacrifice of
his death. S. Augustine is of this belief; and though, according to his
Principles, Si utrique boni squaliter creati sunt, istis mala voluntate
cadentibus, illi amplius adjuti ad eam beatitudinis plenitudinem unde se
nunqua^ casuros certissimi fierent, pervenerunt. Aug. l. 12. de Civ. Dei. c. 9.
it seems we must conclude that the good Angels were not recompensed but
because their Will made good use of their Grace, he unsays it in other places,
and confesses ingenuously, that they received new assistances, and that they
were victorious, because they were better seconded then the others. I know what
may be said in answer to this passage: but I find it so clear, and uttered in
such strong expressions, that those that explain it will pardon me if I remain
in my opinion, and if with S. Augustine I believe that the good Angels owe not
their salvation to Grace Sufficient, but to that Christian Grace the Word
Incarnate merited for them by his travels.

Though Man was not advantaged equal to the Angels, neither in Nature nor in
Grace, because they were Hierarchies, and one was the rule of the other: yet
every one confesses Man's Will was created right; his Understanding cleared,
his Senses faithful, and his Passions obedient: He felt not those revolts which
now trouble our rest; the Flesh warred not against the Spirit; and those two
parts, notwithstanding their difference, were not as yet enemies: original
righteousness composed their quarrels; and living in good intelligence under
the dominion of this prerogative, they conspired together man's felicity:
Sufficient Grace was always offered him; whatever enterprise he took in hand,
this faithful companion never left him; she came to his aid as often as he
called upon her; or rather, preventing his desires and his necessities, waited
his orders and directions. Nevertheless, amidst all these privileges,
miserable man lost himself; the first temptation made him forget his duty;
though he knew that his Soul was taken out of Nothing, and his body formed of
the slime of the earth, he suffered himself to be persuaded that in violating
the Laws of God, he could make himself immortal. Whence, think you, proceeded
this misfortune? and what was the cause of so dismal a disgrace? 'Twas not the
strength of the temptation; for that was ridiculous; and we cannot yet conceive
how it could make any impression upon the mind of a Rational creature: 'Twas
not Concupiscence; for this infamous daughter was not born before her Father,
nor had Sin as yet given her a Being: 'Twas not the refusal of Grace; for it
was due to man in this state, or at least was never denied him. 'Twas then his
Liberty which was the cause of his misfortune: his Will, which, without being
forced by temptation, corrupted by the Senses, or solicited by the Passions,
made no use of Grace, and so fell headlong into sin.

If it be true that Free Will was so impotent in the state of Innocence, What
can we expect in the state of sin? And if Sufficient Grace supported by
original righteousness, hindered not Man from falling, What assistance can we
promise our selves thence, now that it is assaulted by Concupiscence? Let us
rest our Salvation upon a surer Foundation; let us implore some more vigorous
Grace; let us give our Liberty leave to be overborn by its motions; let us
grow wise by our Fathers losses, and not pitch our hope upon a succout which
ruined him only because he was subject to his Will. Grace is changed with
Nature: as this is not in her primitive purity, neither is the other in her
primitive weakness. JESUS CHRIST is come to be the Founder of a New Order in
the world; and because he finds men in infirmities which they had during the
state of Innocence, he furnishes them with stronger Graces, that the Remedy
surpassing the Disease, may afford them a perfect Cure. When he had to do with
Adam, whose vigor was natural, because his Forces were not yet divided, he
left his Salvation at his own disposal; and giving him a Grace that depended
upon his Liberty, made him in some sort the Author of his good or bad fortune:
but as he deals now with infirm men, whose Forces are weakened by Division,
he will have their Salvation depend upon his Will, and gives them a Grace,
which, seizing their heart, makes them victorious in the midst of their
Infirmities. Thence it comes to pass, says Saint Augustine, that the Liberty
of Man, though never so languishing, perseveres in Good by the virtue of JESUS
CHRIST, when the Will of Adam, with all its vigorous activity, stood not out
against the Temptation. It Is the glory of the Son of God, and the assurance of
a Christian, who comforts himself when he sees that his Salvation is no longer
founded upon the Inconstancy of his Liberty, but upon the Stability of Grace,
and certitude of Predestination. This Belief makes him not more insolent,
because he knows this Mystery is hid, and that there is not any one upon earth
that knows whether his name be written in the Book of Life: It makes him not
more lazy, because he is not ignorant that Grace obliges him to a combat,
that Glory is a Triumph that succeeds a Victory, and that no body is received
into heaven, that has not suffered with JESUS CHRIST upon earth. But this
Belief ministers them Tranquillity in the midst of all the miseries of life; it
sweetly mingles Hope with Fear in his soul: at the sight of his Infirmity, he
trembles; looking upon the vigor of his Grace, he takes courage; and having
had so much experience of his frailty, he comforts himself that his Salvation
stands fixed upon the Rock of Grace: he blesses the mercy of the Almighty,
that has found a secret whereby to vanquish us without forcing us; which,
leaving us our Liberty, fortifies our Weakness; and gives us an assurance in
our Banishment, which our first Father never had in Paradise: For, to conclude
this Discourse and this Treatise with the words of Saint Augustine; Ille Adam,
nempe Job in stercore, est cautior quam Adam in Paradiso: nam Adam-in Paradiso
consensitmulieri ut de Paradiso emitteretur, ille in stercore respu ^t mulierem
ut ad Paradisum admitteretur. Aug. in Psalm. 29.
Job was more happy in his misery, then Adam in his innocence: He was
victorious on the Dunghill, this Other was defeated in his Throne: He gave no
ear to the evil counsel of his wife, this Other was cajoled by his: He despised
all the assaults of Satan, this Other suffered himself to be worsted at the
first Temptation: He preserved his Righteousness in the midst of his Sorrows,
this Other lost his Innocence in the midst of his Pleasures. Let us comfort our
selves then in the Grace of JESUS CHRIST, whereby the Infirmity of Man triumphs
over the Malice of Satan: Let us rejoice, because he enjoins it his Disciples,
in the hope we have that his hand has written our names in the Book of Life in
Characters that cannot be blotted out: Let us give Thanks to him, who, knowing
our Weakness, is willing to save us by his Power; and protesting that his Grace
is the Fountain of our Salvation, beg it in our Prayers, expect it from his
Mercy, and hope not for it only by our Merits.

The Fifth TREATISE. Of the Virtues of a Christian.
The first DISCOURSE. In what Christian Virtue consists.
IF it be true that the Christian is an inward man, we need not wonder if he be
hid, Condelector legi Dei secundum interiorem hominem. Romans cap. 7.
nor that his virtues carry less splendor with them then those of
Philosophers: Inasmuch as all their beauty resides in the soul, it can be
perceived by none but by Angels; Those that have not their lights cannot
observe them; and the same blindness that occasions their ignorance, occasions
also the neglect they conceive of them. The Chastity of Lucrece has received
more Elogies then that of the Catharines and Cecilies, because it sparkles with
more pomp; and the murder which should arraign her as guilty, has made her
more notable and glorious. The Constancy of Cato has far more admirers then
the undaunted Courage of the Martyrs: Pride and Despair that forced him to
sheath his sword in his own bowels, to avoid something he called Servitude,
have heightened his Glory and his Crime in the soul of the children of Adam, who
can admire nothing but what is arrogant and pompous.

Thence it comes to pass that Christian Virtue which is humble, and seeks no
other witness, but he that reads the the heart, receives not always the
approbation of men, and wanders uon the Earth without any Elogy or
Commendation; Her Essence is concealed, we have much ado to discover her
Proprieties; and if Grace do not second Nature, we shall be at a loss to
define or describe her. As every one has formed an Idea of her, every one
makes descriptions of her according to his own humor, or his knowledge; and we
may say of Virtue what the Orator said of the Supreme Good, that men consulted
rather their Inclination then Truth, when they were minded to speak of it.

I wonder not that Philosophers, who had no other light then that of Nature,
have injured Virtue in thinking to bestow commendations upon her: But I wonder
that Christians have followed them in their errors, and that leaving the
Fathers of the Church, they have taken the Blind for their Guides. For there
are some at this day that confound honesty with virtue, Virtus and houestas
nomina diversa sunt; res autem subjecta prorsus eadem. Cicero de Offic.
who would persuade us that whatever is honest is virtuous: Wherein I find them
little differing from those that place Virtue in Glory, and imagine a crime
lawful when it cease to be shameful, and begins to appear honourabble. Seneca
as proud as he was, has well taken notice that this error was prejudicial to
virtue, and that the ambitious would no longer court her, when once she should
oblige her Partisans to quit their honor to continue in their duty.

Some others not so much in love with glory, but more in love with nature, are
persuaded that Virtue is nothing else but a natural inclination guided by
reason, and perfected by Science; so that to live according to the Laws of
Nature, was to live according to the Laws of Virtue. This opinion is approved
of by the Stoics among Philosophers, and by the Pelagians among Heretics; It
infuseth blindness and arrogance into the spirit of those that side with it,
and the esteem it puffs them up with of Nature, makes them neglect the
assistance of Grace. It seems they would retrive the state of Innocence, that
they have a design to persuade us that sin has done no hurt to the will of
man, that he is as free under the captivity of Concupiscence, as under the
dominion of Original righteousness: and that Nature having lost nothing of her
primitive purity, may serve for a guide to guilty man, as well as to man an
innocent.

Others following the Maxims of Aristotle, place Virtue in Mediocricy, and
lest they should give the lie to an Infidel, endeavor to suit the Maxims of
the Gospel with those of Philosophy. Seeing that Liberality must be as far
distant from Prodigality as from Covetousness; and that Fortitude, if it be
true, must neither partake of Cowardice nor of Rashness; they have confined all
other virtues within these limits, not considering that the noblest, and most
common, find their perfection in their excess; For Humility and Charity have no
bounds; the one descends to sin and nothingness, the other ascends as high as
God who is infinite. Therefore says Saint Bernard, Modus amandi Doum sine modo.
Bernard.
Love has no measure; and considering the greatness of its object, endeavors
to love according, or as much as it is lovely.

But the most dangerous of all these Masters, are those that confound reason
with virtue, and conceive man sufficiently virtuous, when he is rational; they
give a thousand fair glosses to this lie; and making reason the chiefest or
only good of man, they suppose they have secured him from all vices in deputing
him this Idol for the conduct of his life. They will have her a Sovereign whose
power is lawful, all whose decrees are just, and her designs laudable. They
ascribe to reason what we do to grace; and not fearing to render her
government tyrannical, they will have her reign absolutely over the will
without constraining it, illuminate the understanding without dazzling it, use
passions without stifling them, and employ the body without offering it the
least injury or violence: But these blind Dotards will not see that reason
being a slave, cannot be a Queen; and so far is she from guiding man, that she
her self has need of a star to enlighten her, and a prop to support her. For
since the fall of Adam this Sovereign is a Captive, all her subjects slight
her Laws, and whatever vain Authority she slatters her self with, she meets
with as many rebellions as she gives commands.

Reason without Grace, has hitherto brought up none but proud Scholars; and
not to examine what she can do, she has yet served for no other use, but to
swel Philosophers with vain glory, and to persuade them that Original sin was a
fable, and the corruption of nature an illusion. Idolaters have not so much
resisted the Gospel as Philosophers; Superstition has with more ease struck
sail then vain Philosophy, and the gods that reason fashioned and set up, have
stood longer then those of wood and of marble.

Whatever is rumored of the Letters and Conferences between Seneca and Saint
Paul, I have always believed the conversion of that Stoic harder then that of
the Covetous and most impudent Lascivious. The Pride that inanimated his
spirit, was so strong a bulwark against grace, that he had never stoopt to the
Maxims of Christianity, if that Conqueress of hearts had not employed all her
charms and all her forces to bring him under. It had never troubled him to part
with his goods, Annaeo Senecae non quidem ex toto virtus, verum ex aliqua part
defuit; affuit enim scribenti, cesuit viventi. Aug.
though avarice be reckoned one of his sins: be had suffered the torments which
served for proofs to the Primitive Christians, and his vainglory had armed him
with courage enough to endure those affronts that accompanied the Preaching of
the Gospel. But the love he bore his reason had never given him leave to
believe, without some miraculous work of Grace, that man was born a criminal,
that his nature was corrupted, his liberty weakened, and that to the practicing
of virtue, there was requisite some external assistance, which God might refuse
him without the least show of injustice. This Philosopher had he kept his
opinions, had been the first Author of Pelagianisme in the world; and his
pride making him the capital enemy of grace, had obliged him to side with
reason against her.

But not to combat a Heresy, the Church has triumphed over so many ages
since; nor to condemn Seneca whom she has anathematized in the person of
Pelagius; It contents me to say, that virtue to the end it may be solid, must
be the gift of God: that she cannot be acquired without grace, of whose aid
being destitute, she is rather the shadow of virtue, then true and real virtue
indeed. If that of the Heathen be not a sin, if all the circumstances of it be
not bad, and if we may not blame a son that succors his Father, a Subject that
desends his Prince, a Citizen that dies for his Country, we have great cause
to bewail the misfortune of those, who having not the light of faith, could not
direct all their actions to their first principle, nor refer them to their last
end.

Let us affirm then with S. Augustine, Virtus est bona qualitas mertis quae
recte vivitur, qua nemo male utitur, and quam Deus in nobis operatur. Aug. lib.
1. de lib. arb.
the Master of Virtue as well as of Grace, that Virtue is a quality of the
soul, wherewith we live well, which we cannot use ill, which God works in us,
either to guide us or defend us. Let Us give a little light to this definiition,
and say, he calls virtue a quality, because though it be an expression of the
Divinity, it is not a substance but an accident, to teach man that virtue is not
natural to him but adventitious, and that he receives her as a present from
the bounteous hand of God; she is good, because she communicates goodness to
us, and by her motions leads us on to the supreme Good; she learns us to live
well because she knocks us off from our selves, lifts us up to God, and makes
our interests give place to the interests of his Glory.

But inasmuch as man's life is civil, this same virtue teaches us to live well
with our neighbor, and to conspire together to find satisfaction upon Earth,
and felicity in Heaven: We cannot use it ill because all her acts are just, and
she would change her nature should she change her inclination. Nemo virtute
abutitur quamvis allquando virtus sit occasio alicujus mali. Isidor.
Wherein I find virtue happier then the faculties of the soul which are daily
abused in the practice of sin: For the memory is not less faithful when it
represents us an injury, then when it minds us of a good turn; The will is not
less free when it commits a sin, then when it practices a virtue, nor has
the understanding less vivacity when it conceives an Error then when it
conceives a Truth: But Virtue is so pure that she cannot be corrupted, her
intentions are so right they cannot be perverted, and her beauty so
resplendant, that it admits of no spots nor imperfections. Finally, it is God
that works her in us, because he is the source of all our good things, and
since the havoc sin has made in men, we have no right to Virtue but what his
mercy bestows upon us.

The ignorance of the last condition of Virtue has thrown all the Philosophers
into pride and blindness: For not knowing the miseries of Original sin, but
seduced by self-love, they have established their strength in their freedom,
and their happiness in reason; they have given stately names to Virtue, which
helping to deceive them, have filled their persuasion that she was rather an
effect of their own labor, then of Grace; Therefore is it that S. Augustine
observes, that all the Philosophers considering the difficulties that accompany
Virtue, and the combats that must be fought to gether, have Christened her with
a name which seems to take its being from force, and which by a just judgment
of God has entertained them in their vanity, hiding from them their weakness.
But Christians, who have learnt humility in the School of Truth, who have
profited by their misfortune, and are become wise by the miscarriages of
Philosophers, have called Virtue a Grace, or a gift of God, and will have her
name an instance of their misery, and of the liberality of their Sovereign.

This is it that the same Doctor says in other terms, opposing the vanity of
Philosophers to the humility of Christians; The Philosophers says he, loved
their own glory, and despised t hat of God; they confided in their own
strength, and were not thankful to him that lifts up the humble, and casts
down the proud. But Christians instructed in a better School avoid the glory of
the world, and seek after that of God. The experience they have of their
infirmity makes them distrust their own abilities: and since they know they can
neither undertake nor execute any thing without the assistance of their
Creator; they invoke him when they begin their actions, return him thanks when
they have finished them, and if they want courage or fidelity, accuse
themselves confessing ingenuously, that all good things come from God, and all
evil from the creature.

Indeed God will be glorified in our weakness, he will have all that we do
rather an effect of his Grace, then of our Liberty: Omnia Dec attribuunt, and
radicem meriti virtutum (cilicet and praemiu^non videntes nec in se nec in alio
nisi Gratiam Dei. Greg. Mag.
and he takes pleasure to command us such things as exceed our power, that the
glory may be his. It Is perhaps for this reason, that he says in his Word that
the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be gained but by violence, and that he has
propounded to us so high a Conquest, that the greatness thereof may oblige us
to seek for his assistance. It is not a Prodigy, says a Father of the Church,
to be born upon the Earth and scale Heaven; to win that by Virtue that cannot
be obtained by Nature: that the whole world may know, that if in this Conflict
man get the victory, it is God that gives him the Courage to overcome, and the
Grace to triumph.

Therefore the great Origin considering the designs of God, and the weakness
of men, Vult Dominus Jesus res mirabiles facere, vult enim de Locustis Gigames,
and de his quae in terra sunt caelestes vincere nequitias. Orig.
said with as much Congruity as Truth, that this great Master took pleasure to
work miracles in our favor; that having drawn us out of nothing, and then out
of sin, he would raise us to glory; that having formed our body of the slime of
the Earth, he destined it for Heaven; and that the Devils by their malice
intending to oppose this design, he gave us arms to fight them; that those
Pygmies vanquishing these Giants, the honor of the victory might be ascribed
to him; where the parties being so unequal, the advantage was found on the
weaker side. It Is upon the discovery of all these verities, that Christians
call Virtue by the name of Grace, and confess that if she came not from Heaven,
they were never able to surpass all difficulties, suffer all sorrows, and
despise all the delights of the Earth.

The Second DISCOURSE. Of the Division of the Virtues of a Christian.
AS Physicians make an Anatomy of Man's Body, thereby to discover its qualities;
and exercise a cruelty upon the Dead, that they may benefit the Living:
Philosophers divide the Virtues, that they may know them: they separate that
which is indivisible; and break the sacred bonds that unite these dear Sisters,
that so they may peruse their beauties: Or, to express this Truth by a more
noble comparison; as the Schoolmen divide the Divine Essence to illustrate its
perfections, separating Justice from Mercy, Majesty from Love, Wisdom from
Power, though they are but one and the same thing; we are obliged to disjoyn
the Virtues, though they be all concentred in Charity, and, according to the
opinion of S. Augustine, are nothing but Charities disguised.

For, taking leave to repeat a Principle often explained in another Work,
Charity is the only Christian Virtue, changing names according as her object
changes conditions: When That is hid, she is called Faith, and with her
obscure lights endeavors to discover that Sun which the splendour of his
Majesty renders invisible: when this object is absent, she is called Hope,
which raises her soul toward him that stands at a distance only to increase
our desires: when it is armed with Thunder, she is called Fear, imprinting
endearments of respect toward a Majesty that can annihilate all those that
offend him. Those Virtues that we style Cardinal, and which seem not directly
to aim at the Supreme Good, are but so many true Loves fastening us to him by
different chains. Temperance, says S. Augustine, is a chaste Love, which can
suffer no parting of hearts; obliging us to consecrate our selves wholly to his
service whom we pretend to affect. Valor is a generous Love, making a Pleasure
of Pain; and gives proof of his Constancy in the hottest battery of
Persecutions. Justice is a regulated Love, teaching us to command by obeying;
and subjecting us to our lawful Sovereign, gains us an absolute Dominion over
all the Creatures. Prudence is a clear-sighted Love which is never seduced,
choosing by its illumination those means which are able to bring us to God, and
rejecting all others that may estrange us from him. So that the Virtues are
nothing but Charity in a several dress; or, to speak more correctly, they are
only the different functions of Love.

But not to wander from this Principle, which I honor because S. Augustine,
after Saint Paul, is the author of it; I will not forbear to divide the Virtues
without interessing their Unity; and to consider their diverse employments,
without wronging their fair correspondence. The same S. Augustine is of opinion
that there are Two Principal Virtues which include all the rest: The one
consists in Action, the other in Contemplation: The one teaches us the way we
must walk in to go to God, and the other happily guides us in it: The one
purifies our soul by Labor, the other unites us to God by Prayer: The one
keeps the Commandments, and the other receives the Recompense: The one is
afflicted with grief, because it bewails his sins with the Penitents; the other
is bathed in pleasure, because it participates in the felicity of the Blessed.

The same Doctor, all whose Maxims are Truths, gives us another Division of
Virtues, from the difference of our conditions; and being not far from that
Principle we are going to explain, attributes but one Virtue to the Blessed,
and leaves all the rest to the Faithful. They indeed find all their happiness
in the Supreme Good which they are in possession of; their Love makes up the
total of their felicity; and that ineffable Union that transforms them into him
they love, is the only Virtue that for ever takes them up in the fruition of
Glory. Prudence is not requisite, because there is no darkness to be
dissipated, nor misfortunes to be prevented. Fortitude is useless, because
there are no sorrows to struggle with. Temperance serves to no end, because all
their delights are innocent and lawful: Neither is there any employment for
their Justice, because in the Tabernacle of Glory there are neither miserable
to be protected, nor criminals to be punished. Thus, as that incomparable
Doctor goes on, they practice but one Virtue; and, by a happy encounter, this
Virtue is their recompense; because, uniting them to God, it makes them find
their felicity in him.

It Is true, that as the Supreme Good contains all other Goods, we may say also
that all the Virtues are comprehended in this, and their several denominations
may be imposed upon it. It is Prudence, because it illuminates them with the
brightness of God himself: Fortitude, because it unites them so firmly with
him, that nothing can separate them: Temperance, because it makes them chastely
embrace the Chief Good, and in the delights they taste of, they seek not so
much their Pleasure as his Glory: Justice, because it subjects them to their
Sovereign, making them find their Happiness in their Submission.

But as there is some analogy between the condition of the Blessed and that of
the Faithful, at the same time that S. Augustine separates them, he associates
them again; and confounding their Virtues together, says, that during this
life Love is the only virtue of Christians, and that there is none other but
to love that which is amiable: So that, to facilitate the acquisition of that
object we place our affections upon, by choosing suitable and convenient means,
is Prudence: Not to be discouraged or diverted by Grief, is Fortitude: Not to
be drawn away by Pleasures, is Temperance; and not to be kept off by the vain
pomp and grandetza's of the world, is Justice. He lodges these Virtues in
Glory, which he seems to have banished thence; and acknowledges that the
Blessed enjoy them as well as the Faithful; but with this difference, That upon
the earth they are in Act, in heaven in Habit; upon the earth they serve for a
Defense, in heaven for an Ornament; upon the earth in Exercise, in heaven in
their Acquiescence; upon the earth they are the sure Landmarks guiding the
Faithful to their journeys end, in heaven they happily unite the Faithful in an
inseparable Bond of Communion.

But because this Doctrine is not fully conformable to that which is commonly
received, and that we have borrowed from Philosophers the Division and the
Quality of Virtues; let us say with them, that we judge of their number by our
obligations and our necessities: We are upon the earth for no other end, but to
Know and Love, to Suffer and to Do; our whole life is spent in these two
employments; and if we be not absolutely unprofitable, we must raise our selves
to the Knowledge and Love of the Supreme Good; and resolve, if we be not
altogether lazy, by our Courage to overcome all the difficulties which occur
in the course of our life. Thence it comes to pass that we have need of
different Virtues, Bonam vitam ego puto and Deum cognoscere and amare, and mala
pati and bona facere, and sic perseverare usque ad mortem. Bern.
and that according to the designs we form, we are obliged sometimes to have
recourse to the Divine virtues, sometimes to the Moral.

Inasmuch as God is surrounded with Light that darkens us, our Understanding
must necessarily be cleared by Faith, that we may know him: In that he is an
Infinite Good, our soul must be fortified with Hope, that we may search after
him; and our Will warmed with Charity, that we may love him. For though Good be
amiable, and the Supreme Good transcendently amiable; yet is it so far above
our reach, that without Grace we cannot approach unto it: and as we must be
clarified by his Light, that we may know him; so must we be warmed by his
Calentures, that we may affectionately close with him. Thus Faith, Hope and
Charity are the Virtues by means whereof we treat with God. But because Man is
born for Society, in serving God he is bound to assist his Neighbor: Charity
has a double respect, having united us to the Supreme Good, for love of it,
she unites us to our Like, and obliges us to love them as we do our selves.
Were this Virtue in its full vigor, 'twould be sufficient alone: Lex venit in
subsidium amicitiae. Atistot.
and as Philosophers have observed that Laws would be useless, did Friendship
reign in men's hearts; I dare affirm, did Charity set up her throne in ours, the
Virtues would be idle among Christians, or act only by her orders and
directions.

But whether we have not as yet attained this Perfection, or that the number of
Subjects contributes to the Greatness of Sovereigns; she has under her command
Four Virtues, which are called Cardinal, that act by her motions, and execute
her designs.

Prudence clears our Understandings to act, helps us to discern Good from Evil,
and Truth from Falsehood: For as there are Evils which under a fair show deceive
us, and Lies that find more credit then some Truths, Prudence must serve us
for a Guide, and in so important an election secure us from mistakes.

Justice gives every one his due, makes our Interests yield to Reason,
preserves Peace in the inequality of our conditions, and taking original
righteousness for an example which made a harmony between foul and body, this
sets Man at union with himself, and by a necessary consequence accommodates him
with his neighbor. Therefore is it that Repentance and Humility are as
rivulets flowing from this Fountain, and as rays issuing from this Sun: For
Repentance is nothing but a severe Justice that animates the sinner against
himself, that obliges him to act the part of a witness in accusing, of a judge
in condemning, of an executioner in punishing himself. Humility is nothing but
a modest and true Justice, which considering the Majesty of the Creator,
forces the Creature to fall down before him, and, upon the sight of sin and
nothingness, to adore the Power and Mercy that drew him out of these two
Abysses.

Temperance regulates our Pleasures, and moderates our Delights, lest their
disorder obstruct our salvation, and, out of a blind impetuosity, find Pain
and Sorrow where we look for Pleasure and Content. It Is true, she is not so
taken up with Particular good, as not to watch over the Public: For, without
encroaching upon the rights and privileges of Justice, she calms the Passions,
allays the storms, and producing a tranquillity in the soul of Particulars,
contributes to that of Kingdoms; because the quiet of States depends upon that
of Families; and it is very hard that those Subjects that yield not obedience to
the laws of Temperance, should to those of Justice.

But as since the Fall of Adam, Sufferings are as common as Actings, and man
spends his life in Pain as well as in Labor; to these Three Virtues is added
Fortitude, as a Supply to combat and vanquish Griefs that set upon us. Indeed,
the chiefest employment of Fortitude is to wrestle with whatever is most
troublesome in the world: It skirmisheth with those accidents that disquiet our
Health, or concern our Honor; is armed against Fortune; and, defying that
blind potentate that seems the enemy of Virtue, stands ready to receive all
the assaults this insolent Tyranness makes upon those that slight her Empire.
Indeed, when Valor is enlightened by Faith, she laughs at an Idol who subsists
only in the minds of those that fear it, and may be called the work of their
Fancy and Imagination: she trembles not at the attempts of a false Deity; and
being assured that every thing is regulated by a Supreme Providence which
cannot fail, lays an obligation upon us to adore his Decrees, though they
condemn us, and kiss his Thunders, though they strike us dead. Thus, under the
favorable shadow of these Virtues, the life of a Christian passes on calmly:
Faith affords him light to illuminate him; Charity, heats to inflame him; Hope
promises to encourage him; Justice and Temperance their several supplies to
put him in action; and Fortitude who her self is a whole Army, gives
undauntedness of spirit to fight and to triumph.

To all these Divisions this may be added, namely, that man being compounded of
a body and a soul, has need of Virtues that may unite them together, and
subjecting the soul to God, may subject the body to the soul; For there is this
order between these two parts, that the body respects not the laws of the
mind, but as far as the mind respects the laws of God: as soon as one
dispenses with his duty, the other fails of his obedience; and at the same
time that the soul rebels against God, the flesh makes an insurrection against
the soul. To this day we bewail the mischiefs of this rebellion, and all the
Virtues are given us only to re-instate us in our Primitive Tranquillity. The
Theological Virtues undertake to subject the mind to God: Faith captivates the
Understanding, and obliges it to believe those verities it comprehends not:
Hope fills the Memory with the Promises of Jesus Christ; and Charity sweetly
divorceth the will from all perishable goods, to fix it upon the Supreme Good.
The Virtues that are called Cardinal, Prudentia se habet ad vera and fa^sa,
temperantia and fortitudo ad prospera and adversujustitiase habet ad Deum and
Proximum. D. Thom. 2.2.
have mixed employments exercising their dominion over soul and body; Prudence
enlightens them, Justice accords them, Temperance regulates their pleasures,
and Fortitude combats their griefs; so that all these Virtues associated
together, restrain man in his duty, and make him find his happiness in his
obedience. But because I destine another Discourse to treat of these last
Virtues, I conceive my self bound to bestow the remainder of this upon the
former, and to show the reasons wherefore it was requisite that the Christian
must be assisted with Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Grace has some resemblance with Nature, and we find in man some Image of a
Christian. Man cannot come to his End, unless he know it, and have some
assurance of a possibility to obtain it. The Christian cannot move toward God,
his sole end, unless he know him by Faith, love him by Charity, and promise
himself the enjoyment of him by Hope. Man, that he may work aright, has need
of three succors; he must know what he does, he must be able to do it, and he
must will it; otherwise all his designs will be unprofitable, nor will he form
any enterprise which will not confound or grieve him. The Christian, whose
salvation is his chief business, has need of the same aids: but because his
enterprise is extremely difficult, and sin that has made strange devastations
in his soul, has spread darkness over his Rational, thrown weakness into his
Irascible, and scattered malice into his Concupiscible faculty; Faith must
enlighten the one, Hope satisfy the other, and Charity, which is nothing but
an effusion of the Divine Goodness, shed it self into the last and amend it:
Or, let us say, that Faith discovers the Supreme Good to the Christian by its
Lights; that thence there arise two affections in his soul; the desire of
possessing it, which is love; and a confidence of obtaining it, which is Hope.
These three Virtues do consummate the Christians perfection: Faith illuminates
him, Hope elevates him, and Charity uniting him to God, makes him partake in
same sort of the felicity of the Blessed.

The Third DISCOURSE. Of the Excellency and Necessity of Faith.
GOd is so far above our apprehension by the Greatness of his Nature, that in
whatever state we consider him, we have only a borrowed light to know him by:
In that happy condition wherein Innocence dispelled all man's darkness,
suffering neither ignorance nor infirmity to engage him in these sins, which
are rather natural then voluntary: he had need of light to know him whose
Image he had the honor to be. Those infused verities he received in his
Creation, those faithful glasses that presented him his Creator, and all the
beauties of the Universe that expressed his Divine perfections, had imprinted
in him but a faint knowledge, if Faith elevating his soul had not clarified him
with its brightness. But when man shall pass from Earth to Heaven, and
removing from the Order of Grace shall enter into that of Glory, In lumine tuo
videbimus lume^ Psalm. 35.
he shall still have need of a borrowed light to behold the Divine Essence.
Though he be then a pure Spirit, and his soul abstracted from matter act as the
Angels, yet all our Divines confess, that his darkness must be enlightened, his
weakness supported, that he may contemplate this Divine Sun, who by a rare
Prodigy hides himself in light, and covers himself with his Majesty.

We are not therefore to wonder if Faith be necessary for man in the state
whereto sin has reduced him, Intellectus humanus se habet ad Divina sicut
visus noctuae se habet ad solemn. Arist.
and that he cannot know God if he be not irradiated with his Grace: For he is
in respect of the things of God, according to the judgment of Philosophers
themselves, as those Birds of night which cannot endure the beams of the Sun,
but are constrained to hide themselves when that glorious Star appears, lest
they should be dazzled with his rays: so that man is bound to renounce his
reason, and to give his judgment the lie if he will comprehend the Truths and
Mysteries of Religion. Thence it is that the Fathers of the Church have said,
Nemo novit filium nisi pater, neque Patrem quis novit nisi filius, and cui
filius voluerit revelare. Mat. 11.
that he could not know the designs of God if he were not informed of them by
Revelation; nor believe them if he were not persuaded by Faith, nor ought at
all to rest in them, if he that contrived them had not commented upon them by
himself or by his Ministers; Because as the great Saint Hila y says, we must
not believe Divine things, but when God pleases to reveal them, because he
alone knows them, and is able to discover them to others.

Thus must we confess, that if Faith came not in to our succor, there would be
a strange confusion in the belief of our Mysteries: For as men's opinions are as
different as their minds, their reason doubtful and uncertain, approving in one
Country, what it condemns in another, changes judgments according to
Climates, and in one and the same man grows weaker or stronger with age; we had
for ever sloated in uncertainty, and our belief had been as subject to change
as our opinion. Wherefore God dealing with all Christians alike, has given
them the same light: and not respecting their natural advantages is pleased
that the simple and the learned have one and the same principle to know his
Mysteries by.

But had not this consideration obliged him to bestow upon us one and the same
Faith to entertain us in the same mind; the extent and variety of the things we
believe, had always required the same Economy: For some ascend into Heaven,
others go down into Hell; some are buried in the obscurity of what is past,
others are hid in the abysses of what is to come; some happened at the birth of
the world, others shall not happen till its decay; so that there being no
natural light vast enough to comprehend all these marvels, separated by the
distance of place or time, we must of necessity be illuminated with a Divine
light which may collect them all; and without giving us a clear understanding,
give us at least a sure belief.

Having so great an obligation to Faith, it is all the reason in the world we
should be acquainted with the nature of that which makes us know all things,
and be informed of the definition of a virtue that serves for the basis and
foundation of all others. Saint Augustine calls it in one place an obscure
light, which having the certitude of Science, wants evidence and perspicuity.
For it is a Truth that Faith clears us, that it is an effusion of the Light of
Glory, and an emanation of that admirable clarity that discovers all things to
the blessed. A Light shining, says the Apostle, but in an obscure and dark
place, in Caliginoso loco. It Is a Star wrapped in a Cloud, an Aurora that knits
the shadows of the night with the brightness of the day; its obscurity
constitutes one part of its Essence; when it becomes evident it changes its
nature, and ceasing to be Faith, begins to be Science or Revelation. Thus the
Christians are like those people, who for the space of six Months see no Sun,
yet because that glorious Luminary wheels continually round their Horizon, they
may boast their nights not to be without some brightness; and though deprived
of the presence of the Sun, want not altogether his Light.

S. John Chrysostom says, that Faith is the basis of Religion; that it is in
this spiritual building what foundations are in houses, and that as these
cannot subsist when removed from their groundsils, so does a man cease being a
Christian as soon as he leaves off to be a Believer. Indeed all the Virtues lean
upon this, and by a particular privilege she is preserved without others, but
others are not preserved without her: Their absence weakens her; and Faith, not
quickened with Charity, nor supported with Hope, has no vigor, because, in the
judgment of an Apostle, it is then dead. Nevertheless this spark lives under
the ashes; and though never so weak and languishing, may, with the benign
influence of heaven, produce some effects.

But S. Bernard, whose wit is no less solid then agreeable, Fides est quaeda^
voluntaria and certa praelibatio nondu^ propalatae veritatis. Bernar.
gives us an excellent definition of Faith, when he says, It Is like a
voluntary and assured prejudice of a Truth not yet evident: For it is certain
that Faith is not only an Earnest of the Truths we believe, but as it were an
Antepast and Prelibation of them: we see them not evidently, but we believe
them certainly; we find that its Obscurity produces Light, and that Evidence
is oftentimes the recompense of its Firmness. If ye believe not, ye shall not
understand. So that we may say, As in Christianity Weakness produces strength,
Obscurity many times produces Evidence. Thus S. Augustine defining Faith,
calls it sometimes a Light guiding the mind to the Prime verity; and by
obscure and cloudy passages, leads it securely into the region of Light.

For all this, we must acknowledge that the fullest definition of Faith is that
which S. Paul gives us, Est autem Fides sperandarum substanmia reru^,
argumentum non apparentium. Hebr. 11.
where he calls this Virtue the substance of things hoped for, and the argument
of those not seen: For as Substance is the support of Accidents, Faith is the
pillar of Virtues, and the immovable basis of the Spiritual building, because
it is founded upon the Prime verity. It looks upon the things we hope for,
because they are more noble then those that we possess; and this generous
virtue leaving the consideration of Mediums, soareth as high as the
contemplation of the last End. It is also an argument of those things we see
not, because it gives us a certitude, and, without exhibiting them to our view,
settles in us so strong a persuasion of them, that all the reasons in the world
cannot alter our belief: But its principal advantage, and which is happily
expressed in this definition, is, that as it is called the substance of things
hoped for, because it is the earnest of them, giving us, in some sort, what it
has promised; so is it the demonstration of things not seen, because it makes
them in a manner visible, and its obscurity begets in our souls light and
certitude.

Having considered its essence, it is fit we consider its properties and
effects, which are so great, it self must come in to gain them belief: For the
Scripture seems to attribute to Faith whatever is most august and reverential
in Scripture: It is the Principle of spiritual life; and according to the
language of Saint Paul, the just does live by Faith. For though the lise of a
Christian be composed of many parts, Initium bonae vitae, cui vita etiam
debetur aeterna, rectafides est. Aug.
as the body is of many members; and to be in a vigorous condition, which is
the symptom of perfect health, Faith must be animated with good works;
nevertheless Faith is the first principle, and, without it, every one
confesses all virtues are dead or languishing: Therefore when S. Bernard calls
Charity the life of the soul, he acknowledges at the same time that Faith
conceives her, Hope brings her forth, the holy Spirit forms her, Reading
suckles her, Meditation nourishes her, and Prayer fortifies her.

As Faith is the life of the soul, so is it also the eye; and he that takes it
not for his Guide, shall never come to Glory: it enlightens all the other
virtues, and penetrates those clouds of darkness that surround them: It Is also
an observation S. Bernard has made, that Christ was never so closely hid, but
Faith always discovered him: If he be Incarnate in the womb of his mother,
Faith does him homage in the person of S. John: If he be born in a manger,
Faith adores him with the Wisemen, and acknowledges the Word in Infancy,
Majesty in Baseness, and Power in Infirmity: If he be presented in the Temple,
Faith receives him in the arms of Simeon, and makes his Elogie by the mouth of
that aged Saint: If he enter the river of Jordan to be baptized among sinners,
Faith manifests him by the testimony of his Precursor, and teaches us that he
is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: If he die upon the
Cross, or lose his honor with his life, Faith acknowledges his Innocence in
the midst of his Punishment, and begs a share in his Kingdom by the mouth of
the good Thief: If he be veiled upon our Altars, and the outward species of the
Sacrament conceal him from our eyes, Faith adores him in the person of
Believers, and discovers his splendor under the clouds that encompass him.
This made S. Bernard utter those excellent words, That Faith was very
quick-sighted, because it acknowledged Christ born in the Manger, and dying
upon the Cross.

But as if one sole virtue made up all our Glory, I find that our highest
qualities take their being from its merit: For if we be the children of God,
it is because we are Believers; and the great Apostle, that describes the
prerogatives of Man's nature, discovering the humiliations of the Word
Incarnate, observes expressly, that the quality of the children of God is an
appendix of Faith; and that heaven shall not be our inheritance, but because
this virtue was the principle of our Filiation: He gave them power to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name. This august quality is
not indulged us in Baptism, but because there we receive Faith; and it is so
truly the effect of that Sacrament, that the Believer that gives proof of his
Creed in the midst of torments, fails not to be the child of God, though he be
not baptized.

If Faith advance us to dignity, it also communicates power to us; it gives
Reputation to our Dominion, that it grow not contemptible; and makes us in some
sort absolute in the State of our Master. For the gift of Miracles is a
privilege of Faith: These Prodigies that astonish the Universe, convert
Nations, make Tyrants tremble, tame Devils, are donatives heaven has promised
to Faith rather then to Charity. Every thing is possible to him that believes:
this virtue may boast it self absolute; and, as if it were inseparable from
Sovereignty, it seems he that is a Believer becomes powerful: Those men of
renown whose Elogies Saint Paul makes in his Epistles, owe all their
privileges to Faith: It Is by it that they subdued Tyrants, changed Nature,
disordered the Seasons, and altered the Elements: It serves us for a Conduct in
Peace, and a Defense in War; and whenever the Apostle arms the Christians, he
gives them nothing but Faith either to assault or repel their enemies: He
Christens one and the same thing with diverse names; and calling it sometimes a
Buckler, sometimes a Brestplate, sometimes a Sword, lets us see that it is
sufficient to procure as many victories as it stands assaults, or sights
battles. Finally, it seems God takes pleasure to fasten our Power to our
Infirmity; and treating us like Samson, all whose strength lay in his hair, he
will teach all the world that the Miracles we work are not so much the effects
of our Ability as of his Grace. For Faith is nothing but a submission of mind,
and a blind obedience, which, holding more of Credulity then Argument, seems
rather a mark of our Weakness then of our Strength. In the mean time, the Son
of God, that has a mind to humble us in raising us up, and to manifest his
greatness in our abasement, has founded our ability upon belief, and is
pleased that the gift of Miracles should be the recompense of our Credulity.

But nothing more astonisheth me, Creditis quia hopossum faccrevobis? dicunt
ci, Utique, Domine, Tunctetigit ocu. los coru^, diceus, Secundum filem vestra^
fiat vobis Matthew. 9.
then to consider that God has in some sort subjected his own Power to our
Faith; and before he would heal the sick, or raise the dead, he requires our
Belief as a preparative to his Miracles: For he never undertook any Cure, but
he obliged the Patient to believe; and if he were not in a condition to use his
own Understanding, he demanded that disposition in the Assistants or Witnesses.
The same Evangelist observes, that his power was manacled by the Infidelity of
sinners, Et non poterat ibi virtutem ullam facere, and mirabatur propter
incredulitatem little. Matthew. 6.
and that there were some Towns where he could work no Miracles, because he
found no Faith among them.

We need not wonder that the Son of God has so greatly honored this virtue,
because it gives him so much obedience; and that of all the Sacrifices the
Christian can offer him, this seems the hardest and most honorable: For, it
makes an Oblation of our Understanding, takes from us the liberty of reasoning
in our Mysteries; it persuades us what we understand not; and contesting at the
same time against Reason and Sense, makes a perfect Holocaust of the Christian:
It reduces that insolent undertaker, who would know every thing in Paradise,
to believe all without knowing any thing: it makes him purchase Faith with the
expense of his Reason; and it seems that to render him Faithful, it will not
suffer him to be Rational.

Though Faith have all these advantages, yet must we acknowledge that without
Charity it is unprofitable; all a man's Miracles profit nothing without Good
works: and though this virtue reign so absolutely in the State of Jesus Christ,
she will never cause the Faithful to reign in Glory, if he add not the ardors
of Love to the Light of Belief. S. Augustine has observed, that though Abraham
owe the beginning of his happiness to Faith, he owed the perfection thereof to
his Good works and Obedience: when he believed the Word of God, 'twas a rare
effect of Faith; but when he obeyed the voice of the Angel, armed his hand with
a Sword, lifted up his arm to strike his only son, 'twas doubtless a very
great act of Faith, and a certain proof of his obedience. Let us join therefore
these two virtues, that we may imitate him: let us pass from Faith to Good
works; and if we would have the merit of that Patriarch, let us fully believe
the promises of Jesus Christ, and faithfully execute his will, that we may not
be reproacht that our Faith is like that of Devils, that fear the Justice of
the Almighty, but love not his Goodness.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. Of the Hope of a Christian.
AS Sin has robbed us of our Light, so has it deprived us of our Strength;
and he that cast us into Error, has precipitated us into Weakness: we are not
only Blind, but Impotent; nor is it a sufficient Cure for us to have our
Sight restored, if withal we recover not our Vigor. Faith takes pains to
scatter our Darkness, and Hope endeavors to strengthen our Weakness. This
virtue bears up the heart of a Christian, draws him out of that unhappie
Impotencie whereto sin had reduced him; and resting upon the veracity of God,
expects with confidence the effects of his promises: it knows very well that
his Word is not like that of Sovereigns; and being not subject to their
Infirmities, neither is he liable to their Changes.

For Princes oftentimes break their word, either out of weakness, or lightness,
or imprudence: they cannot always do what they would; their Will exceeds their
Power; and they are constrained to recall their word, because they are not able
to put it in execution. It Is enough that they are Men, to make them Liars: The
Scepter that adorns their hand, and the Royal Wreathe that circles their head,
change not their Nature; upon the Throne they are sensible of the failings of
their Subjects; and though the disposers of Honor and Life, yet are they
inconstant as their Mothers. But were they resolved to keep their word, that
they might imitate his Constancy whose Majesty they represent, they would be
often forced to revoke it, to avoid those disorders their Prudence had not
foreseen: for the Light of Kings is bounded as well as their Power; they cannot
read the obscure Characters of Futurity; and whatever ministers their Council
is composed of, they cannot prevent accidents if they consult not with
Prophets; so that necessity compels them to fail of their word, if they will
not fail of their duty.

But the God we adore is free from these infirmities: and if he appear
sometimes to repent of his designs, or recall his decrees, it is only to suit
with our understanding, and to deal with men after the manner of men: He is
absolute in his state, his Power is his Will, as his Goodness is his Essence;
he finds no Rebels in the world, and if there be any that seem to brave his
Mercy, they obey his Justice that punishes them: His Immutability is equal to
his Power, he never changes his designs; and though he accommodate himself
sometimes to his creatures, it is in reducing them to his Will without
constraining them. He magnifieth himself in this Attribute in Holy Scripture;
and as if his Constancy were a proof of his Divinity, he will have us believe
him God, because he is Immutable, Ego Deus and non mutor. A surprisal or a
mistake obliges him not to change his resolution; nothing happens in his State
contrary to his Will, or his Permission; he prevents the revolts of his
Subjects, and if his Justice punish Crimes in Time, his Wisdom foresaw them in
Eternity; His Council regulates Events, Success answers his Enterprises, and
the malice of men not being able to surprise his Providence, he is never forced
to revoke his Decrees.

Thence it comes to pass that Hope which is founded upon his Promises, is not
liable to distrust; it is well assured that Truth can neither deceive nor be
deceived; that an absolute power meets with no difficulties that check it; and
that a wisdom subject to no error, is subject to no change. Thus the
Christian assisted with this Virtue, lives in the sweetness of tranquillity;
nothing in the whole world makes him afraid, the greatness of danger heightens
his confidence, and knowing very well that God can raise his salvation out of
his very fall, he is fearless in the midst of his enemies. This made David
utter those words, In Domino sperans non infi mabor; he could not have said so,
had he placed his confidence in the creature, because as Saint Augustine says,
it fell with man who was its support; but being grounded upon him who is as
Powerful as he is True, he was able to preserve his assurance in the midst of
danger, and to promise victory in the thickest of the conflict.

Thus does Saint Augustine paraphrase upon the words of the same Prophet, where
out of an excess of confidence he calls his God his Hope; Quoniam tu es Domine
spes mea. Let other men, says that incomparable Doctor, trust in the vanity of
their riches, and think that with their gold they can seduce Women, corrupt
Judges, and subdue their Enemies; Let others confide in their Friends, and
persuade themselves they have a share in their goods as well as in their
affections; that assisted by their counsel, or supported by their furtherance,
they can triumph over grief and fortune: Let others raising their thoughts a
degree higher, hope in the weak power of Kings, promise themselves admittance
into their favor, to be of their Council, to partake of their Secrets, and to
govern their Person or their State; as for me who am no longer abused with
these vanities, I will rest upon my God, and not violating the respect I owe
him, making the Almighty my Hope, will say, Quoniam tu es Domiue spes mea.

If this Virtue heighten the infirmity of Christians, we must confess it
sweetens their discontents, and is in stead of Consolation, midst all the
torments that afflict them. Not to know that man is miserable since he became
criminal, is to be extremely ignorant; the sweetest life has its labors; the
shortest is long enough to be sensible of a thousand calamities; the remedies
whereof are a second affliction; and that which we call comfort and
consolation, is often a disguised misery, and a real torment. Among so many
adversities, Heaven that watches over the welfare of Christians has furnished
them with Hope, which never confounds those it assists: for it awakens their
courage with recompenses, stirs them up by the examples of former Saints,
quickens them by the shortness of their life, and making them balance what they
suffer with what they expect, gives them occasion to say with Saint Paul, Non
sunt condignae Passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam quae revelatur in
nobis.

But inasmuch as Jesus Christ is the principal object of this Virtue, hence
arises the strongest comfort it can bestow upon us; for representing us his
Shame and his Glory, his Death and his Resurrection, it makes us patiently
suffer the afflictions of this present life in consideration of the advantages
of the future. The Son of God, says Saint Augustine, becomes the hope of the
Faithful, they behold in him labor and recompense: labor in his Passion,
recompense in his Resurrection; and in these two states rather different then
contrary, they behold two kinds of lives, whereof the one being miserable and
present, must be endured with courage; the other being happy and future, must
be expected with patience. Jesus Christ has manifested the former in his
Cross, the second in his Glory, to the end that having born the former in this
world, they may hope to possess the second in the other world.

Though this Example be able to encourage the most fearful, and comfort the
most afflicted, we must acknowledge nevertheless that the assurance we have,
that God will not forsake those that are his is a powerful Consolation: which is
indeed the reason Hope makes use of to encourage Christians; nor was ever
expressed more eloquently then in the words of the Psalmist, who representing
them the power of their Sovereign, obliges them to hope all things and fear
nothing. Ideo nihil dicit ut omnia dicat, and tu omnia credas.
Spera in Deo and ipse faciet. In a word, it mentions all in naming nothing,
and giving no bounds to its promises, suffers us to hope every thing from God;
it instructs us by silence, leaves us to think what it expresses not, and lest
some favors might be forgotten in the rehearfall, chooses rather to be
altogether silent, then to forget any.

If I may serve for his Interpreter, me thinks his meaning is, that from the
Almighty power of God we may expect every thing; That he will stop the Sun,
shake the Earth, remove the Mountains from their stations, open the abysses of
the sea, and do an hundred miracles for our sakes, if we hope in his goodness:
or this Virtue will have us understand, that God will heal us if we be sick,
that he will comfort us if we be afflicted, enrich us if we be poor, restore us
to liberty if we be in prison, and deliver us from the grave when we are dead:
Finally, we may hope all that he can do; our hope is as large as his power; and
without rashness we may expect as many favors as he can work miracles.

Seeing this Virtue is as lowly as generous, it keeps us from complaining when
successes answer not our desires; and teaches us, that there are two ways
whereby God assists us when we are persecuted; the One is glittering and full
of pomp, showrs astonishment into the soul of our Enemies, tameth lions that
would devour us, quenches flames that would burn us to ashes, and disarms
Executioners that are ready to sacrifice us: The other is more reserved and
less splendid; for not delivering us from torments, it gives us courage to bear
them, makes us victorious by enduring, and working the miracle in our selves,
sweetens not the cup of our punishment, but increases our constancy, whereby
we triumph over it. The former of these ways appeared in the three Children,
who were thrown into a fiery furnace by the command of a heathen Prince: The
fire spared their clothes, respected their bodies; and having consumed their
chains that they might walk at liberty, sought out their Executioners to
execute vengeance upon them. The second appeared in the person of the
Maccabees, who vanquished in suffering, tired their Enemies, and in an age that
trembles at the frowns of a Master, laughed at the fury of a Tyrant. Might I
pass my judgment upon these two Miracles, I would prefer the later; and had I
liberty to choose, I would rather be in the condition of the Maccabees, then in
that of the companions of Daniel.

But leaving this Digression to pursue my Discourse: Hope is not founded upon
promises, but upon assurances: it has earnests that dissipates all doubts; and
considering what has passed, easily believes what is yet to come: For though
God be the supreme Verity, though his words be Oracles, and reason it self
persuades us, that he promises nothing to his subjects he does not perform;
yet is he so good, he gives them earnest of his promises; and as if he were
afraid to weary their hope in making them expect too much, he sweetens their
anxious pains by pledges of affection, which make up a part of that sum he
has promised them; he gives us favors, whereby we are enabled to hope for
what remains behind; the death he suffered for us, is an assurance of that
life he prepares for us; neither can we doubt (says St Augustine) that we
shall not reign with him in heaven, seeing he was willing to die for us upon
the Cross. For what Goods may we not expect, when his death is a pledge of his
love, and an assurance of the happiness we look for? Let us hope then for his
Kingdom; and when the greatness of his promises shall raise any doubts in our
soul, let us consider the greatness of our Surety, and we shall securely wait
the accomplishment of our desires.

Having considered the necessity of this Virtue, it is just that we consider its
Nature, and consulting the Divines and Fathers, be acquainted with its
Definition. Philo the Jew calls it the Forerunner of Joy, a Harbingerpleasure
preceding the Eternal one, an antepast of Blessedness; so that following the
opinion of this Philosopher, he that hopes, may boast himself happy
beforehand. The Master of the Sentences comes near this sense, when defining
this Virtue, he calls it a certain assurance of a future Felicity; the
certitude that accompanies it, sweetens the pain which the remoteness of the
Good it waits for, occasions; and she thinks her self happy because the
felicity she promises is certain. St Augustine calls it by a more magnificent
name, and making it pass for a view of the supreme Good, seems with Philo to
confound it with Joy: for he says, that Faith cures the eyes of the soul, and
that Hope makes her see what she desires.

But because things never appear so clearly as when they are opposed with
contraries, I conceive, I cannot better discover the nature of Christian Hope,
then by confronting it with that that deceives men by the vanity of its
promises: This then is uncertain, doubt makes up a part of its Essence; and by
a misfortune inseparable from it, it cease to be Hope as soon as it begins to
be sure: Therefore Seneca said, she promised a doubtful good, and to her very
favorites leaves all things dubious and uncertain: But the Hope of a Christian
is sure, his certitude commensurate, and all men that define it make it
synonimous with Assurance. That of Men is false, whatever fair colors its
promises are dressed with; it cannot avoid the denomination of a Lie: Therefore
the same Scripture that calls it uncertain, calls it a lying vanity: and
finding nothing vain enough whereby to express its essence, compares it to
Dreams, that abuse men in their sleep, Vana spes and mendacium viro insensato;
somnia extollunt imprudentem: so that those that give ear unto it are like
those poor Dreamers, who being rich only whilst they sleep, lose all as soon
as they awake: their sleep enricheth them, and when they awake they are
plundered of all, and reduced to their former poverty: But the Hope of a
Christian is true, and being founded upon the promises of God, who cannot lie,
never deludes the Believer that listens to them.

If that of Men be false, we need not wonder that it is miserable; and for
those imaginary contentments it allures us with, gives nothing but real pains.
For though we may flatteringly apprehend her as the most agreeable passion, and
endeavor to persuade our selves that she sweetens the disquietnesse of our
longings; true Philosophy confesses her the cause of our Fear; Desines
sperare, desines timere. Senec.
and that the only means to be free from distrustful apprehensions, is to be
free from hope: But the Hope of a Christian is accompanied with confidence, and
so close united to pleasure, that it passes for one part of our Felicity.

Finally, the Hope of Worldlings is so often faulty, that the Scripture calls
it an Abomination, and makes us know, that all the pretenses of sinners are
nothing but Crimes: The Lascivious promises himself nothing but Adulteries,
the Ambitious naught but Tyrannies, the Furious plots vengeance, the Covetous
feeds himself with unjust gains, and all of them says S. Gregory never
acknowledge their sin till the pleasure is past, and grief succeds in the place
thereof: But the Hope of a Christian is Innocent, produces just desires in
their souls, and the Good they wait for, makes them commence Saints upon Earth,
that they be perfected in heaven.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. The Description of Christian Charity.
DIvinity teaches us, that God is so infinite, that to express all his
Greatness, he must have as many names as he has perfections. Therefore is it
that the Scripture calls him sometimes a Sun, because his brightness dissipates
the darkness of our hearts, and discovers our intentions from the very depth of
our wills: Sometimes he is called a Heaven, because his Immensity incircles all
his works, and comprehends in his Nature, whatever he produces by his Power:
Sometimes he is styled a devouring Fire, because he consumes our sins, and
because his holiness more active then that Element, burns the souls of the
Saints whom it purifieth: Sometimes he is called a Flower, because his beauty
ravisheth us, his odor perfumes us, and his splendor dazels us. In as much as
Charity is his noblest and most excellent expression, the Scripture handles it
with the same respect, and perceiving that it cannot manifest all its
Excellencies by one single name, gives it as many Appellations, as this Virtue
has different qualities. And because every name is a kind of a Definition, I
believe I ought to rehearse them in this Discourse, which will contribute very
much toward the knowledge of the Excellencies of Charity.

Saint John the Evangelist, whom we may call the Disciple of Love, as well as
of Light, Deus charitas est and qui manet in charitate in Deo manet, and Deus
in eo. 1 John 4.
teaches us that God is Charity, and though in this definition he pretends not
to persuade us that the Charity which makes us love God is God himself, yet
his design is to inform us, that there is nothing can more happily transform us
into God then this virtue, because he vouchsafes to bear the name thereof; and
of all the things in the world there is none that express his Greatness in so
noble an Hieroglyphick. Therefore Saint Augustine ravished with this Speech,
has uttered that which gives us the meaning thereof. God is Charity, a short
Elogie, but exceeding great; short in words, but great in sense: If you inquire
how many Gods there are, this Definition will tell you but one, and if you ask
what he is, will assure you he is Love. St. Bernard, who following the steps of
St. Augustine, revived his opinions in France, Deus Charitas est, quid
pretiosius? and qui manet in charitate in Deo manet, quid securius? and Deus in
eo, quid jucundius. Bern.
and made us see that in the matter of Grace we need consult no other Oracle,
heightens this Definition, with as much learning as Eloquence. God, says he,
is Charity, what more precious? he that abides in Charity, abides in God; what
more secure? and God abides in him, what condition more agreeable? Indeed we
cannot possess Charity in our hearts, but together with it we must have the
Divine Essence, and their Union is so inseparable, that the one cannot be lost
without the other.

This gave the Apostle of the Gentiles occasion to call Charity the Fellowship
of the Holy Ghost, because being the chiefest of his Gifts, he never produces
it in a soul but he always enters together with it: Light is never dis-joyn'd
from the Sun; and if it be true that this noble quality subsisted some days
without adhering to that glorious Star, the same power that united them, may
again separate them: But the Holy Spirit and Charity are indivisible, this fire
is never without heat, this Sun is never without brightness, and all Scripture
would be false, if Charity were not a certain proof of the presence of the Holy
Spirit in our souls.

The same Apostle whom we style the Panegyrist of Charity, assures us, that it
is the fulfilling of the Law, and the accomplishment of the Decalogue: Indeed
he lives holily, that loves the Supreme Good, and at the same time those that
may enjoy it with him: He is perfect, says S. Augustine, that can regulate his
affection, and govern himself with so much justice, that he loves what is
amiable, and hates what is odious; and proportioning his charity to the merit
of the objects, loves that differently, which he cannot love equally. Therefore
is there not so great a necessity in reading holy Books, in diving into the
mysteries of Scripture, to search out the meaning of the Prophets, because in
exercising Charity we may boast we have fullfilled all, we have understood all.
Therefore says the same St. Augustine, sinners have no more excuse, nor can
they lay their sins upon their ignorance, because God to ease their memory
seems to abbreviate his Doctrine in abbreviating his Word Incarnate, and
clothed it with so much light, that the most Ignorant may understand it: It is
short, that it may be remembered; clear that it may be comprehended; and this
treasure, notwithstanding its preciousnes, is so easy to be discovered, that
it costs us no pains to have it, but to ask for it.

Let us add further with Saint Paul, to explain the nature of a virtue that
seems inexplicable, that it is the source of all good things, In charitate
radicati, not only because it imparts life but merit and goodness: For when Hope
or Faith are divided from Charity, they die or languish; and when Justice or
Temperance are animated with any other Spirit, they are criminal or
unfortunate. I know there are some Virtues that share in this glory with
Charity; that Faith is called the principle of Christian life, because it is
the first that God sheds abroad into men's souls, that Humility is the root,
because it is always hid in the Earth, nor shines forth but by those fruits
that spring from it, but both of them owe their worth to Charity, because
without it, the former is unprofitable, the second hypocritical.

If leaving the Apostles we consider what the Fathers of the Church have spoken
of Charity, we shall find all their writings so many panegyricks of this
virtue, that they are never more eloquent then when they discourse of charity;
and looking upon her as the Queen of virtues, speak of her with that respect
which is due to Sovereigns. Saint Augustine who has no less defended the part
of Charity, then of Grace, seeing in a thousand passages he is pleased to
confound them, says, that this excellent virtue is the only Science of
Christians, that it comprehends what ever we know already, and what ever we are
yet ignorant of; that it is the principle upon which all other knowledges do
depend, and that it imbraceth in her chaste bosom what ever is scattered in
the garden of the Scriptures, that it shines forth in those mysteries we are
acquainted with, and lies hid in those we are yet ignorant of. Thence it comes
to pass that this great Saint engaging himself in the proof of this verity,
makes us see that Love is the Epitome of all Sciences, and that to be learned
is to be charitable. What lights, says he, can we find in the writings of
Philosophers which we may not discover in this Commandment, which obliges us
to love God above all things, and our neighbor as our self? There you shall
find the secrets of natural Philosophy, because the true causes of the
Creatures are in God as in their Principle; there you shall perceive the
precepts of Morality, because we cannot form a good life, but in loving what is
amiable, and withal, in loving it as much as is meet: there you shall read the
demonstrations of Logic, because the reasonable soul ought not to seek, nor
indeed can find reason and truth any where but in him that is the fruitful
source thereof; There you shall discover the mysteries of the Politics,
because the preservation of States, and the right conduct of Monarchies depends
upon the fair correspondence and fidelity of the Subjects, who will never love
themselves sincerely, if they love not the supreme Good, God; and if for the
love of him, who cannot be deceived, together with him they love not all their
like.

The Master of the Sentences, Charitas est dilectio qua diligitur Deus propter
se, and proximus propter Deum, vel in Deo magis. Senten.
who deserves that name for no other reason but because he is the Disciple of
Saint Augustine, walking in his steps, that he may not wander, and following
his principles, that he may not mistake, teaches us that charity is a love as
just as it is discerning, which weighing the condition of persons, loves God
for himself, and his neighbor for Gods sake: Indeed it is a kind of iniquity
to seek for motives to love God out of God himself; he ought to be the cause
of our love; if we respect his recompenses, rather then his perfections, we are
mercenaries; if we stand more in fear of stripes then of his frowns, we are
slaves; and as Saint Augustine says, if we are more taken with his gifts, then
his goodness, we are adulterers. Charity, that it may be holy must be chaste,
or to speak more truly, it cease to be charity, when it cease to be chaste;
our love changes it is nature as soon as it changes it is motive; when it
fastens upon our interests, it becomes concupiscence, and when a man loves God
only to purchase perishable goods, or to avoid eternal pains; me thinks he
better deserves the name of Slave, then that of Lover.

I am ashamed that we should deal with God, as we would not be dealt with our
selves: could we read men's hearts, we should be extremely offended at the
carriage of those friends, who more respect our fortune then our person, and
who consulting only their own interests, study not so much our glory, as their
own profit. There is no Master will keep servants who serve him only because
they cannot impunely offend him, who obey him merely for fear of the lash,
respect not his commands, but because they fear his anger; and certainly he
would be well grounded in this resolution, because there is no body but knows
that a slave, who has no other obligation but his fear, manumits himself as
soon as he loses it, and neglects the service of his Master when he hopes for
no more recompenses, nor stands in fear of no more punishments.

If we believe Saint Augustine, such a slave has innocent hands with a guilty
heart; Sin lodges still in his soul with fear; he overcomes not his
inclination, but out of the apprehension of pain; he loves what he dares not
do, and by an infallible consequence; he hates the Master that forbids his
undertakings. Therefore does Charity which is so contrary to Concupiscence,
banish fear from their souls in whom it resides: It seeks the honor of him
she loves, sacrifices her Interests to the glory of God, and having none but
commendable motives, loves him not because he is beneficial, but because he is
indeed amiable: when she communicates her affection by endowments to her
neighbor, she looks only upon him whose image he is, and not considering those
reasons that are the inducements of interessed souls, it is enough that a
creature is capable of possessing God to merit a charitable affection. Thence
it comes to pass that she renders the same duties to her enemies; cherishes
them that injure her; and insensible of their wrongs, pardons those that
trample upon her. The will of her God sets all her motions awork; though
inordinate nature counsel her, she remains constant in her resolutions, and
knowing there is no sinner whose conversion may not be hoped for; she prays
for those that despitefully use her, that after the example of Jesus Christ,
she may make her tormentors her friends.

In as much as this Discourse draws to an end, I must be more brief in the
other definitions of Charity, and say succinctly with Saint Augustine, that she
is the love of the true good, because to speak properly, she adheres only to
God, in consideration of whom she despises all other goods, which are nothing
but lies or illusions. The desire and possession whereof she leaves to
concupiscence; she envies not her false felicity, because she knows it is really
but a true misery; and by means of those lights that came down from heaven, she
never troubles her self to acquire those Goods which make not the possessours
better, because they cannot use them well, if they be not good before they take
them in possession.

By a necessary Consequence, Charity is a love which makes us tender of those
goods we cannot lose against our wills; I wonder not that Concupiscence is
poor, because the preservation of her riches depends not upon her will; she
may be robbed of all that she loves; violence or injustice may spoil her of her
treasures, calumny may black her reputation, grief may damp her pleasures,
death whose only name brings so much terror with it, may take away her life:
But Charity, who has this advantage that she has chosen the better part, is
well assured it shall never be taken from her: she loves a Good she cannot be
plundered of, she knows that Fortune has no Dominion over Grace; that the
severity of torments, and the sweetness of pleasures cannot impair her
felicity. This is it that St Augustine has so happily expressed in those
words, which contain the Encomium and the definition of Charity: Charitas est
amor rerum quas non nisi volentes amittimus: It Is the love of things which we
part not with but when we have a mind to it. Inasmuch as there is great
affinity between the supreme Good and dilection, St Augustine has drawn from
one and the same Principle their common advantage; for he teaches us, that as
Love is not charitable but when it respects a Good which cannot be taken away;
the Good also is not true, but when he that possesses it cannot lose it but by
his own fault. Nolite amare praesentia, quae possessa onerant, amata inquinant,
amissa cruciant. Ber.
Solid good, says he, is of such a nature, that it is never lost unless a man
will: The Covetous every day lose their riches with sorrow of heart; the
Ambitious fall from their dignities with grief of mind; and the immodest
Wantons testify by their tears, that the deprivation of what they love is no
voluntary loss: But this Good, that inspires us with Goodness, can neither be
acquired nor lost without our own consent.

Thence arises another Definition of Charity, and a second opposition to
Concupiscence her Enemy: This makes us slaves of what we love, find Servitude
where we expect Sovereignty, punishes our Ambition in deceiving it; as she
imitates the Devil, who ruined us by his promises, she throws us into thraldom
by filling us with the hope of Liberty: There is no sinner but is sensible of
his torment. The Covetous are the slaves of their wealth; a great Fortune is a
glorious servitude, and all those that are engaged in love are entangled in a
Captivity. Therefore has Augustine said admirably well; Men become vassals of
the Creatures, when by unjust means they endeavor to make themselves Masters.
It Is Charity only that exalts us in humbling us, and more happy then
Concupiscence, makes us find liberty in bondage, sovereignty in obedience; for
submitting to God, we soar above all sublunary things; by teaching us to obey,
we learn to command; and imposing but one Sovereign over us, gives us as many
subjects as there are creatures.

Finally, to conclude this Discourse with a Definition which may be called the
Panegyric of Charity, we say she is the Love of eternal Goods, as
Concupisence is of perishable ones. This virtue is so generous that after the
example of Eagles which look only upon the Sun, she considers only God: when
she expresses any affection to men or Angels, she rises as high as the
Creator; she would conceive her self unjust, did she love any thing but for
God; and making her glory of that Maxim she bespeaks God by the mouth of one
of his Lovers, with these excellent words; Minus te amat qui tecum aliquid
amat, and non propter te. Aug.
He loves thee not at all who loves any thing with thee, which he loves not for
thy sake. Concupiscence on the contrary is wedded to the creatures, runs along
unhappily with them, finds sorrow where she looks for content, and seeing
those objects perish which were the Fuel to her flames, is forced to wast away
in sad lamentations, and to begin those complaints here, which will last for
ever in the dominions of Hell.

The Sixth DISCOURSE. Of the Properties and Effects of Charity.
IF the Learned Tertullian, had reason to call the Devil Gods Ape; me thinks I
may style Concupiscence the Ape of Charity, because she endeavors to copy her,
thereby to obscure her, promising her slaves the same advantages Charity makes
her subjects hope for: she takes the same course, continues the same designs,
and in her opposition is so perfect a Transcript of this excellent Original,
that the most part of Philosophers confound them together. Their ends are
rather contrary then different; but the means they make use of to come thither,
are altogether alike; Their Principles are opposite, but their Conclusions run
parallel; Their thoughts clash, but their language agrees; so that to complete
the Portraicture of Charity, I must draw the Picture of Concupiscence, and make
use of the same colors to paint them both.

Concupiscence or self-love is active; the greater it is in the source, the
more violent is it in the effects; nothing can stop its fury, and all the
disorders we see in the world, are the works of this irregular passion: she
changes her name according to the objects she fixes upon; and adhering to
Glory, or Profit, or Pleasure, she is styled Ambition, Lust, or Avarice: But in
all these different conditions, she is ever active, and by no means sits still.
Sometimes she beats an Alarm to war, to increase her reputation in enlarging
her Empire: Sometimes she passes the Seas to get riches, and driven by want
which never forsakes her, feeds her wolf, supposing to allay his appetite:
Sometimes she sets upon Chastity, and making use of a thousand subtilties to
corrupt it, troubles whole Nature to purchase her satisfaction. Therefore is it
that Saint Augustine who was so well acquainted with the humor of
Concupiscence, says, that no love was idle; that 'twas active as soon as born;
that the oppositions made against it, double its fury; and judging its strength
by its violence, finds nothing impossible. Thence is it that the ambitious
conceive so many designs that surpass humane power, and hardening themselves
against all difficulties, had rather break then bow. Thence comes it to pass,
that the covetous undergo so many miseries to fill their coffers, and are
exposed to the fury of all the elements to comply with that passion that
tyrannizeth over them.

These attempts are the images of those Charity effects, which is yet more
active then Concupiscence: For as her hope is founded upon God, and the
greatness of her Conquests heightens her courage, whereby she travels for
Eternity, she believes there is no pain she ought not to suffer, nor
difficulties she must not overcome. Nothing seems hard when it may serve her
turn, and measuring her force by her affection, imagines nothing ought to check
her enterprises; Nihil difficile videtur amanti: amor enim nome^ difficultatis
erubescit. Bern.
She chides her laziness when she deliberates: she is afraid her weakness
should be objected to her, when she parlies for composition; and she is so used
to overcome, that she looks upon difficulties not so much as a true excuse, as
a shameful pretense. Thus the Martyrs have traversed the flames to find Jesus
Christ; The Virgins have provoked wild Beasts, that they might be the sooner
with their Beloved; The Anchorites have contested with grief, that they might
carry Heaven by violence. Finally, Charity is of the nature of fire, she cannot
lie still, she sets upon her body when she finds no other enemy; and that she
may not be unprofitable, seeks for occasions of suffering when she wants those
of acting: And this is the second resemblance between these two Loves.

For Concupiscence has her Martyrs as well as Charity, she suffers for what
she loves; and as doing and suffering are mutually in the world, she gives
proof of her courage in these two different conditions: From the evils she
undergoes, she extracts vanity; she makes them her happiness when they are
past; and lest they should slip out of her memory, she ruminates upon them in
her solitudes, and entertains her self with them in companies: she has some
satisfaction in her Martyrdom, when she thinks it will be an argument of her
Constancy, or of her Fidelity; nor is she troubled to be made the prey of
Flames or of Lions, provided she may evidence her Courage and her Affection.
Charity thrives better in this design then Concupiscence; she has made many
more Martyrs then vainglory has; as she takes her birth from the Cross, so
is she never more vigorous nor content then when she swims in her own blood;
she is witty to invent occasions of suffering, and becomes her own tormentor
when she can meet with no other. The absence of her Beloved is the greatest
part of her punishment; and conceiving that torments may shorten her
banishment, she is inquisitive after them, as the remedies of her languishing:
Therefore do these Divine Lovers suffer always upon Earth; the peace of the
Church frees not them from persecution; and though the Princes that govern them
are Christians, they meet with Tyrants that persecute them. Every failing is
their torture; every moment makes them languish, and they die a thousand times
in a day, because they will not die at last. Indeed their Love which is as
witty as cruel, learns them innocent murders; they commit Parricides without a
Crime; they kill Adam in their person, that Jesus Christ may live there; they
take vengeance of this Father that made them guilty, and destroying whatever
they received from him; of every one of their inclinations they make a
reasonable sacrifice.

But the Masterpiece of Love is, that it makes that present which we love, and
in despite of absence unites us with it. Remoteness is certainly one of the
greatest torments of Love; he shuns it as his mortallest enemy, and employs all
his stratagems to be secured from it: he has recourse to Presents, knowing
very well that they are the remembrancers of the absent, and that it is very
hard to forget a person to whom we are beholding: he entertains himself by the
commerce of Letters; he writes to those he cannot speak to; he beguiles his
Passion with a picture; and not being able to see his friend, he is satisfied
with beholding his portraicture: But when all these inventions content not, he
reflects upon himself; and making use of his thoughts and desires, he goes upon
the quest, and retrives him whose absence caused his punishment. For the
Understanding is an imperious faculty, which by a Natural Magic renders absent
things present; excelling the Imagery of Painters, because her Idea's can
speak; and the same spirit that gives them life, infuses motion into them, and
speech: If Love be not satisfied with this invention, he obliges the Will to
enquire out what she affects; and to quit the body and the soul, to be united
to the object of her sorrow. To obey her Sovereign, she commands her desires to
bestir themselves, to prevent the diligence of the winds; and passes Sea and
Land to seek the Subject of her vexation to the worlds end: She pursues the
Posts she has dispatched; imitates the agility of Angels; and like those
spirits finding themselves wherever they operate, clings in spite of absence
to what she loves. In these admirable courses, she arrives at her journeys end
without passing any middle distance; she traverseth Kingdoms in a moment; and
disengaging her self from the body she informs, finds her self miraculously in
the subject she loves.

Concupiscence works the same Miracles every day; she makes use of the
Understanding and of the Will for her satisfaction; she employs these two
faculties to content her Passion; and when the ears or the eyes can tell her no
news of the remote objects that torment her, she has recourse to her thoughts
and desire to bring them to her presence. But we must confess that Charity acts
this part much better; for though that which she loves be in heaven, she
journeys thither without weariness; she goes to seek him whom the Angels enjoy;
Iter tuum ad. caelum voluntas tua, gradus tui affecius tui; ambulas affectibus
non pedibus; accedis ad Deum amando, recedis neg^igendo: stans in terra in
caelo es si diligas Deum. Aug.
and leaving the Sun and Stars below her, is swallowed up in that Abyss of
Glory, whose elongation caused her torment. For S. Augustine excellently
informs me, our Affections are our Wings, and our Will is our Guide to conduct
us to heaven. You think perhaps you must build a tower to ascend thither; that
the Angels must be invited down to assist you, or that the wings of a dove must
be borrowed to convey you thither: but your Love is your Pole Star; by your
Desires you scale those heavenly regions; by your negligence you stand at
distance from them; and loving God upon the earth, you may boast your selves
already in heaven: For it is not with the Soul as with the Body; this cannot
move without changing of place; but that needs only change her affection, and
presently she ascends: she is where she would be; her love makes all her
objects present; and as soon as over she sixeth her affection upon any thing,
it is no longer at a distance: This is it which he delivers admirably in another
passage: We can never be better then when we are with him whom nothing can
equal in goodness; we go thither not walking, but loving; and he is so much the
nearer and at hand, by how much our Love is more pure and vigorous. Then
letting us see the advantage Charity has above Concupiscence, he brings in God
speaking these words which evidence an Oracle: I command you to love me; and I
assure you that in doing so, you shall enjoy me: Sinners possess not all that
they love; there are covetous worldlings that sigh for gold, and yet are poor;
Ambitious persons that are passionate for glory, and yet are infamous: but
every one that loves me, finds me; I am with him that seeks for me; his love
makes me present in his soul; as soon as he longs for me, I am in his embraces;
and I leave off to be absent as soon as he begins to be in love with me.

Though there is not any lover that has spoken more nobly of this residence of
God in our souls by Charity then S. Augustine; the Fathers his followers have
used the same language; and once instructed in the School of Divine Love, have
acknowledged that 'twas impossible to love God and not to possess him. Qui
mente integra Deum desiderat, profecto jam habet quem amat; neque enim quisquam
posset Deum diligere, si hunc quem diligit non haberet. Greg. mag. in Moral.
See what S. Gregory says in his Morals, which differs little from what S.
Augustine has delivered in his Confessions. The Believer that seeks after God
without dividing his affections, possesses him already whom his soul loves:
For he could never be amorous for him, were he not filled with his love, and
inanimated with his presence. S. Bernard, who serves for an Interpreter to the
Spouse in the Canticles, and expresses her mind with as much innocent
nakedness as winning sweetness, brings her in holding the same discourse. She
comforts her self in the absence of her Beloved, by the belief she has that
she bears him in her heart, and that she is the living throne of him who never
forsakes her but to exercise her patience.

Let us conclude this Discourse with the highest operation of Love, and say,
that this last effect is to transform Lovers into the things that they love,
and to stamp them with their qualities. This property is so natural to Love,
that it remains with it even when it exercises its power over inanimate
things. If the Elements jar, if they trouble the peace of the Universe by their
contestations; if these four bodies that compose all others, seem to engage
whole Nature in their quarrels; it is Love that obliges them to the combat: and
when Fire and Water dispute in the bosom of the clouds, or in the bowels of
the earth, they have no other design but to transform each other. Love has a
greater share in their difference then Ambition; neither do they strive so much
to destroy one another as to be united, that they may be but one and the same
thing. Concupiscence succeeds wonderfully in this enterprise; she imprints in
men all the qualities of those objects she obliges them to be in love with;
and by a strange Metamorphosis, deprives them of their proper inclinations, to
indue them with strange external ones: They become abominable as the things
that they dote upon; they change their Nature, in changing their Love: and we
see by experience, that Lascivious persons become effeminate as the women they
caress, that the Ambitious assume the vanity of that glory they court, and the
Covetous become as senseless as the metal they adore. Similes eis fiant qui
saciuns ea, and omnes qui confidunt in eis. Psalm. 115.
Therefore David justly wished that Idolators, following the laws of Love,
might become like their Idols, and might lose speech and motion for their love
toward dumb and senseless gods, that the Israelites might more easily defeat
them in the combat.

But inasmuch as Concupiscence plays the deceiver, she makes good but half her
promises to her servants: For she transforms them only to their loss; she
changes them merely to make them miserable; and of all the qualities the
things they love are endued with, she communicates none to them for the most
part but bad ones: The Lustful, who contract the lightness of women, gain not
their beauty: The Covetous, who grow stupid as their metal, extract not its
value: and the Ambitious, who vapor like the glory they feed upon, become not
always Sovereigns.

But Charity, which is more sincere and more powerful then Concupiscence,
happily transforms Christians into what they love: she imprints upon them the
qualities of heaven, and makes them heavenly upon earth; by different degrees
it exalts them as high as Divinity it self; she gives them what the devil
promised their first father; she changes them into Gods by a holy
Metamorphosis, and makes them innocently obtain what Pride made them heretofore
insolently covet: For Man's most ancient passion is to be like God: this was his
crime and his desire in Paradise; 'twas upon this consideration that he listened
to the devil; and under this hope he violated the command of God. His Pride was
punished with an ignominious brand; and he that pretended to an equality with
his Sovereign, saw himself reduced to the condition of his meanest Subjects:
This correction made him not forget his desire; he preserved his arrogance in
the midst of his misery; and being but the relic of innocent man, he could
not forbear to wish to be a God.

Piety has taught him an honest means to content his ambition: Grace takes
pains to assimilate him according to his desire: the Virtues are so many
draughts completing this Image; but Charity, their Queen, gives it perfection:
She it is that satisfies his longings; and raising him above himself, happily
transforms him into God: This is the end of all the designs of this august
Virtue, the Masterpiece of her power, the triumph of her glory; and when she
has brought Man to this height of felicity, she is content, because he is
happy: Let us not advance so important a Virtue without caution; let us make
it appear that he who was so well acquainted with the nature of Love, was not
ignorant of his effects: Let us make use of the words of S. Augustine: Men,
says he, take their name from what they love; they owe their condition to
their affection; as wives take the quality of their husbands, and Lovers those
of their Mistresses: so in loving the earth, they become earthly; in loving
heaven, they become heavenly; and carrying their affection higher in loving
God, they become Divine. But there needs no other proof of this verity, but the
Mystery of the Incarnation, where Love triumphing over God himself, made him
assume the form of a Man, invested him with our nature and our miseries, loaded
him with our sins, and obliged him to appear before his Father as a Penitent,
or rather as an Anathema. This prodigious change makes us look for another: For
God was not made Man, but that Men might be made Gods; he was humbled, that
they might be exalted; he took their nature, that he might bestow his upon
them; nor did he suffer his love to render him like Man, but to persuade them
that the same love may liken them to God.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. Of the Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance of
a Christian.
THough sin has committed so many outrages against Nature; divided her Forces,
obscured her Lights, and weakened her Liberty; yet has he not been able to
destroy the workmanship of God: There remains to man since his Fall, some
strength to combat his enemies, some light to discover errors, and some
liberty to defend him against evil: After his Transgression, his misery opened
his eyes, when, seeking out remedies for his disease, he made himself a
Morality, which taught him virtues to rectify those disorders his disobedience
had occasioned in his person.

Some call them the Relics of Innocence, Virtus ars est, nou natura. Senec.
but without any reason; Because the Virtues that accompanied that happle
condition having no enemies, were not obliged to stand upon their guard. Others
call them the Succors of sinful Man, and that very justly, Because they help
him in his necessities, and comfort him in his misfortunes. They believe that
Adam receiving them from God after his repentance for his fault, taught them
his children, and left them these arms to combat their Passions: But inasmuch
as they went not to him who had bestowed them upon their father, and had
reserved himself the power of dispensing them to their children, there remained
nothing but the appearance and the name. Concupiscence took the place of
Charity; and animating her false Virtues, made them true Sins. This made S.
Augustine so often profess, that the Prudence of the Heathen is blind and
interessed; that their Fortitude is upheld merely by Vanity; that their
Temperance overcomes one passion with another; and that their Justice being
arrogant, seeks only fair pretenses to authorize its usurpations: So that these
Virtues have not recovered their Primitive purity, but by the grace of
Christianity. They owe all their worth to Charity; they are acceptable to God,
because they proceed from Jesus Christ; nor can they hope for an eternal
recompense, but because they have a Supernatural and Divine Principle:
Therefore the same Doctor mingles Charity always in the definition of these
Virtues, Definitio brevis est and vera virtutis ardor amoris, propter quod
dicit sponsa ordinate in me charitate^. Aug. lib. 15. de Civ. cap. 12.
Prudentia est in eligendis, Temperantia in utendis; Fortitudo in tolerandis,
Justitia in distribuendis. Aug.
and makes them pass for so many several motions or functions of Love. In
this conceit he calls Prudence an illuminated Love, Justice a regulated Love,
Fortitude a courageous Love, and Temperance a faithful Love.

But because this definition seems to limit these Virtues, and many think they
are not so much the Impulses as the Ministers of Love; Let us say, that
Prudence is a Practical Science, teaching the soul what it ought to do,
inspiring her with a love of good things, and a detestation of bad; and
carrying light into the understanding, teaches it to discern what is
profitable from what is hurtful.

Fortitude is a courageous Virtue, making us suffer with an evennesse of mind
affronts and griefs; It Is a victorious habit that triumphs in suffering, and
owes the best part of her advantages to the bitterness of the afflictions that
persecute her: It Is a stability of spirit against all the miseries of the
world; a resolution to fight and overcome all the labors that accompany life;
It Is a Virtue whose generous humor makes us desire great things, contemn low
things, and endure hard things; or it is a Virtue that raises the soul above
Fear, apprehending nothing but dishonor, and which instructs us to carry our
selves equally in favors, and in disgraces; If we will shut her up within the
bounds of Christianity, we may say, it is a Virtue informed with Grace,
preparing us to undergo all things rather then fail of our duty.

Temperance is a just dominion of reason over the passions, but especially over
those that flatter us by the pleasure they promise, and employ voluptuousness
to seduce us: It Is a Virtue that teaches us to wish nothing that may cause
shame in us or regret; not to do any thing that exceeds the bounds of reason;
to suffer nothing that may diminish her authority, and foment the rebellion of
her lawful subjects: Or to use Saint Augustines expressions, it is an affection
that subdueth the Concupiscible appetite, and gives it not leave to hunt after
those pleasures which are accompanied with shame or followed which repentance.

Justice is a Virtue that prefers the public interests before private; and
many times punishes a Delinquent with more severity then his fault requires,
to stop the course of evil, and to astonish other offenders. According to the
opinion of Saint Ambrose, it is a Virtue which has more respect to the service
of others, then of it self; and considers more the advantages of her neighbor,
then her own. According to Aristotle, it renders every one their due, punishes
Vice, rewards Virtue, maintains the peace of the State by the severity of
punishments, and the liberality of recompenses; Let us add with Seneca, though
very blind in the knowledge of Christian Virtues, that Justice is a secret
Convention Nature has contracted with men for the succor of the innocent or
distressed; that it is a Divine Law that entertains humane society, preserves
every man his right, and not respecting the quality of the persons, considers
only their merits. Finally, it is a Christian Virtue, which enlightened by Faith,
animated with Charity, obliges man to satisfy at once God, himself, and his
neighbor.

Having examined the nature of these Virtues, it remains that we take notice of
their use, and the profit that arises from them. S. Augustine, whom in
Morality I look upon as my Guide, and in Divinity my Master, says, that these
Virtues are given to the soul to imbellish her, and to arm her against Vices.
Prudence teaches her what she is to do, is in stead of a Torch to light her
in the darkness of the world. Temperance learns her not to be charmed with
pleasure; Fortitude not to be vanquished with griefs; and Justice not to be
transported with her own interests: or to express another way, no less
solidly, and more pleasingly, the obligations of these Virtues, it concerns
Prudence to know our power, Fortitude to employ it, Temperance to moderate it,
Justice to rule it; and as this Divine Spirit can never be exhausted, but knows
how to give a hundred colors to the same thing, thereby to discover all the
different beauties thereof; Let us add with him, that Prudence concerns the
choice of means: Temperance the use of pleasures: Fortitude that of
afflictions, and Justice the distribution of all these. Finally, he concludes
that it belongs to Prudence to foresee hidden things, to Temperance to desie
pleasures, to Fortitude to attaque them, and to Justice to regulate their
interests.

But because these duties savor still of the description, let us speak of
those that denote the necessity of these Virtues, and say, that honesty which
is inseparable from them is composed of four parts, without which it cannot
possibly subsist; The first is Knowledge, which serves it for a conduct and a
light; The second is the Interest of Society, which ought always to be
preferred before that of particulars; The third is a certain magnanimity, which
seems as it were the soul of all honorable Actions, and the defense of all
Virtues; The fourth is Moderation, which keeps every one within his duty, not
suffering him to undertake any thing that may be disadvantageous to his
neighbor. Light appertains to Prudence; the care of the Community to Justice;
Glorious enterprises to Fortitude, and the regulating of Pleasures to
Temperance.

Therefore has that excellent Copier of Saint Augustine, venerable Bede, who
being able to be a great Master of his own Head, chose rather to be an humble
Disciple of that learned Doctor; observed, that the Virtues coming in to the
help of man a sinner, seemed to have a mind to cure four great wounds which
Original sin had inflicted upon him.

The first is Ignorance, which is born with him, which involves him in
darkness as soon as ever nature exposes him to the light; For he is Ignorant
as soon as Criminal, and as Grace is necessary to deliver him from sin, Prudence
is requisite to defend him from Error and Falsehood; she irradiates his mind
with a Heavenly Light, gives him the spirit of discerning between Good and
Evil, and severing apparent good from real, keeps him from wandering in the
course of his life.

The second wound is that of Concupiscence, which seems particularly to have
set upon the Concupisicible appetite, which she has engaged in the love of
sinful sensualities, and diverts from innocent contentments; against this
agreeable enemy, Heaven has given him Temperance, whose business it is to
undeceive this irregular appetite, to make use of charms to suppress his
unjust inclinations, and to reduce him to a condition, where he wishes only
reasonable things.

The third wound is Weakness, which plungeth man in idleness, suffering him not
to act, frights him from Virtue, because of the difficulties it is accompanied
with, and representing Death as a Spectrum, Grief as a Monster, strives to
deter him from his duty by such fearful apprehensions: against this great
inconvenience, which may be called the root of all other; Fortitude stands up
which heightens our courage, fills the man with hope and activity, animates him
with glory, the companion of difficulty, and changing our diseases into
remedies, makes us find honor in pain, and Immortality in Death.

The fourth and deepest wound is the malice of the will, which may be called a
Natural Injustice, which is troubled at the prosperity, and rejoices at the
adversity of his neighbor: when a man minds nothing but his own interests,
believes whatever is profitable is lawful, places right in force, duty in
pleasure, and is persuaded that glory being inseparable from profit, there is
nothing beneficial which at the same time is not honorable. Morality to rid
him of so Potent an enemy, has given him Justice, which supplying the loss of
Original righteousness, teaches him to prefer his duty before his interest,
and his conscience before his reputation. This excellent Virtue which is the
soul of all the rest, undertakes to regulate man's actions, to appease all
disorders wherein his guilty birth has engaged him; For she submits his
mind to God, his body to his mind, and having made this double agreement, tries
to accommodate man with his neighbor, and to establish peace in his state
after she has brought it into his person.

Nothing distinguishes this Virtue from Original righteousness, but the
resistance it meets with in those things it would regulate; for the first took
no pains to be obeyed, she had to do with tractable subjects; the soul and
body had not as yet clash'd; their inclinations though different, were not
opposite; and these two parts that make up man, were not contrary in their
designs: so that Original righteousness had no hard task to manage a peace,
which seemed founded as well in Grace as in Nature; But Christian Justice meets
with insolent subjects, who acknowledge not their Sovereign, obey her not but
by compulsion; who being born in sedition, think it their duty to live in
disobedience; nevertheless, when assisted with Prudence to choose means of
accommodation; seconded with Temperance, to suppress pleasures; and manfully
supported by Fortitude, to overcome grief; she gains that by violence, which
Original righteousness did by sweet compliance; and if she be not so quiet, she
may boast at least she is more glorious.

To express the same Truth in other words, and to give it a new beauty in
setting it out in new colors, we may say, that Prudence is busied in
discussing those things that deceive us, to discern truth from falsehood, and to
secure us from being surprised with a lie: Temperance is employed to suppress
those things that charm our affections, and whose allurements pleasingly
heighten our appetites: Fortitude is engaged to vanquish those things that
terrify us; it revives our spirits; and as a General of an Army that heartens
his soldiers, endeavors to rally that Courage Grief or Danger had in a manner
routed. Justice is busied in regulating those concernments wherein lies our
interest, and which, under a color of some gain, would set us upon some
violent course to compass it. Wherefore Seneca said, that perilous things were
to be mastered by Valor; pleasurable things to be moderated by Temperance;
Things that abuse us to be examined by Prudence; and those that tempt, and fain
would corrupt us, to be regulated by Justice.

If it be true that Virtue respects only our person, and that, according to the
opinion of some Philosophers, who would make her the slave of our interests,
her sole object is man; we may say, without thwarting their conceit, that
Prudence considers things without us, which being hid and obscured by the
distance of places and times, cannot be foreseen but by the light of this
Virtue, which seems to be a natural kind of prophecy: According to this
principle, Temperance regulates things that are below us in the inferior
Region of the soul, reduces the passions and the senses to their duty, and
entertains reason in her Empire: Fortitude combats those things that rise
against us, defends us from our enemies, scatters all those evils whos^ pomps
has no other design but to weaken our courage: Justice looks after that which
is beside or above us, makes us render to God our Sovereign, and to our
neighbor our equal, what of due belongs unto them: and parting our obligations
according to their conditions, binds us to love the former above our selves,
and the later as our selves.

If, as it is very likely, these Virtues respect our rest and quietness; they
deliver us from four inconveniences which may exceedingly trouble us: For many
times we prefer an imaginary apparent Good before a real one; and from this
error Prudence secures us: we desert a Good, because difficult; and from this
cowardice Fortitude rouzeth us: we seek after some pleasing, but unprofitable
or pernicious Good; and this pitfal Temperance teaches us to avoid: or,
lastly, we desire something advantageous to our selves, but prejudicial to our
neighbor; and this iniquity Justice forbids, obliging us to preserve the
interest of another as our own.

But whatever succor the Christian can draw from these virtues, he must
confess they reproach him with his miseries, and exprobate him with his crimes:
For Prudence informs him that he is in banishment, where Good and Evil are mixed
together, and where he is in danger to mistake as often as he has occasion to
choose. Temperance teaches him that he has inordinate Passions that must be
suppressed, that he nourishes monsters in his person which must be strangled;
but that the disease over-tops the remedy, because Prudence dissipates not the
darkness of his Ignorance, nor does Temperance regulate all the disorders of
his Appetite. Justice tells him he must submit his spirit to God, his body to
his spirit; but the resistance he finds, makes him sadly feel that earth is
not the mansion of Peace, nor this life the time of Triumph. Finally,
Fortitude, which obliges him to combat Grief, is an argument that he is still
criminal, because he still remains miserable.

The Eighth DISCOURSE. Of the Humility of a Christian.
IT is a strange thing, but withal exceeding true, that of all the Virtues
there is none more natural, nor yet a greater stranger to Man then Humility:
For she is born with him; he carries the principles thereof in his soul and in
his body, in that the one is drawn out of Nothing, the other is formed out of
the Slime of the earth: He must forget his extraction, to give the least
admittance to Vainglory; and he need only study and mind himself, to be
sensibly affected with Humility. Therefore said an Ancient that Pride was a
stranger-vice, and Humility a natural virtue. In the mean time, Man was never
more arrogant then since he became so wretchedly miserable: That which ought to
take down his spirit, has raised it; and the misery that should have taught
him Humility, has made him quite forget so commendable a virtue. She was
unknown to the Heathen: her name, which we account so glorious, was infamous
among them; nor was it ever ascribed to any actions but those that deserved
blame. It was necessary that Christian grace should revive her, and that her
light should discover the beauties of this unknown virtue: Indeed she had no
credit with men, till the mystery of the Incarnation: God must be abased, that
we may learn this lesson; and his examples must persuade humane wilfulness that
true greatness consists in low deportment.

Though this Virtue takes her merit from her Master, and her glory is very
remarkable in having God for her Author; yet must we confess that in her own
nature she is of very high esteem, and that her proper intrinsecal excellency
gives worth and value to her. For she seems to include all the Cardinal
virtues, and to comprehend all their advantages in her essence: She partakes of
Prudence, because she is illuminated, and knows the greatness of God and the
meanness of the Creature: She has something of Temperance, because she bridles
the pleasure that vanity promises, and defends her self from that agreeable
enemy, who makes use of praises only to deceive us: She shares with Fortitude,
because she combats shame and grief, which frequently accompany base and
unworthy actions: Finally, she is an image of Justice, because she treats the
Creator and the Creature with so much equity; and rendering Glory to the one,
reserves nothing but Contempt for the other.

But lest we should think her riches are merely the spoils of another, that she
has none but borrowed excellencies, nor is at all considerable but for the
alms she receives from other virtues; we shall do well to consider her nature,
and to be acquainted with her by weighing her definition. Humility, according
to S. Augustine, is a voluntary debasement of the soul before God, in the sight
of her own condition; which representing her Nothingness, reads her this
lesson, that none can preserve her but he that created her: This great man
expressly joins the Creature with the Creator in this definition: for Man
looking only upon himself, might easily grow proud at the sight of his own
privileges: when he looks up to God, compares the Creature with the Creator,
confronting two things opposite by such an infinite distance, he is obliged to
fall low upon his face, if his Pride exceed not that of the devil. Therefore
did that afflicted Prince, who would persuade his friends that his being
miserable was no argument he was criminal, change his language, when he had
compared his own defects with the perfections of God, and confess there was no
creature so holy that was not guilty before him: Now mine eye sees thee, and
therefore I abhor my self: As if he would have said, Whilst I compared my
actions with those of men, I cherished a high opinion of my virtue; but when
thy light had cleared my spirit, and I beheld that holiness whereby thou art so
gloriously separated from thy works, I prevent thy arrest; and forgetting my
innocence, pass sentence of condemnation upon my self. This is the apprehension
of Humility; and whenever Man is tempted to Pride, this lowliness of mind
presents him before God in his nature, in his person, in his actions: in his
Nature, that he is miserable; in his Person, that he is criminal; in his
Actions, that he is unconstant and wavering.

Others define Humility a disesteem that Man conceives of his own excellency,
inasmuch as he has not any thing which was not given him by Grace, and may not
be taken away by Justice. For this wretch lives but upon loan: In the height of
his Innocence, he was but many creatures in gross; and it seems that God, to
oblige him to Humility, made him up of borrowed pieces: He takes his Being from
the Elements, his Life from Plants, his Sense from Animals, and his
Understanding from Angels: So that should he return every Creature what he has
received, all that would remain to him would be his Nothingness and his Sin.

S. Bernard, whom we may call the Panegyrist of Humility, knowing that this
virtue has two Principles, the Mind and the Will, defines it sometimes a
knowledge of our miseries, sometimes a contempt of our advantages: Both these
definitions are true; but the second is much more perfect then the former: For
the very devils, in the midst of their darkness, acknowledge their miseries;
they are not ignorant that he that punishes them is able to destroy them; and
that notwithstanding their rebellion, they depend upon this just Sovereign whom
they have dishonored. But there are none but the Righteous that join
Submission to their Knowledge, and, by an act of the Will, Humilitas est
contemptus propriae excellentiae. Bernard.
pass from the sight of their infirmities to the contempt of their perfections:
They would not change their nature nor their condition; they rejoice that their
Being makes them the servants of God: of a happy Necessity, they make an
excellent Virtue; and profiting by their Misery, they grow great by diminution.
For Glory is the portion of Humility; she cannot shun that honor she flies
from; this enemy she apprehends leaves her not but for a time; and that which
seems to threaten her ruin, becomes at last her recompense.

Inasmuch as Pride and Humillty are opposite in their nature, they are also
contrary in their effects: Pride intending to exalt it self, is thrown down;
the more it approaches to God, the more it removes from him; and by a
misfortune inevitably accompanying this capital sin, it tumbles into hell, when
it thinks to scale heaven: But Humility, which walks another path, is exalted
in being abased, draws near to God by standing at a distance from him, and
reaches heaven by descending to the gates of hell. Therefore does her enemy
dress himself sometimes in her mantle, to carry on his designs; he affects
modesty, and, to gain reputation, seems to slight it: but his dissimulation is
of no continuance; his vanity presently betrays him; and upon the first battery
made against his honor, he is transported with invectives, which discover the
stately humor he fain would have concealed.

In this opposition of Pride and Humility, they have notwithstanding some
correspondence: For as Humility preserves all the Virtues, Pride animates all
the Vices: He excites Envy, which is nothing but a sadness at the prosperity
of another: He whets Vengeance, which is armed only to destory whatever
resists it: He awakens Calumny, which sets upon virtue but because she darkens
his glory: and this Monster which produces all sins by his activity, protects
them by his malice. Humility, on the contrary, is the Guardian of all Virtues:
if she gives them not their life, she preserves it; if she be not their Mother,
she is their Nurse; and if she be not pompous enough to serve them for an
ornament, she is courageous enough to serve them for a defense. It is S.
Ambrose that bestows this Elogie upon her, and calls her the Protectress of the
Virtues, because they are exposed to Vanity as soon as ever they are left
destitute of Humility; and that it is a kind of miracle, when, having lost this
support, they can for any time defend themselves from their enemies. S. Bernard
sets a higher price upon it then S. Ambrose, and will have the Virtues no
longer acceptable to God then they are humble: nay, he goes further, that the
Purity of the Virgin Mary had never procured her the quality of being the
mother of God, had she not been accompanied with Humility.

Seeing this Virtue is so necessary, the rest of this Discourse shall be spent
in the search of some Reasons which may as motives beget it in our souls, and
convince our Judgments, that so our Wills may incline toward it. I find that
this Virtue has three Principles absolutely incompatible with Pride. The first
is Nothing: the second is Sin: the third is Death. Nothing is the Glory of God,
and the Shame of Man; it is the Theater upon which the Divine Majesty acts most
nobly, the Womb whereout he extracts all his works of Creation, the most
obedient of all his subjects, and which acknowledges none but his Orders.
Nature cannot create any thing; and though she be so powerful, her operations
are rather changes then productions. She converts the dew into flowers and
fruits, turns the vapors into clouds, dissolves them into showers, inflames
them into lightnings, or makes them rattle in thunder: She is absolute when she
acts upon the Elements; and having altered their qualities, converts them into
their contraries: But notwithstanding all her power, she cannot act upon
Nothing: and, as if she knew him for her father, she bears him respect, and by
no means dares venture to command him. Art, which is the Ape of Nature, never
makes her industry admired but in alterations: Nature must sustain her; and
there must be some matter whereon to exercise her power. Painters can draw no
Pictures without Colors, Architects raise no buildings without materials; and
if you take away Marble or Porphyry from Engravers, they can carve neither
Images nor Statues: It is only God that actuates Nothing, who forms a Being
out of a Nonentity, and makes his Omnipotence manifest in commanding this
Rebel.

As it is the Theater of his Glory, so is it the subject of our Confusion: It Is
enough to abase the stoutest, but to think that Nothing is his original, that
an eternity of ages passed before he was in Nature, and that he could not come
forth of that abyss of darkness and misery. In this dreadful habitation the
Angel has no privilege above the Beast; all things are more confused then in
the fabulous Chaos; and in this undigested medley, the noblest creature has no
mark of separation from the most vile. But that which adds much to man's
humiliation, is, that he has a natural bent toward annihilation; the power
that redeemed him from it, must still preserve him from relapsing; He is
divided by two contrary Inclinations; he removes from Nothingness, as from the
place of his loss; he approaches insensibly toward it, as the place of his
Original; and the experience he daily meets with of his infirmity, confirms him
in the truth of this belief. All creatures would cease to be, says Saint
Augustine, did God withdraw his arm that sustains them: Si potentiam suam
fabricatoriam rebus subtrahat, ita non erunt sicut antequam fierent non
fuerunt. Aug.
and did he leave off to uphold them, they would leave off to subsist; did he
not keep them by his looks, they would vanish into air; and did he not
contemplate himself in his creatures, they would have the same destiny with the
shadows in a glass; which depend so absolutely upon our presence, that they
would perish, did we but turn away our face from beholding them. This is it
perhaps that the Prophet intended in those words which he addresseth to God in
behalf of the creature, Avertente autem te faciem turbabuntur.

The second Principle of Humility is sin, which is a Nonentity in the order of
Grace, and which abaseth the sinner to so low a condition, that he is much more
miserable then if he were annihilated. For inasmuch as he recedes from God the
supreme Being, adhering to the creature, who is in a manner Nothing, himself
becomes a wretched Nonentity, and loses all those advantages he was made
partaker of by the union he had with his Creator. Tamdiu est aliquid homo
qua^diu haeret illi a quo factus est homo. Aug. in Psalm. 75.
This is it that Saint Augustine expresses in those excellent words; Man is
Something as long as he is united to God from whom he had his Being: but he
cease to be as soon as he separates from him by sin; and finding his Fall in
his Crimes, tumbles into a more deplorable Nothing then that of Nature: For the
former obeys the voice of God; if it contribute nothing to his design, neither
does it resist his hand; and the world that issued out of its barren depths,
was an evident proof of its submission: But the Nonentity of sin resists the
will of God, forms parties in his State, deboists his most loyal subjects, and
mastering their wills, disputes the dominion with their Sovereign. Therefore
does Saint Augustine in some place of his writings call sin an armed Nothing;
and the Scripture to show us the horror goes along with it, Nihil rebelle and
in Deum armatu^. Amb.
prefers the condition of men who never were, before that of transgressors who
are fallen into sin.

The third Principle of Humility is Death, which seems the middle between
Nothing and Sin: It is an image of the former, and a chastisement of the
second; it bears the name of both in Scripture; and the Prophets illuminated
from above, call it sometimes a Nothing, sometimes a Sin. Saint Augustine gives
us a handsome proof hereof in these words: Death, says he, is the punishment
of sin; he bears the name of his Father, to teach us that though man sin not in
dying, he never should have died if he had not sinned: and the same Doctor in
another passage, acquaints us that Death is a Nothing, which having no Essence,
might indeed be ordained by the Justice of God, but not produced by his Power.
Thence it comes to pass that it is a shameful punishment attempting the honor
of man and his life, and makes him feel himself a Criminal, because having set
upon his reputation, it proceeds to attaque his person: For he destroys this
Masterpiece of Nature, separates the two parts that compound him, breaks the
ligaments that unites them, and being not able to be revenged upon the soul,
discharges his fury upon the body, and afflicts the Mistress in punishing her
servant.

But should not all these powerful considerations oblige man to humble himself,
the Christian could by no means refuse this homage, when he considers that his
salvation depends upon Grace; that his Liberty without this Supernatural aid,
serves only to damn him; and being fallen from that happy condition wherein he
was the master of his fortune, he is now the slave of Concupiscence if he be
not enfranchised by the merits of Jesus Christ. Indeed the Example of God
debased, greatly comforts him in his misery; he is never troubled to humble
himself; when he considers the Word annihilated in the Incarnation, he submits
to the Counsels of that Divine Master; he is not ashamed to learn humility in
his School; and having heard that Oracle from his mouth, Discite a me quia
mitis sum and humilis cord: he looks upon this Virtue as his Glory, and is
forced to confess with Saint Augustine, that if it be a Prodigy to behold a man
proud, it is a Miracle to see a God humbled; and by consequence of so great an
Example, that man must have lost his judgment that should be ashamed of
Humility.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. Of the Repentance of a Christian.
ALL the Virtues have their particular advantages: the least splendid are the
most useful, and those that have not so many allurements have commonly most
desert; Repentance is of the number of these, and it seems it is not so much her
beauty, as her necessity, that makes her considerable; Her Countenance has no
comeliness; her Mouth is always full of sighs; her Eyes moist with tears; her
shoulders covered with sackcloth, and her hands armed with discipline. The
Interest of God sets her against her self; his Goodness offended, his Glory
obscured, his Mercy neglected, provokes her indignation against sinners, and
obliges them to invent torments to punish their offenses.

But did not her zeal contribute to her excellency, she is so necessary, that
in whatever condition man appears, she is proper and peculiar to him; It seems
she is his difference in Grace, and that this Virtue distinguishes him from
Angels and Beasts; For these have only a blind instinct that guides them, they
have no liberty in their actions; It is not reason but Nature that leads them,
and as they are incapable of Sin, so are they of Repentance. The Angels are
unchangeable in good and evil; Constancy has made the Angels happy, and
Obstinacy has rendered the Devils miserable; These pure spirits cannot alter,
and whether they know good and evil intuitively, or whether they act with the
full extent of their power: or whether they had but one moment to merit in, all
Divinity assures us that they cannot repent. I intend not to examine whether
Grace by its victorious sweetness, be able to work a change in them: and
whether their will be so perversely obstinate in evil, that it cannot be
diverted; But I say with our Masters, there is something in their Nature and in
their Sin, which renders them unworthy and incapable of Repentance: so that
this Virtue is a privilege of a man, one of his properties in Nature, and one
of his differences in Grace.

Being weak he never adheres so strongly to Virtue, but he may desert her; and
by a happiness arising from his infirmity, he is never so deeply engaged in
vice, but he may shake hands with it. He is neither constant in good, nor
obstinate in evil: and though he can neither leave the one, nor embrace the
other, unless he be assisted by Grace, he has a natural disposition, which
rendering him unconstant, makes him capable of this happy change that
accompanies Repentance. It seems the mercy of God which makes use of our sin to
redeem us, will make use of unconstancy to convert us: and managing this
weakness which is natural to us, takes pleasure to save us by the same means
that ruined us. If those that are of opinion that the Grace that changes men,
were able also to convert the Angels, are not agreed as touching this Maxim,
they ought at least to confess that the Angel having had but one moment to
merit in, was not capable of this Grace in the order of God, because his
Salvation or his Fall had immediately followed his Obedience or his Rebellion;
and thus it is always true, that Repentance is a favor reserved for man, and
if it lean not upon the unconstancy of his mind, it is founded at least upon
the length of his life, which seems therefore prolonged that he may have time
to repent.

But if Repentance be not natural to man, it is at least necessary for a sinner;
if it be not his difference, it is his remedy; if it be not his propriety; it is
his only refuge; and as Tertullian says, it is the Table after the Shipwreck.
Man in Paradise might save himself by his Innocence; this acceptable convoy had
brought him through a Garden of Roses; he had found pleasure with virtue; he
had conquered without fighting; and though he had had no enemies, he had not
failed to triumph. But now there remains only Repentance which swims in blood
or in tears, which is covered with earth or with ashes; which blots out no
transgressions but by lamentations; satisfies not the Justice of God, but by
preventing his arrests; nor gains any battles, but those that cost him fighs
or wounds.

The sinner following the Counsels of this austere Virtue, is always animated
against himself; his whole life is spent in sorrow; and since he lost Grace, he
is obliged to bid adieu to all pleasure; his very reconciliation with God
dispenses not with him from this severity; To be a Christian, Nullus hominiu^
transit ad Christum ut incipiat esse quod non erat, nisi eu^ poeniteat fuisse
quod erat. Aug.
intitles him to be a Penitent; it is enough that he has sinned in Adam, to
live in sadness; and being a member of Jesus Christ, he is bound over to
penance. For though the union he contracts with this adorable Head in Baptism,
happily deliver him from all his sins, that he recovers Innocence with Grace,
and be freed from all those pains which are prepared for offenders in Hell: he
becomes Penitent in becoming Innocent, and the same Sacrament that ties him to
Jesus Christ, engages him in griefs and sufferings.

The Son of God uniting the Divinity with the Humanity in his Person, is
pleased also to unite all things that seemed incompatible: Having surpassed the
difficulties that withstood the accomplishment of this mystery; having accorded
power with weakness, Nonentity with Being, Life with Death, he would make
Innocence friends with Repentance, and charge himself with the pains our sins
deserved, without interessing the holiness that made him impeccable; he was the
most just and most afflicted of all men; he was equally divided between the
blessed and the penitent; his soul resented grief with joy, and at the same
time that he reigned with the Angels, he suffered with Mortals: According to
his example, the greatest Saints have labored to join Repentance with
Innocence; His Mother the purest of Virgins, the Holiest of Women, bare the
infirmities of our nature, without contracting the obligations; and to imitate
her Son, was content to be miserable, though she were not criminal. Saint John
Baptist, who was a sinner but for some months, who received Grace in his
mothers belly, who after the Virgin was the first object of the miracles of
Jesus, who was born without sin: nor brought into the world with him the
ignominious quality of a sinner; This great Saint, I say, was the example of
Penitents: he spent his whole life in the Deserts; he had no other covering
then that of Trees or Rocks; Earth served him for a Bed, Sackcloth for a
Garment, Water for Drink, and Locusts for Food: He added the labors of
preaching to the austerity of penance; he reproved sin with boldness; his
generous freedom procured him the hatred of the great ones; and for a
recompense of so many virtues, he lost his head at the entreaty of an
incestuous woman.

Thence it comes to pass that the Christian, having the honor to be a member
of Jesus Christ, is obliged to Repentance: the favor he has received in the
Church, gives him no dispensation from this duty; and if he have the use of
Reason when admitted to Baptism, his Contrition must precede that Sacrament,
and recover his lost Innocence by the assistance of this virtue. His obligation
continues with his life: For as the Grace of Christianity does not enfranchise
him fully from Concupiscence, but he groans still under the weight of his
irons, sees his heart divided between Self-love and Charity, that both these
principles make him act successively, and having obeyed Grace, obeys Sin again;
he is bound to run to sorrow, to deface his light offenses with Tears, and to
spend his whole life in Repentance.

It is the opinion of S. Augustine, who carries this truth on farther, and
imposes a more severe law upon Christians: for be will not have Innocence it
self to exempt them from Grief; he will have them sigh, not because of their
sin, but because of their banishment; he will have them bewail their exile as
long as long as it lasts; and condemning their coldness that can find any
pleasure in this sad abode, says, that the Believer who has not an aversion
for this mortal and perishable life, can have no love for the Eternal and
Beatifical: his regret ought to be an argument of his love; and that it becomes
him to bemoan his abode upon earth, if he have a real desire of being speedily
translated to heaven.

This great Master of Grace seeks no other motives of Repentance then the
miseries of life; he thinks it sufficient to sad our hearts, that we live under
the tyranny of sin, that we feel the rebellions of the flesh, and suffer the
persecution of the Elements: the justice of these continued pains teaches us
that we are guilty: the Prayer that Christ taught us, confirms us in this
belief; and seeing we cannot be his disciples except we daily say Dimitte nobis
debita nostra, we must confess we are not free from sin: otherwise the Church
would abuse the Faithful; the Son of God himself had involved us in an error;
and, as S. Augustine says, asking pardon for a sin we never committed, we
should utter a blasphemy, because we should lie in the midst of our most august
mysteries.

We cannot doubt then that Repentance is necessary for a Christian, nor can we
deny, that, to the end it may be profitable, it must be severe, especially if
the precedent sins have been notorious. For as Repentance is a kind of
Justice, it proportions the Punishment to the Offense; it respects the quality
of the delinquents, considers the Majesty offended, and casting its eyes upon
the torments of the damned, strives to make some resemblance of them in the
revenge it takes upon Criminals. Let us carefully examine all these Reasons,
see the just motives we have to punish our selves; and, not to slatter our
lazy negligence in so important a concernment, let us consider the qualities
of this Virtue.

Repentance is a Judgment, where, contrary to the ordinary Laws, the same
Delinquent is Witness, Judge, and Executioner. In the quality of a Witness, he
is bound to examine his Conscience, to Wrack his Memory; to search the inmost
thoughts of his Mind, the secretest intentions of his Will, and to convent
himself before himself, without Excuse or Flattery. As a Judge, he ought to
consider the Number and the Quality of the crimes, dexterously to examine the
prisoner, carefully to observe the cause of the fault, and with Justice to
pronounce sentence whereby the Criminal may suffer according to his desert, and
the party offended receive fatisfaction to his dignity. And because soul and
body are both concerned in the sin, they must be jointly condemned: but the
soul being the author of the iniquity, and the body but the minister or
complice, he must begin the correction by an inward sadness mixed with Fear and
Love, and finish it by an external pain attended with Shame and Sorrow: For
there would be a kind of Injustice, to separate those in the Punishment that
were Partners in the Fault: and the Repentance would be imperfect, did it not
reach the body as well as the soul. Having pronounced righteous judgment, the
Judge must take upon him the quality of the Executioner, and execute what
himself has ordained, being zealous for the Justice of God; betraying
Self-love, so that he abandon it to Charity; and, full of anger and
indignation, revenge Jesus Christ upon his enemy. All true Penitents have done
thus; the Contrition of their spirit has produced the Maceration of their
body; and having conceived a mortal displeasure at their offenses, they have
obliged their eyes to bewail them, their hands to punish them, and their
mouths to confess them: They joined Fastings to Prayer, Watchings to Reading,
Discipline to Obedience; that mortifying both soul and body, they might obtain
pardon for both these offenders.

Nothing can yield such assistance to so good a design, as the consideration
of a second quality of Repentance: For it takes the name from Pain; it is a
Punishment as well as a Judgment; it is mingled with Grace and Rigor; In
peccatorem poenitentia pronuntians pro Dei indignatione fungitur, and temporali
afflictatione aeterna supplicia non dicam frustratur, sed expungit. Tertul.
and, according to the conceit of Tertullian, it is an abridgement of eternal
pains. The sinner, if a believer, is not ignorant that his crimes, which
inflict death upon his soul, merit hell: he knows very well the decree is gone
out, the truth whereof he cannot question; and that every transgressor that
loses Grace, is worthy of the Torments the devil and his angels suffer: When
he is converted therefore, and by the favor of Repentance has his sins
remitted, he is obliged in spirit to descend into the center of the earth, to
consider the pains the damned endure; and then, to equalize his sorrow, he
ought to imitate what he has seen, and to deal so severely with himself, that
he may satisfy that Justice which inflicts eternal punishments upon his
enemies.

But nothing ought so much to animate him against himself, as the consideration
of his offense, which being in its own nature infinite, merits eternal
punishments. For though the sin be committed in a moment, Momentaneum est quod
delectat, aeternum est quod cruciat. Greg. Mag.
and the pleasure that accompanies it be but an illusion; yet does it put the
sinner in a condition out of which he cannot arise but by Grace, which is not
at his disposal: He falls into this abyss by his own proper motion, but he
cannot get out of it by his own strength: He may defend himself when he is
tempted; but, being overcome, he cannot rid himself of his enemy: He enters
into a slavery that insensibly engages him into a necessity: If Grace, which
he cannot challenge as his due, prevent him not, he lives and dies in a very
deplorable condition, and carries the same mind into hell which he cherished
upon the earth: Therefore does the Divine Justice that reads men's hearts, and
looks rather upon the dispositions then actions of offenders, inflict an
eternal punishment upon a sin not fully finished, and condemns a transgressor
to endless torments, who had always offended, had he always lived.

But though he should not retain this unhappie disposition till his death, it is
enough to merit an everlasting punishment, that he has committed a sin whose
malice has no bounds: For Reason tells us there is no proportion between the
Creature and the Creator; the distance that separates them is infinite; and
therefore the sinner that forsakes the Creator to adhere is infinite; Qui
peccat mortaliter, vult Deum esse impotentem, aut injustum, aut insipientem;
quia vellet Deum aut sua peccata nescire, aut vindicare non posse, aut
vindicare nolle. Bern.
offers him an infinite injury, which cannot justly be punished but by an
eternaltorment. Indeed, he endeavors to destroy God by his offense; he would
rob him of his perfections; and in the mind he is in, to content himself, he
would have God void of light to see him, without goodness to hate him, without
power to correct him. Therefore is the Penitent, at the sight of so many
disorders and injustices, obliged to make war upon himself, to take Gods part
against himself, to punish a delinquent severely whose due it is to burn
eternally, and to continue a torment during his life, which ought to continue
for all generations.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. Of the Renunciation and Self-denial of a Christian.
Policy and Religion, in the difference of their designs, exact the same
dispositions in their subjects: Policy will have men prefer Public interests
before Private, and to sacrifice their Fortune for the preservation of the
State: Religion also will have men consider nothing but the glory of Jesus
Christ, being always ready to immolate themselves in his quarrel. Policy will
not have men wedded to their goods, lest Avarice should make them cowards:
Religion, going a step further, obliges them to a voluntary poverty, and will
have them really or in affection divorced from their riches. Finally, Policy
will have Subjects renounce their Will, that they be more the States then their
own Families, and depend more upon their Sovereign then on Themselves: Religion
requires the same duty from her disciples, Qui vult venire post me, abneget
semetipsum, tollat crucem suam, and sequatur me. Luc. 9.
and will ahve them renounce their inclinations when they are admitted into the
Church, and Jesus Christ to be the Master of their actions and of their
persons: All the Maxims she gives us, tend to this end; all her counsels
inspire us with this disposition; and it seems the whole Gospel has no other
intention then to make us die to our selves, that we may be guided by Jesus
Christ.

And certainly we must confess, If there be Rigor in the design, there is
much Justice in it: For besides that the Church no more then the State can
subsist without submission, and a Government loses all command when not
obeyed; there are a thousand Reasons which no less respect our own Interest
then the Glory of our Sovereign, which oblige us to this undisputed
resignation. If we consider the Word Incarnate, we shall find that his
deportment toward his Father exacts this humble duty from us: He does nothing
upon the earth but by his orders; he consults his will before he undertake any
thing; and if the time he has set him to work his miracles in be not yet come,
he rejects the entreaties of his mother, who can receive no other answer from
his mouth but these words, Nondum venit hora mea.

But if we look upon the holy Humanity united to the Eternal Word, we shall see
that as it is despoiled of its proper subsistence, it has no other motions
then what it receives from the Divine Assistant that sustains it: Humanitas
Christi non est sui juris sed verbi; actiones enim sunt suppofitorum.
It is more a his devotion then at its own; is guided by that that preserves
it; and having no dominion over its actions, is in a submission equal to its
love: whatever it acts upon earth, all is referred to the Divine Person; and as
there is no union more strict then theirs, neither is any dependence more
obedient then that of the Humanity to the Divinity. The Word acts absolutely in
this holy Humanity; Aliud est inviolabile, aliud est passibile; and tamen
ejusdem est contumelia cujus est and gloria; ipse est in infirmitate qui in
virtute. Leo.
he reserves the whole conduct thereof to himself, appropriates all the
Inclinations; and whether the Humane nature suffer or be abased, he will have
us know and believe that a God suffers and is humbled with it.

Therefore are all Christians, after the imitation of so rare an example,
obliged to despoil themselves of their Wills, to renounce their Desires, to
submit to Jesus Christ, and to manifest in their person an image of the
Incarnation: 'Twas certainly this powerful reason that made the great Apostle
to utter these notable words: Vivo autem jam non ego, vivit vero in me
Christus, and to teach us, by his advice, to derive our guidance, as well as
our glory, from the Son of God. Indeed, the whole Abnegation of a Christian is
founded upon the mystery of the Incarnation; and when they consider how the
holy Humanity is obscured in the deserts, humbled in the Villages, sacrificed
upon Mount Calavary, to be obedient to the person of the Word, they need not
think it strange if to do Homage to Jesus Christ, they are obliged to renounce
their glory, and consent to lay down their lives at his command.

But if this example be not powerful enough to persuade us, we must be
convinced by reason, and confess, that Christians have no quality that that
does not exact this blind submission from them: For if we consider them as
Temples of the Holy Ghost, or Members of the Son of God, we are forced to
acknowledge that these two glorious qualities are as well the Fountains of
their dependence as of their greatness. Temples are only for the Divinity that
honors them with his presence; they breath forth nothing but his glory, and
were they inanimated, they would act merely by his motions: Therefore inasmuch
as Christians are the living Temples of the Holy Ghost, they ought not to act
but as guided by him; they are unable to perform any thing but by his order;
and all their actions that have not his Grace for their principle, are Criminal
or profane. We are no more the children of God, but as far as we are quickened
by this ever to be adored Spirit; all our merit is from our acting by his
Virtue, and when he cease to incite and stir us up, we leave off to form good
thoughts, or perform good actions.

The quality of Members ties us not less closely to our Head, then that of
Temples to the Holy Ghost: for according to the Laws of Nature, the Members
more belong to their Head, then slaves do to their Master; they receive life
and motion from his Influences; they owe all their vigor to the communication
they have with him: aand whenever there happens any obstruction that hinders
him from sending his Spirits into his Members, they lose all sense and
strength; Besides, he has such command over them, that he applies them
according to his designs, takes no notice of their wills; employs the eyes to
weep as well as see; the hand to serve as well as command; the tongue to manage
meat, as well as compose words; and as if it were their greatest glory to
perish for him, there is not any Member but willingly exposes it self to death
for his defense or honor.

This submission is an Image of the dependence Christians ought to have toward
Jesus Christ; they are no longer their own, when once ingraffed upon his
person; they receive an obligation to obey, from the same quality that gives
them a power to operate; Quam in in Christo manes per amorem, and ipse in te
per sanctitatis and justitiae operationem, in ejus corpore and membris
computaris. Ber.
they become Servants as soon as they become Members; their liberty depends upon
their servitude; and by a happy occurrence, they lose their own will by
submitting to that of the Son of God: As it is love that unites them to him, so
that their liberty is not interessed in their obedience; they are never more
their own, then when they are their Heads; they recover themselves in being
lost; possess themselves by forsaking themselves, and by a strange adventure,
find a resurrection in dying. Thence it comes to pass, that they are never
troubled to sacrifice themselves to Jesus Christ; they account themselves
sufficiently happy, if they can be serviceable to his Glory; it matters not
though they lose their lives, provided they obey him; and knowing very well
that in the State, and in Nature, subjects expose themselves for their Prince,
Members for their Head, they are of this mind as soon as ever they enter into
the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ.

^^t when they consider how he has joined the quality of Redeemer to that of
Head, and that to associate them to his person, he has delivered them by the
loss of his own life, they believe they can no ways acknowledge this extreme
obligation, but in dying for his glory, who was willing to die for their
salvation. Indeed we are the servants of Jesus Christ; he has bought us by his
death; we are the price of his blood, and we owe our happiness and our hope to
his merits: This is it that the Apostle represents to us in such emphatical
terms, when he says, Empti estis pretio magno: and by a necessary consequence
teaches us, that we ought to glorify him in our body and in our soul. Thence
it is that he infers, that those that live upon his bounty, ought to live for
his service; Thence he concludes, that we offer our members as oblations, and
employ all that we are for the glory of our Redeemer.

Slaves in the negotiations of the world, could not dispose of their actions;
they acted by order of their Master; they took pains for his Interest; they got
wealth for his profit; and as if nature had lost her right in their persons,
they got children to increase his family. Philosophers acknowledge, that
servitude falls only upon the body, that it fetters only the feet and the hands,
leaving the slaves more free many times in their irons, then the Sovereigns
upon their Throne. Bondage has no dominion over their will, and with all her
rigours cannot extort the least baseness from them, if they be generous; they
dispute their liberty with fortune; they preserve in deed what they have lost
in appearance; they many times command their oppressor, and bearing the hearts
of Kings in the bodies of slaves, are more free and more happy then their
Master. But the Christian enters by Redemption into a Thraldom, which passes
from his body into his soul; fetters his heart with his hands; triumphs over
his liberty without constraining it; confiscates all his goods to his
Sovereign; and despoiling him of all but Nothingness and Sin, obliges him to
confess that he owes all the rest to the Liberaility of his Redeemer.

For the understanding of this Verity, which makes one of the foundations of
Christianity, we must know, that though God be the Sovereign of all men, he
treats not the innocent and the guilty alike; He seems to respect the former,
to refuse them nothing that they desire, preventing their wishes: and in that
happy state wherein Concupiscence had not disordered them, he subjected their
salvation to their liberty, and made them in some sort the disposers or masters
of their good fortune: Grace is always at the door of their heart, this Divine
assistance never fails them, and God would think he violated the Laws of his
Justice, had he not given these Innocents all that is necessary for their
salvation; But he deals far otherwise with Guilty men; It seems Sin gives him
more right over these wretches, then Nothing does: and being fallen from their
privileges by their own fault, he owes them nothing but punishments; He
abandons them to their own conduct, leaves them in blindness and weakness: and
as if they were merely the objects of his anger, he sometimes withdraws from
them the assistance of his Grace. Thus did the Eternal Father deal with men
before the mystery of the Incarnation; his Son found them in this deplorable
condition, when he undertook their deliverance: they had no right neither to
Grace nor Glory; and sin that had deprived them of their innocence, had
confiscated all their apennages. Thus we owe our Salvation to our Redemption;
we hold that of Mercy, which heretofore we held of Justice; we are saved rather
as men enfranchised, then free: and acknowledging our salvation an effect
rather of Grace then our own freedom, we ought to renounce the one to give our
selves over to the other.

This conceit carries me insensibly to another, which seems only a consequent
of this; and the coherence they have, will not give me leave to divide them.
Man in the state of Innocence, was the master of his actions; the uprightness
wherein he was created, was the cause that God left him to his liberty; having
no inordinate motions to regulate, no wild passions to subdue, no unfaithful
senses to correct, he had need only of a succor to sustain him; His will was
the principle of his merit: and the good works he did, proceeded rather from
himself, then from God; Thus his good fortune was in a manner in his own hands;
he depended more upon Liberty then upon Grace: and being the Director of this,
he might say without vanity, that he was the principal Author of his own
salvation; Divine Providence obliged him to take the guidance of himself, to
determine his own actions, that he was the master of his fortune, and making
use of the advantages she had given him, the acknowledgement of the victory was
due only to his own courage and dexterity; But now that he is fallen from his
Innocence, has lost half his Light, and Liberty, carries a Tyrant in his very
Essentials, which subjects him to his Laws, he stands in need of a Grace that
may deliver him: and exercising a dominion over his will, may save him by a
more humble, but surer way then that of Adam; He is no longer the Master of his
actions, nor the Author of his salvation: he must take direction from Jesus
Christ, learn to deny himself, distrust his own abilities, and place his hope
in that victorious Grace which subjects whose man, captivating his
understanding by Faith, and his will by Love.

This Economy of God toward the Christian is mixed with Justice and Mercy:
it is Justice to take from him the disposal of his person, because he used it
so ill in the state of Innocence; It Is Justice to submit his Liberty to Grace,
because when he was the master thereof, he neglected to make use of it; It Is
Justice to treat him as a Pupil or a Slave, not to trust him any more with the
government of himself, and to employ for his cure a remedy, which reproacheth
him with his blindness and infirmity. It Is Mercy also to knock off the fetters
of a slave: to indulge him the true liberty his sin had deprived him of; to
unite him to God from whom he was estranged; to assure his salvation by a Grace
which infallibly produces its effect; to sanctify him in Jesus Christ whereof
he is a Member: and to give him an occasion to offer himself an Holocaust to
God.

For it is true, that self-denial is a parting with all things; a sacrifice
wherein man immolates his will by obedience; a combat wherein he triumphs over
himself; where he is the vanquisher, and the vanquished; where he subdues his
passions by reason, and subjects his reason to grace. After this advantage
there is none but he may with Justice hope for, because he that has conquered
himself, may easily conquer all others; It Is a punishment which in hardship and
durance disputes with that of Martyrs: It is long, because it lasts as long as
life, may take up the best part of an age: nor spares the strength of the
penitent, but to make him suffer more; It is rigorous, because there is no
cruelties a man given over to grace, does not exercise upon his person: and
being witty to invent torments, converts all things into corrections; For as
Saint Gregory the Great says, he suppresseth vanity by the sword of the Word
of God; he cuts off his head to ingraffe Jesus Christ upon his body; he makes
all die that he received from the old Adam, to make all live that he has drawn
from the new: and if he cut not off his arms and his legs, he pares away his
desires and his hopes to give Jesus Christ some testimonies of his love:
Therefore does the Scripture inform us, that there is no Virtue receives a
greater recompense then Self-denial. The Man that is knocked off from himself is
united to the Son of God: the creatures respect him, the Sun obeys his word,
and it is in this sense that the Scripture to make his Panegyric, is not
content to say, that he pronounces Oracles, but adds, that he gains Battles,
and bears away victories by speaking: All things stoop to his commands, and
more glorious then the first man, who could not use the creatures but according
to their inclinations; he disorders them to make himself feared, and testifies
the power he has in the state of his Master, by the command he exercises over
all the parts of the Universe. Thus Self-denial which seems to abase men,
raises them up; the Virtue that entertains them in the distrust of their
weakness, gives them admittance into the power of God: and that which obliges
them to renounce their own will, makes them find the accomplishment of all
their desires.

The Sixth TREATISE. Of the Nourishment and Sacrifice of the Christian.
The first DISCOURSE. Of Three Nourishments answering the Three Lives of a
Christian.
SOme will wonder, perhaps, that in the same Treatise I join two such different
things together; and that speaking of Nourishment, which preserves the life of
a Christian, I treat of a Sacrifice, that engages him in Death: But the wonder
will cease, if we consider that these two things are united together in
Religion; and that the same Sacrament that feeds us, obliges us also to die:
For the Son of God, upon our Altars, is as well our Nourishment as our Victim:
inviting us to a Feast, he bids us to a Sacrifice; and his Love associating two
Subjects which have so small a relation, he makes use of one and the same body
to destroy our sins and to preserve our souls: He offers himself up to his
Father as an innocent Sacrifice, and gives himself to the Faithful as a
delicious Viand: His Power, which equals his Love, takes from this Sacrifice
whatever might render it horrid, and removes from this Banquet whatever might
make it sensual: In both of them, he satisfies his Father and his Children; and
exalting us in the light of Faith, makes us believe what we cannot conceive.
Following therefore his intentions, I have joined in the same Treatise what he
has joined in the same Mystery; and resolve to manifest the wonders of this
Food, and the Prodigies of this Sacrifice.

Reason, that teaches us that Nourishment is the staff of Life, teaches us
also that every living thing has need of Nourishment; and that the Divine
Providence, whose care is extended over all the Creatures, has left none
without aliment: This feeds the Fowls of the air; and the Psalmist
confesses, it provided for the necessities of their young, when forsaken by
the dams: It makes Grass to grow in the deserts for the Cattle; and Rain,
which seems unprofitably to fall into the Sea, serves for refreshing and meat
for the Fishes. Inasmuch as Men are Gods masterpieces, he takes a particular
care to nourish them: whole Nature labors to furnish their Table; her
fruitfulness is only to satisfy their hunger, or content their appetite; and
every Creature she teems with, seems a Victim to be immolated to preserve their
life. But as they have Three Lives that answer to the Three Orders of Nature,
of Grace, and of Glory, God has given them Three sorts of Food, which, in the
difference of their qualities, cease not to have wonderful Correspondencies.

The Earth is the Nurse that furnishes us our chiefest nourishment: that
Divine word, Crescite and multiplicamini, which enricht her with fruitfulness
in the very birth, has preserved this prolifical virtue in the succession of
so many years; and if the Justice of God make her not barren for our
punishment, she returns with usury the laborious pains of the Husbandman. Corn,
which is our principal support, is multiplied by its corruption; it is born by
death; and making us see an image of the Resurrection, persuades us our bodies
may rise out of the Grave, after they have been resolved to dust, because the
Grain springs not up till it be putrified in the earth: This production would
pass for a Miracle, were it not so common; and to observe the wonders thereof,
would be sufficient to oblige all men to reverence the power and wisdom of the
Creator. For when the Corn is corrupted, it puts forth a bud, which cleaves the
earth, and covers it with a tuft of Grass, which preserves its verdure in the
midst of the sharpest Winters: At the Spring, it thrusts forth a stalk, which
rises insensibly, and from time to time is strengthened with joints to resist
the violence of the winds: Upon the top is formed an Ear, wherein Nature seems
to employ all her industry; Seritur solummodo granum sine folliculi test, sine
fundamento spicae, fine munimento aristae, fine superbia culmi: Exurgit autem
copia faen^ratum, compagine aedisicatam, ordine structum, cultu munitum and
usquequaque vestitu^. Tertul.
every grain is enclosed in a husk, that if one be corrupted, the rest may not
be infected, and the evil prove not a contagion: each husk is fenced with a
prizly sharp, to guard the enclosed fruit from the injury of the air, and the
rapine of birds. The heat of the Summer compleats the whole work, gives it
Color in giving it Maturity; and gently opening the several cells which lock
up the treasure of the Husbandman, admonishes him to prepare for the Harvest.

If this Wonder ravish us, and if we are bound to reverence the Divine
Providence which makes the earth fruitful to nourish us; we are not less
concerned to admire the prodigious alterations it causes in Nature to increase
provision: For it makes use only of Rain to enrich us, and from this
inexhausted source draws so many different Fruits, that if their number please
us, their qualities astonish us. Rain is nothing but a Vapor in the
conception; the Sun sports with it in the air, thickens it into a cloud, to
take it out of our sight; then destroying his own work, dissolves it into
showers, to water the thirsty earth. In the mean time, this Rain is turned into
all things it touches, takes the nature and quality of those things it bathes,
and, by a miraculous Metamorphosis, is changed into Wine falling upon grapes,
into Oil upon olives: It contracts the taste of all Fruits, and the color of
all Flowers: It grows yellow upon the Marigolds, red upon Pinks, white upon
Lilies; and though, when it falls, it have neither taste nor color, yet may it
boast it gives both to all Fruits and all Flowers.

This prodigious change which is daily wrought upon the earth, is but an
overture of that which is made upon the Body of Man, to maintain it: For all
the Nourishment he receives, is digested by the Stomach, and is turned to Blood
in the Liver; thence it is conveyed by the Veins into all the parts of the
body; which assimilating it into their substance, gives it as many forms as
they themselves have. There, by a strange prodigy, the same aliment is softened
into Flesh, hardened into Bones, stiffned into Sinews, extended into Cartilages:
its superfluities are not useless; and, if we bebelieve Physicians, they serve
to nourish our Hair and our Nails, whereof the first is the ornament of the
Head, the second the defense of the Hand. Who will not acknowledge that Man is
very dear to God, since he works so many Miracles to feed him, and produces so
many several Meats to entertain a life common to him with beasts?

But inasmuch as that of the Soul is much more noble, the nourishment whereby
it is preserved is exceedingly more excellent: and if in the order of Nature
God has made so many prodigies to nourish Man, he works many more in the order
of Grace to entertain the Christian. For the body of his oncly Son is the food
of the Faithful; they live upon that Blood which begat them on the Cross; that
the same Principle which gave them their life, may preserve it. This Body is
formed upon our Altars by the Word of Jesus Christ himself; the Priests are
only the Ministers or Interpreters; they repeat what he delivered in the
Supper; they do that in the Church, that he did at Jerusalem: and offering up
this Sacrifice to the Eternal Father, make provision to nourish the Faithful.
Thus, in Nature and in Grace, it is the Word of God that makes us live; and we
may truly say, Non in solo pane vivit homo, sed in omni verbo quod procedit ex
ore Dei. But this Bread that nourishes our souls, is not of the same quality
with that that nourishes our Bodies: For the Corn whereof this is made, owes
its Life to its Death, nor can increase till it be corrupted; but that which is
exhibited to us upon our Altars, felt corruption only on the Cross, where
dying to procure us life, he himself boasted that he was the Grain of Corn
whose fruitfulness proceeds from its corruption: Si mortuum fuerit, multum
fructum affert. But now it is incorruptible in our Tabernacles; death can no
more injure it; the Glory that invests it, secures it from our fury as well as
our wrongs.

We must acknowledge nevertheless, that its presence depends upon the species
that cover it; it cease to be with us, when the heat has digested them, or
time consumed them: and though he remain by his Grace, his body is absent,
which is tied to accidents, as to chains his love has forged for it. He never
dispenses with this bondage; the treachery of Judas could not make him violate
the laws he had prescribed; the blind fury of Heretics cannot compel him out
of this prison; and the impiety of Sinners has not been able to force him to
quit their hearts, till the species that preserved him there be consumed by the
natural heat: He is as faithful to observe his promises, as to obey the will of
his Father: and as the blasphemies of the Jews could not make him descend from
the Cross to give them proofs of his Innocence and of his Divinity, the
sacriledges of profane Christians cannot make him desert the Host, where his
love and fidelity hold him prisoner.

Though he be subject to all these humiliations to become our nourishment, he
is not liable, for all that, to all the conditions of Nutriment: For he passes
not into our substance, he is not changed into those that receive him, and in
his debasement he reserves himself the power to convert them into him: His
being our Food, hinders him not from being our God: he acts upon those that
feed upon him; he makes an impression of his Divine qualities in their souls;
and if he changes not their Nature, at least he makes them change their
Condition and their Life. Neither ought this to seem strange to those that
consider that Natural meats communicate their qualities to us; and, by a mutual
Metamorphosis, we are changed into them, when they are assimilated into us.
It Is believed that Nero was therefore cruel, because he sucked the milk of a
cruel Nurse; and that Achilles was therefore valiant, because his Master
nourished him with the marrow of Lions: Experience it self teaches us that
people draw their humors from the earth that bears them, and the heaven that
covers them: Those that are bred among Rocks, are savage; those that live in
the fertile Plains, are more tractable: Therefore we need not wonder if the
Christians, feeding upon a Divine meat, do so easily change their inclinations,
Au^ite officaciam and communionem corporis and sanguinu Domini; and nos Jesu
Christo, and Jesus Christus nobis in unitate foederatur inenarrabili, sicut
ipse dicit, Qui manducat carnem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo. Bern.
because more powerful and successful then ordinary food, it has the virtue of
conveying its own qualities, and of changing the guests into it self. And from
this Principle do the Fathers draw the obligation the Christians have to be
gods upon earth, because they receive a God in the Eucharist; who, acting
according to the extent of his power, would transform them into himself, were
not his Divine operations hindered by the weakness or malice of the recipient.

But that which is begun upon Earth, is happily perfected in Heaven; where
Divinity being the food of the Blessed, raises them to a condition, where,
leaving off to be Mortals, they commence Gods: Indeed, the holy Scripture
teaches us that the Beatifical state is a Feast, where God communicating his
Essence to Angels and Men, makes them, in one dish, taste all imaginable
delights: For though there be diversity of conditions among the Blessed, though
the degrees of Glory answer the degrees of Love, and those who have been most
affectionate, are those that God most honors: yet all Theology confesses,
that the Divine Essence is the only object of their felicity; that every one
enjoys all without division; that though common to all, it is notwithstanding
proper to each particular; that being wholly communicated to one, it takes
nothing from the rest: and more excellent then the light which enlightens one
man as perfectly as the whole world; it is as fully communicated to the lowest
Angel, as to the highest Seraphim.

God is divided upon the Earth without interessing his simplicity, he
communicates himself to the faithful, but in part: and handling every one
according to their Merit and his Grate, is not always the same to one that he
is to another. He has manifested his Wisdom in Solomon, his Clemency in
David, his Patience in Job, his Love in Saint Peter, his Zeal in Saint Paul,
his Purity in Saint John, and his other perfections in the rest of the
Faithful. But at the end of the world, God will be all in all things; he will
pour out that in abundance, which now he deals forth in measure: and all the
Saints possessing all the Virtues, shall possess God in all his perfections.

But the chiefest advantage of this Divine Banquet, is, that the Mess which is
served up, will be instead of all things: as long as we live upon the Earth,
the misery of our condition, or the frailty of our goods, suffers us not to
find our contentment in one single object; That which allays our hunger,
quenches not our thirst; that which enlightens us, covers us not; that which
serves us for a garment, serves us not for a house; and that which satisfies
our mind, does not always content our body: But when we shall be in Heaven, the
Divine Essence will fill all our desires; and being infinite, will alone
abundantly supply the fullness of all perishable Earthly goods. Your God, says
Saint Augustine, shall be your All; you shall feed upon him, to satisfy your
hunger; drink him, to quench your thirst; rest upon him, for your support; make
him your garment, to cover you; you shall wholly possess, and he as wholly
possess you; you shall find in him all that others do, because both you and
they shall be but one and the same thing in him.

For the last effect of this viand, whereof we have but an essay in the
Eucharist, is, that it will perfectly transform us into it self, because all
Scripture teaches us, that when we see God, we shall be like him: Scimus
quoniam cum apparuerit similes ei erimus. Joan.
and that Glory having consumed all that was mortal and perishable in our
nature, we shall be happily swallowed up in him without ceasing for all this to
be our selves. Thus God nourishes us in nature with the fruits of the Earth,
which maintain a body taken out of the Earth; in Grace by the blood of Jesus
Christ, which preserves the life he merited for us upon the Cross; In Glory by
Divinity it self, which is both together our food and our felicity.

The Second DISCOURSE. Of the Nourishment of Innocent Man; and of that of Man a
Christian.
I If the state of Innocence be unknown to us by reason of its dignity, or its
remoteness: we must confess, that Original Righteousness and the fruit of
the Tree of Life, which were the chief privileges thereof, are so hid from us,
Immortalitas ista praestabatur ei de ligno vitae, non de constitutione naturae,
quo ligno separatus est eu^ peccasset ut posset mori. Aug.
that we have but weak conjectures to judge of their properties or of their
effects. Saint Augustine that has written most rationally, confounds them so
often one with another, that he seems to attribute to the Tree of Life, that
which appertains to Original Righteousness: For though we know that this united
the soul with the body, subjected both to God, and preserving the one from sin,
exempted the other from death; yet he forbears not to impute that to the Tree
of Life, which we impute to Grace, and to allot it so many advantages, that it
seems the whole happiness of man depended absolutely upon this miraculous Tree.

But having well considered the words of this great Saint: I find his doctrine
so conformable to Scripture, that there is no doubt but it was suggested to him
by the same Spirit that made Moses speak in Genesis. For as nourishment is
ordained to preserve our life, we need not think it strange that it holds some
analogy with the principle that gives it us: and that there should be some
agreement between the matter whereof we are made, and that wherewith we are
nourished. Therefore may we say, that the Tree of Life preserved in Innocent
man, all that Original Righteousness had endued him with: and that the fruit
thereof, which certainly was a figure of the holy Sacrament, repaired the wastes
of the natural heat, maintained man in his vigor, and secured him from death.
Wherein I find a great resemblance with truth, because it wrought that in man
an Innocent, which the Body of the Son of God does in man a Christian; For
there is none but confesses, that this admirable fruit united the soul with
the body, that it entertained that good intelligence which made up a notable
part of his happiness, and subjecting the body to the soul, by a necessary
consequence subjected the soul to God.

Divinity has not yet fully examined, whether this Virtue were natural to this
Tree, or whether being but a visible sign of an invsible grace, the Divine
power produced this effect in man when he took of that fruit with the
dispositions of a firm faith and an humble obedience. If we take the Scripture
for our Guide, and Saint Augustine for its Interpreter, it will be easy to
judge that this effect depended not upon the disposition of Man, but upon the
Virtue of the Tree, because we see in Genesis, that one of the reasons why our
forefather was driven out of Paradise, was, that he might not eat of that
wonderful fruit; and so the miseries he had contracted by sin, be prolonged
together with his life. Saint Augustine explicating this passage, makes us
plainly see, that man having lost Original Righteousness, had not lost
Immortality, if he had continued to feed upon the fruit of the Tree of Life.
Thus we are forced to confess, that this Tree had a secret Virtue which
depended not upon the sole disposition of man: and that it was capable of
producing a quality in his body, which desending him for a time from death, had
increased his misfortune with his years.

But not to engage in a question more curious then profitable, it is enough to
know that as this fruit of the Tree of Life subjected the body to the soul, and
the soul to God, the Eucharist produces the same effects in the Christian: and
being received with the dispositions requisite to this Sacrament, calms the
passions weakens Concupiscence, enthrones reason: For though Baptism leave
Concupiscence to exercise the Christian, and this Sacrament which opens him the
Gate of the Church, gives him not victory together with life; yet all the
Fathers confess, that the Eucharist more powerful then Baptism, furnishes them
with forces to set upon this domestic enemy; that it sweetens his fury in
combating him, and that the presence of Jesus Christ delivers him from this
evil, more obstinate then the Devil and Sin: For whether the purity of his
flesh cures ours by a holy contagion, or whether Concupiscence tremble at the
apprehension of a body which is the work of the Holy Ghost; or whether lastly,
this Sacrament that preserves our life gives us strength, and delivers us from
that languishing impotency which seems the very soul of Concupiscence: we find
by experience, that the body of the Son of God procures us the victory, and
prepares us the triumph.

If it defend us, it nourishes us: and if it pacify our disorders, it repairs
the devastations the heat of self-love makes in our souls; In which respect,
it is certainly the truth of the Tree of Life, and the accomplishment of that
figure: For though Innocent Man had other meats besides that; and excepting the
forbidden fruit, all others that Paradise afforded, were allowed him; yet was
he obliged to take of this from time to time as a medicine which the mercy of
God had prepared for him, to defend him against the Natural heat which
insensibly wasted him. Whence it is easy to infer, that in the state of
Innocence, the body of man was composed of parts that could not agree; That
fire which makes man live, devoured the radical moisture on which it feeds: and
though he daily took in nourishment, which being much purer then ours, might
preserve life much longer; yet had he need of an extraordinary diet which might
repair the ruins the natural heat made in his body; and Divines Providence
which never abandons that sinner, provided the Tree of Life for Innocent Man,
to defend him against the internal enemy, who had insensibly brought him to
death by means of old age and consumption.

Thus may we say, that the body of the Son of God shields us against that
forain heat, Concupiscentia carnis in Baptismo dimittitur, non ut non sit, sed
ut non obsit and non imput tur. Aug. lib. de Nup. and Concup. cap. 25.
which setting upon the warmth of Charity, threatens the Christian with death.
For though Concupiscence since Baptism, be no longer sin: and if sometimes they
give it this name, it is because it is the principal effect; yet is she not idle
in our souls; she makes strange progresses, when her fury is not stopped; she
makes use of all occasions that are offered, and holding under her command the
passions and the senses, she endeavors by their mediation to enslave the
understanding and the will; Though never so weak and langnishing in Christians,
she has still vigor enough to engage them in sin, if their reason assisted
with grace, continually oppose not her designs: The little remainder there is,
makes them they cannot live secure, and as long as they nourish the least
degree of self-love, there is no crime whereof they have not the seeds in them.
What the Son of God has said of the grain of Mustard seed, which is so small
at first, and so prodigious in the progress, is not comparable to
Concupiscence, whose least sparks are able to kindle mighty conflagrations,
which only the Grace of Jesus Christ can extinguish. Indeed his Body, the
noblest Organ of his Spirit, moderates daily these heats in the Eucharist,
smothers the flames Concupiscence stirs up to consume us; he gives being to
that virtue that fight obscenity; weakens that strange burning which glows
against divine heat, without which a Christian cannot live; He produces two
contrary effects which manifests his power to be infinite: For by kindling one
fire, he quenches another: and warming us with his own love, happily delivers
us from that of self; It Is a a wonderful Wine, which contrary to the nature of
ordinary wine, bears Virgins, and renders them pure, thereby to render them
pregnant in Virtues: Finally, it is a Bread of Life, that nourishes soul and
body, carrying vigor into the one, and light into the other, to the end that
preserving the whole man, it may be his food in health, and his remedy in
sickness.

Having contrary to the Laws of Physic cured him, contrary to the Laws of
Nature, it endeavors to make him young; For Religion more powerful then the
Fable, has found out a secret to renew the Christians youth in the Eucharist,
and to discover in Mysteries what it made us believe in Types and Figures.
Indeed all the Fathers are of opinion that the Tree of Life defended man from
old age, and preserved him from that languishing consumption, which disposed
him insensibly to his death; if common fruits could preserve his life, they
were unable to maintain his vigor; Though they had all the purity Innocent
Nature could furnish her works with, yet in repairing man's strength, they had
not restored that freshness which accompanies youth: To secure himself from
that mischief which had not respected his Innocence, he was obliged to have
recourse to the Tree of Life, and from time to time to take an agreeable
Physic, which being no way distasteful, restored him his primitive vigor, and
re-instated him in that flourishing age he was at first created in. It is true,
that as Prudence was natural to him, he never expected length of days to impair
his beauty, nor that old age should print wrinkles upon his face: he made such
seasonable use of this remedy, that the freshness of his complexion never
faded: The Roses and the Lilies were always mingled on his cheeks: age and
deformity never seized a body whose soul was exempt from sin; and the fruit of
the Tree of Life seconding his ordinary food, maintained him in a vigorous
constitution, which was afraid neither of Sickness nor Weakness. In this happy
state, Man had the advantages of the Aged, and not their imperfections: his
Reason, without the tedious trouble of Experience, was furnished with all
Lights requisite to conduct him; he had no need to enfeeble his body to
fortify his mind; but both the parts that composed him being equally
innocent, he had no occasion to wish that age might weaken the one to make it
more obedient, nor strengthen the other to render it more absolute. Thus the
fruit of the Tree of Life maintained Man in Youth and Innocence; and these two
inseparable qualities combating Old Age and Sin, made him spend his life
happily and holily.

Although Christians have not this advantage upon the earth, and that their
body, being still the slave of Concupiscence, cannot avoid the infirmities
incident to old age; yet in their souls they fail not to enjoy the privileges
of Innocence; they find in the holy Sacrament, what Adam found in the Tree of
Life; they receive a new vigor in the Eucharist; their souls grow young as
often as they approach to Jesus Christ: when, like Eagles, they soar as high as
this Sun lodged in a cloud, they are astonished that in the infirmity of their
flesh their spirit is renewed; and that the outward man falling to decay by
years and penance, the inward man recruits by the heavenly meat he feeds upon.
This Miracle passes sometimes from the soul to the body; yet there have been
some holy persons who taking no other sustenance but what is offered upon our
Altars, have lived many years. Many times this Nutriment has imprinted its
qualities upon their bodies; and darting forth certain rays of Grace upon their
countenances, communicated to them a part of that beauty which the blessed
spirits shall possess. Post prima^ caenam it a similes evascrunt
Christodiscipuli ejus, ut vix ab illo possent discerni. Chrysostom.
S. John Chrysostom was of opinion that the Apostles participated of this
privilege in their first Communion; and having received the Body of the Son of
God, became so resplendant with light, that the Jews had taken them for Jesus
Christ in the Garden of Olives, had not the traitor Judas prevented their
mistake by the perfidious kiss he gave his Master.

If this sacred Nutriment always produce not this Miracle, at least we must
acknowledge it gives us an Earnest of the Resurrection, and a right to
Immortality: In which respect, I find it as powerful and as happy as the
fruit of the Tree of Life. One of the wonders of this Tree was, in the
judgment of all the Fathers, to secure Man from dissolution; and so firmly to
unite the soul with the body, that the number of years could not separate them.
Death respected not only Original righteousness, but the fruit of the Tree of
Life; and though it might grow from the mixture of the Elements which composed
the body of Man, it durst not set upon him as long as original righteousness
maintained their good correspondence, or this convenient remedy hindered their
division. Thus Man was not Immortal so much by his own constitution, as by a
borrowed assistance; that the obligation he had to make use of it, might
instruct him that he owed all these advantages to the liberality of his
Creator. Now it is certain that the Eucharist works all these Miracles daily in
the Church: for it imprints an occult virtue in our bodies, which is as a
Pledge of the Resurrection; it sheds abroad in our members the seeds of an
eternal life; and by a holy contagion, which corruption it self cannot deprive
us of, communicates a certain right to Immortality: For we have the word of the
Son of God for a caution of this immutable verity; and after the solemn
promises he has made in the Gospel, we may, without wronging his Greatness,
affirm, that his Justice obliges him to give the Christians a Resurrection,
and that he cannot deny a habitation in heaven to those bodies that have served
him for temples upon the earth.

If he prevent not Death, but suffer this faithful minister of his Vengeance to
exercise so many cruelties upon our body, it is to deliver us from him with
greater pomp and power: if he give him leave to reduce us to dust, it is to make
us rise out of the Grave, as the Phoenix from her funeral-pile; it is, finally,
that having had a part in his Shame, we may share in his Glory; and that it may
be said of all the Elect, what S. Augustine said heretofore of Lazarus, that
the Son of God forbore to cure him, that he might raise him; and was unwilling
to lift him from his Bed, that he might call him out of his Grave, and seal his
love by the greatness of his Miracle.

The Third DISCOURSE. That the Body of Jesus Christ is the same to the
Christian, that Manna was to the Jews.
THe Types and Figures of the Old Testament are, in respect of our Mysteries,
what Enigma's are in respect of Truth: They conceal and discover them to our
eyes; their shadows have some glimmerings of light; and these transparent
clouds occasion the bright breaking forth of those Stars they rob us of. They
instruct the Learned; and the least measure of understanding they have of the
Gospel, makes them easily conceive what the jews were not able to comprehend.
When this people saw the Manna descend in the wilderness, they never minded the
secrets to come; and without diving into the designs of God, believed that his
Divine Providence was pleased to give them that miraculous bread in a place
where Humane Prudence could not possibly procure any. But there is not the
meanest Christian, instructed in the School of Jesus Christ, but understands
that it was a Figure of the Eucharist; and that God intending to prepare our
minds for his Masterpiece by this essay, wrought this Miracle for no other
end but to persuade us of those he would one day exhibit upon our Altars.
Indeed, there is so much resemblance between the Manna and the holy Sacrament,
that if it be an Enigma, it is also a Glass, wherein may be observed all the
wonders that render it commendable.

That miraculous meat took its original from heaven; it was formed, according
to the opinion of S. Augustine, In illa superiori part terrae, ubi grando and
nix gignitur, nascebatur manna, and in cibum inferioris terrae partis,
hominibus per angelos administrabatur. Aug.
where storms and rain are hatched: The credulous multitude did not imagine it
only the work of Angels, but, dull gross as they were, were persuaded that
those blessed spirits fed upon it, and that God, to deal with them as he did
with those Intelligences, had given them the food of Angels: Angelorum esca
nutrivisti populum tuum. That which the Jews conceited of Manna, we have reason
to believe of the Eucharist; because the meat we eat, being the work of the
Priests, may well be called the work of Angels: For all Scripture teaches us,
that the Ministers that wait at the Altars of the living God, are Angels; that,
more happy then those pure spirits, they produce the body of their Master by
their words, and give a new life to him who is the Eternal Word of his Father.
This Bread came down from heaven by better right then Manna, because Jesus
Christ took his beginning from his Father who dwells in heaven; and though
conceived in Nazareth, and born in Bethlehem, was notwithstanding as truly
denominated the dew of heaven, as the fruit of the earth.

Manna took its name from the astonishment of the Jews; Dixerunt ad invicem
Manhu? quod significat? quid est hoc? Ignorabant ^ enim quid esset. Exodus 16.
the people enquiring into the cause of this prodigy, named it in wondering at
it; and taught us, that so great a Miracle could not be sufficiently expressed
but by wonder and silent admiration. The holy Scripture has left it this
glorious name, that, entering in the mind of this people, we may admire the
wonders God wrought to nourish them in the deserts: But certainly we may truly
say, without offending the Israelites, that their wonder arose from their
ignorance; that they had not been so ravished with this prodigy, had they but
known that the same Vapors which compound the Clouds, might form Manna; and
that it was as easy for the Providence of God to nourish them with this meat,
as to nourish all the people of the earth with Rain and Dew. They had certainly
reserved their wonderment for the Eucharist, had they had the knowledge of our
mysteries: For indeed, it is the strangest and most glorious: it seems the Son
of God has drained his power in producing it; and recollecting all the
miracles of his life, would sum them up in this stupendous Sacrament: He makes
use of the mouth of a man to exhibit a God; he will have a transient and
perishable word produce the Eternal and Divine Word; he will, contrary to all
the laws of Nature, that the Accidents subsist without their Subject, and that
the Substance of the Bread and Wine, being turned into that of his Body and
Blood, keep notwithstanding its Color, Taste, and Form: He is multiplied
without being divided, to satisfy the love of his Spouse; and admitting his
Humanity into the privileges of the Divinity, fills his State with his
presence. We are in a doubt whether he does not work a Miracle for the Faithful
which is not indulged the Blessed; and we are yet ignorant whether this divine
multiplication be an effect of his glory, or of his power. For though there are
some Divines who believe that glorified bodies may be in diverse places without
a miracle, and that the part they have in the Immensity of God multiplies their
bodies without dividing them; the Schools have always looked upon this effect as
a prodigy, and have taught us that the order of Glory had its Miracles as well
as that of Nature and Grace.

Finally, it seems that the Son of God, to make his power and his love admired,
Dicitur virgini supervenient in te Spiritus sanctus, dic^tur etiem Sacerdoti
superveniet in te Spiritus sarctus; and efficiet quod intelligentiam tuam
excedet. Joan. Damasc.
had a mind in this Mystery to repeat all the Miracles he had wrought during
the course of his life: For if he were born of Mary without interessing her
Virginity; if, making her a Mother, he left her a Virgin; if the Fruit she bare
deflowred not her Purity; he is produced in our Sacrifices without violating
their Accidents; and changing their substance into his, alters not the Species
that cover them: If he turn water into wine at a Marriage in Cana, and manifest
himself the Master of the Elements in changing their qualies; he appears no
less absolute in a Sacrament, where he turns the Bread into his Body, the Wine
into his Blood, and the Creature into his Creator: If he multiply the loaves in
the wilderness, and operate this prodigy by the hands of his Apostles, they
being ignorant of the manner; he daily multiplies his Body by the hands of the
Priests, who cannot comprehend a miracle whereof they are the witnesses and the
Ministers: If heretofore he cured the sick that came unto him, here he cures
the diseased that receive him; and if he raised the dead by his touch or by his
Word, here he promises life to all those that feed upon him, and engages
himself by a promise as sure as an Oracle, that he will draw all those out of
the grave that have served him here for a Temple. Thus this adorable Sacrament
deserves the name of Manna, better then Manna it self, and ought no less to
fill our hearts with astonishment then with love.

But to continue our resemblances, and to manifest the truth in the figure; The
Psalmist has observed, that Manna was not a bare Nutriment, but a preservative
and a remedy. For while the Israelites made use of it in the Deserts, they were
never molested with any infirmities; Though they so often changed their
Quarters, marched through a Wilderness where the want of water, and the
multitude of serpents might make them fear an infection; nevertheless, this
food which participated of the Tree of Life, and made them taste in the Deserts
the delights of Paradise, so well suited with their temper, that though they
daily beheld rebels in their Camp, they never saw any sick: In Tribubus eorum
non erat infirmus. There by a strange prodigy, diseases were not the harbingers
of death: they gave up the ghost without any pangs; some small weakness gave
them notice of the hour of their departure; the soul fairly took leave of the
body, and the Fever which seems the forrager of death, durst not set upon men
whom Manna served for nourishment. The Eucharist works the same miracle in our
souls, that this Heavenly food did in their bodies; It is at the same time diet
and an Antidote; it gives life and preserves it; it delivers us from evil, and
then protects us against it; it maintains the constitution of the soul in a
regulated evenness of temper, and much happier then physic, which cannot tame
the disease without weakening nature; it deals so critically with the sins, that
it never prejudiceth the sinner. Many times when Faith seconds Piety, this
Celestial viand extends its effects as far as the body; it maintains health as
well as salvation, and cures the diseased as well as the wicked: In the
Primitive Church it wrought wonderful cures, and the great Saint Cyprian tells
us, that Physicians were useless in those days, because Christians found their
cure in the Eucharist, and proved there was the same Jesus present, whose Word
was heretofore so fatal to infirmities, and so favorable to the infirm.

If in this particular it supass Manna, in another it equals it, Manna non
solum sanitatem sed and animum Judais conserebat, Jos^ph.
because in restoring health it infused strength, and inspired courage; For
there are some Writers that are of opinion, that the valor of the Israelites
was an effect of Manna; that they owed those formidable victories they gained
from their enemies, to this meat that came down from Heaven. Neither ought this
to seem strange to the incredulous, since experience teaches us, that wine
which is the pure work of Nature, produces daily the same effects; drowns fear
in its vapors; inspires men with the contempt of dangers; gives a new vigor
to soldiers, and constitutes the best part of their courage. Therefore I am
easily persuaded to believe, that Manna wrought the same wonder in the
Israelites, whilst nourishing their body, it maintained their valor: and
making them sound and lusty, made them withal magnanimous and valiant. Indeed,
inasmuch as this food was more miraculous then natural, and acted rather by the
directions of Heaven, then the properties of its own nature, it lost this
faculty as soon as the Israelites lost grace: and as if it had changed quality
when they changed disposition, it produced fear in the same hearts where it had
formerly produced courage and assurance.

All these wonders were but the shadows of what we adore in the Eucharist,
which is not only the food but the force of the Christian; we come from the
Altar as Lions terrifying the Infernal Spirits, they cannot endure our sight;
the presence of Jesus Christ wherewith we are surrounded, startles them into a
disorder: and remembering that we bear about us the same slesh and blood which
triumphed over them upon Mount Calvary, they dare not set upon us; They fly
such men who lodge a god in their souls, and beholding their Judge seated in
our hearts as upon his Throne, they are afraid lest he pronounce sentence
against them, re-doubling their pains, and aggravating their torments. It was
this Heavenly Bread that animated the Martyrs to the combat; this adorable
Bread that gave them courage to daunt their executioners; and the sword of
Gideon that won so many victories, was but the Type of this; For this mighty
man entering the Camp of the Madianites, and hearing one of their soldiers tell
his fellow, that in his sleep he saw a Cake fall from Heaven, which routed
their army; he persuaded himself, contrary to all appearance, Sicut verbum Dei
cibus est and gladius, ita and corpus ejus. Ber.
that this Cake was his Sword: and taking advantage from this dream, set upon
his enemies and defeated them; Non est hoc aliud nisi gladius Gideonis. But
it is very true, that the Bread of Jesus Christ is the Sword of the Christians;
the same meat that nourishes them, defends them; and the same remedy that
cures their maladies, subdues their enemies.

Its strength no way hinders its sweetness, and like Manna there are charms in
it, that make it pleasing to every palate; For the holy Scripture assures us,
that this Heavenly food was fitted to the appetite of the Israelites: that
never changing the fashion, it altered the savor, and following their
inclinations, complied with their tastes to satisfy their longing. I know Saint
Augustine is of opinion, that this miracle was wrought only in favor of the
righteous, and that the guilty were deprived of a Grace, which in stead of
heightning their devotion, did only whet their stomach: But the Scripture
declares this miracle; and the words thereof, which are as true as Oracles,
inform us, that Manna, besides its natural taste, had other rellishes according
to the several appetites of those that gathered it.

If the Figure were thus advantageous for the body, the Substance is much more
beneficial for the soul: For inasmuch as this Sacrament contains the source of
Grace, there is none but may from thence be communicated unto us; though its
principal effect be to maintain life, it fails not to produce all Virtues, and
to satisfy the inclinations of all those that receive it: It inspires Lovers
with Charity, weak persons with Courage, Virgins with Purity, Penitents with
Sorrow: and becoming all things to all upon Earth as well as in Heaven,
perfectly fulfils all the desires of the Faithful; By its abundance it supplies
all other Sacraments: It gives us Jesus Christ in all his different relations;
and comprehending as well his Mysteries as their Graces, makes us enjoy him
living and dying, humble and glorified, acting and suffering.

For whether Eternity which in one indivisible moment includes all the
differences of time, recollect here all the Mysteries of Jesus Christ; or
whether this Sacrament comprehend all that it exhibits, and being the Figure
and Truth both together, presents us the Death and Resurrection of the Son of
God, because it is the Sacrament thereof; or finally, whether Jesus Christ upon
the Altars, to comfort the Faithful, who saw him not upon the Earth, will by a
miraculous way for their sakes, accord the present with the past, and let
himself be enjoyed after his Death, as he was seen before his Birth; he gives
himself wholly to them in this Mystery, and fully communicates all that he is,
all that he has done, and all that he has suffered for their salvation: so
that simple souls may consider him there as a child; Hermites as solitary; the
Evangelists as a Divine Preacher; the Martyrs as a Sacrifice; the Prelates as a
Pastor: In hoc Sacramento judex and advocatus, sacerdos and victima, Leo and
Agnus, Pastor and Pascua. Ber.
and every one following his own piety, may behold him in the condition which
most affects him with pleasure or pain. It was perhaps for this cause that the
Moserabs in their Liturgy divided the Body of the Son of God into nine
portions, upon which they imposed the names of his chiefest Mysteries, to teach
us, that he repeated them upon our Altars to content our piety: and
accomplishing the Figure of Manna, exhibited himself in all these different
estates, thereby to accommodate himself to all our inclinations.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. That this Nourishment gives the Christian whatever the
Devil promised Innocent Man, if he did eat of the Forbidden Fruit.
THe Divine Providence is never more wonderful, then when it employs the same
means to save us, the malice of the Devil had made use of to destroy us. Thus
let us magnify his Economy when we see our salvation somewhat resemble our
fall, and the same things that involved us in transgression, deliver us out of
it. A Devil jealous of our happiness, began our misery; a Woman, too easily
listened to his words; a man over-lightly complacent, suffered himself to be
cajoled by her: and the beauty of the forbidden fruit charming his eyes,
seduced his mind and corrupted his will. The Divine Wisdom imitating our fall
in the work of our salvation, made use of an Angel the Interpreter of his
designs; of a Virgin true to his Promises; of a Man-God, that satisfied his
Justice; and of a fruit not forbidden, but commanded, which really exhibits to
the Christian all those advantages man was made to hope for in his Innocence.
For the Devil considering the just inclinations Nature and Grace had imprinted
in the soul of man, to seduce him, promised him that if he would disobey God,
he should find his happiness in his rebellion: and that the use of the fruit he
was forbidden to meddle with, should make him Immortal, knowing Good and Evil;
and Christian Religion teaches us, that the Body of the Son of God received in
the Sacrament, with piety due to so great love, produces in us these effects:
and making us Men-Gods, makes us Knowing and Immortal. Let us examine these
Promises, and see what we ought to expect from the God of Truth, and the Father
of Lies.

If the fear of death, and the desire of life, be not the most ancient passions
of man, we may affirm them the most natural and most violent; He has an
apprehension of death, before he knows what it is; he desires Immortality,
before he believes it: and whatever he does here below, is only by defending
himself from a dissolution, to live for ever. Every one seeks after the same
end, though by different mediums; and he that would put the question to each
particular, would learn by their answers, that they labor only to become
Immortal. Fathers mary not so much for the pleasure of the bed, as for the
desire they have to survive in their posterity; and, in spite of death, gain a
perpetuity to their Being as well as their Name. Philosophers are not so much
in love with Knowledge and Vanity, as with Life; whilst they spend whole nights
in their books, and leave the productions of their brain to posterity: For they
think to cozen death by this stratagem; they believe their reputation will
pierce the Generations to come; and that, living in the memory of men, they
shall in some sort enjoy Immortality. Monarchs, whose mind and body are
equally barren, leaving neither Children nor Virtues behind them, whereby they
may be known to their Successors, raise Pyramids to preserve their memory; and
being not able to busy the Pen of the Historian, employ the Tool of the
Engraver; and stamp their name upon Marble, being unable to write it in the
Annals. Conquerors are not exempt from this madness; they fight only to get
themselves a Name, seek for Life in the very bosom of Death, depopulate
States, to make succeeding ages talk of them; destroy Towns to raise Trophies;
and, Longum est retexere Curios and Regulos, and Graecos, viros quoru^ iunumera
elogia sunt contemptae morti^ propter posthumam famam. Tert.
not able to gain Reputation by their Justice or Clemency, strive to purchase
it by their Courage and Valor. From this Passion does Tertullian draw
arguments to prove the immortality of the soul; and to persuade the Infidels
that whole man dies not, because he extends his desires beyond this life: and
knowing very well that his spirit must survive his body, is much troubled how
he may preserve his reputation after his death.

The Devil, who is not ignorant that this desire is engraved in our hearts by
the finger of Nature, and that it is easier to divert it then smother it, tried
to make use of it in Paradise, to seduce the first man: he went not about to
take from him the belief of the immortality of his soul; he knew, a mind so
enlightened could not be clouded with such darkness; but he persuaded him that
his happiness depended upon his disobedience, and that, to defend him from
death, wherewith God had threatened him, his only way was to eat of the
forbidden fruit. This subtle spirit would not set upon man till he had stirred
up the most violent of his Passions; and he conceived it an easy matter to
ruin him, if he could but persuade him that Immortality would be the
recompense of his crime: Indeed, Man, charmed with so fair a promise, violated
the respect he owed his God; he reached his hand to that fatal Tree, and
plucking the fruit which served for a proof his obedience, made himself guilty
of sin and obnoxious to death.

But inasmuch as the Son of God takes pleasure to draw our Salvation out of our
Fall, and makes us, in a blind submission, find that advantage we sought for
in a foolish credulity; he has instituted a Sacrament in his Church which
contains an admirable fruit, giving those that eat of it a happy Immortality.
For the chief effect of this celestial food, is, to preserve us from death, and
assure us of life: He that eats my flesh, says Jesus Christ, shall live for
ever: He opposes this nourishment against that of the fathers in the
wilderness; and protesting that those that eat his flesh shall never die, he
engages himself, by a solemn promise, to raise them from the dead: So that
though his Justice did not oblige him to raise the Innocent and the Guilty out
of the grave to give them their reward, his Truth would oblige him to restore
life to the Faithful, who in obedience to his will have eaten this
ever-to-be-adored Fruit. Therefore is it that the Fathers of the Church, making
the Elogie of this Sacrament, call it sometimes the Earnest of glory, sometimes
the Antidote of death, sometimes the Seed of immortality: But because the devil
joined the desire of Glory with that of Life, and promised man to make him a
god if he would eat of the Forbidden fruit; Jesus Christ takes the same course;
and having made us hope for immortality in this Sacrament, he raises our
expectation, and promises us Divinity.

I do not wonder that Innocent man desired to be God, Nec quicquam homine aut
superbius aut miserius. Plin. maj.
seeing Guilty man covets it to this day; and that the misery which punishes
his disobedience, has not flatted this his desire: nor do I conceive it
strange, that the greatness of his condition, seconded with the promises of the
Serpent, had persuaded him, that, in eating the forbidden fruit, he might
purchase Divinity: For in that happy state all was submitted to his will, he
was equally absolute in his Person and in his Kingdom; he discoursed familiarly
with the Angels, and he knew that his soul, though included in a body, was
little inferior to those blessed spirits: His Sovereignty gave him hopes of an
Independencie: being Lord of the Universe, he was easily persuaded he might be
the Conservator; his lights, which should have cleared up his judgment, dazzled
him; his present greatness made him forget his former original: The promises of
the devil charmed him; and not imagining that Humility was the way which should
lead him to Glory, he suffered himself to be transported with Pride, which
threw him into confusion and misery.

His loss had been irrecoverable, had not the Son of God found out a remedy,
and, obliging him to taste a Divine Fruit in the Eucharist, had not repaired
his fault, and satisfied his desire. For it was not enough to cure Man of his
sin by a Sacrament, if the Divine Mercy had not furnished him at the same time
with a means innocently to content his longings. The inclination to Divinity
was riveted in the very bottom of his Essence; and I dare say, the persuasion
of the Serpent, very far from defacing it, had rooted it faster: Man had a
mind to command: though he had lost the power, he still retained the desire;
and as there is no miserable man that would not with all his heart be happy,
neither is there any sinner that would not reign with God.

This wish was a Sacrilege, and an attempt against the Godhead; but by the
goodness of Jesus Christ, it is become an act of Religion and Obedience. For
this Son, who is equal to his Father, and who, being his primitive Image, and
the Character of his Substance, has the right of exalting men to this dignity,
was made Man in the Incarnation, that they might be made Gods in the Eucharist;
and was laden with their Miseries in the One, that they might be clothed with
his Glory in the Other. Indeed, it is in this ineffable Mystery wherein Man
mingles himself with God; where, by a holy confusion, he loses his bad
qualities, and assumes divine ones; where, leaving off to be a sinner, he
begins to be innocent; where, soaring above himself, he enters into the rights
of God. Eucharistia videtur esse velut Incarnationis mira quaedam extensio. D^.
Tho.


There it is that the Eucharist supplies the mystery of the Incarnation: For
this made only a Man-God, included its effects in one Individual of Nature;
the holy Humanity enjoyed this favor all alone; and if men received any
advantage, it was rather honorable then useful. This Alliance was like those
Marriages where all the profit is the Brides, and the glory only the Kinreds:
'Twas indeed a happiness for men, that their nature was preferred before that
of the Angels, and that God, intending to be allied to his Creatures,
vouchsafed to make himself a Man, and not a Seraphim: But had not this mystery
been attended with other consequences, and had not the holy Sacrament been
added to the Incarnation, the Man-God had not communicated to us his qualities;
and remaining still the children of Adam, we had never been made the children
of God: This great effect was reserved for the Eucharist; it is in this mystery
that whole Nature was Deified; and we may say, that if the Communication of the
Word in the Incarnation was infinite, it was not immense but in the holy
Sacrament of the Altar. There it is that we become Gods without committing a
crime; there Piety satisfies our Ambition: there the union we contract with the
Word, imitates and honors That it contracted with the Father from all
Eternity. Finally, there it is that the only Son becomes the firstborn; and
taking us for his Brethren, makes us the Children, and withal the Images of his
Father.

After this great advantage, it is not hard to conceive that he was willing to
content our third desire; and having made us Gods, has endued us with
Knowledge, to bestow upon us in earnest what the devil promised us in jest. For
this Spirit, who still retains so much light amidst the thickness of his
darkness, perceiving that the desire of Knowledge is one of the strongest
Passions of Man, persuaded him that God had not forbidden him the use of the
fruit he advised him to eat, but to keep him in ignorance, and to deprive him
of those innocent pleasures Science brings with it into the mind. This
temptation proved so powerful, that it prevailed upon man for his consent; and
he that had resisted the promises of Glory and Life, suffered himself to be
charmed with the hope of Knowledge.

Indeed, we must confess, that of all the Passions this is the most reasonable:
Beasts are moved with the love of Life and Glory; they fear Death and
Dishonor: They fight, to be secured from both these; and those that are
accounted the noblest, are as ambitious in their victories of the increase of
their reputation, as of the preservation of their life: But the desire of
Knowledge is peculiar to Man: there is no creature but he, that takes pains to
be delivered from Ignorance: His combats for Glory are not more famous then his
disputes for Truth; and Conquerors take less pleasure to gain Slaves, then
Philosophers do to purchase Disciples.

The contestation of Wits is nobler then that of Bodies: and if there be any
conflict among the Angels, it more resembles that of Philosophers then that of
Conquerors: The Understanding and the Will are the only Atms made use of,
either for offense or defense: whole Nature is the Field; the differences
spring not from the diverse interests of Sovereigns, but from the contrary
opinions of Masters: the recompense of the Victors is not so much the Conquest
of Glory, as of Knowledge: they are never more satisfied with their advantage,
then when of their Enemies they make their Partisans; and delivering them from
Error and Falsehood, enrich them with Knowledge and Truth. Therefore did the
devil make use of this stratagem to gain man to his side; and believed that if
any thing in the world would make him forget his duty, 'twas his desire to Know
Good and Evil. In the mean time, Man lost his Light by losing his Innocence;
the father of Lies plunged him in darkness; and, falling into the pit of Sin,
by a just judgment he fell into the abyss of Ignorance.

But Jesus Christ, all whose Promises are Truth, opens the eyes of the soul to
the Faithful that receive his Body: he enlightens their Understanding, and
warms their Will; he manifests himself to those that receive him in this
Sacrament; and leading them to Knowledge by the mystery of Faith, may be said
to give them sight, by making them blind. It Is in the breaking of this Bread,
that his disciples know him; it is by the virtue of this Drink, that the scales
are taken from their eyes; and it is by the Grace of this Food, that the Just,
who are nourished therewith, receive Understanding together with Life. If Jesus
Christ reign upon our Altars as a Sovereign, he instructs thence as a Master:
if we are his Subjects in that condition, we are also his Disciples; and if he
gives us Laws to regulate us, he gives us Counsels to inform us. From all this
Discourse it is easy to infer, that Jesus Christ is the God of Truth, and the
Devil the Father of Lies; That the One, promising us Honor, Knowledge, and
Life, involved us in Shame, Ignorance and Death; the Other, giving us his Body,
made us Wise, Immortal, and Glorious.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. That this Nourishment unites the Christian with the Son
of God.
INasmuch as Unity is the most excellent perfection of God, all the works of
his hands bear the Character thereof; there is no creature that in his
composition maintains not this advantage; he cease to subsist or live, as soon
as he begins to be divided; and if S. Augustine judged rightly, that grief was
nothing but the division of the soul, we may say that death is nothing but the
dissolution of the body. Thence it comes to pass, that God, in Nature and in
Grace, that he may preserve his creatures, maintains them in unity, and makes
his noblest operations and his highest mysteries serviceable to this design.
His Providence that guides the Universe, takes no other care but to associate
the creatures together, that their union may compose the worlds Harmony: As the
Battles of Princes tend to peace, the jar of the Elements wrangles out a
concord; if they recede from their contraries, it is to embrace their like; and
when they seem most incensed, they intend not so much a mutual destruction, as
to remove those obstacles that hinder their alliance.

That which is done in Nature, is effected in Grace; all the operations
thereof, mean only to reconcile us to God; Teneamus charitatem, fine qua etiam
cum Sacramentis and cum fide nibil sumus: tenemus autem charitatem si
amplectimur unitatem. Aug.
This noble expression of the Divine Essence breaths nothing but Unity; and
these austere Virtues which seem to annihilate the sinner, have no other end
but to destroy his sin, to reunite him to his Principle. All our Mysteries,
and all our Sacraments, seek the same end by different ways. Baptism unites us
to Jesus Christ, as to our Head; Repentance, as to our Surety; the Eucharist,
as to our Beloved, because completing all the other unions, it happily
converts us into him that nourishes us with his Flesh and Blood.

This design has excellently appeared in the choice he made of the matter of
this Sacrament. For the Bread, whose substance is changed into that of the Body
of Jesus Christ, is made up of many grains of corn, which being kneaded and
baked together, composeth that Sacrifice which is offered upon our Altars: The
Wine, whose substance is turned into the Blood of Christ, is compounded of many
Grapes, which being trodden in the same Press, sends forth that juice which is
exhibited in this oblation: So that the Son of God prepares the heart of the
Faithful by a sensible union to a spiritual one; and teaches them, that he
will unite them with him in a Sacrament, whose outward appearances breathe
nothing but unity.

The Flesh which the outward species cover, is so one, that its multiplication
cannot divide it: it is produced in a thousand places to reunite those that
receive it; and contrary to that of Adam, is one in its substance, Omne bellum
oritur ex carne; homo enim si carnalis non esset, nunquam cum alio homine
pugnaret. Aug.
as well as in its effects. For the flesh of our first Father is a fruitful and
unhappy spring of division; it is parted into as many bodies as there are
children: and we may say, that all men are the wretched portions of this guilty
flesh. The souls are divided with it to inanimate it; and acting by its Organs,
contract its bad qualities, whence arise quarrels and disputes that distract
States and Fam lies: But the most Tragical division is, that being the channel
of sin, it makes the souls guilty as soon as they touch it, and separate them
from God by an offense which was free in the first man, and natural in all his
posterity: For it is enough that they are blended with the flesh of Adam, to
make them become guilty. It Is from this unhappy mixture that those fatal rents
issue and proceed, which occasion all our disasters; and if we did not
communicate in flesh with Adam, we should not partake of his sin, nor be liable
to his punishment.

But this of Jesus Christ more happy and more innocent then his, heals our
division, and leads us to unity; it is one in substance; and though a part of
Adams, is exempt from all sin, because the work of the Holy Ghost, and the Word
that sustains it, renders it impeccable; He that communicates life to it,
communicates innocence in so high a degree, that he imparts it to those that
receive it. Its multiplication dissolves not the unity; the same Word that
produces it upon our Altars, gives it the impress of its qualities; and
contrary to all the rules of nature, which cannot multiply things without
dividing them, finds a secret to give it a Being in a thousand places without
impairing its unity.

There is this difference between Nature and a Word; the former is fruitful
only by division; it is wonderful how from a grain of corn she extracts a whole
Harvest; pays the labor of the Husbandman with usury; recompenseth his pains
with plenty; and imitating the power of her Creator, which makes all things of
nothing, makes a great deal of a very little. But she cannot accord
multiplication with unity; she must divide whatever she produces: and her
liberality is founded upon the fraction of her Presents. A Word more powerful
then nature, is brought forth without partition; it is communicated through the
fullest Auditory without wronging its Unity; and though always one, fills the
ears of all those that are within the sound of it.

It seems that the Body of the Son of God, which produced by the Word,
Vnusquisque accepit partem suam unde and ipsa Gratia parts vocantur, per
parts manducantur, and manet integer totus, per parts manducatur in
Sacramento, and manet integer totus in coelo, manet integer to^us in cord tuo.
Aug. Sermon. de Verb. Evang.
has borrowed this Virtue from its cause, is multiplied in the world, and is
not divided; it is received into the heart of all the Faithful; and this kind
of Immensity that multiplies its presence, alters not its unity: It is whole
and entire under every part of the Host; though they break it, they cannot
divide it; but preserving its unity in the fraction of the species, remains
always the Numerical body of Jesus Christ. Thence it comes to pass, that it
unites all the faithful that receive it; For though they be as different in
conditions as generations; as contrary in humors as interests; as great
strangers in their inclinations as climates; they do notwithstanding make up
one body, because they are nourished with one bread, and all eat the same meat;
which having the power to assimilate the feeder into the food, communicates
unto them a wonderful unity which composeth all their differences.

But to comprehend this last miracle, we must remember that this viand being of
another nature then common meat, is not disgested by the natural heat, nor
converted into the substance of those that take it; only the accidents that
cover it resent that injury, and yielding to that fire that animates and
consumes us, becomes a part of our selves: Being impassible and glorified, it is
free from corruption, acting upon those that eat it, and having the same effect
upon them, they have upon other nutriments, converts them miraculously into it
self. Thus every Christian, if he bring not resistance with him, becomes
another Jesus Christ; he parts with the bad qualities of Adam, to assume the
glorious ones of the Son of God; if he share not in his impassibility, he does
in his innocence; if he become not immortal, he becomes in some sort glorified;
and if he change not nature, he alters at least his inclination.

Therefore is it that all the Fathers of the Church admiring the holy
stratagems Jesus Christ makes use of to unite us to himself, Qui vult vivere
habet unde vivat; accedat, credat, incorporetur, vivificectur, inhaereat
corpori, vivat Deo de Deo, nunc laboret in terra ut postea vivat in cae^o. Aug.
call this Sacrament a Divine Transformation, wherein man losing what he had of
corruptible and criminal, gains the advantages of the Blessed, and is happily
changed into him that nourishes him. Indeed experience teaches us, that
nature and love have found out no better invention to convert Essences then
Nutrition: Every day the meat we eat, is assimilated into our substance; the
wine altering its qualities by a natural Chemistry, is turned into our blood;
bread without any other additional supplement then the natural heat, becomes
our flesh; and all the nourishments we take, by a wonderful metamorphosis pass
into our nature: The union they contract with us is so great, nothing can break
it; all the endeavors of men cannot dissolve it; and it is easier for the
cruelty of the Executioner to bray the chains that fasten the soul to the body,
then to unravel those links that do consubstantiate the food with him that
has disgested it: Being changed into his substance, and blended with all the
parts that compose him, the inquisition must search for it in his Arteries, and
break his very bones to extract it with the marrow.

Love also, that takes pleasure to imitate nature, has found out no more
powerful means to unite lovers together, when one of them has bid farewell to
the world, then in making the dead serve for a nourishment to the living; and
to give him a resurrection by an artifice which can find no excuse, but in the
excess of that passion that gave it a being. Thus we read that disconsolate
Artemisia having lost her dear Mausolus, Mortui cineres vino commistos ebibit,
and memoriae ejus tam splendidum sepulchrum erexit, ut magnifica monumenta
deinceps Mausolea ab illius nomine fuerint appellaii. Gelli. lib. 10. cap. 18.
could not satisfy her love but by swallowing his ashes, thereby to be united
to him, and to make him still co-habit with her. Her grief spared nothing that
might comfort an afflicted wife, in honoring the memory of so dearly a beloved
husband; she employed the most famous Orators of her time to sweeten her
sorrows; and to make the Panegyric of him she had lost, she erected a staely
monument which passes for one of the seven wonders of the world; and having
not seen any Tomb that can equal its magnificence, gives a denomination to this
day to those of the the greatest Monarchs of the Universe: But inasmuch as
nothing can content the extremity of love, and ordinary remedies do but
aggravate a violent sorrow, this afflicted lover resolved to drink the ashes of
her dead husband; Vt esset vivum and spirans conjugis sepulchru^.
that changing them into her substance, she might expire with him, or he
survive together with her.

Me thinks the Son of God completed in the Eucharist what love engaged this
amorous Princess to attempt: For being united to us in this Sacrament, and
converting us into himself by the mighty working of his infinite Power, we may
say he re-animates ashes, because he raises the dead and converts sinners: So
that of all the alliances he has contracted with us, we must needs acknowledge
this the closest and most intimate. 'Twas certainly a great testimony of his
love, when he was incarnate in the chaste Womb of his Virgin Mother; and
clothing himself with our flesh, took upon him the burden of our sins, and of
the punishments due unto them: it was a consequence of this love, when he
vouchsafed to converse with us, and treating us as his brethren, gave us part
in the inheritance of his glory: It was a proof of his compassion, when he
became our Advocate to his Father; pleaded our Cause before his Throne; and to
purchase an act of oblivion for all our transgressions, mingled his tears with
his blood in the garden of Olives: It was me thinks the utmost expression of
his love, when he became our Surety upon the Cross, loaded himself with our
sins to enrich us with his merits, and made an exchange with us, which cost him
his life, and procured us salvation. Nevertheless all these favors united him
not with men, and when he was our Brother, Cum autem datur in cibum unio
perfecta est; uniuntur enim in unitate corporis and cibus and qui cibum sumit.
Di. Tho.
our Advocate, our Surety, he was not one person with us: But in the Eucharist,
wherein he is our nourishment, his love has found out the secret of
incorporating us with him; he yet unites man with God; he repeats the Mystery
of the Incarnation; he does that in favor of all men, which he only did for
Humanity; and he works a thousand times one miracle in the Bosom of the
Church, which he acted but once in the Womb of his Mother: For if we compare
the Eucharist with the Incarnation, we shall find that in the one, God is made
Man; in the other, Men became Gods; In the one, he is united to our nature; in
the other, to our person; in the one, he is invested with our miseries; in the
other, he apparels us with his greatness.

But because in all these Alliances we meet not with that of Mother, he is
willing that his body, conceived by the Virgin, should be also produced by the
Priests upon our Altars, that they might be his parents, and might boast that
the Incarnation has no preeminence above the Eucharist. For the Scripture
teaches us that Jesus Christ in his birth is the work of the holy Ghost, and
of the Virgin; both these persons became mutually pregnant: Mary restores to
the holy Ghost what she received from him; and when she became the Mother of
the Son of God, he became the Principle: The same Jesus in his Passion is the
work of sinners; they condemn him to death by the mouth of Pilate, nail him to
the Cross by the hands of the Executioners, and despoil him of his honor and
his life by the outrages of the Jews: In the Resurrection he is the pure work
of his Father; he it is that draws him from the grave, who gives him the
recompense of his labors, exalts him to glory, and makes him reign
everlastingly with him. But in the Eucharist he is the work of the Priests;
it is their word that makes him present upon our Altars; their intention, that
makes him descend from heaven: in the name of all the Faithful, these are the
powerful Ministers that conceive him, and bring him forth, that this holy
Sacrament may perfect all the Alliances the mystery of the Incarnation had
begun, and that we may have this consolation, to know that there is no union in
Nature we contract not with Jesus Christ in the Eucharist.

The Sixth DISCOURSE. Of the dispositions the Christian ought to bring with him
to receive this Nourishment.
IF it be a truth, that great benefits require great acknowledgements, we must
confess that extraordinary Mysteries require extraordinary dispositions; nor
that they must otherwise be approacht unto, then with that reverence which is
due to sacred things: It Is a Sacrilege to have to do with them with a profane
spirit; and we do but expose our selves to the indignation of heaven, when we
think to partake of them without that preparation their stupendous holiness
does require. The Levites were not admitted to the service of the Altar before
they were purified: The High Priest went not into the Sanctuary of the Temple,
till he had expiated his sins by the blood of a Sacrifice; neither did the
Prophets deliver Oracles to the people, till the holy Spirit, who spoke with
their mouth, resided in their heart. The Eucharist therefore being the most
august of our Mysteries, obliges us to very great and reverential
dispositions: Each quality it is attended with, exacts a particular preparation;
and all the titles it bears, demand of the receivers as many different virtues.

Inasmuch as it is the most hidden Mystery of our Religion, whose wonders
deceive our eyes, whose luster dazzles the sunshine of our nearest observation;
the manner of Christ's residing there being altogether imperceptible to our
Senses, and unconceiveable to our Understandings, we are obliged to bring along
with us much Faith, and little Reasoning: a blind obedience is a Sacrifice
that must accompany this oblation of the Son of God upon our Altars; and at the
same time that his Body is the Holocaust of his Love, our Understanding must be
the Victim of our Faith. It Is in this occasion that we ought to rely upon the
Power and Truth of him that works this Miracle; and examining the
difficulties that combat our Faith, we are only to consider that he that has
drawn All things out of Nothing, is still able to extract his Body out of the
substance of the Bread, Haec Sacramenta necessario fidem exigunt, and rationem
non admittunt. Bern.
and change one thing into another, since he was able to produce what was not.
This is the Mystery must be approached unto in the simplicity of Faith; where
we must believe Jesus Christ whom we do not see; that Darkness being the
midwife of Light, we may behold him in heaven, whom we have believed upon earth.

The second disposition of the Christian is derived from the second quality of
this heavenly meat: All Religion informs us that Heaven bestows this Nutriment
upon us by the mighty power of its Love; every effect we observe therein, is a
Miracle; never will the Prodigies of Manna equal those of the Eucharist; Tota
ratio facti potentia facientis. Aug.
nothing is done here according to the laws of Nature: God dispenses with all
those rules in other occurrences he obliges himself unto; and we may say that
in this adorable Mystery he consults only his Power and his Goodness: He
changes the Elements without altering their qualities; he sustains Accidents
without their Substances; he multiplies his Body without dividing it; he
nourishes the Faithful with his Flesh without wasting it; he is present in a
thousand places at the same instant: Whilst Men possess him, the Angels do not
lose him: he is wholly in heaven, and wholly upon the earth: and, as if the
Incarnation were but an Essay of the Eucharist, this gives all the world the
same Body the other indulged only to Judea. Such a cloud of Miracles exact our
silence and astonishment: we must admire what we cannot comprehend; and making
Ignorance serviceable to Piety, say with the Prophet, Mirabilis Deus in sanctis
suis, and magnus in operibus suis. Indeed, if we admire the wonders of Nature;
if that which surpasses our apprehension ravish our understanding; if the
disorder of the Elements, or the irregularity of the Seasons, strike a kind of
awe into us; Ought we not greatly to respect a Mystery whose every circumstance
is a Miracle, and every effect a Prodigy!

But inasmuch as this Food is an Earnest of Glory, and this Feast whereto the
Faithful are invited, is a figure of that Eternal Banquet which the Blessed sit
down at; we must bring along with us Desire and Hope: God gives us nothing upon
the earth which he does promise us aforehand to occasion our desires: But
because Promises are not bare words, Judaei quippe habebant quandam umbram, nos
veritatem: Judaei fuerunt servi, nos filii: Judaei per mare transierunt ad
Eremum, nos per Baptismum intravimus in Regnum: Judaei Manna manducaverunt, nos
Christum: Judaei pruinam, nos Deum caeli. Salvia.
he many times gives us a part of what he has promised: Though the Law were
but a shadow of Truth, the Sacraments thereof but vain and empty Figures, yet
did they contain something that the Israelites were to hope for by them. Manna
had qualities expressing those of the Body of Jesus Christ: The Law, though
obscure, was an exposition of the Gospel, and, rightly understood, obliged us
to love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves. The Sea, which
favored their retreat in parting asunder, and coming together again swallowed
up the Egyptians, darted forth some glimmerings of light amidst these shades of
darkness, and by sensible effects exhibited what was to be acted upon our souls
in the Sacrament of Baptism. The Land of Promise had some resemblance with that
of the Living; its plenty was an image of the felicity of heaven, where nothing
is wanting to the blessed inhabitants.

Nevertheless we must acknowledge that the pledges we receive in the New
Testament, are far more certain and substantial: They exhibit the best part of
what they promise, they do what they make show of; and joining the Figure with
the Substance, we may say, that, without depriving us of the quality of the
Faithful, they procure us that of the Blessed. Baptism, which raises us to the
dignity of the Sons of God, gives us admittance into his Inheritance; we are
already new creatures; and though not yet perfected by Glory, are
notwithstanding begun to be wrought upon by Grace. We are the members of Jesus
Christ, though we remain the members of Adam: if the Charity the holy Ghost
has shed abroad in our hearts quench not Concupiscence, at least it abolisheth
the sin; and though our righteousness be imperfect, it fails not to be true.
The Incarnation raises our hopes; and having seen a God made Man in being born
of a Virgin, we have not much ado to believe that Men may become Gods in being
born of the Church.

But not to enter upon a deduction which would lead too far from the Subject of
my discourse, we need only consider the Eucharist, to be persuaded of this
Verity: It is a pledge wherein God performs what he promises: It Is part of
that sum he bids us hope for, Sacramenta prima erant praenvnitiativa Christi,
and ideo ablata quia completa: alia sunt instituta, virtute majora, utilitate
meliora, actu feliciora, numero pauciora. Aug.
an Antepast of the felicity we expect; neither is there any Christian who is
not fully assured to possess Jesus Christ in heaven, because he so entirely
enjoys him on earth. He waits with patience for the effect of so many gracious
promises whereof he has received such certain earnest; he comforts himself in
his discontents, from the consideration of his advantages; neither can he doubt
that he that is so often sacrificed for his salvation, will not wholly
communicate himself for his happiness.

This infallible Gage exacts from us as much Desire as Confidence: It is not
enough to be assured of the promise of God, we must long to have it effected:
our enjoyment ought to produce our yearning after it: All Christians must be
like Daniel, men of desires; and renouncing the things of the world, fix all
their pretensions toward heaven. This Mystery that unites them to Jesus
Christ, must raise them as high as God; and when his presence is vanished with
the species, the desires that Grace inspires them with, must give them another
relish of what the natural heat has made them lose by digestion.

This disposition prepares us for another more noble and more holy: For if we
are to express our longings because the Body of the Son of God is a pledge of
his Promises, we ought to be endued with Love and Fidelity, because this
Sacrament is a Marriage of his soul with ours: Baptism is the Beginning, and
the Eucharist the Consummation hereof: we have engaged our word when we were
admitted into the Church; and receiving the character of our servitude, we have
given bond for our Faithfulness. But in the Mystery of the Eucharist he deals
with our souls as with his Spouse; we become flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone; he enters into our bosom, and we into his: his body and ours are
animated with the same Spirit; and partaking in all the qualities of our
Beloved, we have right to his most glorious privileges.

But so noble an Alliance requires a great affection, and much fidelity: This
Lover is jealous; he will reign alone in the hearts that he possesses: as he
cannot endure a Competitor in his State, so neither can he a Rival in his Love:
he will have nothing loved but for his sake: and because our adhesion to the
Creature is not without imperfections, he never beholds it without grief, nor
leaves it without punishment. Whatever is prejudicial to Fidelity, displeases:
he never breaks his word, and therefore cannot endure we should fail of our
duty: He will keep what he has once gotten: and seeing his Power is equal to
his Love, he is as severe in his Revenge, as he is liberal in his Favors When
I consider the obligations we have to his Goodness, I never wonder that his
Justice corrects us; but I am ashamed there should be any souls so negligently
careless as to provoke him; and that, after so many favors, any should be so
wretched as to betray their duty, and abandon Jesus Christ. Nevertheless this
crime is so common among Christians, that those who will not break their word
with an Enemy, take no care to be true to the Son of God, basely desert his
party, lodge the devil in the same Throne where they had seated their
Sovereign, and take an Adulterer into the bed from whence they have driven
their lawful Husband.

If the remembrance of his favors cannot produce love in our souls, the
terror of punishments must beget Fear: For if he be our Beloved in the
Eucharist, he is also our Judge; and having fruitlesly exhibited testimonies of
his Goodness, Qui enim manducat and bibit indigne, judicium fibi manducat and
hibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini. 1 Cor. 11.
will sensibly inflict marks of his indignation. The great Apostle of the
Gentiles tells us, that he that receives unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself: that the Devil being the Minister of the Divine Justice,
takes visible possession of the soul of that Delinquent; that he erects an
Altar in his heart, and of his slave making his victime, engages him in
despair, having engaged him in Sacrilege. Et post buccellu^ introivit in cum
Satanas. Joan. 13.
Thus dealt he with Judas, when he had communicated unworthily; The Evangelist
observes, that he entered into his soul, urged him to execute his abominable
design; for a light interest, obliterated out of his mind the remembrance of
all the favors he had received from his Master; and tumbling him from one
precipice to another, from Covetousness tempted him to Treachery, from Treason
to Sacrilege, Diabolus intravit in cor ut traderet eum Judas; quomodo intravit
in cor nisi immittendo iniquas persuasiones cogitatienibus iniquorum? Aug. de
Consen. Evang.
from Sacrilege to Parricide, and from Parricide to Desperation: For when the
wicked spirit that possessed him had counseled him to betray the Son of God,
he counseled him to hang himself, and setting him against himself, made him
make use of his own hands to inflict a just and cruel death upon himself.

Finally, there is no mystery wherein the Son of God manifests more love, or
more severity, where he obliges more dearly, or punishes more strictly, or
pardons more rarely; and because the crimes committed here are the greatest, it
seems the vengeance inflicted upon them is most memorable. The first of all
sinners is a great Saint in Heaven; The man that was our Father, and our
Parricide both together; De illo quidem primo homine patre generis humani, quod
eum in inferno solverit Christus, Ecclesia fere tot a consentit, quod eam non
inaniter credidisse credendum est. Aug. Epist. 99. ad Enod.
The Criminal who is accessory to all the transgressions of the world; The
Father that engages all his posterity in his offenses and his punishment; The
Rebel who makes an Insurrection of all his Descendants against their lawful
Sovereign; That unfortunate Chief who lives yet after his death, sins still in
his members, and by a dreadful prodigy being happy in his person, is miserable
and guilty in his posterity: That old man who is new born in every sinner; and
in one word, That Adam, who committed a fault whole nature bewails to this day,
found his pard on in his repentance; and whiles he sees Hell pepled with his
offspring, enjoys glory with the Angels in Heaven.

That great King whom God raised to the Throne against all humane probability;
That Stripling who without arms gave a Giant battle; That Shepherd whose Crook
was turned into a Scepter, who reckoned his victories by his combats, and
boasted that the Lord of Hosts had trained him up in the Discipline of War:
This Prince, who forgetting all these favors joined Murder to Adultery, and
made an Innocent dye to cloak the dishonor of a debauched woman: This glorious
Criminal, who saw all the Vials of Heaven poured down upon his Head; his
Kingdom divided; his subjects revolted, and his own children in the head of an
Army against him; This famous Delinquent reigns in glory with the Son of God;
his tears have washed away his iniquities; and his grief more powerful then his
offense, opened him the gate of Heaven.

That Apostle, who having received so many testimonies of affection from his
Master, forsook him so shamefully in the Garden of Gethsemane; denied him so
openly in the house of Caiaphas; is as great in Heaven as he was upon Earth:
The Church to this day reverenceth his Injunctions; the Popes boast themselves
his Successors, and all the faithful glory in being his children. That young
man full of zeal and and fury, who intended to strangle Christianity in the
very Cradle, who was the boutefew of the first persecution against the
Disciples of Jesus, who stoned Saint Stephen by their hands whose clothes he
kept, De caelo vocavi, una voce percussi, alia erexi and elegi, tertia implevi
and misi, quarta liberavi and coronavi. Aug.
has found his salvation in his sin: He was converted when he went about to
plunge himself in the blood of the first believers; he received Grace when he
was upon the very point of increasing the number of Parricides; in one moment
he became a Preacher of the Gospel, an Apostle of the Son of God, and the
Master of the Gentiles.

But the first that ever profaned the Body of Jesus Christ and committed a
Sacrilege in approaching the Altar, was given up to the fury of Satan: To his
Sacrilege he added a Parricide, and expiating these two offenses by a violent
death, taught us there was never any crime more severely punished upon Earth,
then what was committed against Jesus Christ in the Eucharist: so that a man
cannot dispose himself too carefully when he is to approach this holy
communion; and seeing the Son of God recollects all his Graces in this
Sacrament, thereby to oblige us, we ought to come accompanied with all kind of
Virtues worthily to receive him.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. That the Christian owes God the Honor of a Sacrifice.
SAcrifice is the most ancient duty of the creature toward his Creator; It is
the soul of Religion, precedes affection; and before man can be obliged to love
God, he is bound to offer him a Sacrifice: For love presupposes some society
between God and man, which is not so much an effect of Nature as of Grace; but
Sacrifice supposes nothing but dependence, which is inseparable from the
creature, and engages him as soon as ever he proceeded out of Nothing, to
acknowledge his Original by a solemn homage. From hence may be inferred, that
Sacrifice is an honor can be rendered only to God, and that it is changed into
Sacrilege when offered to a mere creature.

Neither is this hard to be conceived, if we consider the diverse motives we
have to offer Sacrifices to God, since sin has corrupted nature. The first is,
to reconcile us to him, and to mitigate his anger by the merit of the victime;
The second is to be united to him, knowing very well that as his Indignation is
the soucre of all our evils, his Grace is the Fountainhead of all our good;
whence it came to pass, that in the Old Testament there were peace offerings
offered to him for the salvation of sinners, which testified by their dying
mouths, that to be removed from God was to be miserable: The third is to obtain
eternal glory, which makes us find our happiness in the union it procures us
with God, and destroying whatever we had of mortal or perishable, happily
transforms us into him; Holocaustum dicitur sacrificium cum totu^ accenditur,
quando totum ardet and totum absumitur igne divino. Aug.
Therefore were Holocausts immolated, wherein the oblation wholly consumed by
the flame, figured out this Truth; and by a silent language taught us, that man
should never be happy till he was despoiled of all his corruption, that he
might be perfectly consummated in God. Now all men confess, that God only can
bestow Grace, remit sins which brave his Majesty, sanctify souls in uniting
them to himself, and glorify them by communicating to them his Essence.

Therefore by a necessary consequence, they acknowledge, that as from him only
these favors are to be obtained, we have no other way to intercede for them,
but by sacrifice. The Law punished those with death that erected Altars to
strange gods, and offered those honors to vain idols, which could not be
safely given to true men: Nature her self, though never so blind, sacrifices
to none but those she conceives at least to be Gods; and sin being not able to
quench all her lights, she retains this belief in her error, that Divinity
only deserves the honors of sacrifice: Faith confirms this Truth, and strongly
persuades us, that if the creature adores not his Creator, he is miserable; and
if he encroach upon the honor due to him, he becomes guilty. Creatura
rationalis si non colit Deum, misera est, quia privatur Deo; si colit Deum, non
vult se coli pro Deo. Aug.
Sacrifice then is a divine worship, whereby a reasonable creature honors his
Creator, and publicly professes, that as he has received being from him,
it is from him likewise that he expects felicity. But though there is nothing in
God which being God himself deserves not this homage, and all his perfections
may justly require it; we must confess nevertheless there are three that oblige
us to this duty, and which in the state of innocence as well as sin, demand this
sacrifice.

The first is the Sovereignty he has over his creature: For he depends of him
in Creation and Preservation; He had no right to exist before he issued from
Nothing; in these profound abysses he could not so much as desire or ask any
thing; and being not yet in nature, could have no pretensions of aspiring
either to Grace or Glory. Being now reduced from Nonentity, he depends still
upon his Sovereign; he could not be able to subsist one moment, without
assistance from him; he cannot act but by his impulses; and though he be free
in his operations, he that gave him being must give him motion: his
preservation is a consequence of his Creation: the same power that produced
him, preserves him; and unless he be strangely impudent, he must confess he
depends not less upon God in his Entity, then in his Nonentity. There is no
need that the Earth should open under his feet to swallow him up; that thunder
should fall upon his head to crush him to ashes; nor that the waters should
flow from their couch to drown him: God needs only withdraw his hand, and he
perishes; let him but cease to preserve, and he moulders into annihilation.
Dependency therefore and servitude constitute one part of his Essence: he is a
slave as soon as a creature; and though God be Almighty, we may say, without
offense, he can produce neither man nor Angel able to support themselves
without him; and who in the progress as well as beginning of his life, depends
not absolutely upon his All Sufficiency.

This is it that obliges both of them in their Creation to offer sacrifices to
him; 'twas their first reflection toward their Principle, their first duty
toward their Sovereign, and their primitive inclination toward their last
end: If they do not acquit themselves, it is their fault; if dazzled with their
own light, and charmed with their own beauty, they fail of this their lawful
homage, they need seek no other cause of their crime, nor of their fall. I
pretend not to express the nature of this sacrifice, because it is unkown to
us; but I will say thus much, thatthe Angels being pure spirits, seek not
oblations out of their own person; they stoop before the Almighty at the
presence of his greatness; they offer him what they are bound to by Creation,
and refuse not to submit to him by the motion of their proper will, as they did
from all Eternity in their nature.

For men, there is great likelihood, being compounded of a body and a soul,
they would join external sacrifice to internal; and to the end they might offer
all they had received, presenting him an Holocaust of their person, they would
employ their mouths to praise him, and their hands to serve him, having made
use of their understandings to know him, and their wills to love him: we might
believe also that acknowledging all the goods of the Earth the effects of his
bounty, they would bring presents and victimes of them; that returning his
Sovereignty what they had received from his mercy, they would sprinkle his
Altars with wine, load them with fruits, and deck them with flowers.

But there is a question, whether to satisfy their piety they would exercise
their cruelty upon Animals: whether they would butcher those innocent victimes;
shed their blood upon the Earth, and in that happy state commit murders, that
they might offer sacrifices? Some are of opinion, that man living only upon
fruits, slaughtered no victimes; that having not as yet deserved death, he
would not make them bear the punishment of his sin; and being content to offer
their Wool or their Milk, he honored God, and did not deprive them of life:
Others conceive, they slew these innocent Beasts, not to pacify the Justice of
God, who was not as yet offended, but to adore his Sovereignty, and publicly
to profess, that expecting no sin, he might bind Man over to death, and
require it of him not as a Punishment, but as a Sacrifice. The Scripture seems
to favor this opinion; and the skins wherewith our first parents were clothed
after their transgression, make us suspect they had sacrificed some Animals
during the state of Innocence, and that the Supremacy of the Almighty
imitating his Justice, was content that Man sacrificed them in stead of
himself. But not to engage in the search of a Truth which lies buried in
darkness and oblivion, it is enough to know, that Sacrifice is a public
acknowledgement of Gods Sovereign power, and that this was the first motive
that invited Man to offer him Oblations.

The second is taken from his Holiness, Sanctum and terribile nomen ejus. Psalm.
110.
which is one of the noblest and least known of all his perfections. The
Scripture never speaks of it but with respect; and mixing admiration always
with this attribute, teaches us that we are to magnify it rather by our
silence then by our words: The Angels in their eternal Hallelujahs are taken up
only with this adorable perfection. They forget as it were his Power that drew
them out of Nothing, his Providence that guided them while they walked in the
way of Merit, his Mercy that fortified them in their conflict, his Justice that
crowned them in the victory, to think only upon his Holiness, Sanctus,
sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus exercituum, Isa. 6.
which unites them to the Supreme Good, and separates them from all things
else. Indeed, it is the Seat of the Almighty; and if it be true, according to
the opinion of the Fathers, that his Essence was his Habitation, we may say
that his Holiness is his Throne, and place of rest. For all the other
perfections, more sollicitous after our advantage then his glory, oblige him to
apply himself to our necessities: His Power marches forth to seek us in the
Abysses of Nonentity; his Mercy delivers us from our Miseries; his Goodness
pardons our Offenses; and if his Justice that punishes us seem to espouse his
interests, it presently forgets them, because, having revenged them, it studies
to recompense our deservings: But Holiness, Sanctitas est ab omni inquinatione
libera, incontaminatissima and perfectissima puritas. Dionys. Requievit ab
operibus, non in operibus suis; in se enim Deus requiescit.
it studies to recompense our deservings: But Holiness, more zealous for the
Glory of God then the Salvation of Man, separates him from all things, shuts
him up in himself, and surrounds him with such a brightness of Majesty, that
his Creatures dare not approach unto him: He rests in this
ever-to-be-worshipped Throne more holily then in those blessed spirits, who,
borrowing their name from their properties, or from their offices, are called
the living Thrones of the Divine Essence.

Sacrifices then are immolated upon Altars, to adore this ineffable Perfection:
They perish by the knife, or by the flame, to testify that God is not at all
fastened to his Creatures, that the noblest are unworthy to come into his
presence, and that, approaching before him, he must destroy them, because there
is nothing deserves to be offered up unto him. 'Twas in this humble and true
sense of the Divine Majesty, that the most innocent of all Sacrifices bowed
his head, and gave up the ghost: In this apprehension, that Jesus Christ,
adoring the dereliction of his Father, acknowledged that as his Victim he was
to be forsaken, though as his Son he remained inseparable; nor that it was just
for God to go out of his rest to deliver him from his sorrows, or to avenge him
of his enemies. Tu autem in sancto habitas laus Israel. But because we cannot
speak much of a Perfection whose Greatness amazeth us, and the luster whereof
dazzles us, we pass to the Fullness of God, which is the Third Motive of our
duty of Sacrifice. Sadai appellatur Deus ab Hebraeis, hoc est sibi sufficiens.


God is so Immense, that, by a glorious Impotency he can do nothing which is
not useless in respect of Himself: Whatever he produces out of his Essence, is
unworthy of his employment: Inasmuch as he finds his happiness in himself, he
stands not in need of our Magnificats; and seeing his felicity supplies him
with inexhaustible riches, he has no need of our Presents: he possesses all
things in a transcendent eminency; and they are much nobler in him then in
themselves. Omnis pulchritudo agri mecu^ est, ubertas omnium in terra
gignentium mecum est; cum illo sunt omnia cognitione; quaedam ineffabilis
sapientia Dei in verbo constituta. Aug. in Ps. 49.
The Flowers are immortal in God; the Fields are always clothed with a
springing fertility; the Trees never lose their fruit; the Seasons are never
irregular; the Elements jar not in him; there men live for ever; and all
Creatures subsist in their perfections, without any mixture of deficiency.
Thence it comes to pass that we deliver up Victims to the knife, and consume
them in the fire, to publish aloud that we pretend not to enrich him that
possesses all things, and who would not be God, did he stand in need of our
Oblations. Dixi Domino, Deus meus es tu, quoniam bonorum meorum non eges.
Therefore in the very state of Innocence they poured out the Liquors that were
offered, they burnt the Fruits that were presented; and striving to annihilate
them, proclaimed openly that they were no way profitable to him.

But since sin has robbed us of original righteousness, we were obliged to
join offended Justice to these three Perfections, and to offer Sacrifice to
him, to pacify his Fury. For inasmuch as he is chiefly busied to revenge his
neglected slighted Mercy, that it is this that laid the foundations of hell,
made deluges overflow, shakes the earth till it tremble, we have endeavored
to appease this incensed attribute by our homages. Knowing that Death is one of
the highest vengeances he takes, we make use of it in Sacrifice; and laying the
punishment we our selves deserve upon the Creature, we do our utmost to avoid
his indignation, by an invention his own mercy has taught us. Et viles animas
pro meliore damus. Ovi. Fast.
Thence it is that those people who have lost the true Religion, have not left
off to continue Sacrifice; and, instructed either by Tradition or Nature, they
have labored to appease the gods they worship by the slaughter of Victims.
Apud Aegyptios victimae inurchantur sigillo quodam, in quo effigies erat servi
seipsu^ gladio confodientis. Plut. in Isid. and Osy.
By that Ceremony they acknowledged themselves worthy of death; and at the same
time they went about to satisfy Justice, they confessed that his Mercy
suffered them to transfer the punishment due to their offenses upon the Beast,
and to immolate innocent Animals in stead of guilty Men. The Egyptians, who had
more dealing with the Jews, give testimony they were of the same mind, when
they stamped upon the Victim the picture of a Slave stabbing himself; to inform
all the world, that the Justice of God sparing the Man, gave them leave to
sacrifice the Beast in his place, and in a manner to charge him with his sin
and his punishment. It Is true, that as Oblations were not considerable among
the Jews, but because they were the Figures and Types of Jesus Christ, Huic
summo veroque sacrificio, cuncta falsa sacrificia cesserunt Aug.
it was thought requisite that in the fullness of time he should accomplish the
Truth; and that he might perfectly honor all the perfections of his Father,
should himself be sacrificed upon the Altar of the Cross.

The Eighth DISCOURSE. That the Christian stood in need that the Son of God
should offer for him the Sacrifice of the Cross and of the Altar.
IT is a strange Paradox, but very true, that Sin, which obliges Man to
sacrifice himself, deprives him of the power to do it, Animantia minus ingrata
Deo, quia minus infecta peccato. Philo Jud.
and reduces him to a condition, where, not being able to find a Victim in
himself, he is driven to seek for one among the Creatures. This shameful
necessity discovered not to him only the Goodness of God, who was content that
Beasts should be offered up in stead of Men: but it upbraided him with his
unworthiness, and made him woefully resent, that being able to offend his
Creator, he could by no means make him satisfaction. Having imprinted this
truth in his mind, and for many Generations reading him this lesson, that he
that pretended to equal the Almighty, was in a worse condition then the Beasts:
in process of time, it was demonstrated to him that his crime was too great to
be expiated by the blood of Goats or Lambs, and that his excess required a
Sacrifice whose merit was Infinite.

Indeed, that a Sacrifice might be acceptable to God, it must have those
qualities which are found neither in Angels, nor Men, nor Beasts. For it must
be Innocent, and no way obnoxious to that evil whereof it is to be the remedy:
It must be Reasonable, to treat with God, and to speak in behalf of them whose
place he appears in: It must be mortal, that it may undergo the punishment sin
has deserved, and thereby satisfy the Divine Justice: But above all, its
merit must of necessity be Infinite, that, being equal to the malice of sin,
the honor of God may have full reparation, and the debt of man an entire
complete acquittance. De Adaestirpe nullus propagari poterat naturaliter, qui
illius delicto non teneretur adstrictus. Aug.
The Angel had two of these conditions; he was Reasonable, and Innocent; but
being Immortal and Finite by nature, he could neither die nor satisfy: Man was
Reasonable and Mortal; the one he owed to his Sin, the other to his
Constitution; but having lost his Innocence, he could neither Satisfy nor
Merit: The Beast, more happy in some sort then Man, was Mortal and Innocent;
but having not the use of Reason, his death was unprofitable, nor could his
sacrifice reconcile us to God.

Therefore did the Eternal Word contrive to be Incarnate, that, uniting the
Divine Nature with the Humane in his Person, there might come forth a Divine
Compositum, which, being God and Man both together, might possess all the
qualities requisite to accomplish the work of our Salvation. He was Mortal,
because he was Man, and had assumed our Nature, with its imperfections, the
appurtenances of sin: He was Innocent, because he subsisted in the person of
the Word, which managed his Will without constraining it, and by a happy
necessity made him absolutely impeccable: He was Reasonable, inasmuch as having
taken our imperfections, he withal took our advantages; and, by a privilege
due to his Greatness, the use of Reason was indulged him with life, that from
the first moment of his conception he might honor his Father, and satisfy for
sinners: His Merit was, as his Person, Infinite; and the actions that were
performed by this God-Man were Meritorious, because Humane; and on the other
fide, Infinite, because Divine. Thus the Word Incarnate became the Sacrifice of
God and Men; and entering into our duties, paid what we stood bound for to the
Justice of his Father: he suffered what our sins deserved, and delivered us
from those punishments our sentence condemned us to.

But being the Substance of all the Shadows of the Old Testament, and by his
acquitting us being obliged to fulfill all the Figures thereof, he offered up
himself to the Eternal Father by a double Sacrifice, that one seconding the
other, the Christians might render as much honor to God as the Jews. For the
Synagogue had four kinds of Sacrifices: The First was the Holocaust, which
respected the glory of God, wherein the Victim was wholly consumed by the fire:
The Second was an Atonement for sin, where the Oblation being parted between
God and his Ministers, one part was burnt in the fire, and the other remained
to the Priest for his nourishment: The Third and Fourth were called
Peace Offerings, with this distinction, that the one was made to obtain some
favor of God, or to give him thanks for what was already received; the other,
to acquit the offerer of his promises, and to accomplish those vows he stood
engaged to God for. In these two last Sacrifices, the Victim was divided into
Three parts: The First was consecrated to God, the Second designed to the
Priest, and the Third left to the Faithful.

Therefore has the Son of God joined the Sacrifice of the Cross with that of
the Altar, to accomplish all those of the Old Law: Upon the Cross he offered up
himself an Holocaust to his Father; where being destroyed by death, he rose
from the Grave, to be consummated in Glory, and to be received into the bosom
of his Father, from whence he came forth by the Mystery of the Incarnation. But
because in the Oblation where the Sacrifice is wholly reduced into God, men
have no part, he was pleased to institute another in his Church, where giving
himself wholly to his Father, Hujus sacrificii caro and sanguis ante adventum
Christi per Victimas similitudinum promittebatur, in Passione Christi per ipsam
veritatem reddebatur, post ascensum Christi per Sacramentum memoriae
celebratur. Aug. lib 20. cont. Faust.
and to the Faithful, he completed with advantage the sacrifices of the Old
Testament: For he is there after such a wonderful manner, that without being
divided, he enters equally into the bosom of his Father, and into the heart of
his Ministers: every one possesses him entirely; and this communion is so
perfect, that none are excluded but those that will have no part in it. But for
the better understanding of a truth which is one of the principal Articles of
our Faith, and to resolve the difficulties Heresy opposes against these two
sacrifices; we must know, that both of them make up but one; and that one
without the other would be utterly unprofitable: For the Scripture teaches us,
that to the perfection of a sacrifice, Si autem habuerit macula^ vel claudum
fuerit, vel coecum, aut in aliqua part deforme, vel debile, non immolabitur
Deo. Deuteronomy. 15.
there are required five parts; The first is the sanctification of the Victime,
which consisted in four things: The first was its perfection, which excluded
all blemishes, because they are the marks and punishments of sin; whence it was
that the Law in express terms enjoined that nothing should be offered to God
that was not perfect: The second was a supernatural sanctification, which
elevated the sacrifice above it self, and which being stamped upon it by Divine
Authority, disingaged it from the dominion of man, and destined it for the
Altar: The third was separation which consecrated it to God, and suffered it no
longer to be employed to any profane use: The last was the obligation to death,
Haecomnia patent ex libris Exo. and Levi. Vbi de h^stia dicitur quod
sanctificabitur and scparabitur Domino.
as a thing dedicated to God, and which ought to perish for his glory. The
second part of the sacrifice was the oblation of the Victime, where according
to the form prescribed in the Law, or taught by Tradition, it was actually
offered to God, and began to appertain to him by a new right, greater then that
of sanctification. The third was the death or killing of the Victime, which
though the most sensible part of the sacrifice, was not yet the principal;
because it was performed by the Levites, and not by the Priests; in the Court
of the Temple, and not in the place next the Sanctuary: The fourth was the
consummation of the sacrifice which was devoured by the flame; that the smoke
ascending up into Heaven, God might partake of the oblation, as the Scripture
testifies in those words, Odoratus est Dominus sacrificium; and that which
seems to have given some color to the false opinion of the Heathen, who
imagined that God was nourished with the fume of the offerings. The fifth was
the communion of the Victime, which as we have already observed, was sometimes
wholly devoted to God, sometimes was divided between God, the Priest and the
people: But inasmuch as these sacrifices were but the types and shadows of that
which Jesus Christ was to offer to his Father, he did not partake of it but in
a figure by means of fire, which in the belief of the world was accounted the
noblest representatation of the Divinity, Deus noster Ignis consumens est; as
for the people and the Priest, they communicated really, and received the
sacrifice into their mouth to digest it in their stomach.

If Jesus Christ be the accomplishment of the Law, his Sacrifice must
necessarily comprehend all these parts; and we must find on the Altar, what we
do not find on the Cross. His sanctification is fully evident; for besides
that he is the firstborn, and in that consideration is holy; we know that he
is the work of the Holy Ghost; that his Father is God; that his Mother is a
Virgin, and that his Conception is altogether Immaculate: But his Divine Person
is his principal sanctification; and if other sacrifices be sanctified by some
transient words, this is consecrated by the Eternal and Divine Word: The same
Unction that made him Priest, made him the Victime, and dedicated him by a
double title to the service of the Altar. His oblation began in the womb of the
Blessed Virgin; continued in the Temple, and during his life, and was at last
finished upon the Cross: In the womb of his mother he offered himself in
spirit, according to the meaning of Saint Paul; and explaining his mind in the
words of the Prophet, he protests that he took a body only to be immolated to
his Father: In the Temple he was presented by the hands of the Virgin, and
received by Simeon, who penetrating the design of Jesus Christ and his mother,
answers their intentions, and instructs her in the mystery of the Cross,
whereof this oblation was the prologue. During his life he continued to offer
up himself to his Father as an innocent Victime, till upon the Cross he
acquitted himself of his promises, and satisfied his obligations; Obtulit se
immaculatum Deo per Spiritum Sanctum. His death appeared upon Mount Calvary,
where making use of the cruelty of the Jews, of the treason of Judas, and of
the rage of the Executioners, he was offered up for our salvation: But because
it is not the principal part of the sacrifice which is not complete, if the
Victime be not consummated, it was requisite that the Resurrection should
finish what Death began. Indeed the Resurrection of the Son of God is his
consummation; it is in this mystery that Glory swallowed up what Death had left;
that he parts with whatever remained of perishable; that he enters into that
Majesty which is due to his Birth; that he is reduced to God, and received into
the bosom of his Father, his lawful and natural habitation. This is the
mystery to which Saint Paul attributes the perfection of our salvation, because
it is the Crown of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; Therefore discoursing of what
we owe his Death and his Glory, he says, Mortuus est propter peccata nostra,
and resurrexit propter justificationem nostram: where he assigns the principal
effect of our salvation, not to the Passion, but to the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. There it is in a word, that Jesus is perfected, that his work is
accomplished, where he is happily consummated; where the Divine Essence having
the same operation in him, that the fire had in the sacrifice, he is despoiled
of our infirmities, and invested with all the glories of his Father.

Inasmuch as the life of a Christian is a sacrifice which honors that of the
Word Incarnate, it is not terminated so much by Death as by the Resurrection;
nor will the Faithful be truly consummated, till he shall be transformed into
God by the splendours of Glory. Therefore does Saint Augustine in his Comment
upon that passage of the Psalmist, Introibo in domum tuam in Holocaustis,
deliver these excellent words which serve greatly to illustrate this truth: The
Holocaust is a Sacrifice, wherein the Victime is wholly devoured by the fire;
and the Church, in the expectation she has one day to be admitted into Heaven,
uses the same language, and persuades her self that the fire of glory will
consume her, to the end that nothing of her self remaining in her, she may be
wholly her Beloveds: This desire will not be accomplished till the general
Resurrection, when our mortal shall be clothed with Immortality, and life
shall triumph over death; the Divine fire will produce this effect, and
consuming all our perishable being will make of us an Holocaust: For nothing
mortal shall remain in our flesh; nothing culpable in our soul; both of them
shall be consummated by life, that passing into a new being we may become the
Holocausts of the Lord. That which ought to befall all Christians at the day of
the general Resurrection, did happen to Jesus Christ at the day of his
glorious Resurrection; Death was swallowed in Life, Glory consumed infirmity,
and leaving the likeness of sin, he entered into the Majesty of God his Father.

But because this sacrifice would be impetfect, if the Communion did not
succeed the Consummation; The love and power of Jesus Christ invented a means,
whereby without departing from God, he might communicate himself to the
Faithful, and make them partakers of his body and blood. This is done upon our
Altars, where offering up himself daily, he finisheth the sacrifice of the
Cross; and by a mystery worthy of his charity, he communicates not only the
merits of his death, but the very victime that was immolated upon Mount
Calvary. It bears the name of sacrifice, not only because it finisheth that of
the Cross, which precisely contains nothing but the killing of the sacrifice,
but for that it exhibits all the marks of a true sacrifice.

For besides that it is the verity of the sacrifice of Melchisedeh, instituted
by the High Priest, who has commanded his Ministers to do it in remembrance
of him: We may say, without any offense to piety, that it has more show of a
sacrifice, then that of the Cross, because it begins with Prayer, succeeds the
eating of the Paschal Lamb as the substance the shadow; contains an innocent
victime; is instituted by words dedicated to sacrifices; and examining it
seriously, we shall find the oblation of the victime, because there it is
offered by the hands of the Priest; His mystical death, because immolated not
by the knife, but by the Word of God; its perfect consummation, because in a
glorious condition which rescues it from all humane miseries; and its
communion, because taken into the bosom of God, Sacrificium corporis and
sanguinis Christi successit omnibus sacrificiis veteris Testamenti quae
immolabantur in umbra hujus futuri. Aug.
and the mouth of the Faithful. But though all these conditions should fail, it
would be enough to say, that as the death of Jesus Christ, though but the
killing of the victime, cease not to be a true sacrifice; that of the Altar,
though but the communion of the victim, cease not to be also a true
sacrifice; though to speak properly, both of them make but one perfect
sacrifice, according to the true sense of those words of Saint Paul, Vna
oblatione consummavit sanctificatos; and that one and the same Jesus is
continually the victime, but in such different conditions, that they give
occasion to Divines to make them pass for two distinct sacrifices.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. Of the difference between these two Sacrifices; and what
the Christian receives in the one, and in the other.
THough it were very easy to demonstrate the wonderful resemblances which are
found between the sacrifice of the Cross and of the Altar; and without doing
violence to Scripture, we might make it appear that one is the image of the
other; that the same victime is immolated in Both; that the Eternal Father is
equally honored in Both, and that the Faithful receive thence like advantages:
yet because things are illustrated better by their differences then their
similitudes, and that which distinguishes them from others is always more
particularly theirs; I have designed this Discourse to unfold the oppositions
Nature and Grace has placed in these two sacrifices; Quod autem mortuus est
peccato, mortuus est semel; quod autem vivit, vivit Deo. To. 6.
which though one and the same thing in their ground and foundation, are
notwithstanding different in their circumstances; whereof the first is, that
that of the Cross was never offered but once; and this of the Altar is offered
every day.

For the right understanding of this difference we must know, that the
sacrifice of the Cross is a sacrifice of Redemption; Qui non habet necessitate^
quotidie quemadmodu^ sacerdotes prius pro suis delictis hostias offerre, deinde
pro populi: hoc enim fecit semel se offerendo. Hebrae. 7.
where the victime is charged with the sins of the world, satisfies for them by
the infiniteness of his merits, appeaseth the Justice of the Eternal Father,
and delivers men from the tyranny of the Devil. Inasmuch as all those things
are no otherwise performed then by the death of Christ, which cannot be
repeated without a miracle; and the Glory whereinto he is entered, suffers him
not to die a second time: Saint Paul tells us, that he redeemed the world by
that one only sacrifice; The Priests of the Old Testament were bound to
reiterate their sacrifices, because the merit of the victime was limited; and,
to speak properly, were neither acceptable to God, nor meritorious for men, but
because they were the Figures of Jesus Christ: But inasmuch as the Sacrifice he
offered to his Father upon the Cross is of infinite merit, he need not repeat
it; and having sufficiently expiated all the sins of the world, it had been
useless to pacify God who was no longer offended, and to satisfy for those
faults which were already pardoned.

Thence it comes to pass that the Sacraments which exhibit the death of the Son
of God, and are applicatory to us of their merit, imprint a Character upon us,
and are never performed twice. Baptism is administered but once, not only
because it is the Christians birth, which cannot be done over again, but also
because it is the Figure of the death of Christ, which, according to the
language of S. Paul, Sicut semel Christus moritur in Cruce, ita semel
Christianus moritur in Baptismo. Aug.
cannot be readministred without offense. Therefore is it that the same
Apostle, condemning those that gave themselves over to sin, in hope to make an
atonement by a second Baptism, said to the Hebrews, that they crucified again
the Son of God, and that, contrary to his intention, and that of his Church,
they would make him die twice in their person, who died but once in his own;
Rursum crucifigentes sibimet ipsis Filium Dei, and ostentui habentes.

But inasmuch as the Sacrifice of the Altar is a Sacrifice of Religion, it must
of necessity be repeated; and for the continual honoring of the Eternal
Father, must continually be immolated in our Temples. Therefore is it that the
Synagogue, which was the Figure of the Church, had some Sacrifices which were
offered but once every year; nor had been offered but once at all, had they had
the merit and value of that of the Cross: But there were others offered every
day, which the Scripture for this reason calls Juge Sacrificium. The Church,
which has not less piety then the Synagogue, imitates and outgoes it in this
point, because it offers a daily Sacrifice, and never changes the Victim. For
it is always the same body she produces and immolateth; that satisfying her
love, she may render an honor to God which ends not but with the world. Her
Beloved, who has inspired her with this desire, has given her the means to
put it in execution; she acts by the virtue received from him; she repeats his
words, to repeat his miracles; she produces upon the Altars him that produced
her upon the Cross; she becomes the mother of him whose daughter she is; and,
by a happy exchange, conceives in her chaste womb him that heretofore
conceived her in his wounds. Thus this Sacrifice of Love is repeated every day;
and the Victim being incessantly produced by the Priest, the Eternal Father is
continually honored.

The second difference is, that the Sacrifice of the Cross is General, and that
of the Altar Particular. Upon the Cross the Son of God was offered up for the
salvation of all men; his love is extended over all the Nations of the earth;
he excludes no Condition from this universal benefit; he looks upon the
Gentiles together with the Jews, he mingles the Guilty with the Innocent; and
making no distinction of persons, dies as well for Slaves as for those that are
Free, Ne existimes pro illa tantummodo gente hanc hostiam offerri: propterea
extra muros and extra civitatem occiditur, ut intelligas quoniam communis est
hostia pro humano genere oblata. Aug.
and for the Poor as well as for the Rich. Therefore neither was this Sacrifice
offered in the Temple, nor in the City of Jerusalem, that all people might know
this favor was not particular; and the most desperately-wicked might pretend
to it, since the first that felt the effect thereof were Thieves and
Murderers: But the Sacrifice of the Altar is particular; being instituted in
the Church, it relates only to the Faithful; its Merit, though infinite,
reaches not to strangers; excommunicated persons are banished from it, neither
are the Catechumeni admitted: The wedding garment is requisite for those that
are received; and being a Feast as well as a Sacrifice, they must be the
Friends of the Bridegroom that are partakers of it.

But the third and most notable difference is, that upon the Cross the
Sacrifice was blended with Sacrilege; whereas upon the Altar it is altogether
pure, attended with nothing that makes it not acceptable to God. It is one of
the Miracles of Providence, to make wicked instruments serviceable to its
designs, and to employ their very malice to the execution of its will and
intendments. Joseph ows his Greatness to the Hatred of his Brethren; and their
ill disposition, well husbanded by the conduct of heaven, made him sit upon the
Throne of Egypt. That prodigy of Patience, whose example comforts all that are
miserable, is glorious by his very detriment; and had not the devil been
permitted to afflict him, he would not be the wonder and astonishment of all
the Righteous. The Martyrs were not admired by Christians but because they were
persecuted by Tyrants; and had they not given proofs of their courage in the
Conflict, they never had triumphed with Jesus Christ in Glory. But that which
most astonisheth me, is, that the very Passion of the Son of God was not
effected but by the malice of men and devils; this Sacrifice is accompanied
with a Sacrilege; and the holiest action of the world is shrouded under the
appearance of a murder. In respect of the Son of God, there is nothing more
sacred then his death: it is the most illustrious testimony of his Obedience,
the last office of his Piety, the greatest expression of his Love, and the most
memorable action of his Life: There is no Creature that is not beholding to him
for it: Men owe him their Salvation, the Angels their Crowns, the Elements
their Deliverance, the Earth her Purity, and Heaven its Ornament and Glory.

If we consider this Death in respect of the Jews, we want words to express the
horror thereof with: It was the most unjust Sentence that ever was pronounced,
the most shameful ignominious punishment that an Innocent ever suffered, the
most execrable attempt that ever was projected by Rebellious Subjects; in a
word, the most abominable Parricide that ever was committed by unnatural
Children. Comparing the motive of the Jews with that of Jesus Christ, we cannot
say whether God was more honored or more offended upon Mount Calvary, nor
whether Nature conceived more horror or compassion at the Tragedy. The
Eternal Father was abundantly satisfied, Ibi Deus per malos quidem, sed tamen
ipse bonus; per injustos, sed justus and just: ita in eos vindicavit, ut
perimerentur multa hominum millia, and ipsa civitas everteretur. Aug. in Psalm.
73.
because in consideration thereof he forgot his injuries and our sins, and
consented that his enemies should become his heirs: But on the other side, he
was mightily offended, because he discharged his wrath upon Judea, armed the
Romans against the Jews, sacked Jerusalem and his Temple; and, his just
indignation not satisfied with so many miseries, persecutes to this day that
vagabond and criminal Nation.

Nature imitates the mind of her Author; all her parts testified their Anger
and their Pity: The Earth trembled, to swallow up the executioners in her
fearful abysses; the Rocks clave asunder with grief; the Stars sunk into the
Firmament, that they might not be the witnesses of this Parricide; the Sun was
eclipsed, that it might not enlighten such prodigious wickedness; and whole
Nature being not able to destroy them, endeavored to die with her God that
died for her. Thus Sacrilege was mixed with the Sacrifice of the Cross; the
Father was Oftended even whilst he was Satisfied; and the whole world was
scandalized by the crime of the Jews, at the same time when it was purified by
the Blood of Jesus Christ.

But Sanctity is altogether spotless upon our Altars; there appears not that
Medley which makes a confused mixture of Love and Hatred in our hearts; and the
Sacrifice that is offered is no longer a Sacrilege to be detested: It is not
Cruelty that makes Jesus Christ die, but Piety: It Is no longer a Crime, but an
act of Religion to immolate him; neither is he offered by the hands of
Executioners, but of Priests. The Father receives this Sacrifice with Pleasure,
without Indignation; the Son presents himself with Affection free from Sorrow;
Nature beholds it with Respect and no Horror; and Men partake of it Profitably
and without Sin.

The fourth and last difference is, that the Sacrifice of the Cross merits all,
and applies nothing; and contrarily, that of the Altar merits nothing, and
applies all. For the comprehending of this Truth, we must know, that General
Causes are the sources of all things: nothing is produced here below, that
flows not from their fecundity: the very operation of Particular Causes is an
emanation of their virtue. Did the Sun cease to shine, all things of the world
would not only cease to act, but also to subsist: this goodly Star maintains
them with its aspects; and though he be not their Creator, he is in some sort
their Preserver: But though he equally shed heat and light over all Creatures,
yet must we confess some receive his influences more favorably, and apply them
more faithfully: With the Clouds he forms those Meteors which pleasantly ravish
the eyes of the beholders; with dew he enamels the Flowers which serve for an
ornament to our Gardens; with the Earth he produces Gold and Iron, which
Avarice and Cruelty employed to a hundred different uses: But did not these
Causes that apply his power, weaken his virtue; and were there a Sun here
below to receive his influences without confining them, all the world are of
opinion he would produce far nobler effects, Virtus Causae generalis recipitur
a causa particulari secundum suam agendi capacitatem. D. Tho.
and that in stead of Roses and Lilies we should see nothing but Stars in our
Walks and Gardens: But because he cannot act alone, and the Causes that apply
him debilitate his power, we behold nothing here below answerable either to
his excellency or beauty.

What we see in Nature, we believe in Grace: General Causes produce all, but
apply nothing; Particular Causes produce nothing, but apply all. The death of
Jesus Christ is the Springhead of all Merit: the Faithful can hope for nothing
which is not acquired by that Sacrifice: Heaven is not so much the recompense
of their Virtue, as of its Value: and if the quality of Members, which ties
them to Jesus Christ as to their Head, did not give them part in his merits,
they could not pretend to the inheritance of heaven. In the mean time, so
powerful a Cause produces nothing, if not applied: this fruitful Fountain
sends forth no streams, if there be no Channels disposed to receive them: Mors
Christi Fons omnium bonorum, Sacramenta vero Rivuli.
and this Star, which darts forth so much heat and light, makes neither flowers
nor fruit grow up in the Church, if there be not some secondary cause which
conveys its virtue to us. Therefore has the Son of God instituted Sacraments
in his Church, which happily apply whatever he has liberally merited for us
upon the Cross: They are so many Pipes issuing his blood into our hearts, so
many Suns carrying their influences into our souls: but they have this
unhappiness in applying his merits, they weaken them; and not being capable of
receiving all his virtue, neither have they the power of communicating it to
us. Every Sacrament operates in us according to its particular condition.
Baptism gives us our new birth; Sacramenta novae legis representant passione^
Christi, a qua fluxerunt, sicut effectus representant causam. Hugo a Sancto
Victor.
Confirmation strengthens us; Repentance raises us; Ordination designs us to
the service of the Altar; and, being second causes, they limit the virtue of
this universal cause which they apply unto us. But the Sacrifice of the Altar,
more happy and more powerful then the rest, applies the merits of the Cross
without any limitation: It procures us all kind of Graces, has the power to
produce and raise us, gives us life and strength, unites us to God, and takes
us off from the world, weakens concupiscence and sin; and the Son of God
finding himself applied by himself, there are no wonderful effects which he
cannot give a product to: There he merits nothing, because he is at the end of
his Course, in the place of his Rest, and in the time of his Recompense; But he
applies all, because, being equal to himself, he has gained nothing by the
Sacrifice of the Cross, which he cannot communicate by the Sacrifice of the
Altar: Nothing can hinder his divine operations, but our Weakness or our
Malice: for as he acts with Free causes without constraining them, we must lend
him our Will for our Sanctification; that making him Master of our hearts, we
may in some sort assist him to reign absolutely in his State, and prepare our
selves worthily to receive at the Altar those Graces he has merited for us
upon the Cross.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. Of the Obligation the Christian has to sacrifice himself
to God.
SInce the Son of God has united in his person the Humane Nature with the
Divine, Deus erat, homo factus est, suscepit humanitate^, non amisit
divinitatem; factus humilis, mansit sublimis; natus est homo, non destitit esse
Deus. Aug. lib. de quinq. haeres. cap. 5.
and mastering the difficulties which stood in opposition to the execution of
so great a design, has effected this admirable Masterpiece, which accords
baseness with greatness, misery with happiness; it seems he has taken pleasure
to conjoin in his person all those qualities which clash in others: so that we
may say, he has pacified all the differences that were in Heaven and in Earth.
Indeed he is the Father and the Son of the Church; he produced her upon the
Cross, and is produced by her upon the Altar: He is the Son and the Servant of
his Father; he associates two qualities which appear incompatible in men; and
tempering respect with love, teaches us, that Gods being his Father, hinders
him not from being his Sovereign: He is our Advocate and our Judge; having
pleaded our cause, he pronounces our sentence; and I know not whether it be a
ground of fear or of confidence, in that we are assured that he that is entered
into our obligations, is admitted also into the rights of his Father; and that
one day he will punish those for whom he has satisfied upon the Cross.

But if there be any qualities whose alliance ravisheth us in the person of
Jesus Christ, we must confess it is that of Priest and Sacrifice: These two are
so different among men, that nothing but a supreme power, or an extreme love,
could unite them together. When the Synagogue would represent us with the
Sacrifice of the Son of God in that of Isaac, it was obliged to separate the
Priest from the Victime, and to arm the hands of the Father to immolate his
only Son: In the mean time Jesus Christ unites them in his person; and in this
adorable Sacrifice which he offers to his Father, whether on the Cross or on
the Altar, he is both the Priest that consecrateth, and the Victime that is
immolated. Inasmuch as Jesus Christ, says Saint Augustine, is our God and our
Temple, he is also our Sacrifice and our Priest: He is the Priest that
reconciles us; he is the Sacrifice whereby we are reconciled; and the same
Doctor admiring the novelties of the sacrifice of the Cross, expresses his
wonder by these words: The Altar of the Sacrifice is new, because the
Immolation is new and admirable; For he that is the Sacrifice is the Priest;
the Sacrifice, according to the Flesh; the Priest, according to the Spirit; and
both, according to his Humanity: He that offers, and he that is offered, is
one and the same person, and these qualities which have so little analogy are
found united in the sacrifice of the Cross.

Inasmuch as the Christian is the Image of Jesus Christ, and this glorious
title obliges him to transcribe his original, he ought to sacrifice himself as
he did, and to be both the Priest and the Oblation together. Indeed if we
descend into the Mysteries of our Religion, and consider with the eye of Faith
what we are not able to discover with the light of reason, we shall find that
we are immolated upon the Altar with the Son of God, and that after his
example, we are both the sacrificers and the sacrifice: For Jesus Christ is not
offered all alone in our Temples; he is immolated by the hands of the Priests;
and at the same time that he offers his natural body to his Father, he offers
also his mystical body; so that offering himself to his Father by his Church,
and offering his Church together with himself, he teaches all the Faithful to
join the quality of Priests with that of Victimes.

This is it that Saint Augustine informs us of in his Book De Civitate Dei; Per
hoc and sacerdos est ipse offerens, ipse and oblatio; cujus rei Sacramentum
quotidianu^ esse voluit Ecclesiae sacrificiu^, quae cum ipsius capitis corpus
sit seipsam per ipsu^ discit offerre. Aug. lib. 10. de Civit. ca. 6.
where searching into our mysteries, he finds that the Church offers her self
with her Beloved upon our Altars, and that in the same sacrifice she is both
Priestess and Oblation: His words are too elegant to be omitted, neither must
it be a less Doctor then he that must appear that Protector of so important a
Verity. It Is particularly says he, in unity that the sacrifice of Christians
consists, where being many in number we make up but one body with Jesus Christ;
this is it that the Church daily does in this Sacrament, which is so well known
to the Faithful, wherein is demonstrated that in the Oblation she offers, she
her self is offered, that after the example of her Beloved, she may be in the
same sacrifice Priestess and Victime. From this passage may easily be inferred,
that the Faithful are offered with Christ upon the Altar; that the Host that
contains him is large enough to contain all his members; and that his mystical
body being immolated with his natural body, he obliges all Christians to
associate as he does, the quality of Victime with that of a Priest.

But if leaving the Altar, we consider the Faithful in the course of their
life, we shall see there is none but ought to sacrifice himself, and who either
in his body or in his soul may not find Victimes to offer to God. There is no
more need of providing Bulls or Goats with the Jews to lay upon our Altars: The
time of the Mosaical Law is past; truths have succeeded figures; and if we
rightly understand the secret of our mysteries, Noli extrinsecus thura
comparare, sed dic, In me sunt Deus vota tua; noli extrinsecus pecus quod
mactes inquirere; habes in te quod occidas. Aug. in Psalm. 51.
it becomes us to offer those things these Animals represent. We have whereof
to sacrifice within our selves; there is not any passion in our soul nor part
in our body, whereof we may not make an innocent Victime. Indeed Christian
Religion converting the sinner into a sacrifice, obliges him to immolate to
God all that he is: He is deficient in the lawfullest of his duties, if his
whole life be not a sacrifice; and being compounded of soul and body, he ought
to sacrifice both, that he may have the honor to be a perfect Holocaust.

The virtues are auxiliaries which facilitate these means, and it seems these
glorious habits are given us for no other end then to teach us to sacrifice to
God all the faculties of our soul. Inasmuch as the will is the noblest, and
this Sovereign being once perfectly gained over to God, gives him an absolute
dominion over all the rest; there are some virtues which have no other
employment but to be made victimes. Sorrow which discovers to man the excess of
his crime, labors to convert him; it bruiseth his heart by the violence of a
holy contrition; and if it cannot draw blood from this sacrifice, it draws
tears, which are more acceptable to God then the blood of beasts. This made
David say, that the spirit broken and afflicted, was a true sacrifice; and that
he who sometimes refuses Goats and Lambs, never despises a heart that
Repentance and Humility offers up unto him; Sacrificium Deo spiritus
contribulatus.

Obedience comes in to the succor of grief; this beats down the pride of the
will, masters that imperious faculty; and changing her triumph into a
sacrifice, obliges her to die to her own inclinations, that she may live to
those of the Grace of Jesus Christ: But love happily finisheth this design; he
burns the victime with his flames to render it an Holocaust; and finding the
means to put to death an immortal power, teaches us, that a pure spirit may
offer sacrifices to God: For there is no lover but knows that love imitates
death, that he commits innocent murders; and by stratagems which himself is
only privy to, makes sin die in us that Grace may live.

If the will become a Victim by means of Charity, the understanding is offered
up to God by the intervening of faith; This virtue subjects it to her Empire,
persuades truths she explicates not; she obliges a man to suspend his
judgment, to renounce his reason, and to give his senses the lie; she engages
him to offer as many sacrifices as she propounds mysteries; and by a power
which would seem tyrannical were it not legitimate, forbids him the use of
reasoning in matters of religion.

The memory after the example of the understanding, is immolated to God by
remembrance and forgetfulness; These two different ways make two contrary
sacrifices; This faculty calls to mind the benefits received from its Creator,
and forgets the injuries received from Enemies: Between these two exercises it
is equally divided, and whatever outrage sin has committed in our soul, she
finds that the art of oblivion is harder then that of retaining or learning.
It Is upon the first that the love of enemies is founded, which seems the most
troublesome sacrifice of Ghristian Religion; and upon the other, acknowledgment
or the action of thankfulness, which is the justest duty of the creature
toward his Creator.

Though the body be the least moity of man, yet is it not destitute of Victims
which it furnishes him with to appease God; and according to the different
virtues that inform it, offers sacrifices which are little inferior to those
of the mind. Repentance afflicts it a hundred several ways; and this virtue
no less austere then witty, invents every day new means to tame its rebellion,
and of a disobedient slave to make a voluntary sacrifice: Sometimes she
punishes his boldness by fasting; sometimes abates his strength by watchings;
sometimes lets him blood by disciplines; sometimes tames his pride with ashes;
Finally, by these diverse artifices she lets us see, that a penitent is nothing
but a man armed against himself, who offers a sacrifice of Justice, when he is
more offended at his own sins then those of his neighbor: Repentance calls in
Continence many times to her aid; for when this rebel resists grief, she
forbids him the use of the most lawful pleasures; and depriving him of whatever
he loves, makes a victim of him, which suffers the more, the slower his sorrow
is, and his sacrifice more sharp and irksome.

But because the eye and the mouth are the most guilty parts of man, repentance
obliges the first to bewail his sins, changes his fountain of flames into
floods of tears, compels this complice of impurity to become the Minister of
sorrow, forces this faithful Interpreter of the heart to betray it no more
with his glances, and to be closed to all objects which might trouble his rest
or pervert his good designs, she deals more imperiously with the mouth; for
seeing this is guilty of two contrary evils, and his silence is sometimes as
criminal as his words, this part is condemned to two different punishments,
sometimes being obliged to keep silence, sometims to speak: of his silence and
of his discourse is composed one and the same sacrifice; The mouth is obliged
to open in chanting forth the praises of its Creator; and having discharged
this part of duty when the words are no longer answerable to the greatness of
the subject, it has recourse to silence, and by wonder and astonishment makes
amends for those faults committed by too much liberty. This double sacrifice
has its value and its price; and the Scripture which tells us that God is
pleased with praises, acquaints us also that silence, when arising from a great
respect, is not unacceptable to him. By the first, we profess that he is the
Author of all perfections, that ours are derived from him; and because speech
is an advantage we hold from his goodness, it ought to be consecrated to his
honor: By the second, we tacitly confess, that as his Divine Essence cannot be
known, neither can it be expressed; and that of all the ways we have to
magnify him by, silence is most agreeable to his greatness and our humility.

After that man has immolated his body and his soul, he is obliged to tender
his goods, and to offer him a sacrifice of all that he possesses: Alms and
Poverty are his assistants in so pious a design; and these two virtues by
different mediums arrive at the same end; for Alms parts goods with God, and
looking upon Jesus Christ in the person of the poor, restores that to his
indigence which he received of his bounty: It Is true in this point his meaning
is much different from those that address themselves by way of sacrifice; for
they when they offer a victim slay him at the Altar, to testify that their
presents are useless to God, because being the source of all good, nothing can
be given him which he possesses not in himself. But he that does Alms has
this satisfaction, Noli contemnere Christum in coelo sedentem, in terra
egente^; veniet cum retributione, and vita aeterna, and igne aeterno. Aug.
that his sacrifice is not unprofitable to Jesus Christ, because though he be
happy in his person, he is indigent in his members. Poverty out-bids Alms,
despoils a man of all, is of the nature of the Holocaust, where he that
sacrifices reserving nothing to himself, gives all wholly to God: This
forsakes not goods only, but the very desires also, renounceth all pretensions
to the Earth, and not content to offer God what is in possession, bestows upon
him whatever may be hoped for; so that this sacrifice being as large as Hope,
we may say, it comprehends all that this passion, which is boundless, promises
the Ambitious or the Covetous.

Thus the Christian acquits himself of the promise he made in Baptism, and
consecrating his soul by Charity, his body by Repentance, and his Riches by
Alms or Poverty, satisfies both his obligations and his promises: Ipse homo Dei
nomini consecratus, and Deo devotus in quantum mundo moritur ut Deo vivat
sacrificiu^ est. Aug.
For Saint Augustine teaches me, that he that dies to the world, to live to
Jesus Christ, is a true sacrifice; when following the motions of Grace, he
uses his body to the Glory of his Creator; striving to quench the fire of
self-love by that of Charity, making his members servants to justice in being
serviceable to repentance, he becomes a sacrifice wel-pleasing to God, and may
boast that in satisfying the duties of Christianity, he acquits himself of the
obligation of the sacrifice with which Christians can no way dispense.

The Seventh TREATISE. Of the Qualities of the Christian.
The first DISCOURSE. That the Christian is the Image of Jesus Christ.
ALthough men are dignified by Qualities, being the marks either of their Birth
or Desert; yet must we confess that they add nothing to their Persons, nor
imprint any Character upon their Soul or Body: They are fair illusions which
pleasingly deceive us, Dreams that amuse men awake, Charms that inchant those
that are in love with them. They owe their Luster to our Blindness, their
Grandeur to our Ignorance: For the highest dignities which so much disquiet the
Ambitious, are but the Errors of their Understanding, and the Idols of their
Imagination: should we pare away from Great Personages the attendance of their
followers, the pomp of their habits, and the magnificence of their houses,
Magna Fortuna magna Servitus. Senec.
we should find their Charges mere Chimera's; and that which we call Fortune,
nothing but a False Greatness, or a Real Slavery.

But inasmuch as the Qualities of a Christian are not the works of Vanity, but
such as imprint Characters, or produce effects in their souls, they are as
solid as glorious; they raise men up to heaven, make them heirs of the Eternal
Father, and brethren of his only Son: Their greatness depends not upon the
opinion of people; though they are unknown, they are notwithstanding
honorable: sometimes Contempt augments their reputation; and the less splendour
they bear amongst men, the more respect they find with God. Therefore I should
betray the honor of the Christian, if, having spoken of his Virtues, I should
not speak of his Qualities; and, having described his Labors and his
Sacrifices, I should say nothing of his Rewards and Recompenses. True it is,
that, as the parts of this work are mutually interwoven, and the remotest have
secret links that unite them all together; in speaking of the Christians Birth
I have handled his Noblest Qualities, and have made it appear, that he was the
Brother and the Member of Jesus Christ, that he was the adopted Son of the
Eternal Father, and the living Temple of the holy Ghost. In making the Elogie
of his Virtues, I showed that Faith made him a Believer, Charity a Lover,
Austerity of life a Penitent; so that having already spoken of these
advantages, there remains only to supply what is behind, to complete his
Portraicture, which I cannot better begin, then in demonstrating in this
Discourse that the Christian is the Image of Jesus Christ.

For the happier explaining of this Verity, we must know, that the Word is the
Image of his Father, the Character of his Substance, Qui videt me, videt and
Patre^. Joan. 14.
the Express of his Greatness: He gives himself this Title in the Gospel, and
teaches his Disciples, that, in seeing Him, they see his Father in his person.
Our Divines abound with Reasons of this Assertion, to prove that this Elogie is
not unworthy of the Eternal Word, and that his being the lively Image of his
Father, no way hinders his being equal with him. But, not to trouble my self in
the proof of a Truth Faith obliges us to believe, it is enough, with the great
S. Athanasius, to let you see, that this Divine Image has none of those
defects which are inseparably incident to those of our Carvers and Painters:
for, Existimavit Philo Judaeus prohibitas esse a Deo picturas, quia sunt
mendacia.
the most exact Pieces that come from their hands are false, because they are
not that which they represent; nor can all the industry of Art make them other
then agreeable Illusions: Though they are Liars, yet are they mute; painting
cannot make them speak; and the highest commendation can be given them, is, to
say that nothing but Speech is wanting to them: Lastly, they are dead: Art,
less powerful then Nature, cannot inanimate them; what ever dexterity it uses,
it cannot enliven them: they are children that expire in their very birth; and,
could they speak, would complain of the rigor of their Parents, who, in stead
of making them Men, have made them only Idols. Now this Image that so lively
represents the Eternal Father, has none of these imperfections: It is very far
from a Lie, because it is so conformable to its Original, that it is as well his
Truth as his Copy: It is not dumb, because it is the Interpreter of the
Father, his Eternal Panegyric, his subsisting Word, all whose works are so
many expressions chanting forth the praises of their Author: It is not dead,
because it is the Fountain of Life, wherein the Creatures, before their birth,
and after their death, live; and, by a perpetual Miracle, enlivens all those
works it has produced. Imago ista non falsa est, quia Veritas; non muta, quia
Verbum; non mortua, quia Vita. Lib. de Incar. Verb.
This is it which S. Athanasius says with as much pomp of Eloquence, as
Learning and Piety: This Image is not mute, because it is the Word; not false,
because it is the Truth; not dead, because it is Life.

This same Son, who is the Image of his Father, is by a necessary consequence
the Idea of all the Creatures; they are all formed after this Divine Examplar;
and according as they more or less participate of his likeness, they are more
or less noble in their nature: Men and Angels have no advantage above the rest,
but because they are the Transcripts of this Idea, and others at most but the
Footsteps thereof. The Scripture teaches us that Man was formed after this
primitive Image, that he was made after the similitude thereof, and that in the
very Creation he belonged not to the Father but by the mediation of the Son:
This Greatness was the occasion of his Fall: for, solicited by the devil, he
was not content to be the Image of the Word, but would also be that of the
Father, and pronounce these words, which are only true in the mouth of the
Son, Ego sum similis Altissimo. This Crime was the cause of his disaster: the
Father, to revenge his Son, drove this Insolent, that had encroached upon his
rights, out of Paradise; and reduced Him to the condition of Beasts, who had
impudently aspired to the equality of his Word. So great a misfortune had
utterly ruined us, without any hope of recovery, had not the Son of God, who
was the Innocent occasion, been also the Charitable remedy: For seeing that men
were become guilty in striving to imitate him, that to revenge Him his Father
had destroyed Them, he resolved, says S. Bernard, Per me Pater recipiat quos
propter me amisisse videtur; ecce, venio, and talem me eis exhibebo, ut
quisquis gesticrit imitari, fiat ei aemulatio in bonum. Bern.
to put himself in a condition wherein he may be securely imitated, and where
the desire of being like him being no longer a Crime, is become a means to
arrive to happiness. He was made Man, to serve for an Example to Man; he
submitted himself to his Father, to teach them obedience; he was abased to the
shame of the Cross, to teach them Humility; and he forgave his Executioners
their putting him to death, to oblige them to pardon their enemies.

Therefore is it that S. Paul, discovering the secrets of Predestination,
says, that his design is to render the Elect conformable to his Image, and to
bestow Graces upon them, which, satisfying their desires, may make them,
without committing a fault, like his only Son. For this reason Tertullian
says, that the same Eternal Father forming the body of the First man at the
Creation of the world, Quodcunque limus exprimebatur, Christus cogitabatur homo
futurus. Tert. de resurrect. carn.
was taken up with Jesus Christ; that the Slime represented him the Incarnation
of his Word, and that, foreseeing the sin of Adam, he already provided him a
remedy. It is true, then, that the Christian is the Image of the Son of God,
that Nature and Grace obliges him to imitate this Pattern, and that his
perfection consists in the likeness he may have to this Model. Let us see then
what it concerns him to do that he may gain it, and afterward we will consider
the obligations so great an advantage requires at our hands.

Grace has more analogy with Art then with Nature: For when this makes a man,
at the same time she is busy about all the parts whereof he is composed: and,
as if she were afraid to make them jealous one of another, she hollows the eyes
when she bores the ears, and fashions the tongue as soon as the heart: But Art,
less happy or less powerful then Nature, contrives her works successively: one
while she makes a hand, and divides it into five fingers, whereby it becomes as
useful as it is handsome; presently it opens an eye, then the mouth; and
effecting that at diverse turns which it could not do at once, finisheth the
Picture with much time and labor. Grace, imitating Art more then Nature,
spends whole months to form Jesus Christ in our souls: In our Birth we are but
rude draughts of the New man; our virtues are not acquired all at an instant;
and whether Grace find resistance in our Wills, or Concupiscence combat her
designs, she thinks her progress very considerable, if in a whole year she can
enrich us with one virtue; and having spent much sweat to finish us, is obliged
to say, by the mouth of S. Paul, Filioli, quos iterum parturio donec formetur
in vobis Christus. She calls us little, to teach us that we are still growing;
she puts us in mind that she still travels with us, that we may comprehend
it is at diverse passes that she brings us forth: she says she teems with us till
Christ be again formed in our hearts, to persuade us that our production is not
wrought in a moment; and, to make us the Images of Jesus Christ, she must
successively employ the Lights of Faith, the Fervours of Charity, the Vigours
of Repentance, and the Submissions of Humility. For all this, it often falls
out that the Christian is not perfect when he dies, that he is but a defective
Image of the Son of God, and that there is need for the flames of Purgatory to
supply the negligence of our labor and the weakness of our virtue.

Nevertheless, if he will, during his life, make use of a double address, and
join two Arts together to express Jesus Christ in himself, he may make his
designs happily succeed. Painting and Carving do both of them make Images; but
the ways they take are extremely different: for the Carver uses nothing but
the Chizel; he hews away whatever is superfluous in the Marble or in the Wood;
it seems to search for the Statue in its matter, takes away that which covers
it, strips it to enrich it, destroys it to perfect it; and removes the form of
a tree, or of a stone, only to give it that of a Man, or of a Beast. The
Painter goes a quite contrary way: for he finisheth the Picture by laying
Color upon Color, draws the Pencil a hundred times over his work, adds one
dash upon another; and emboldening bright Colors by dark ones, extends Fields,
depresseth Valleys, raises Mountains, and does all those wonders which cousen
our eyes, and ravish our understandings.

To the completing of a Christian, and to form the Image of Jesus Christ in
his soul, these two contrary arts must be associated, and the Statuaries
industry and the Painters dexterity jointly imitated; Sculptoris Artem imitetur
Christianus; detrahat quotidie quod sibi nocet, and quod Deo displicet. Hugo de
sanct. Vict.
he must every day lop off some imperfection, deface some bad habit, pare away
some vicious inclination; and, as if he sought for the beauty of Grace under
the rubbish of Sin, remove whatever seems to hide it from us: But at the same
time we must imitate the Painter, add virtue to virtue, join patience to
humility, heighten constancy by sweetness, mingle many good works together, and
by that pleasing medley perfect the Image of Jesus Christ. The Pencil-must be
sorted: with the Chizel; chop off, as-Carvers do, useless Pleasures,
superfluous Riches, excessive Honors; and at the same time, like the Painter,
add the practice of virtue the exercise of good works, and the patient
suffering of advesities.

Finally, the most excellent disposition is, so to engrave the Image of Jesus
Christ in our heart, that nothing can blot it out: We draw figures upon the
sand, but a little wind blows them away; we paint the water, but the least
storm spoils our fancy; we cut in brass and marble, and these characters stand
the fury of time, and endure many ages. The Image of Jesus Christ meets with
all these different subjects in Christians; sometimes it is formed upon souls
that have no more consistence then the sand, or waves; the wind of temptation
scatters the impressions of grace, and the least occasion makes them lose
advantages they had received in the Sacrament of Repentance: There are others
more constant which keep the form they have taken, who amidst the storms of
grief preserve the character they bear; and more lasting then brass, lose not
in the flames what they have received from the Sacraments: If we are of this
number, there remains no more to make us perfect, but to render to Jesus Christ
the submissions are due to him from his Images.

The first is to depend upon his will, and to acknowledge, that as we hold our
being from his power, so we expect the preservation thereof from his goodness.
There are some pieces that survive the Artists that have wrought them, and
having been made by mortal hands, cease not in some sort to enjoy a kind of
eternity: There are other images which cannot subsist but by those that have
given them their being; Our presence produces them in a Glass; our absence
quite defaceth them, and they cease to live as soon as we cease to inanimate
them: Vt in nobis quasi in quoda^ speculo Divinae bonitatis forma resplendeat.
D. Leo.
Christians are like these later Images; The presence of Jesus Christ is
necessary for their preservation, and the Grace that produced them is the same
that preserves and upholds them.

The second duty is to express him so happily, that he may be seen in our
person, and that we may be taken for second Jesus Christ's; For if a picture be
good, it makes us know him it represents; we see the lineaments of his face,
observe his behavior, and discover his very humors: If the Christian be the
Image of the Son of God, he must have his air, express his virtues, imitate
his actions, and follow his motions.

The last duty of an Image, is to serve for the glory of him whom it
represents; Could it speak, it would publish nothing but his praises, and would
witness that being only his, it espouseth no other Interests but what are his.
The Christian is bound to be of the same mind, because he is the Image of the
Son of God; he ought to breath only after his honor, to act for his service,
to speak for his glory; and as a Criminal whom the Prince has pardoned,
remains a living monument of his clemency: so a Christian whom Jesus Christ
has redeemed, is an inanimated picture of his mercy; nor ought to have any
other design then by the luster of his actions to manifest the goodness of his
Divine Redeemer.

The Second DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a Priest and a Sacrifice.
LOve has made the Son of God so liberal, that he possesses no qualities
which he communicates not to the Christians: If he be God by his Essence, we
are by his Grace; if he be the Son of God by Nature, we are by Adoption; if he
produce the holy Spirit from all Eternity, we produce him in Time; if he confer
Grace in the state of his Father, we confer it in his; if he be Priest and
Victim in his Sacrifice, we partake these two qualities with him; and the
Church bears no Christians in her womb, who may not boast that in some sort
they are both Priests and Victims. Gens sancta, regale sacerdodotium. 1. Pet. 2.
The Scripture gives them this honorable title by the mouth of S. Peter; the
Saints glory in the Apocalypse, that the Grace of Baptism has made them
Priests and Kings, Fecisti nos regnum and sacerdotes Deo and Patri: so that we
cannot question this title, as not belonging to the Christian, unless we
question the Authority of the Scripture; nor can we doubt that the Son of God
has honored them with this Character, but we must withal doubt of his love
or of his power.

Indeed the Fathers of the Church have professed, that the Christians were
Priests; that their Baptism was their Priesthood; Sacerdotium Laico um
Baptisma. Hieron.
and that in this Sacrament which separates them from the world, they were
consecrated to Jesus Christ; Therefore does the great Saint Hierome writing
against the Luciferians, honor the Laity with this title, and calls their
Baptism their Priesthood. Saint Augustine is of the same mind; and though he
was not ignorant of the difference between the Laity and the Clergy, he
forbears not to style all Christian Priests, because their Name denotes their
Unction, and their Grace makes them the members of the High Priest Jesus Christ.

And certainly, he that shall consider the employments of Priests, will find
that they are common to the Laity; and though they have neither their character
nor their power, they are with them admitted into the dispensation of the
Sacraments. They may administer Baptism in case of necessity, communicate the
Grace they have received, and bring forth children to Jesus Christ: Though they
are not raised to that pitch of dignity which makes the Priests Judges in the
Tribunal of Repentance, and have not any Authority from the Son of God to remit
sins; nevertheless it has sometimes fallen out, that the Faithful being not
able to meet with a Priest, have confessed themselves to Laics, and the Laics
have endeavored to obtain Grace for them by means of Prayer, which in some
sort supplies the virtue of Absolution. Saint Thomas authoriseth this custom,
and exhorts Soldiers that enter into the field, Mariners that are surprised
with a storm, not to neglect this remedy, and to fly to this kind of
confession, when they want the ordinary one: He confirms the use thereof by his
reasons, and tells us, that the sorrow and the humility Christians epxresse in
this occasion, is not unprofitable to draw down upon them the Divine mercy.

The Laity in some sense may be said to sacrifice daily in our Churches; If
they pronounce not the Sacramental words with the Priests, they join themselves
with their intentions, and accompanying them with their vows, have a share in
the producing of Jesus Christ on our Altars: For the Priests representing the
whole Church in this Sacrament, they are the Syndics, or Proctors of the
Faithful, acting in their name; they require their assistance, and conjure them
to join with them in an action which equally concerns them all. All the words
of the Mass confirm this truth; The confession which is common to Priest and
people testifies that the sacrifice is common; The oblation of the Host,
wherein the Priest requires the attention and consent of the people, is an
evident proof of the part they bear in it; the very Canon wherein the Priest
treats in secret with God, where he interposeth the credit of the Saints that
reign in Heaven, authoriseth this belief: For he speaks in the name of the
Faithful, and even then when he offers this sacrifice in their behalf,
testifies that he offers it with them, and that he is at the same time the
Minister of Jesus Christ and of his Church.

Finally, Christians are Priests as we have said, because they are ordained
daily to offer up sacrifices; Perum Sacrificium est omne opus quod agitur ut
sancta societate haereamus Deo. Aug.
and according to the language of Saint Augustine, all virtuous actions are so
many holy oblations which they present to the Eternal Father. He that sings
with the Priest, offers the sacrifice of praise; he that gives Alms to the
poor, makes a sacrifice of his goods; he that is sorrowful for his sins, offers
a sacrifice of his heart; and he that endeavors to wash them away by his
tears, offers a sacrifice of his eyes: But not to reckon up all the actions of
the Faithful, it is enough to say with the same Saint Augustine, that their
whole life is a sacrifice, and that they begin to be Priests as soon as they
begin to be Victims.

These two qualities were inseparable in the person of Jesus Christ; he bare
them from the very first moment of his Incarnation; and as soon as ever he held
the language of a Priest, A Domino Deo missus Christus sacerdos noster,
assumpsit a nobis quod offerret Domino, ipsas primitias carnis ex utero
virginis. Aug.
he had the dispositions of a Victim: He began his sacrifice with his life; he
offered himself to his Father in the chaste womb of his Mother; and having
received that Divine Unction, which constituted him High Priest, he protested
that he would be a public Victim; He finished upon the Cross what he had
projected before his Birth; and joining these two qualities in his Death,
taught us, that we should not separte them during our life: Therefore are all
Christians obliged to be Victims, and after the example of Jesus Christ, they
ought to find in their person the subject of their sacrifice: They have no
remainders of Adam, which may not happily be subservient to this design:
Whatever they hold of this wretched Father, ought to be consumed by the flames
of Justice or those of Charity; Purgatory will burn that which the fire has
not; and Heaven finishing what these two had begun, w^^ reduce the Victim to an
estate where nothing will appear in it which is displeasing to God.

But in expectation of this happy hour, they must begin their sacrifice here;
and by little and little destroying what is contrary to Grace, make Holocausts
of all their inordinate inclinations; For we learn from Origin, that though we
are no longer under the Law of Moses, we are not dispensed with for
sacrificing; but as the Law of Grace is the accomplishment of the other, we
ought to immolate all those passions that were represented to us by the Beasts
they slaughtered at the foot of the Altar: We satisfy this duty when we set
upon our criminal affections, and full of zeal and courage we endeavor to
stifle them. We immolate a Bull when we tame our pride, and labor to kill this
sin that gives life to all others; we sacrifice a Goat when we quench the
lustful flames of impurity, and by a divine fire mortify this infernal one,
which devours all virtues; we slay a Ram when we subdue our anger, disarm this
seditious passion, calm this raging sea, and manacle this fury which troubles
the tranquillity of our mind; we offer Pigeons and Turtles, when we banish
those volatile inordinations which divert us from piety, and engage our minds
in the affairs of the world.

But if we have subjected our passions to the dominion of reason, and by a
happy barrenness the Earth of our Intellectual part breeds no monsters which we
may offer up to God; we must seek into our body, and of our members make
innocent sacrifices: For the great Apostle of the Gentiles teaches us, that we
are obliged to offer our bodies a lively sacrifice, and to pacify the anger of
Heaven by a holy oblation acceptable to him, Vt exhibeatis corpora vestra
hostiam viventem; as if he would say, that we ought to die to sin, that we may
live to Grace; and the members which have served heretofore to the tyranny of
Concupiscence, may now become serviceable to the lawful power of Charity: or,
he would advertise us, that if in the Old Testament only dead Victims were
offered up to God, in the New we must offer up living ones; and that
mortification working in the Christian what death did in the Beasts, we must
join the two sacrifices together, and accord death with life to satisfy the
Divine Justice: Thus the whole exercise of a Christian is to make war upon
their bodies; and to gain victories over themselves, they vanquish their
enemies in facrificing their members, and they may boast that in offering
sacrifices to God, they erect trophies to themselves.

In consideration of these Truths, me thinks we may say with Origin, that all
the faithful are Victims, and that in the difference of their conditions, they
agree in this common quality: If any thing distinguish them, it is the degree of
their love, and the perfection of their Sacrifice. The Apostles, says He, were
the first Victims, because they forsook all to follow their Master; and having
given him their heart by Charity, their spirit by Faith, their goods by
Poverty, they moreover consecrated their bodies by the Repentance of their
life, and by the cruelty of their death: The Martyrs immediately succeed them,
because having a long time labored by Grief, at last they have perfected their
sacrifice by Martyrdom. The Virgins hold the Third place, because they triumph
over their bodies, tame a hundred several ways this domestic Enemy, and not
content to consecrate him by purity, borrow the assistance of penance, to
mortify him by contrition; The Continent and the Married follow these close;
and if in their sacrifice they destroy not the Victim, they put it at least in
a condition, that it no more rebels against the Sacrificers, and where it
expects with patience for death, Castitas and viduitas de bonis carnis Deo
adolentur. Tertul.
to finish that which Continence has begun: Tertullian was much of this
opinion, when he said, That our bodies furnished us with Victims as well as
virtues; and that Fasting. Silence and Chastity were fruits of this Tree, which
might be gathered to make an offering for Jesus Christ.

For though the Body be the least part of man, it is not the most unprofitable;
its imperfections are advantageous to us; its rebellions serve us for Trials;
and Grace, which is ingenious, turns the most part of its miseries into
remedies. The infirmities which trouble its health, help our Sacrifice; and the
diseased person that suffers his afflictions patiently, is a victim: who though
not innocent, is notwithstanding well-pleasing to Jesus Christ. Poverty which
strips us of superfluities, or of necessaries, which reduces us to the
condition our Birth found us in, and whither Death will bring us, is a
sacrifice which gains us as much merit, as it procures us inconvenience.

Nay, Death it self, which seems the eldest daughter of sin, who shows all the
horrors of her father upon her countenance, is not so much the destruction, as
the sacrifice of our Body: she imitates the severity of fire and sword: she,
she alone does what the knife and the pile of wood sometimes did; and reduces
the victim to ashes, having deprived it of life: she serves for the Divine
Justice and Mercy together: Deficit homo ad Gloriam, moritur a^ vitam, perit ad
salute^, and mors per Christum commendatio facta est Charitatis. Chrysostom.
she prepares the body for Immortality; nor despoils it of corruption, but to
apparel it with Glory. This is it that imprints so violent a desire of Death
in the hearts of the faithful; which makes them in the midst of their
prosperity call her in to their assistance, and wish, that coming to end their
life, she may come to perfect their sacrifice: For it seems she has changed
Nature since Jesus Christ consecrated her in his person; she is like those
waters that take the taste and color of those Minerals through which they
pass; she has lost all her gastliness, and has some secret beauties which
beget love in the soul of all Saints. She that led us to the gates of hell,
lifts us up to heaven: she that was the mother of shame and sadness, is now the
mother of joy and glory: she that filled us with despair, buoys us up with
hope: she that established the Empire of sin, destroys it: in a word, she that
was the Chastisement of our Crime, is now the Sacrifice of our Love.

For this end have all the greatest Saints made the Panegyric of death: they
have rendered thanks to the Divine Justice that inflicts a punishment upon us
which shortens our misery, and advances our happiness, which separates us from
the world, and unites us to Jesus Christ; and under a false appearance of
rigor, delivers us from the dangers that threaten us, the griefs that torment
us, and the sins that tyrannize over us. This made that famous Penitent say, He
was just that expected death, but he was holy that desired it. Finally, this
drew that Elogie out of the mouth of S. Paul: for, considering the advantages
which he promised himself by death, how that it would unite him to Jesus
Christ, he called it, by a new name, his Gains and his Riches; it enters into
his mind as the recompense of his travels, an indemnity for his losses, and
the most assured purchase he could make in this world: Mihi vivere Christus
est, and mori lucrum.

Thus every Christian may easily become a Victim, because death is a favorable
occasion; and being well managed, may serve to expiate our sins, to satisfy
the Divine Justice, and to imitate the charity of Jesus. But the misfortune is,
that Love is wanting in this Sacrifice; and, holding a language far different
from that of Isaac, we are obliged to say, We find the Sacrifice, but there is
neither knife, nor fire to consume it. Indeed, all men die, but few Christians
make good use of their death; and there are none but the Elect, who, turning it
into a Holocaust, know so well how to use it, that it opens them the gate of
heaven.

The Third DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a Soldier and a Conqueror.
THe God whom we adore takes his Glory as well from War as from Rest; and if he
be called in Scripture the God of peace, he is as often called the Lord of
hosts: His Angels are the soldiers that wait upon him to the Battle, who
avenge him of his enemies; Numquid est numerus militum ejus! the Stars, which
keep watch as Sentinels about his Palace, bear the name of the Militia in the
language of the Prophets; Militia coelorum: and all those that serve him for
Ministers in his Embassies, serve him for Combatants in his Conquests.
Therefore did the Angels who gave notice to the Shepherds of the birth of Jesus
Christ, take their name from their principal employment, and called themselves
the heavenly Host, Multitudo Militiae coelstis: and when the Son of God was
taken in the garden of Olives, and blamed Saint Peter, who would have hindered
the work of our Salvation, he told his disciples that it was easy for him to
ask of his Father legions of Angels to defend him from his enemies.

Men are considered under this quality upon earth; the holy Scripture calls
them Soldiers; and if we believe the testimony of Job, their whole life is a
continual warfare: They have as many Enemies as Subjects: Rebellion is spread
over every corner of their State; the parts whereof they are composed, are
revolted; and, which way soever they turn themselves, they find occasions of
Fighting. Christians are yet more obliged to War then Men: the Sacrament, that
enables them, withal engages them into the combat: Labora sicut bonus miles
Christi 2 Timothy 2. Nemo coronabitur nifi vicerit, neque vincet n si certaverit:
quis autem certet, nisi inimicu^ habeat? Ex Sent. Prosp.
The Earth is the Field where they try the Mastery; and these terms of a List,
a Crown, a Soldier, which S. Paul so often uses in his Epistles, are so many
proofs of so known a Truth: The Church it self is an Army, the Christians
whereof it is formed are the Soldiers; and the Scripture describes her in arms
in these words, Terribilis ut Castrorum acies ordinata.

Wherein it seems we may behold the difference between a Camp and a City: Both
of them are Bodies which have their Head and Members, their Laws and Policy,
their designs and employments: But in Cities we observe a pleasing variety of
conditions equally contributing to their advantage and beauty: There we see
Priests, who chant forth the praises of God in his Temple, who load his Altars
with offerings; and mixing their tears with the blood of the Victims, endeavor
to appease his just indignation: There are Magistrates which end Controversies,
maintain Peace among the People, and make Justice reign in Families: There are
Merchants which traffic with strangers; who, by their Commerce, occasion
Plenty, and by their diligence supply all necessities. But difference of
condition seems to be banished from Armies: as all fight, so all are soldiers:
those that command, and those that obey, bear this quality, and both of them
place their glory in their valor. Therefore the Church being an Army, those it
consists of must necessarily fight: the most feeble must be courageous; the
women must be Amazones; and all Christians, forgetting the difference of their
conditions, must take upon them the quality of Soldiers.

Enemies will not be wanting to exercise their courage, because the World, the
Flesh and the Devil hold intelligence to set upon them: For the Christians war
is at home; whatever he has received from Adam, is an occasion of exercising
him; and, for a punishment of his sin, he is obliged to fight with himself. The
Flesh is never at agreement with the Spirit; these two parties have always some
difference to compose; and though linkt together by natural chains, and common
interests, cease not continually to make war upon one another: They are two
friends that usually fall out, and two enemies that caress each other; two
friends that shake hands, and two enemies that make mutual visits; two friends
that cannot endure one another, and two enemies that can never be asunder. This
division is the first punishment of our sin: and when we began to be upon ill
terms with God, we ceased to have any good correspondence with our selves.

But that which seems most troublesome, is, that one Combat furnishes us with
many enemies: for, as S. Augustine says, we daily fight in our heart; in such
a little room we find whole armies; and sometimes we grapple with Avarice,
sometimes with Pride, sometimes with Impurity: so that it is very hard, being
set upon by so many enemies, if we receive not some wound: This Combat is
obstinately disputed: if there be some Truce, there is no real Peace: it lasts
till death; and if soul and body be not separated, it is impossible to make
them friends: The Senses bring us false reports, the Passions raise storms, our
Inclinations set up a party; and, to defend us from so many enemies, we are
obliged to borrow the assistance of Virtue. Every Age has its exercise:
Infancy is oppressed with Error and Ignorance, Youth is baited with Ambition
and Wantonness, Old Age is clogged with Anger and Peevishness; so that there is
no condition but has need of Grace, to defend it from those enemies that set
upon it.

The Devil takes part with the Body to destroy us, employs his wiles or his
force to terrify or seduce us; he mingles himself with our Humors, disorders
our Passions, troubles our Temper; and, as if he were the Sovereign of Man, as
well as the Prince of the World, he deboists our Subjects, to disquiet our
Rest. Sometimes he takes upon him the shape of a Lion, and sometimes that of a
Serpent, that using subtilty and violence, he may gain some advantage upon us:
He studies our inclinations, to destroy us; suits himself with our humors, to
surprise us; and, regulating his promises according to our desires, propounds
Honors to us if ambitious, Riches if covetous, Pleasures if wanton: He
persuades us that our Revenges are just, our Inclinations reasonable, and our
Recreations innocent; and hiding Vice under the mantle of Virtue, hinders us
from reforming or defending our selves. To secure us from so redoubted an
enemy, who sets upon us so many different ways, we must oppose our Prudence
against his Cunning, our Patience against his Fury: we must countermine his
Stratagems, penetrate his Intentions, and discover the hook which lies under
the sugared bait: we must also bless the Justice of God, who exercises us by
the cruelty of this Executioner; put our confidence in his goodness, and
remember that in this Conflict we can overcome only by suffering.

Having obtained this victory, we must arm our selves against the world, which
is the most dangerous enemy the Christian can have: He set upon Jesus Christ in
his birth, and being true to his Tyrant, knew not his lawful Sovereign even
then when he came to be his deliverer; In mundo erat, and mundus eum non
cognovit: He persecuted him during his life, nor lost any occasion wherein he
might do him a mischief; Mundus me odit: He conspired his death with the
Devils, and expressing himself by the mouth of the Scribes and Pharisees,
charged him with calumnies before the Tribunal of Pilate, cast fear into the
soul of that cowardly Judge, and forced him to condemn a man whom he
acknowledged innocent. Therefore neither had Jesus Christ any commerce with the
world, he protested he had nothing to do with it, Ego non sum de mundo; and
that contrary his to maxims, he could neither approve nor suffer it: He would
not so much as pray for it, when he prayed for his executioners, Non pro mundo
rogo: He boasted in the presence of his Apostles, that he had subdued this
rebel, and defeated this enemy, Confidite, ego vici mundum; Finally, he
promised his Disciples, that he would destroy the world in the dreadful day of
his vengeance; so that professing to imitate the Son of God, we are obliged to
hate what he never loved, and to defend our selves from a Traitor, who employs
lying, grief, and pleasure to gain us to his party.

He tries to deceive us, that so he may corrupt us; he sets up Maxims which
under a pretense of maintaining society, introduce Libertinisme amongst men; he
makes debauches pass for recreations, revenge for greatness of courage,
Duplicem aciem mundus producit coutra milites Christi; blanditur ut decipiat,
minatur ut frangat; ad utrosque aditus occurrit C ristus, and non vincitur
Christianus. Aug. de sanc. vinc.
impurity for a lawful affection: If he cannot seduce us, he goes about to
terrify us, casts pannick fears into weak souls, makes them apprehensive of
grief or infamy; persuades a young man that chastity is a blemish to his
reputation; a woman that modesty spoils the luster of her beauty; a Gentleman,
that the forgetting of injuries damps his courage; and being a Tyrant, makes
use of fear to keep his Subjects in obedience: But when he meets with generous
souls, who reject his Maxims, and contemn his Threats, he has recourse to
pleasures, and employs charms to soften the obdurate: This last battery is the
most to be feared, because the sweetest; This is it that enervates the
Sampsons, masters the David's, and triumphs over the Solomon's: Engages these
great men in a lie by blinding them, terrifies them by making them Cowards; and
breeding fear in their hearts with love, causes them to apprehend the loss of
those things he makes them passionately affect. He lays before their eyes
whatever may allure them; makes pleasure enter in at their senses; and
forgetting no artifice to render wickedness agreeable, widens his Empire, and
increases the number of his Subjects.

If we be Christians indeed, we must combat this enemy, oppose the Maxims of
the Gospel against his falsehoods; destroy error by truth; and protest that
being the subjects of Jesus Christ, we acknowledge no other Laws but those of
his Church: To evacuate those terrors wherewith he shakes our courage, we must
discern true honor from false, fix our glory in our duty; and remember, that
the true Disciples of Jesus Christ, ought always to prefer virtue before
honor, and conscience before reputation. To defend us from the pleasures the
world tempts us with, we must look upon their end, and represent the shame and
grief that never forsakes them: Finally, we must beg Grace of Jesus Christ, who
has overcome the world; that assisted with his favor we may vanquish his
enemies with all the errors wherewith he would seduce us, the fear wherewith
he would astonish us, and the pleasures wherewith he would enchaunt us.

For it is not enough for the Christian to be a soldier, if he be not also
victorious; his condition is more painful then that of soldiers: For though
these are the Victims of Glory and of Death, that for a little pay they expose
themselves to a thousand dangers, they are not responsible for the success of
the battle; and provided they lend their heart and hand to their General, there
is nothing more can be expected from their valor. But the Christians are such
soldiers as must be victorious, it is not enough that they fight, they must win
the field, they must overcome here, if they mean to-reign with Christ
hereafter: It Is true, he has this advantage over all other Captains, he
inspires courage into his soldiers, and gives them victory who engage in the
combat; so that it is their fault if they be defeated, and the glory of their
Commander if they remain Conquerours: Their birth obliges them to this duty;
for the Scripture teaches us, Omne quod natum est ex Deo vincit mundu^. Joan.
16.5.
that those that are born of God overcome the world; that Grace which contains
Glory in the seed, is able to preserve them from sin; and that leaving them to
the spirit that inanimates them, they remain impeccable in his hands: S.
Bernard is of this mind, and will have their victory over temptation a certain
proof of their adoption.

The virtues themselves they have received at their Baptism, are helps which
facilitate the defeat of their enemies; For faith is not only their strength
but their victory, and renders them as well Conquerours as Soldiers; Hope
heightens their Courage, and giving them the Almighty for their Second, makes
them gain as many Victories as they fight Battails. Charity that finds nothing
impossible, which measures its power by its courage, and more prevalent then
death, overturns whatever resists it, inspires them with so much force, that
they vanquish all griefs, and master all difficulties: But if there be any
virtue that renders them invincible, we must confess it is their despoiling
themselves of the goods of the Earth; For Satan never catches us but by those
things that engage us; he seduceth only by those things that please us, and
when self-denial has perfectly separated us, they lose the boldness to set
upon us, and the hope of overcoming us. Therefore does S. Augustine admirably
conclude, that he that only loves that good which cannot be taken from him is
truly invincible: and Seneca founded upon the same principle had reason to say,
that Alexander was vanquished by Diogenes, because he found a Philosopher to
whom he could give nothing, and from whom he could take nothing away.

Indeed the ambitious are not subdued, but because they are afraid to lose
their honor; the immodest are not gained, but because they have a mind to
preserve their love; nor are the covetous engaged in injustice, but because
they cannot resolve to part with riches. But the Saints who are wedded only to
God, laughed at Tyrants and Devils; and cruelty being not able to ravish from
them what they love, they happily associate the quality of Conqueror with that
of a Soldier. Let us add, that the believer is invincible, if he be perfectly
united to Jesus Christ; our strength depends upon this union, and when the
Devil breaks the secured bonds, he has an advantage against us. He defeated us
in the person of Adam; he vanquished all men in one; he gained a hundred
victories in one duel: But he has lost all his advantages against Jesus
Christ; in him we are Conquerours; and as S. Augustine says, his victory would
not be perfect if he did not still conquer the world in his members: Let us
therefore unite our selves to him, that we may be invincible. When we feel the
solicitations of the flesh or the Devil, and these two Tyrants confederate
together endeavor to overpower us, let us implore the assistance of our Head,
and nothing presuming upon our own abilities, but promising our selves all from
his Grace, render the honor to him of whom we hold the victory.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a King and a Slave.
THough the Christian be a Conqueror, he cease not to be a slave; and though
he be called to Liberty, he finds himself engaged in a happy servitude, which
subjecting him to his Sovereign, raises him above all creatures: For as in the
state of Jesus Christ, grief is the mother of pleasure, and humility the
midwife to greatness, servitude begets liberty, and to be truly free, we must
be Christ's bondmen: All the Saints were of this belief; and whilst they lived
upon the Earth, they have been proud of those chains the love of God loaded
them with. Saint Paul makes it his boast that he was the slave of the Son of
God; he many times prefers this quality before that of an Apostle; and he had
rather be known by his Chain then by his Preaching. The Blessed Virgin makes
her apology from this advantage; and being chosen by the Eternal Word to be his
Mother protests, she will be his Handmaid; and that the dignity wherewith she
was honored, shall never make her leave the affections of a servant, Ecce
Ancilla Domini: But because there are many conditions of Servitude, it is fit
to take notice of them in this Discourse, and to see what sort that of the
Christians ought to be.

The first is founded in Nature, we bear the Character of it in our very
essentials, we are Gods Vassals, because we are his Creatures; there is no
Greatness can give us a dispensation from this Thraldom: Kings are obedient to
his will, their hearts are in his hands; and as there is in every thing a
secret obedience, which maugre the proper inclination subjects it to the power
of the Creator; so there is in every man a natural submission, which without
violating his Liberty, makes him stoop to the command of the Almighty. The
second Servitude somewhat different from the former, is a forced subjection,
making Caitiffs obey their Sovereign, even whilst they resist him; to follow
his Ordinances whilst they contemn his laws; and to be serviceable to his
Justcie, when they would not be wrought upon by his Mercy. The third is a
Servitude arising from fear, which makes slaves more sollicitous after their
own interest, then the glory of their Master, and are more apprehensive of the
punishment then of the sin. These slaves are guilty in his eyes, who reads
their souls; if their hands or mouth be Innocent, their heart is Criminal, and
if they commit not the act of sin, they preserve the desire of it in the inmost
recesses of their Will. The fourth and last Servitude is voluntary, because
amorous; these slaves love their master, Boni servi sumus quande ipsum qui
jubet diligimus nec aliud in nostra servitute commodum quaerimus, quam ut ad
ipsum pervenire valeamus. August.
and seek nothing but his Glory; whatever pleases him, is agreeable to them;
all his commands seem easy: and having no other inclinations then his, find
their happiness in their bondage: Thence it comes to pass that it is
profitable, glorious, welcome, accompanied with none of those conditions that
make slavery painful.

Slaves labor not but for their master; they till the ground, but reap not the
fruits; they plant vineyards, and drink not of the wine; they suffer much pain,
and another tastes the pleasure: They are not as wives called in to a community
of Goods, they are not as Children admitted to share in the inheritance; and by
a misfortune which seems to violate all the Laws of Nature, they neither
dispose of their estate nor of their persons: But the slaves of the son of God
find riches in their servitude; their Master adopting them for his children,
makes them his Heirs, and before he gives them his Glory for their Portion,
gives them the disposal of the Earth for Assurance: For these Great Saints who
may be called the Royal slaves of the son of God bear rule in his State; The
sun rises only to enlighten them, the Earth is fruitful for no other end but
to nourish them; Kings reign to be their Conductors; Tyrants are their
persecutors, only to exercise them; and whole Nature travels for their glory
and their salvation: The seasons respect their Commands, diseases obey their
words, these animated Nothings which being the works of sin, should not in
reason acknowledge their power, are subject to their Empire; and the Miracles
these work in the world, are proofs that their service puts them in possession
of all the goods of their Master. Vnus est sapiens cujus omnia sunt, nec ex
diffic li tuenda; quemadmodum. Dii immortales regnum inermes regunt; ita hic
officia sua quamvis la^issime pateant sine tumultu obit. Senec. 7. Been. cap. 3.
They are in deed what the Stoics Wise man never was but in speculation; All
things belong to them without injustice, they keep them without disquietness;
they are not obliged to send Lieutenants into remote Provinces, nor to maintain
Garrisons upon the Frontiers to stop the incursion of Enemies; They govern
without arms and soldiers, and which way soever they turn their eyes, they may
without vanity utter these words: Whatever we see is ours; and though we leave
the propriety to particular persons, we cease not to enjoy the sovereignty with
God.

But we need not wonder if these slaves are rich, because they are free; and
that the same quality which instates them in plenty, puts them into liberty.
Man is so free that he cannot be compelled; Sin that deprives him of Grace,
robs him not of his Liberty; and into whatever condition he throws himself, is
still his own Master. It is true, that according to the language of Saint Paul,
he becomes the slave of sin, and free from Grace when he becomes Guilty; and on
the contrary, free from sin, and the fervant of Grace when justified: Although
in these two states so opposite, Liberty is always mixed with Servitude; St
Thomas and St Augustine, Masters with whom we cannot easily mistake, teach us,
That in the state of sin there is a real Thraldom, and a false Liberty,
because man departing from God, wanders from his duty; and subjecting himself
to his passions, is a slave in earnest, and free only in appearance: On the
contrary, there is a real liberty in the state of Grace, and an apparent
servitude, because Man does what he will, in that he does what he ought: that
he is free because reasonable, and master of himself, because the slave of
Jesus Christ. This is it that the Word Incarnate had a mind to teach us with
his own mouth, when he said, We should be free indeed, if the Son made us free;
and this is it that Saint Augustine would have us understand by those excellent
words; We were the slaves of self-love, and now that we are made free, we may
boast that we are the Slaves of Charity: Neither is there any Divine that does
not acknowledge, that our will is never more free, Omnia propter Electos.
then when she is most submitted to God; and, that true Liberty is the
recompense of so happy a Bondage: I may well give it this name, because it
produces Glory, and that all the slaves of the son of God are Sovereigns.

But that we may rightly conceive of the Greatness of this Privilege, we must
remember that Servitude is the daughter of Sin, that men were not slaves till
they became Guilty, and that Nature which labored to equal their Conditions,
is not she that created this shameful difference, which distinguishes them
one from another. They were all Kings before their Defection, Innocence was the
character of their Royalty; and as long as they were the Images of God, they
were his Vicegerents in the world; But sin that deprived them of Grace,
ravished from them their Liberty, gave them as many Masters as they have bad
inclinations; and making this misfortune pass from their person into their
estate, many times imposed Tyrants over them, under a color of constituting
lawful Sovereigns.

We had for ever remained in this shameful Bondage, had not the son of God,
who draws our salvation out of our fall, made us recover Liberty by Servitude:
For Grace bringing us in subjection unto his will, has put all Creatures under
us; his love subjecting our soul to his Empire, has made us the Masters of our
Body: this insolent slave is is become obedient; and as it revolted not against
the soul, but because the soul was revolted against God; it returned to its
duty, as soon as she betook her self to her respect; and acknowledged his
Sovereign, as soon as she acknowledged her Creator. Thus our Rule is founded
upon our submission, our Liberty established upon our vassalage, and we command
our Body, because we obey our God. Vis serviat animae tuae caro tua? Deo
serviat anima tua; debes regi ut possis regerc. Aug.
This is it that Saint Augustine expresses so handsomely: When the soul is the
servant of God, she is the Mistress of the flesh; when Reason is subject to
Grace, she is the queen of Passions, and reduces these rebels to obedience; so
that the most assured means to re-enter upon our ancient Privileges, is to
submit to God, and to seek our greatness in our debasement.

The Son of God has furnished us with a rare Example in his Life; he ascended
not to Glory, but by the ladder of humility: He was content to be his Fathers
servant, before he would be adored as his Son; and in heaven it self where he
raigns with him, he still retains this humble deportment. Saint Paul teaches
us, that he wishes not the accomplishment of his mystical body, but that he
may be subject to his Father, Cum autem subjecta fuerint illi omnia, tunc ipse
filius crit subjectus ei. 1 Cor, 15.
having subjected all things to himself; It seems he chose the Virgin for his
mother, because she was devoted to the service of the Altar, and had protested
that she would eternally remain the servant of the Lord: He boasts of it by the
mouth of a Prophet: he will have all the world know, that his service is
founded upon his birth, and that he is the slave of the eternal Father,
because the Son of his handmaid. Ego servus tuus and filius Ancillae tuae.

Humane Laws acknowledge three sorts of Slaves: The First, Servi sunt alii a
Conventione, alii a fortuna, alii a natura. Arist. 2. Poli.
those that sell themselves, and, to gain a small livelihood, engage their
Liberty, and become Slaves, to enrich their friends or children: Others are
those that Fortune throws into Fetters, whom the loss of a Battle subjects to
the mercy of the Conqueror, and, according to the Laws of War, become the
prisoners of their enemies: The Last are those who are born of slavish parents,
and who seem to have less reason to complain, because their servitude preceded
their Birth, and Nature conspired with Fortune to deprive them of their
Liberty: The Son of God was pleased to be of this number; he desired his
Thraldom might be natural, Partus sequitur ventrem.
and that the same mother that made him a Man, might make him his Fathers
Servant: and we cannot deny that he is liable to this condition, because all
Laws ordain that the Child is of the same quality with the Mother: It seems
she had inspired him with this desire, in giving him a being; and that at the
same time she conceived him, she imprinted in his soul the mind of a Slave.

The Naturalists assure us that Mothers have so much power over the bodies of
their children in the moment of conception, Matres dum concipiunt, foetibus
desiderioru^ signa quaedam inurunt. Plin.
that they express upon them their Longings and Imaginations; and those
extraordinary marks they bring along with them into the world, are certain
proofs of so known a Truth. But the Scripture acquaints us that the Virgin,
more happy and more powerful then other mothers, has made an impression upon
the soul and body of her only Son; and having conceived him in the humble
apprehensions of a handmaid, as her last words to the Angel sufficiently
testify, Ecce Ancilla Domini, she infused her holy dispositions into the heart
of Jesus Christ, who, as a faithful Echo, repeating the words of his mother,
protested he would be his Fathers Servant. Therefore there is no Christian who
ought not to esteem a Quality common to him with the Son of God; which, though
it were not so honorable, in yielding complacency would appear sufficiently
agreeable.

Servitude has always this misfortune, that it makes us regret the loss of
Liberty; whatever charms it uses to sweeten our discontents, it is always
troublesome when forced: A Chain, though of Diamonds, is a punishment, and no
ornament, if it load us; the stateliest Palace loses its pleasantness, when it
becomes our prison; and wherever there is compulsion, we find pain and sorrow.
Aliquando revera inventum est quando aurum non ametur. Tert.
There is nothing more acceptable then Gold; it is the richest and the fairest
of Metals; it is the noblest production of the Sun; and this Star, which gives a
being to so many Flowers in the Spring, spends whole Ages to contribute the
last perfection to this Masterpiece of his light and heat. In the mean time,
the love of Liberty has made some Slaves utterly abominate it; and in those
Countries where it is so common, where they make it the manacles of offenders,
it is insupportable to the wretched inhabitants: They complain when they are
adorned with it; that which is the pompous dress of our Kings, is their
torment: because this Metal engages them to Bondage, it is the object of their
hate; and Nature has found out an innocent artifice to render it odious to
these Captives.

But though Servitude be so grievous, it loses its bitterness when voluntary;
Love, without breaking their Chains, sweetens them; and mixing his Charms with
their Weight, makes them so welcome, that there is not one Slave would recover
his Liberty. Ask all sinners, who live in slavery, you shall not find one that
complains of his Irons: every one seeks to add to their weight, or to tie them
faster; and, as if their Passion had changed their Nature, they hug their
Bondage, and are afraid of their deliverance. Who doubts but that a Wanton is
captivated with the beauty he idolizeth? Who knows not, by his complaints, that
he has lost his Liberty, that he wears the Colors of his Mistress as a Slave
those of his Master, and that all the actions he does are so many proofs of his
Slavery? In the mean time, he loves his Prison, boasts of his Captivity, and is
proud of his Misery; he would not change condition with a Monarch.

Inasmuch as the Grace of the Son of God is nothing but Love, it knows the way
of mixing Sweetness with Servitude; it makes us slaves in subjecting us to his
will; it triumphs over our Liberty, because it is victorious; it imprisons us,
because we are made its Captives, by being delivered from the Tyranny of sin:
Captivam duxit Captivitatem: But it is agreeable, because amorous; amorous,
because voluntary; and charms our discontents, because it sweetly inchants our
Wills. It has no Slaves that complain of their Bondage, or regret their
Liberty: if they express any sorrow, it is because they are not yet fully under
the dominion of Jesus Christ: if they are big with any desires, it is, that they
may see themselves in a happy impotency to break their chains, and to be so
strongly fastened to their Master, that, as S. Paul, they may bid defiance to
all Creatures, and say with that great Apostle, that they cannot separate them
from their divine Redeemer. Therefore did S. Augustine heretofore admonish his
Auditors, Nolite timere Domini servitutem; non erit ibi gemitus, non murmur,
non indignatio, sed libera servitus est apud Deum. ubi non necessitas sed
charitas servit. August.
that the name of Servitude ought not to astonish them: for Charity had
dulcorated all the bitterness thereof; in that Family no Slaves complained of
the severity of their Master, nor of the misery of their condition, because the
service is always free and pleasing, seeing it is not Necessity, but Charity,
that makes us embrace it. Thus may we with reason glory that we are Slaves and
Sovereigns; that the same power that united the Word with Flesh in Jesus
Christ, Virginity with Pregnancie in Mary, has been pleased in Christians to
associate Servitude with Liberty, Plenty with Want, Glory with Humility; since,
by a strange wonder, there is not any Believer that owes not his Greatness, his
Pleasure, his Empire, to the humble condition of a Slave which he received in
his Baptism.

The fifth DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a Saint.
THough there be nothing in God which is not God himself, and his Unity which
forbids us to divide him, suffers us not to know him: Nevertheless, the
Scripture teaches us to distinguish his perfections, to compare one with
another, and to give them the advantage which seems most conducing to his
glory, or to our profit. There is none but sees that our interests oblige us to
prefer Mercy before Justice; that being laden with miseries and crimes, we love
the one, because it assists the distressed, and fear the other, because it
punishes offenders. Following this principle, I conceive I may give Holiness
the pre-eminence over all the perfections of God; because uniting our interests
with his, it contributes most to his Glory and our salvation.

It Is this to speak truly that separates God from his works; which preserves
his respect in preserving his Majesty; and which putting him at a distance from
us, confines him within himself: Therefore may we say, it repairs the wrong his
immensity seems to do to him; For though this noble perfection scatters him
over all the corners of his state, raises him into Heaven, and leads him into
Hell; nevertheless it engages him in creatures which are unworthy to possess
him; and though this effusion of himself be as well a mark of his Greatness as
of his Goodness, the understanding of man can hardly comprehend that the Divine
Majesty is not interessed when it is in the Intellect of a Devil, or in the
heart of a sinner; we have much ado to suffer his Omnipotence to inanimate an
impious person, to move the tongue of a blasphemer, to guide the hand of a
parrcide, and not to be wanting to the Laws he has been pleased to prescribe
himself to assist the guilty when they offend: But his Holiness secures him
from these outrages, removes sinners far from him, Peccator long abest ab
illo qui ubique est. Aug. in Psalm.
scatters those wretches from him that fills all places, preserves his purity
in the midst of their crimes, and manageth his honor so dexterously, that he is
as glorious in Hell as in the highest Heaven, and as pure in the heart of a
Reprobate, as in that of an Elect.

This Attribute is not less delicate then zealous; all transgressions
scandalize it; nor does any thing bear the stamp of sin, that does not offer it
violence: she has more enemies then the rest of her sisters, and if the other
perfections of God are dishonored by some particular crimes, this is by all
inquities of what kind soever. Those that sin of infirmity, and pretend to find
their excuse in the cause of their offense, dash only upon the power of the
Almighty: Those that sin out of ignorance, and conceive themselves not guilty,
because they are blind, offend only the wisdom of God: Those that transgress
out of malice, and who are less excusable, because more enlightened, wound only
the Goodness of God; and though so highly criminal, persuade themselves that
wronging but one of his perfections, the rest will be favorable toward them.
But all sinners together injure Holiness; and as there is not one who turns not
his back upon the Creator to embrace the creature, neither is there any that
dishonours not this Attribute, whose principal design is to unite them to their
Creator.

Though Sanctity be thus injuriously dealt with, it cease not to be most
profitable to Christians; and so well manageth their interests with those of
God, that it produces all the miracles which so highly advance his Greatness
and their merit. All the other perfections study more our glory then our
salvation: Power makes only Kings, and when it would draw admiration from
mortals, Singula Dei Att^ibuta singulos Angeloru and hominu ordines
effinxerunt. Marsil. Fisci. de religione.
is content to raise Shepherds to the Throne: Wisdom makes Philosophers, and
communicating to them a part of its light, gives them the understanding of the
works of God: Providence makes Politicians, or Prophets; and discovering to
both of them the secrets of futurity, inspires them with a science which is not
learnt in the Schools: But Holiness more happy and more powerful, makes Saints
which are Gods Masterpieces; separates them from the creatures, and unites
them to the Creator; transforms them into him, or to use the words of
Scripture, makes commenced Gods by Grace, and perfect Gods by Glory. It Is to
this height of honor that all Christians are destined; They bear this glorious
title in the Gospel. Saint Paul treats them as Saints in all his Epistles; and
as their sanctity is an effusion of Gods, it obliges them to knock off from
all things that they may be united to him, and to cling so close unto him, that
nothing can separate them.

Therefore is it that the Religion that leads us to Holiness, invites us to a
Divorce with all things else; The Son of God admits none into his School, of
whom he exacts not this promise; The Church who imitates him as her Husband,
requires this disposition of all her Children when she conceives them in her
womb by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and the virtue of the waters of
Baptism; she will have them renounce the vanities of the world, and like the
Apostles, forsake their riches in deed or in affection. The first is, matter of
counsel; the second of obligation; Multum deseruit qui voluntatem babendi
dereliquit, a sequentibus Christum tanta relicta sunt quanta a non sequentibus
defiderari potuerunt. Greg
neither is there any creature who is not bound to say with Saint Peter, Ecce
nos reliquimus omnia. I know there are those that laugh at the Confession of
this Apostle, and with Saint Hierome, find it no hard matter for a man to leave
all, whose whole demeans was but a skiffe and a net: But had they well
considered the vast extent of our hopes and our desires, they would find this
man left very much, because he bid adieu to all things these two passions could
possibly promise him.

This first disposition is not the only abnegation the Son of God requires of
us; it serves but for a step to ascend to a more difficult one, and having
enjoined us the contempt of riches, obliges us to deny our selves. It Is not
enough to be admitted into his School, for a man to forsake his goods; he must
withal renounce his inclinations, and pursuing the evil into its very root,
offer up his will for an Holocaust. Had he been content with the first
disposition, he had exacted no more of his Disciples then vainglory had
obtained of its vassal. Philosophers have parted with their goods to defend
themselves from covetousness or discontent, which usually accompanies great
fortunes. The Ambitious are so deeply in love with glory, that they contentedly
part with all riches. The Prodigal seem as it were angry with money; and the
lavish expenses they make, testifies they more undervalue then prize them: But
both of them are wedded to themselves; the more they strip themselves of their
goods, the more are they wrapped up in their inclinations; and the less they have
of avarice, the more are they puffed up with pride and vainglory: Therefore is
it that the Son of God willing wholly to to cure man, passes from Poverty to
Self-denial; and having counseled us to part with our riches, commands us to
shake hands with our selves. Saint Paul following the steps of his Master,
teaches us, that they only who have crucified the flesh with the lusts
thereof, deserve the name of Christians; and speaking elsewhere of himself,
witnesses, that to live to God, he was bound to crucify himself with Jesus
Christ: He makes them pass for enemies to the Cross, who love themselves; and
not content to declaim against uncleanness, makes an invective against those
stately sins, which including man within himself, left him not above the degree
of beasts, but to equal him with Devils: Finally, he will have all those who
are risen with the Son of God to be taken up with the contempt of the Earth,
and to be quickened with the desires of Heaven.

Though this first condition of Holiness gives us occasion to see, that there
are very few Saints in the world; the second, which is union with God, will
more strongly persuade us of it: For sin being nothing but a separation from
God, holiness which is so opposite thereto, is nothing but an alliance with
God: Those that are most united to him, are the greatest Saints; nor does any
thing more gloriously distinguish Christians from Philosophers, then this happy
connection. Every Sect has formed an Idea of the supreme good, and done their
utmost to fasten their Disciples to it. The Epicures who acknowledge no other
good but voluptuousness, had no other passion but for this Goddess: The Stoics
who adored nothing but the mind, spent all their veneration upon this Idol; and
the Academicks who doated only upon Moral virtue, labored merely to gain her:
But Christians who know that pleasure makes none but effeminate, that the love
of understanding renders men arrogant, and that of virtue it self when it
mounts not high enough, makes only idolaters set their affections upon the
supreme good; and seeking their felicity in God, say with David, Mihi autem
adhaerere Deo bonum est. It Is in this point properly that holiness consists;
he that wishes any thing else is blind or wretched; and he that wastes himself
with other desires, is not yet fully informed that the supreme good is the end
and rest of the Christian.

Therefore is it that Saint Augustine speaking to his Auditors, uttered these
notable words: Let us be grieved to see men distracted with the diversity of
their desires; Let us see their different conditions which arise from the
difference of their designs: Let some take arms, and seek for Glory in the
mouth of Danger, hazard their lives to get themselves a Name, and place their
happiness in killing and slaying: Let others more harmless, but not less
ambitious, plead at the Bar, gain reputation in defending Innocence, and
aspire to the Glory of Orators, being not able to purchase that of Conquerors:
Let others more humble, but not less interessed, hold commerce and Traffic
with Strangers, pass the Seas to content their Avarice, descend into the
bowels of the Earth to dig out Treasures: Let others more Innocent, but not
less miserable, till the ground, master barrenness by their laborious
Improvement, and at the years end reap a rich and plentiful harvest: Let all
these different Conditions divide the heap of perishable Goods between them;
but let Believers, instructed in a better School, protest that God is their
portion, and that now and for ever, they will have no other Inheritance.

These last words insinuate to us the last circumstance of Holiness, which is
not true, if it be not Constant and pertinent: A little to clear this Truth, we
must know, there is no Christian that is not united to God: the Character he
received in his Baptism, is a mark of his dependence; Faith which he retains
with sin, is a sacred tie fastening him to Jesus Christ, and gives him the
honor to be a member of his Body; Charity is a perfect Bond, completing what
the others have begun, which knits him so close to his Head, that their Good
and Evil are indivisible: But if the Christian intend to be Holy, Perseverance
must second Charity, and this faithful virtue link them so constantly to the
son of God, that nothing can separate them: Many heard his words, admired his
miracles, loved his person, who because they fell off attained not to that
excellent title of Saints.

It Is this last Condition which Crowns Holiness, the ultimate Character
distinguishing the Elect from the Reprobate: Finally, Absque perseverantia nec
qui pugnat victoriam, nec palma^ victor consequitur. Bernard.
it is this glorious mark that finisheth our salvation, and begins our
Beatitude. It depends absolutely upon the good pleasure of God, and as he
refuses it not without Justice, neither does he indulge it but out of
exceeding mercy: It fixes our will without constraining it, renders it
immovable without taking away its liberty, and gives it so much force, that it
equally triumphs over Griefs that astonish us, and pleasures that corrupt us:
He that has not this Grace cannot complain, nor can he persevere; He cannot
complain, because God denies it not but to his sin, nor is his Reprobation
founded upon any thing but his Infidelity: He cannot persevere, because this
assistance depends not upon his Merit. It being the immutable Decree of Gods
good will and pleasure, which makes men Saints and blessed: It is by virtue of
this Eternal ordinance that they resist temptations, overrule Tyrants, and
vanquish Devils.

It Is by virtue of this internal Grace that they defy all Creatures, and say
with Saint Paul, That nothing can separate them from Jesus Christ: I am sure,
says that Great Apostle, that Death with his terrors, Life with its charms,
Angels with their beauties, Devils with their deformities, Things present with
their allurements, Things future with their promises, Heaven with its glory,
Hell with its torment, can never separate me from the love of God. And indeed
how should they, says St Augustine, because Death though never so hideous,
leads us to Him; Life is found in his possession, Angels and Devils are the
Ministers of his Justice or of his mercy, Things present are false, Things to
come uncertain, Hell with God would be my Happiness, and Paradise without him
my Torment.

Or if we will take this passage another way, let us say again with Saint
Augustine, That nothing can separate us from Jesus Christ; Not Death, because
there is none so dismal as to be deprived of his Love; Not the Angels, because
being united to him we are stronger then all Spirits combined together; Not the
vexations of life, because they are sweet when undergone for his Honor, and
serve only to give us a nearer conjunction to his person; Not things to come,
because nothing can be bestowed nor promised which can countervail him; Not
Heaven, because it is the recompense of those that serve him; Not Hell, because
it is made for none but those that forsake him. From all this Discourse it is
easy to judge, that the perfect Christian is a Saint; that he ought to be
wholly unbottomed from all things, and so closely united to Jesus Christ, that
nothing can remove him: But it is easy to judge withal, that we are at a great
distance from Holiness, because a small Interest, a weak Temptation, a shameful
pleasure, a light Injury separates us daily from him, for whom we ought to
sacrifice our Interests, renounce our pleasures, subdue our Temptations, and
forget our Injuries.

The Sixth DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a Martyr.
THe condition of Christians would be very miserable, did their virtue depend
upon their Enemies, and were they so streightened that they could not compass
the Crown of Martyrdom, but must be beholding to the Cruelty of Tyrants: But
the Peace of the Church has her Martyrs, as well as her Persecution: Love is
witty enough to exercise their Courage, without employing the fury of Infidels;
Every Christian may, without Impiety, be his own Executioner; and provided he
live according to the Laws the son of God has prescribed him, will find his
punishment in his obedience. All the virtues of Christianity will assist him in
this design; Every Maxim of the Gospel will make a part in his Agony: and
having practiced all that Jesus Christ commands or counsels, he may boast,
though he be an unprofitable servant, he cease not to be a faithful Martyr.

For if it be true that the Cause and the Punishment makes the Martyrs, we must
confess that all they that live according to the Laws of Christianity, may
lawfully pretend to this glorious quality: because they suffer much, and for
the height of their happiness, they suffer for the Son of God: This last
condition is so necessary, that, in the judgment of S. Augustine, it is not so
much the Punishment, as the Cause, that makes the Martyr. The Gally-slaves that
tug at the Oar, the Captives that pine away for the loss of Liberty in prisons,
and those Miscreants that are broken upon the Wheel, endure the extremity of
Torments: but because their sin is the cause of their punishment, they may be
sufferers, but they cannot be Martyrs. To deserve this Quality, Nemo se
extollat and glorietur de passione: nam si attendamus sol^s passiones,
coronantur and latrones; si de passione gloriandum est, potest and ipse
diabolus gloriari. Aug.
the interest of God must be mixed with Grief, and the suffering takes its
estimate from the justice of the Cause: The Macchabees are Martyrs, because
they suffered for the Law of God, and, rather then violate it, courageously
lost their lives: S. John Baptist augments the number of these glorious
Champions, because he died for the defense of Chastity, and is the first victim
this excellent virtue received: The Saints who have spilt their blood in the
Churches quarrels, and have fought against Infidels or Heretics for the
interest of Faith, justly deserve the quality of Martyrs; and the Christian
happily shares it with them, because he suffers in obedience to Jesus Christ:
For when he pardons those that persecute him, stifles those just resentments
which are occasioned by injuries; when he gives Calumny leave to blast his
reputation, and loses Goods or Honor because he will not break the
Commandments, or violate the Counsels of the Son of God, Non Martyrium sola
effusio sanguinis consummat, necsola dat palmam exustio flammarum: pervenitur
non solum occasu, sed etiam contemptu Carnis ad Coronam. Aug. Ser. 46 de
Sanctis.
he is not less worthy of the name of Martyr then those that have shed their
blood for the defense of his honor: It Is of such a one, that we may say,
Occasion was wanting to his Will, and that he had been in the Catalogue of
Martyrs, had he lived in the time of persecution.

But, not to betray the Cause that I defend, I am obliged to say, that, to be
virtuous, is title enough to be a Martyr: For, since Nature is corrupted by
sin, there is no Virtue that is not accompanied with Grief: We learn Vices
without a Master; we carry the seeds of them in our souls; and, preventing bad
examples, we act wickedness before we have seen it: But Christian virtues are
so difficult, that their conquest costs us much labor and travel: we learn
them with much ado, forget them easily; preserve them with care; neither is it
Nature nor Art, but Grace and Sorrow that forms the Habit in us: They cross our
Inclinations; we must fight to gain them: and seeing wickedness is passed into
our Nature, Virtues are become our Torments.

The Darkness we come into the world with, clouds the light of our Prudence:
the infirmities we have inherited from our first Father, make the victory over
Strength extremely difficult: Interest, which is inseparable from Self-love, is
an opposition naturally set against Justice; and this heat, without which we
cannot live, and by a deplorable unhappiness entertains the flames of Impurity,
is an obstacle to Continence: It produces thoughts which stain the luster of
this Virtue, motions which trouble its rest: so that S. Augustine had great
reason to say, that of all the Trials of a Christian, the most furious was that
of Chastity, where the Conflict is so long, the Victory so rare, and the Danger
so great: I would add to the words of this holy man, without varrying much
from his conceit, that it is the sharpest Martyrdom a Believer can endure,
because he confesses in another place, that, to mortify the Flesh, to tame
Pride, makes up the best part of the Martyr: It Is perhaps upon this ground that
the rigid Tertullian, who has defended the advantages of Chastity with the
prejudice of Truth it self, has acknowledged this virtue so austere, that it is
easier to die for her, Majus est in castitate vivere, quam pro castitate mori.
Ter^.
then to live with her: As if he would tacitly insinuate, that it is a harder
matter to be chaste then to be a Martyr, and that a Christian who has overcome
impurity, may easily subdue grief.

If having considered the severity of the Virtues, we consider the rigor of
the Gospel, we shall find it cannot be obeyed without the badg of Martyrdom:
Every People has its Laws; and there are none so barbarous, whom Nature or
Custom have not furnished with some Policy. The Greeks lived according to the
Laws of their Sages: The Romans followed the Twelve Tables; and those that had
neither Kings nor Lawgivers, have had for their guide the light of Nature,
which is a relic of Innocence: The Jews were governed by the Law of Moses,
which, if it gave them not strength enough to combat sin, it gave them light
enough to know and avoid it: But the Christian has so severe a Law, that if
Love did not sweeten the severity thereof, it would drive men to despair; and,
more tragical then Judaism, would occasion not only prevaricators, but
obstinate and hardened disciples: For it has not one Article which is not a
Paradox, and which thwarts not the Reason as well as the Inclinations of
sinners: The First is, that, to love God aright, we must hate our selves; and,
bestowing all our affection upon him, reserve nothing but hatred for our
selves: The second is, to renounce our Will; that is to say, to quit all the
advantages Nature has endued us with; not to reason in our Mysteries, not to
listen to our Inclinations in the practice of Virtues: The Third, which is not
less rigid, and seems to violate the sweetest Laws of Nature, obliges us to
forsake father and mother, and to trample upon the belly of her that bare us,
to follow the voice of him that calls us to his service: But the Fourth, which
has to deal with the dearest and most violent of our Passions, commands us to
pardon our enemies, to forget the injuries they have done us, and to stifle all
those just resentments the love of honor or of life can possess us with. Who
will not pronounce these Laws so many tortures? these Commandments so many
Pursuivants making inquisition after our Inclinations into the very inmost
recesses of our Wills; and one while lopping of love, another while Hatred
subjects us to as many sufferings as Martyrs undergo, whose arms or legs were
chopped off by the cruelty of Tyrants? This made S. Augustine confess, that the
life of a Christian was a painful Martyrdom, Vita Christiani si secundum
Evangelium vivat, crux est and Martyrium. Aug.
nor that any man could observe the Laws of the Gospel, but must condemn
himself to a punishment as grievous as that of the Cross: For this reason also
will I make it appear in this following Discourse, that Christians suffer more
then the Martyrs.

These glorious Heroes of the Church suffered for the most part but in the
body; their souls were quiet in the midst of their torments; God hindered the
commerce that Nature had placed between these two parts whereof we are
composell; a contented mind inanimated a wretched body, love divorced him from
his prison, and by a kind of prodigious ecstasy disingaged him from all the
painful vexations of his slave. In every Christian might be seen an Image of
Jesus Christ, and as he during his life accorded pleasure with pain in his
person, and his glorious soul enlivened his passible and mortal body, this
miracle was repeated in favor of the Martyrs, who preserved their joy in the
midst of their torments: They made Invectives against Tyrants, laughed at the
weakness of their Executioners; and lifting up their soul to him that inspired
them with strength, breathed forth his Panegyric whiles the flames devoured
their bodies, or the wild Beasts tore them in pieces: But the Christians are
bound to make war against both bodies and souls; to struggle against their
inclinations and their senses; to exercise their just indignation against these
two Delinquents, nor to divide those in the correction who were united in the
crime.

These Martyrs had only grief to master; and having tamed this unruly enemy
were certain of a triumph: But the Christians are engaged to combat pleasure;
and as this pleasing enemy knows the secret of gaining love, it is very hard to
stand out against his charms. Grief is violent, astonisheth those that it sets
upon, quels their courage by the pomp of torments; and he that is assisted with
strength, cannot resist the fury of its onsets: In the mean time experience
teaches us, that it is oftener foiled then pleasure, and that there are more
Christians fit to be Martyrs then to be Continent: The soul barracadoes it self
against grief, but lies open to pleasure; The will stands out against the evil
that would force her, but gently surrenders to the delectation that would
corrupt her; her forces are rallied close when she combats grief, but lie
scattered when opposed to sensuality: Grief holds no intelligence in the place
it sets upon to facilitate a surprisal, but pleasure finds a thousand passions
that favor her entrance, follow her motions, Donat Deus ut delectatio peccati
justitiae delectatione vincatur. Aug.
and sight under her ensigns.

Thence it comes to pass, that when God intends to gain a soul, or the Devil to
seduce one, neither of them employ any other thing then pleasure; and knowing
very well that they have to do with a free creature, make use only of
allurements to win his consent without forcing it: God deals only with Grace in
the conversion of sinners, and it is by this victorious suavity that he gains
the Conquest, where honor is the Trophy of the Conqueror, and profit the
reward of the vanquished: The Devil also employs no instrument but Pleasure to
corrupt them; he studies their inclinations, follows their humors, flatters
them to their destruction; and being not ignorant what sway pleasure bears over
the will, promises glory to the ambitious, riches to the covetous: or in a
word, proposes to every sinner the accomplishment of all his desires.
Therefore we need not wonder if the Christian suffer more then the Martyr,
because he has a more redoubted enemy to grapple with, nor can hope for any
recompense except he triumph over pleasure. The great Saint Augustine has
pronounced sentence in their behalf, and comparing believers with Martyrs, has
said, that not to diminish the honor these have purchased by their constancy,
he did verily believe that a Christian who mortified his body, resisted his
inclinations, and defended himself from pleasure, might lawfully pretend to the
Crown of Martyrdom.

But if the sweetness that accompanies pleasure, give Christians such an
advantage above Martyrs, we must confess that the glory which accompanied the
Conflict of the later greatly lessened their sorrows. Nature, who has no other
conduct then that of Providence, has been pleased that whatever was difficult
should withal be glorious; Quae pulchra difficilia; quae difficilia gloriosa.
Pla.
that glory which is attended with so many charms, may give us strength to
master the difficulty: she has so well linkt these two things together, that
they are inseparable; and wherever she has planted pain, she has hedged it
about with honor. It is a hard matter to persuade men to change their minds,
to calm their passions, and to reduce them to their duty; Thus is it glorious
to be eloquent, to be acquainted with all the secrets Orators make use of to
conquer without arms, and to gain obedience without violence: It Is a business
of much industry to rule States, to govern people, to prescribe laws which may
keep them Loyal, without interessing their Liberty: It Is also a high honor to
know the mystery of the Politics, and to pass for a great Prince, or a wise
Statesman: There is nothing that labors under more difficulties then to tame
Nations, subdue Rebels, force Enemies to submit to the Conditions of Subjects
or Allies: Neither indeed is there any thing more illustrious then victorious
proceedings; and the glory which is but faintly and in part bestowed upon
Orators and Politians, descends unanimously and in a full gale upon the head of
Conquerors.

We see nothing in the Church more Noble then Martyrdom; it is the highest form
of Virtue, the last expression of Charity, and when a man has shed his blood,
and parted with his life for Jesus Christ, there is not any instance can
farther be expected from his love: Justly therefore may we acknowledge nothing
more august in Religion then Martyrs; They are the Heroes of Christianity, the
Gallant men of this State, the Noblest parts of this Mystical Body; there is no
greatness that gives not way to their dignity; whatever we admire is below
their merit, and according to the opinion of one of the wisest Fathers of the
Church, Plus est esse Martyrem quam esse Apostolu^. Cyp.
it is more to be a Martyr then to be an Apostle: Neither has any thing been
ever more honored in the world; Heaven has wrought a hundred miracles to
discover their innocence; Wild Beasts have respected them; the flames have
spared their garments; Tyrants have admired them; and many times their
Executioners have become their Disciples; insomuch that these renowned
Champions had great reason to be afraid of vainglory at the same time that God
delivered them from sorrow: But Christians want this consolation in their
Martyrdom; they suffer more then they fight; they are Martyrs, because they
endure pain to master pleasure; they give proof of their courage, because they
resist temptation; but their Martyrdom is secret, it passes in silence or in
solitude; they have no witness but their Judge: If the Angels surround them,
they are invisible; and if they undergo the hardships of Martyrs, they have
neither their comforts nor their indearments: For as Saint Augustiue says, the
soul of a Christian has inward conflicts and domestic enemies; she struggles
with grief, and expects her crown only from his hands who sees her thoughts and
knows her courage.

But the highest advantage of the Christian above the Martyr, is, that this
man's trial endures but a few days. Nature is so good a mother that she has
provided remedies for her children against the violent irruption of
discontents; she has made the chains that unite the soul to the body so
brittle, that the least torments are able to break them; tortures quickly end,
or we end with them; and experience teaches us, that a punishment cannot be
long when violent and extreme. Criminals must be husbanded if you will have
them endure; they must have respite if we intend to torture them for any long
time; their weakness will rid them of their Exeeutioners; and death stepping in
to the succor of these wretches, delivers them from their persecutors:
Therefore is the punishment inflicted upon Martyrs short; many times one day
saw both its beginning and its end; and when Grace wrought no miracle for their
preservation, Nature used her endeavors to succor them: But the Martyrdom of
Christians lasts the best part of an age; Repentance that afflicts them
imitates the Divine Justice, it makes an agreement between life and death,
lengthens that to prolong their misery, and draws out the thread of their
sorrows to prove them more durably miserable: For mortification which
constitutes the chiefest exercise of penitents, is it not a long and cruel
death, which Disciplines the body, afflicts the spirits, nor gives any
intermission to the disconsolate Penitentiary, but to heighten his austerity?
This made S. Bernard say, that the mortification of the flesh was a kind of
punishment, not so cruel indeed but much more irksome then that of Martyrs, and
recompensing the sweetness by the duration, makes the penitent languish as
long as he lives: But after all these differences we must confess that the
Martyrs having been Christians as well as others, have suffered a double
punishment; and living in penance, were prepared for Martyrdom: For as
Tertullian observes the course of their life was a severe probation, wherein
they disposed themselves to grief by austerity, to the prison by solitude, to a
short death by a long mortification: Therefore tortures never startled these
men who provided for them by a witty cruelty; and in so happy an age the Church
had no children who were not the Martyrs of Penance when they could not be of
Persecution.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a Lover.
THere is none but knows that the Son of God is a new Man, that he is
prodigious in his Constitution, assembling Heaven with Earth, Time with
Eternity; That he has a God for his Principle, and a Virgin for his Mother;
that he is the Son and the Father of his Spouse; that he gave her life upon the
Cross, and receives life from her upon the Altar: That he is the Priest and the
Victim of his sacrifice; the Judge and the Advocate of his parties; and by a
strange prodigy the Brother and the God of his Subjects. As he is New in his
composition, he is New in his Councels and his Commandments: Ille qui ven't
vetustatem nostram sua novitate solvere, mandato novo fecit hominem novum. Aug.
Sermon. 39. de Temp.
He will have his Disciples mutually love one another, and Love to be the
Fundamental Law of his State; It seems he would alter nothing neither in Policy
nor in Morality; and leaving men in the Light Reason and Faith had already
inspired them with, was content to bequeath them a New Love: His intendment is,
that all his Disciples be Lovers, that all their Qualities be included in this,
and that the Christian find his full perfection in sole Charity.

It Is in effect the only virtue recommended to us, and when Jesus Christ lays
the foundations of his Empire, Charitas omnia suffert; omnia credit, omnia
sperat animo sustiuet. 1 Cor. 13.
he requires nothing but Love from his subjects: S. Paul confounds all the
virtues with Charity, and teaches us, that he that Loves is endued with Faith,
with Hope, with Fortitude; S. Augustine his faithful Interpreter, acknowledges
but one virtue, and if he gives it different names, it is to express its diverse
effects, or different qualities; All the rest are reduced to this one; and as
the Passions are nothing but the motions of love, we may say that the virtues
are nothing but the Ministers of Charity. The morality of a Christian is easy
and succinct; he is not bound to exercise himself in Patience, to be
established in Justice, to be instructed in Prudence: Charity gives him an
interest in all these glorious Qualities; and being a Lover, he may boast
himself Courageous, Just, Prudent: As Soon as he knows how to Love, he is able
to guide himself; his Light increases with his Heat; and without consulting
the mysteries of the Politics, he becomes a Statesman as soon as ever he falls
in love with Jesus Christ: As pleasures cannot corrupt him, grief cannot
astonish him; His Love inspires him with Magnanimity and Temperance; and being
united to God by Charity, neither the Promises, nor the Threats of the world
are able to separate him: he is incapable of committing an injustice as long as
he keeps his affection; and rendering his Sovereign his due, learns at the same
time to carry himself fairly toward his Equals and Inferiors.

If Love constitute the Christians virtue, it constitutes his difference also:
For as Reason distinguishes Man from Beasts, makes him equal with the Angels,
and in Nature is accounted his principal advantage; we may say, that Charity
divides the Christian from the sinner; and being his richest ornament, is also
his noblest difference: All the Faithful are clarified with the Light of Faith;
they receive in Baptism a Character which time cannot deface; they flatter
themselves with a hope which though unjust, is notwithstanding sometimes true:
The Church which comes short of the Knowledge of her Beloved, admits them to
the Participation of her Mysteries; and being unable to read their hearts,
suffers sacrilegious persons, because she cannot tell how to hinder them: Nay,
Jesus Christ himself honors them many times with his choicest favors,
discovers the secrets of Futurity to his enemies, gives them an absolute power
in his State, and suffers those that offend him to drive away Devils and to
cure the sick: But Charity is the privilege of his Friends; it is the glorious
mark distinguishing them from Reprobates, and the only virtue that is
inconsistent with sin: A man may be burnt in the flames, and give testimony of
his Courage in the midst of torments, though he be not at all acceptable to
God; a man may dive into all the Mysteries of Religion, and not be affected
with them; may give his goods to the poor, and have his soul full of
vainglory: But a man cannot have Charity, and be upon ill terms with Jesus
Christ; those that love him are his Beloved; and if he indulge some favors to
those that fear or serve him, he cannot refuse Heaven to those that die in love
with him.

Thence it comes to pass that Christians, who know that all their advantage
consists in Charity, make this virtue their principal employment: they despise
not others; for they possess all in this one: But being fully persuaded it must
be their felicity in heaven, they make it their business whilst they are upon
the earth: These Divine Lovers can do nothing but love: they imitate the
Seraphims, whose Essence and Exercise is Love; they burn with the same Fire
that makes them live; they swim in flames; and, as if they had forgotten all
the virtues to learn one, they spend their whole life in this amorous
entertainment: If they fear, it is to offend him whom their soul loves: if they
hope, it is to possess him: if they rejoice, it is for being united to him: if
they are afflicted, it is for being separated from him: When they have to do
with their Neighbor, it is upon this wheel that they move: they look only upon
God in his Creatures, and upon Jesus Christ in his Members: if they sometimes
adhere unto them out of a natural inclination, Divine Love furnishes them with
wings to soar above them, and with strength to be disentangled from them.
Finally, Love so well manageth the whole course of their life, that leaving
Respect to Domestics, Hope to Mercenaries, Fear to Slaves, Light to the
Learned, they reserve only Charity for themselves; and are of the humor of
that faithful Lover, who, being confined to solitude, had no other diversion
but her Love.

In consideration whereof, Dei unicum opus est se intueri, and se amare. Plato.
I find their condition very glorious, because they treat with God, as God
does with himself: for his whole happiness consists in knowing and loving
Himself; and should he intermit this employment, he would cease to be happy:
He sees the Creatures, in seeing himself; he loves Them, in loving Himself;
and, without going forth of his own Nature, he finds his felicity in his
Knowledge and in his Love. The Christian, by an admirable privilege, is
advanced to this high degree of glory; Solus est Amor ex omnibus animae motibus
in quo pote^ Creatura respondere Creatori, and de simili mutuam rependere
vi^e^. Bernard.
he enters into society with God, treats with him as with his Peer; and it
seems, being no longer his Slave, becomes his Equal, in becoming his Friend.
Greatness is so opposite to Love, that Kings are fain in a manner to depose
themselves, when they have a mind to love their Subjects: That Majesty
wherewith they are encircled, is fitter to strike Fear and Consternation then
Confidence: If they descend not from their Throne, lay not by their Crown and
Scepter, they can have no Friends, because no Equals: Therefore has Aristotle
observed, that Subjects could not contract Alliance with their Sovereigns; that
the disparity of their Conditions permitted not those privacies which maintain
Friendship among men; and as long as Kings remain in their Grandeur, Subjects
must continue in their Respect. In the mean time, Charity finds out an
Expedient to unite the Christian with God; exalts the One, without debasing
the Other; equals in some sort their conditions; and, as it obliged God to make
himself Man, has given Man a power to make himself God.

Nor must we think it strange that this Virtue is the original of our
Happiness, because it is the source of our Merit; and nothing makes us more
commendable then Love: Though every thing have its estimate in the Church,
Order banisheth Confusion, and in this vast Body every part has its privilege
and employments; nevertheless the whole perfection consists in Charity: he that
knows best how to love, is most accomplished; and, without respecting his
actions or his sufferings, we consider only the measure of his Love. The Son
of God would not have our merit fastened to those conditions which depend not
upon our selves, nor that Greatness or Riches should difference his Subjects:
He would not place Perfection in Alms, because the Rich only can dispense
them; he would not tie it to Preaching, because that Gift is reserved for his
Ministers; he would not limit it to Austerity, because that requires a strong
Constitution; he would not fix it in Martyrdom, because that depends upon
Persecution, with which the Church is not always afflicted: But he has
established it in Charity, where nothing is easier then this Virtue: The
Ignorant and the Learned are equally admitted to it: Kings are not more capable
of it then their Subjects: and if Martyrs pretend some advantage above the rest
of the Faithful, they have a greater obligation to their Love then to their
Torments. The greatest Saint is not he that has Suffered most, or Done most,
but he that has Loved most: All his Merit consists in Charity; if occasions be
wanting, he has recourse to his desires; and he may boast, that, being a
Lover, he is Liberal in Poverty, Learned in Ignorance, a Martyr in the Serenity
of conversation.

Though all these advantages oblige us to Love, that which God witnesses to
us, is the greatest endearment of affection: for there are conditions in his
Indulgencies, which cannot be found in our Expressions; and his love is so
powerful, and so noble, that it is easy to judge it cannot proceed but from an
abyss of Goodness: It is Eternal, and before all worlds; God expects not till
we subsist, to show his kindness toward us; his love makes inquisition after
us in the confused heap of Nothing; as well as his power; he cherishes us in
what he is pleased to put into us; and separating us from all those Creatures
which shall never see the light, makes us the objects of his Liberality: Our
Crimes stop not the current of his Love; he loves us in our Delinquency; and
that which ought to provoke his Justice to punish us, provokes his Mercy to
deliver us: In Nonentity, he loves Ignorant Creatures; in Sin, he loves
ungrateful ones: to the former he gives Being, to the later he gives Grace; and
to both of them he makes it appear that his Love is Eternal and Fruitful.

Men Love nothing but what is lovely, either really or in show; they discover
in their friends those qualities they plant not there, and whatever height of
greatness fortune shall advance them to, they can bestow upon them only riches
or honor; if their favorites have any blemish in soul or body, they cannot
mend it; and unhappy in their affections, they are constrained either to hate
the man for his imperfection, or to love the imperfection for the man: But God,
whose love is equally powerful and pregnant, makes that amiable which he
pleases to set his love upon; he himself forms his own object; he puts that in
his friends which he means to esteem; and by a prodigy which surpasses all
wonder, Meretricem invenit, virginem fecit; faedam amavit ne faeda remaneret.
Au.
he gives purity to the Immodest, and innocence to the Criminals.

This Love has no bounds, neither in relation to its extent nor excess; it is
immense and infinite both together, and when God loves us, he loves us in all
places, and in all his perfections: men are so miserable, that they change
manners when they change Countries and Climats; the Elements make some
impression upon their wills; and being no longer what they were, they cease to
love what they doated on before: should they be more constant, they would be
always liable to this misfortune, that being unable to be but in one place,
they could not stretch their love every where; they borrow tongues to express
their passion: Like earthly Kings who being not in a capacity to fill their
whole State, are obliged to have Leiutenants which represent them; these also
are forced to seek out interpreters to declare their love, and supply their
impotency. But Gods Love is immense, place confines it not, he loves wherever
he is; his charity is as extensive as his essence; in Heaven he cherishes the
blessed, and preserving his love in all the corners of his State, is
affectionate to Christians in the very heart of their enemies.

If it be immense, it is Infinite, and when God loves a person, it is with the
full extent of his perfections: As men are made up of soul and body, the
faculties of that, and the members of this, have their several uses and
employments. The Understanding conceives thoughts, the Memory preserves the
species, and only the will forms acts of Love. The holiest Lover has this
dissatisfaction, that he knows he loves God but with one faculty of the soul;
he is afflicted and not without reason, that self-love shares with charity, and
notwithstanding all his endeavor, he never loves God as much as he can, or
ought to love him. He is not more happy in his body then in his mind; for
every member has its different functions; his hands act according as there is
occasion, his eyes discern colors, his ears judge of sounds, his tongue forms
words, and his heart only is capable of affection: he reproacheth Nature, and
complains that this Step dame having given to him two hands to act, two eyes
to see, two ears to hear, she has given him but one heart to love; in the
ecstasies of his soul he wishes with David, that his whole body were heart and
tongue to love and magnify him with all his power, who is so infinitely
lovely; Nevertheless after all his vain desires he is obliged to confess, that
there is nothing but the will in the soul, and the heart in his body, which is
sensible of the endeerments of affection: But inasmuch as God is a simple
being, suffering neither composition nor division; he loves men where ever he
is, he has not any perfection but contributes to the love he bears them: His
Justice which takes vengeance of his enemies, his Majesty which makes him
respected of his subjects, his holiness which separates him from his works, are
happily confounded with charity; and as he acts with all his power when he
produces some effects, he loves with his whole being when he expresses his
affection to his friends. Therefore the Christians who know very well, that
love is paid only with love, never limit this passion; they endeavor to love
God with all their power, nor do they wish for death but because they are of
opinion that delivering them from self-love, they shall be perfect lovers in
glory.

The Eight DISCOURSE. That the Christian is an Exile and a Pilgrim.
THe advantages we have received from Jesus Christ deliver us not from the
misfortunes we drew from Adam; our being the children of God frees us not from
being his slaves; though associated to his Empire, we are still obnoxious to
the persecution of the creature; and though the objects of his love, feel
notwithstanding the severity of his Justice. Thence it comes to pass that being
Pilgrims we are Exiles, and these two qualities which clash in other men, agree
exceeding well in Christians: For Pilgrims are honorable, Piety invites them
out of their Country, they seek Heaven in the Temple they visit, and honoring
the relics of Saints, oblige the Angels to assist them in their journeys:
Peregrinum facit Pietas, Exulem paena; peregrini sumus qui cives peccatorum,
Exulcs vero quia peceatores. Chryso.
But the banished are criminals; Justice drives them from their home, she it is
that cuts them off from the body of the State like corrupt members, least they
should infect the the rest: In the mean time Christians are Pilgrims and
Exiles; if they draw the former qualities from Grace, they derive the latter
fom sin.

To clear this conceit we must remember that of all the punishments in the
world banishment is the most shameful and most cruel: It has served as a
punishment for the greatest crimes, and the most notorious offenders have
groand under this pressure. Our first father was driven out of Paradise after
he was condemned to death: That Parricide who steeped his hands in his Brothers
blood heard this sentence pronounced against him by the mouth of the Living
God, Eris vagus et profugus super terram; he desired that his punishment might
be commuted, and judging death more gentle them banishment; he begged for an
end of his life, that he might find a period of his torment. Therefore is it
that Philo approving the opinion of Cain, said, that death was the end of our
evils, banishment the beginning; and that if a man going out of the world were
worthy of envy, he that departed out of his Country deserved pity. Thence
certainly it comes to pass, that Christians are dealt with as exiles, that the
severity of their chastisement may make them accknowledge the hainousness of
their sin.

Indeed those wretches are civilly dead, they have no more commerce with the
world, the use of the Elements is interdicted them; and if the judges give them
leave to live it is to make them die more cruelly. Thus it is with man since his
transgression, he has no more intercourse with the Angels; he was driven out
from Paradise; and the Earth being cursed, he must water it either with his
sweat or with his tears, if he intend to have it fruitful. Banished persons
possess nothing; they lose their substance in losing their Country: they can
neither make will nor inherit, and they learn to their cost that want is the
inseparable companion of banishment: there must be some edict of the Prince to
mitigate the rigor of the sentence, and without his express permission, their
very kindred dare not relive them in their misery. If Christians be not so
cruelly dealt with, it is from their obligation to the merits of of Jesus
Christ: For being banished they are fallen from all their rights, losing the
supreme good they have forfeited all together with him; and what they possessed
heretofore escheating to their sovereign by their felony, they can dispose of
nothing but by the privilege they receive from the Son of God.

Finally, banished persons are degraded from their nobility; the loss of their
honor is joined with that of their riches; and being driven from their Native
soil, they can no longer have any share in the Government or charge of the
Commonwealth: There was requisite an order of the Senate to restore Camillus
to his dignities; neither would he accept of the office of Dictator till
recalled from his banishment: All men are thus outed since the fall of Adam;
the same rebellion that made them poor, made them base; they lost their honor
with their innocence; and those that were little lower then the Angels, are
reduced to the condition of Beasts. The world has put on a new face ever since
man changed their conduct; as long as they were in subjection with God, all the
creatures were in subjection to them; but since their insurrection, all their
subjects have rebelled; and the Empire where they exercised their power, is
become the Theater of their punishment.

This gave Tertullian occasion to compare the world to a prison, and to make us
confess that these two places so different in show were exceeding like really
and in deed. Si recogitemus ipsum magis mundum carcerem esse, exisse nos e
carcere intelligemus. Tert. ad Mar.
A prison is the receptacle of darkness, the Sun darts no beams there, and
this glorions Luminary which penetrates the deep, cannot enlighten the dungeon.
The world lies in ignorance; all men are born blind; and if Jesus Christ more
powerful then the Sun, be not pleased to enlighten them, they live and die in a
profound blindness: The Prison deprives Captives of their Liberty; if they be
not loaded with irons, they are at least kept close; and being not able to quit
those sad abodes without satisfying their obligations, they long for death to
be delivered from servitude. The world in this particular is a perfect image of
the Prison; all sinners lie fettered in it, their crimes compose their chains,
and every offense they commit, is a new link making them stronger and more
weighty: The Prison is the mansion of Delinquents; if an Innocent enter there,
it is by misfortune; Justice built those dismal habitations for the punishment
of Criminals; They are Hells upon Earth; the common shoars of the state; and,
when the Prince has a mind to rid himself of some Subject who threatens his
Principality with a sedition or a rebellion, he sends him to expiate his
offense in this dreadful dwelling: since the fall of Adam, the world has
lodged none but sinners; if you except Jesus Christ and his Mother, all men are
guilty; they live and die in this shameful condition; and whatever care Grace
takes to render them innocent, there are very few who stand not in need of the
flames of Purgatory to consume away what the Calentures of Charity could not.
But as in the Prison the Criminals are always in fear, expecting with a
thousand discontents the sentence of the Judge, trembling lest being condemned
the Officer drag them to execution, and make them in some public place an
example to the people; In the world men attend their judgment with the same
trouble of mind; They are apprehensive of the least sickness as personal
summons obliging them to appear before the Throne of their Sovereign; they
tremble at every accident that threatens them with a dissolution; and,
redoubting that arrest which must decide the business of their Eternity, Qui se
nondum intelligit exule^ in hoc mundo, nondum se intelligit peccatorem. Aug.
they live in continual fear if they live not in blindness and ignorance. Thus
the world is our Banishment and our Prison; we are Captives and Exiles, and
both these Qualities teach us, that though we be justified, we cease not to be
Delinquents.

But withal we must confess that we are Pilgrims, and if this condition ease
not our pain, it does at least diminish our dishonor: For every one knows,
that man was a Pilgrim in the state of Innocence; that he looked upon Heaven as
his Country, and though his life were not a Banishment, it was a Pilgrimage.
Indeed sin made it grievous, and changing the face of the Universe, changed our
condition with it: For, before the sin of Adam, Paradise was a Temple, every
creature was an image of God; Peregrinus erat Adam quia viator, sed non Exul
quia non erat praevaricator. Rich. a San. Vic.
and though man promised himself Heaven as the recompense of his merit, he
failed not to meet with some happiness upon Earth: The place of his Pilgrimage
was not yet the path of his Banishment; he loved all things without danger, nor
feared any change in removing his affection; and his thoughts daily raising him
to his Creator, he performed as many acts of Religion, as he employed creatures
for his use.

But now that his condition is changed, and that world for a punishment of his
offense has lost its rest and beauty, he is as well as Exile as a Pilgrim, and
the place of his Pilgrimage is become that of his Banishment, so that his whole
life must be spent in desires and sorrow; He is necessitated to sigh
perpetually after his dear Country, to look upon the Earth as a strange place,
to distrust all creatures which are in his enemies hands for his destruction,
and to be like Passengers who return home as soon as possibly they can. Nothing
can stop these when they are ever so little affected with those they have left
behind; They rise before the Sun be up, go to their rest after he is set, and
by the diligence they make, a man would judge their most violent passion were
to arrive at their beloved Country. Thus ought Christians to make speed in the
way of perfection, they must continually put on, that they may shorten their
journey, and remember that to be wedded to the Earth, is to prolong their
Banishment.

Pilgrims look upon all objects as indifferent; if they meet with pleasant
seats, fruitful fields, populous towns, stately buildings, they never lose the
desire nor the thought of speedily returning into their Country; they know
very well that since they cannot possess these goodly things, neither ought
they to long for them, and that the love they spend abroad is injurious to
their engagements at home. Christians instructed in the School of the Son of
God, have nothing but contempt for the things of the Earth, they behold all its
beauties without dwelling upon them, they take heed of pleasure as their
mortallest enemy, and they groan sometimes under the weight of their travels;
they confess nevertheless that the persecutions of the world are not so
tragical as its caresses.

Experience teaches us, that the pain they endure in it increases their
desire of reviewing their dear Country, and the pleasure they taste makes them
lose the remembrance thereof: For it is impossible says Saint Augustine, that
he should be in love with his Country, that doats upon his Banishment, or
should have any passion for Heaven when he is strongly wedded to the Earth: If
he be stricken with Divine Love, he spends his whole life in sighs; he never
beholds the stars but he sheds tears; and, though there be nothing below that
afflicts him, it is enough that he is in a strange Land to account himself
miserable: His Banishment is his Torment, and without inventing other racks to
exercise his patience, it is enough to make him complain that he is condemned to
travel. David enjoyed a profound tranquillity when he sent up his sighs toward
Heaven, Heu mihi quia incolat us meus prolongatus est: His state was not
divided by a Civil War; the Grandees had not conspired against his person; his
children had not as yet driven him from his Palace, and the people at his
detion were not cheated with the false promises of an unlawful Sovereign: In
the mean time he forbore not to lament, and the remoteness from his Country
was the sole cause of his tears. Si amatur patria, magna poenae illium; si
autem non amatur patria, pejor est cordis poena. Aug.
Therefore had S. Augustine reason to utter these gallant words; that to a man
that loves his Country, Banishment is an insupportable pain; but yet he is
more wretched, who cherishing his Banishment contemns or forgets his Country.

Finally, Pilgrims see nothing during their journey more agreeable then their
Country; the affection they bear the place of their Nativity, ever defends its
cause in heir heart; Though it be but a rock environed with precipices, they
have some secret charms which makes them wish well to it, and in the midst of
fertile fields, they have a longing for the air they first drew their breath
in. Christians are in this particular better grounded then Pilgrims; For they
see nothing here below that can equal the beauty of their Country; whatever
is presented to their eyes, is but the shadow of that happiness they wait for
there: Earth is therefore fruitful, because it receives the influences of
Heaven, and all that ravisheth here below, owes its worth to the heat and light
of the Sun: Nothing can damage their Country, but its greatness; their
understanding is too weak to conceive its Excellency; and, if it be not
sufficiently esteemed, it is because it is not sufficiently known. Nevertheless
it is enough to love it to be acquainted, as Saint Augustine says, that it is a
blessed City, whereof the Angels are the Citizens, the Eternal Father the
Temple, the Son the Brightness, the Holy Ghost the Love; that it is a City where
men are never born, nor ever die; where perfect Health banisheth all Sickness;
where satiety expels hunger and thirst; where rest admits of no labor; and
where we have nothing else to do but to live, reign, and rejoice eternally
with God. The Hope of this Happiness sweetens our present discontents, and
there is not any Pilgrim or Exile upon Earth, who takes not courage when he
thinks that after his tedious wanderings, he shall enjoy a felicity that
nothing can interrupt, nor ever shall have an end.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. That the Christian is a Penitent.
IF Baptism did wash away self-love together with sin, and the Grace we receive
in this Sacrament cleared us of ignorance and weakness, as well as of malice,
we might boast, that being innocent, Repentance were useless: But seeing there
is no Christian who after his Baptism feels not bad inclinations which carry
him to sin, there is none but have need of this virtue, and who after the
imitation of the greatest Saints ought not to join the Quality of a Penitent to
that of a Sinner: For though light offenses rob him not of Grace, he is obliged
to be troubled at them, because they are displeasing to God; and as long as he
feels rebellions in his soul or in his body, he must have recourse to austerity
to stifle them: But if sin make him lose the life he received in Baptism,
Repentance must give him a Resurrection; and coming to the relief of this first
Sacrament, recover Grace by Sorrow and Contrition.

Thence it comes to pass, that the Fathers have called Repentance a laborious
Baptism, because the sinner is washed thereby in his tears, and obtains that
with much difficulty which was easily gained in Baptism: He is obliged to
mingle his blood with that of Jesus Christ, and to apply the merits thereof by
painful and dolorous works of satisfaction: His whole life ought to be spent
in lamentation; Poenitentia est Gratia vel virtus qua commissa mala plangimus,
and semper odimus and iteru^ plangenda committere nolumus.
for as soon as he cease to be a Penitent, he becomes a Sinner: For
Repentance, according to the opinion of Divines, is a Grace or a Virtue,
whereby, often bewailing our sins, we always hate them, and constantly resolve
never to commit them again. This definition contains four things, which happily
express the nature of Repentance; and remarking what it has common with other
virtues, discovers also what it has proper and peculiar to it self.

It is called Grace, because it is the gift of God, and finding us in a crime
cannot be an effect of our merits: For in that wretched condition we are rather
objects of Gods Hatred, then of his Love; and when he delivers, it is of his
Mercy, and not of his Justice: It is also called a Virtue, because it falls
under the Law, combats sin, and obtains our pardon: It seems to belong to
Vindicative Justice, because like it it pronounces sentences, and invents
punishments to torture offenders: In a word, it has no other employment but to
prevent the indignation of Heaven, and to oblige it to clemency by its own
severity: It enters into the interests of God, chastises that in time which he
would chastise for Eternity, and endeavors to proportion the correction to the
offense of the transgressor. But though in some things it agree with
Vindicative Justice, in others it is far different: For Justice is in the
Judge, it pronounces sentence from his mouth, Non impunitum erit peccatum
meum, sed ideo nolo ut tu me punius quia ego peccatum meum punias. Aug. in
Psalm. 50.
and borrows the hand of the Officer to put it in execution: Repentance on the
contrary is in the offender, resides in his soul, expresses it self by his
mouth, acts by his hands, and contrary to all Natural and Civil Laws, obliges
the Criminal to condemn and punish himself.

Justice cannot make sufferings welcome to those that undergo them; though just
yet are they compulsive, and did not the Judges use force in their
administration, all crimes would pass unpunished: But Repentance by a wonderful
dexterity, makes afflictions agreeable, mixeth some sweetness with their
severity, and causing the guilty person voluntarily to embrace such penalties,
finds an expedient to make them suffer without murmuring: Finally, Justice
looks upon the sin in it self, considers only the interests of the state, and
provided that by punishing the wicked she may stop the current of Evil,
accounts her self sufficiently happy: But Repentance illuminated by the Light
of Faith, mounts as high as God, considers his Majesty offended, and full of
zeal and love endeavors to satisfy him by punishing the sinner; Thence it
comes to pass that it is more severe then Justice; and, comparing the Excellency
of the Creator with the meanness of the creature, condemns him to sufferings
which last as long as life.

When strength fails, it has recourse to tears, and gives it self over to
sighs to expiate the offenses committed. Morality has observed, that tears
serve us in all our passions: Joy has its tears as well as Grief, and when
excessive, has a spice of groaning: Love cannot avoid them; when the heart is
wounded, it bleeds at the eyes; and that Lover had reason to blame the Stoics,
who allowed their Scholars to love, but by no means to weep. Mercy is never
without Tears, it daily lets fall some drops as witnesses of her compassion:
When she cannot relieve the distressed, Lacrymis altaria sudant, parca
superstitio. Stat.
she bewails them; and this remedy is so common, that when the Pagans made a
Goddess of this virtue, the Victims they offered were Tears and Sighs: But if
there be any passion which profitably makes use of them, we must confess it to
be Sorrow; this affection is better expressed by weeping then speaking; her
Tears are more eloquent then her Words, and she gains more victories by her
groans then by her reasons. Thence it comes to pass that Repentance being
nothing else but a Sorrow for sin, it swims continually in tears, interrupts
its prayers with sobbings, Purgatorium animae, Baptismus Poenitentiu^, diluvium
pecca. torum. Hiero. Chrysostom. Greg.
and mingles blood with tears in all its sacrifices: Therefore do the Fathers
of the Church call it sometimes the Purgatory of the souls, sometimes the
Deluge of sins, sometimes the Baptism of sinners, and sometimes the Bath of
Penitents.

For this reason all those that have gone about to appease the Justice of God,
have had recourse to their Tears: David mingled them with his drink, and that
famous Penitent watered his Couch with them in the night season: Mary Magdaleu
obtained pardon for her sins by that innocent Stratagem, she bedewed the feet
of her Master with her tears, wiped them with the hair of her head, and making
that instrumental to her Repentance which had been to her Vanity, deserved the
glorious name of the Beloved of Christ: But he himself whom we may style a
public Penitent, bewailed our sins to expiate them, he mingled his sighs with
his words upon the Cross, and for the consummating of his sacrifice, he was
pleased that the Victim should be bathed in his blood and in his tears. In the
mean time all sinners despise this condition of Repentance, they bewail their
miseries, but never weep for their transgressions; and knowing not well how to
apply this remedy, vainly sigh for the loss of their honor or their goods, but
are never seriously sad for the loss of Grace. Saint Augustine blames himself in
his Confessions, that he lamented the death of Dido, but wept not over the
death of his soul; that he bestowed some tears upon a woman that loved a man
too much, and denied them to a sinner that was deficient in his affection to
his God.

Though Tears make up one part of Repentance, they may be sometimes wiped away;
these fountains dry up with time, and there are few sinners who like Saint
Peter can bedew their cheeks as often as they call to mind their offenses: But
they ought always to abominate them, and if there be some truce with their
tears, their hatred must have no intermission. The virtues are not always
active; inasmuch as they have none but particular enemies, they take their rest
when they have either defeated or worsted them: Continence lays aside her arms
when she has mortified the Body; Humility takes some respite when the spirit
is tamed; and Patience is satisfied when she has calmed the motions of anger:
But Repentance is a public virtue; whether she make war upon all kinds of
sins, revenge the outrages done against God, set upon his enemies, she is never
at rest: Her employment is continual; and as long as she sees any remainders
of pride or impurity in the soul or body, she spends all her power to stifle
them.

The havoc that sin bath made in our nature, maintains her in this humor; she
cannot away with our irregularities, at sight of them she presently meditates
vengeance; and as often as she considers our understanding darkened, and our
will depraved, she resents a just indignation which awakens her against the
sin. Nothing so much incenseth a Prince against an enemy that has wasted his
state, as when pursuing him with his Troops he sees the Fields desolate, the
Towns beaten to the ground, the Villages burnt to ashes, and which way soever
he turns himself meets with the marks of the fury of a stranger: Neither does
any thing so much set an edge upon Repentance, as when bidding sin battle, she
beholds the disorders it has wrought in sinners, and perceives neither parts
in their body nor faculties in their soul which are not out of order: Her just
anger reaches sometimes over the very men, and finding they have taken this
Tyrants part, she animates them against themselves, and making them serviceable
to her indignation, changes their love into hatred, and their pleasures into
punishments.

Indeed every Penitent is his own Judge; he enters into the interests of God;
and as if he were elevated above himself, he conceives he has some right to
revenge the former and punish the later. Anger according to the opinion of
Saint Augustine is nothing else but a desire of vengeance; and vengeance
according to the sense of Tertullian, is only the fruit or effect of anger: But
inasmuch as this passion is extremely violent, and that it is a hard matter to
keep a just measure when we are Arbitrators in our own cause: God was willing
to reserve the disposal thereof to himself: He it is that revengeth the
Innocents, and punishes the Guilty; and among so many things that belong to
him, there is none that he is so jealous of as this; Mihi vindictam and ego
retribuam: If he give some persons leave to make use of this right, it is after
he has made them his Images; and of so many men that people the world, there
are none but Kings and Parents that have a power to correct their subjects or
their children: But as the Penitent holds the place of God here below, and
takes part in his Interests, he shares also in his Justice and Power; he
pronounces sentence against himself, condemns himself as a Judge, punishes
himself as an Executioner, and being not able to endure himself, discharges
his fury upon all the parts of his body. He imitates those that are transported
with anger; and as they find no vengeance that can satisfy them, nor any
punishments that equal their injuries, no more can he any sufferings that
content him, nor any chastisements that equal his offenses.

From anger he passes to hatred, and fully to satisfy the Justice of God,
handles himself as a Criminal or as an Enemy; he exercises acts of Hostility
against his body; and finding nothing more ignominious, nor more cruel then
the Cross, condemns himself unto it, and willingly embraces it: For Saint
Augustine teaches us, that the true Penitent ought to be crucified while he
lives; that the Counsels and Precepts of Christ are the nails that must pierce
his heart; that every inclination is a foot or a hand that he is bound to
fasten to the Cross of Jesus Christ; and that it is a crime to take out the
nails as long as we live upon the Earth. The Great Saint Leo is of this mind,
and though he were of so mild a spirit, he is so severe in this point, that he
cannot judge us worthy to be the Members of the Son of God, if our flesh be not
crucified with his: He will not have us the same after Repentance that we were
before; but out of a severity which he believes founded upon the Sacrament of
our Reconciliation, he will have us put off the old man and put on the new, and
renouncing all pleasure, make our body become the Image of Christ crucified.

When he is arrived to this degree of severity, he has no more to do but
persevere that he may become worthy of the glorious name of Penitent: For the
sorrow is not true, unless it be constant; the Repentance is not sincere,
unless it be faithful; and he is rather a Deceiver then a Penitent, who having
testified some desire of amendment of life, commits with pleasure the offense
he had bewailed with grief. Many, says Saint Augustine, protest that they are
sinners, and continue still to sin; This acknowledgment is indeed a Consession,
but no Correction; Irrisor est non Poenitens qut aduc agit quod poeniteat, and
non minuit peccata sua, sed multiplicat. Aug. Ser. 1. de Poen.
they accuse themselves, but they labor not after a cure; and as another
Father of the Church adds, they appease not the Divine Justice by their
prayers, but provoke him by their insolence: For a man therefore to be truly
Penitent, he must lament his sin; in lamenting it, he must punish it; in
punishing it, he must hate it; and that this severity may not be reproached as
counterfeit, it must last as long as our life; and our forsaking sin with a
perseverance in good, must be the certain proof of the Truth of our Repentance.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. That the most glorious Quality of a Christian, is that of
a Christian.
IT is hard to determine, Non minus se debere Aristoteli quam Philippo dicebat
Alexander. Plut.
Whether we have more obligations to our Tutors, or to our Fathers: for if the
one fashions our Body, the other fashions our Mind; if the one give us Life,
the other gives us Reason; and if we receive from the one our Riches, from the
other we receive our Virtues. Therefore in all Antiquity Disciples bore the
name of their Masters as well as of their Fathers; nor were they less jealous
of the Learning of those that had instructed them, then of the glory of these
that had begotten them. This difference has no place among Christians;
Because, he that gives them Life, gives them Grace; and the same Jesus Christ
that has conceived them in his Wounds, has taught them in his School: He is
the Father and the Master of the Faithful; and as these two Qualities oblige us
to bear his Name, they oblige us also to relinquish our own.

He is jealous of this honor; and whatever part his Ministers take in his
advantages, he has never been willing to let them share in this. The Apostles
never transferred their name to their disciples; these faithful servants
wrought all their gain for their Master; knowing very well that all their power
was derived from him, they labored only for his glory; and when they had
brought forth children, they named them by the name of Jesus Christ, and not
their own. They imitated, says S. Augustine, the Israelites, who, marrying the
widow of their brother, made their children bear the name of the dead. Jesus
Christ died upon the Cross; his Ministers are his Brethren; and, to accomplish
his design, they beget children for him by preaching: but they owe him so much
respect, that they baptize them in his Name, and call them Christians.

Inasmuch as this advantage is great, it carries great obligations along with
it; and all the Faithful are bound to imitate the Son of God: This honorable
Title exacts this duty from them. It Is in vain, says S. Augustine, Ex
Sacramento Christi descendit hoc nomen, quod ille frustra sortitur qui Christum
minime imitatur. Aug.
to denominate themselves from Jesus Christ, if they strive not to conform
their life to his. It is lawful for Infidels, that know not the true God, to
seek for Patterns among men, because they can find none among the gods; and
they may regulate their actions according to the example of the Socrates's or
Cato's: But it is a crime for a Christian to transcribe any other copy then
that of Jesus Christ: He that has formed them, ought to guide them; and as his
Death is their Glory, his Life must be their Morality.

I can not endure that the greatest part of Believers should seek for virtue
among Heathens, and, dazzled with a false sparkling that decejves them, quit the
Humanity of the Son of God, to imitate the Vanity of Pagans: For besides that
their virtue has its imperfections, that Self-love is the Principle, Pride the
Soul, and Glory the End thereof, she is accompanied with so many Vices, that,
laboring to render them Virtuous, she makes them Criminals. Alexander was
valiant, but his Anger made him dye his hands in the blood of his Favorites:
Pompey was wise, but ambitious: Caesar was merciful, but lascivious: Cato was
generous, but he drank many times somewhat too liberally; and, not being able
to find consolation in Philosophy, sought it in good company. But neither are
the Saints themselves to be our Models any further then they are conformable to
Jesus Christ. When S. Paul invites us to follow him, it is after he has assured
us that he imitated our Exemplar, and endeavored to exhibit himself a Copy
of that divine Original: Imitatores mei estote, sicut and ego Christi. So that
it is the Son of God always whom we look upon; they are his actions that
regulate ours, and his Person that serves us for a Pattern.

For this reason, he chose a life which may minister instruction to all men;
and carried himself so, that Rich and Poor, Learned and Ignorant, Bond and
Free, may securely imitate him: Had he lived deliciously, Talem se in omnibus
rebus praebuit, ut oivina clementia quo porrigi, and humana insirmitas quo
possit evehi sentiremus. Aug. de util. Cred.
he had disheartened the Miserable: had he conquered Kingdoms, and commanded
Armies; had he heaped up Riches, or sought after Dignities, the Poor and
Fearful had never followed him: and had he preferred Pleasure before Grief, or
Glory before Humility, he had had none but the Ambitious or Voluptuous for his
Disciples: But having placed the felicity of the earth in the contempt of
Pleasure and Honor, there is none but may be of his School: The Distressed
comfort themselves in his sufferings; they endure Persecution with complacency,
when they consider his Cross; and finding their strength in his weakness, they
are not troubled when afflicted, because they worship a God who was willing to
live and die in sorrow: The Great and the Rich also may imitate him: for
besides that they may forsake their goods, and instate themselves in a
voluntary poverty, they ought not to esteem what Jesus Christ has undervalued:
and if they are fully persuaded that he is the Eternal Wisdom, it becomes them
to believe that the condition he has chosen is the surest and most holy.
Thence it came to pass that the Primitive Christians, that had no other
Morality then the Life of the Son of God, distributed their goods to the Poor
when they entered into the Church; and were of opinion that it was to doubt of
the Maxims of their Master, not to follow his Examples.

Though Piety be now grown cold, we have still light enough to know that the
Christian is obliged to contemn Present things, and to hope for Future: He has
not embraced Religion, to find his acquiescence in this world: He is no sooner
admitted into the School of Christ, but he learns that the earth is his
Banishment, and heaven his Country; nor that he is to make any account of
perishable goods, further then they may conduce to the gaining of eternal; he
uses his Riches to purchase the glory of heaven, endures persecutions as
Trials, embraces poverty as an Advantage, grief as an Exercise, fasting as a
Remedy; and setting no estimate upon things but as they relate to his end,
accounts those most beneficial which take him off from the world, and fix him
upon Jesus Christ. The true Christian, says S. Augustine, never need trouble
himself to grow rich; if his ancestors have left him any possessions, he ought
to account them false, that he may long after true ones, and that the contempt
he has of Those, may raise the opinion he has of These: For it is a certain
Maxim, as the same Saint goes on, that the man that loves Earthly goods, has
but little mind toward those of Heaven; and that he that is besotted with the
delights of the present world, never dreams of the pleasures of the world to
come.

Finally, the Christian is not Regenerated in the Church, to seek for his
happiness upon Earth; he makes no reckoning of what the Wicked possess; and he
perceives that Riches and Honors are not the rewards of the Just, Non ad hoc
sumus Christiani, ut terrenam nobis felicitatem quaetamus, qua^ plerumque
habent latrones and scelerati. Aug.
because God bestows them upon his enemies: He suffers Infidels to reign, to
instruct his Disciples; he abandons the fairest part of the world to them that
persecute him, to teach us that Heaven is our Patrimony: and as he punishes
not all Crimes here below, neither does he recompense all Virtues, to persuade
us that there is another life where Misery and Happiness are real. Therefore is
it that all the Faithful find not here matter of Joy and Rejoicing; they use
transitory things with so much discretion, that they no way prejudice those
Eternal ones they look for; and believing themselves Pilgrims upon earth, are
afraid to meet with some Charm, which, making this Exile too agreeable, may
occasion them to lose the remembrance of their dear Country.

As the Christian ought to contemn Pleasures, so is it his part to prize
Sorrow, and to remember that his two Births, though never so different, oblige
him equally to suffer. The First exposes him to the persecution of the
Creatures, to the unfaithfulness of the Senses, to the revolt of the Passions;
and because Criminal, engages him in Misery and Suffering, Man is born of a
woman, Homo natus de muliere, ideo cum reatu: brevi vivens, ideo cum metu:
multis repleretur miseriis, ideo cum fleiu. Bern.
says S. Bernard with Job, therefore is his nativity mixed with shame and sin;
and whoever is the son of a woman, is miserable and guilty: he lives but a
short time, thefore spends his years in fear, and trembles lest every day
should be his last: He is overwhelmed with miseries, therefore he weeps
continually; and following the course of the Distressed, endeavors to appease
his Judge, or mitigate his Pain, with his tears.

His Second birth obliges him to Sorrow: Jesus Christ gave him life upon the
Cross, the Church conceived him in Persecution; and his father and mother
jointly engage him in the Combat: he is no Christian, if he do not suffer; he
is unworthy of so fair a name, if he be not afflicted; nor does he yet believe,
if in the midst of his rest he resent no displeasures: For, as S. Augustine
says excellently well, if he be truly faithful, he must be zealous for the
glory of Jesus Christ: he cannot see his Person dishonored, or his
Commandments violated, but he is grieved at it. Bad examples trouble him, the
Kingdom of Satan torments him, the impiety of his Ministers vexes him; and
when he has none of these rude trials, his being yet at a distance from
heaven, is enough to make him account himself miserable. In the mean time, he
has no other felicity but pain; though he groan, he knows that Delights are
more tragical then Discontents: he is glad of persecution, and storming his
spirit, changes his complaint into grateful acknowledgements, because he is
persuaded that Virtue is not preserved but by infirmities. For his comfort, he
many times entertains himself with this Maxim, he labors to establish himself
in the belief of this Paradox, and blesses afflictions, because, if just, they
increase his Merit; if guilty, serve for his Correction.

And certainly we must c^^fess that in all these dispositions he imitates his
Divine Pattern: For, as S. Augustine judiciously observes, the Son of God
despised riches, to teach us that they are not solid goods; and chose sorrow,
to let us see that they were not true evils: He has given us no counsel which
he has not practiced beforehand; all his admonitions were confirmed by his
examples; and knowing very well that actions persuade better then words, he
would have his life the pattern of ours. If his Disciples imitate him not, if
they fear Afflictions, seek after Pleasures, value Riches, despise Poverty, we
must conclude with Saint Augustine, either that they are not Christians, or but
bad ones. For, as that incomparable Doctor says, there are many that bear the
name of Believers, and have neither their Faith nor their Virtue: they wrong
the Sacraments of the Church, dishonor the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, do
despite to his Cross, condemn his Example; and being unwilling to regulate
their lives according to his, make it appear he is not their Master, nor they
his Disciples: These wretches seek nothing but their Interests; living in
themselves, they die to Jesus Christ; and for the highest pitch of misfortune,
destroy others in losing themselves. Their Evils become contagious; they
corrupt those that come near them; and fighting against the designs of the Son
of God, engage them in sin that he would deliver from thence: They encroach
upon the most eminent of his qualities; and propounding themselves for examples
to the Faithful, strive to spread their impiety over the whole Church.

Let us defend our selves from their Infection; and seeing we have no other
Pattern then Jesus Christ, let us try to regulate our life according to his:
Let us imitate his Actions, because they are holy; reverence his Maxims,
because true: and that we may be the Copies of this glorious Original, let us
esteem those things he esteemed, and despise those things he despised: Let us
be poor, because he was born in a Stable, and died upon a Cross: let us not
fear Hunger, because he suffered it in the deserts; not tremble at Nakedness,
because he had but one garment, and that the Executioners robbed him of when
they nailed him to the Cross: Let us not be afraid of Persecutions, because he
underwent so many during his life; nor let Death terrify us, because that
which he chose was as cruel as ignominious: if we himitate him upon Earth, we
shall be like him in heaven; if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him;
and if we share in his disgraces in Time, we shall partake of his glory in
Eternity.

The Eighth TREATISE. Of the Happiness of a Christian.
The first DISCOURSE. That every man desires to be Happy; and that he cannot be
so but in God.
IF we may judge of the reasonableness of our desires by their constancy, we
must confess there is none more lawful then the passion we express for
happiness, because there is none more firm and durable: All others change with
time or humor; we cure our selves of the vain desire of glory, and are
persuaded that virtue would be miserable, had she no other recompense but
reputation: Age obstructs the desire of pleasure, and when the body is spent
with diseases, or weakened with years, we find little relish in those pleasures
which solicit none but those who have too much ease or too much health: Avarice
it self is not always unsatiable; and when he whom this vice masters, finds his
riches no longer serviceable to his designs, he contemns them: Curiosity, and
the passionate industry of knowledge grows flat with time; the labor that
accompanies it makes men repent of it; Beati omnes vivere volumus, nec quisquam
est in hominum genere qui non huic sententiae antequam fit plane emissa
consentiat. Aug
and there is scarce any man of parts but observes, that the Earth is the
mansion neither of Light nor Truth.

But the desire of Blessedness is immutable; whatever change our condition is
liable to, this passion remains fixed in our souls, nor can all the miseries
that exercise our patience ever deface it. Ask all people, whose designs are
more different then their faces, we shall find they all conspire together in
the search of felicity. They may peradventure propound several Ideas thereof,
but their desire is one and the same; neither are there any wretches so
miserable, who have not a mind to be happy: All conditions of the world agree
in this point, and their differences are so many paths, whereby men resolve to
arrive at the same end. The Covetous seek felicity in treasures; and as if
nature had taught them that plenty attends this state, they never pretend to
enrich themselves, but that thereby they may become happy.

Conquerours seek their felicity in victory; and, because nothing resists man
in Beatitude, their aim is in subduing their enemies to subject all things to
their power. The Learned are in love with science for no other end, but because
they are persuaded that felicity consists in the knowledge of the supreme
Verity, and of all others by that light. The Ambitious are passionate for
honor, because they have learnt that happiness is an Eternal Glory; neither
are they to be blamed, because they are desirous of honor, but for that they
seek it where they neither can nor ought to find it. The Lascivious do not
idolize beauty, but because they have heard that this quality which charms them
is inseparable in God from goodness; and had not sin corrupted nature, whatever
is comely would infallibly be good.

Finally, whatever men do, whatever designs they contrive, whatever
enterprises they execute, they would fain meet with happiness: If they engage
in war, Quaerunt in varietate Creaturarum quod amiserunt in unitate Creatoris.
Aug.
they seek their happiness in victory; if they agree with their enemies, they
fancy it in peace; if they heap up riches, they suppose it in abundance of
wealth; if they love women, they are pleased with beauty; and if they pretend
to dignities, they place their contentment in glory: The truth is, they are
faulty and miserable, because they look for happiness where it is not; and by a
blindness which is the punishment of their sin, would find that in the variety
of the creatures, which is no where to be found but in the unity of the
Creator. Thence it comes to pass, that they spend themselves in desires, form
new projects; and never content with what they possess, heap Conquests upon
Conquests if ambitious; Treasures upon Treasures if covetous; Novelty upon
Novelty if Curious: Their desires are not unjust, because without bounds, but
because without prudence; I condemn them not because they are insatiable, but
because they are blind, and fix upon objects which entertain their Indigence
and Consumption.

Every one blames Alexander the Great, because he could not bound his
Conquests; that he passed from kingdom to kingdom; that the Earth seemed too
scant for his ambition; and what contented so many Kings could not satisfy
him: But for my own part, I think Divine Providence had a mind to let us see in
this Conqueror that there is nothing in the world that can satiate the desires
of man, that all the Scepters of the Universe have not charms enough to make
him happy, and that his heart larger then all Empires, can be filled only with
God: Indeed inasmuch as God is his Creator, he ought to be his felicity; as he
is the Principle of his Being, he must be the object of his Content; and,
having given him life by his power, must give him Beatitude by his Goodness.

It is a question in Divinity, whether man being a reasonable creature can have
any other end then his Creator; and whether the Angels who are his superiors
in Nature and in Grace, can be the objects of his felicity: But not to engage
in the decision of a thing which depends absolutely upon the will of God, I may
safely answer with Saint Augustine: In rebus a Deo factis tam magnum bonum est
natura rationalis, ut nullum fit bonum quo beata sit nisi Deus. Aug. de Not.
bon. cap. 7.
That man in the state he is now in, can have no other end but God. He is too
noble, says that great Doctor, to find his felicity in a creature; he is
destined for the supreme good, has inclinations toward it which cannot be
blotted out; He would be wretched, had he not some hope of possessing it; his
desires would become his torment, were he not assured there was a possibility
of satisfying them; and whatever should be offered him in exchange of the good
they would deprive him of, would minister nothing but want and vexation of
spirit.

But if this were an injustice to man, it would be an injury to God: For he
has two qualities whereof he is equally jealous; The first is that of Creator,
which he communicates to none; He calls neither Men nor Angels to his aid, when
he creates any thing; the distance of Entity from Nonentity is so great, that
it cannot be surmounted but by an infinite power, and the creature is too weak
to be raised to so high a degree. S. Augustine believes it is to violate the
respect due to God to imagine that the Angels can become Creators; and God
himself who makes use of the Sun to preserve his works, would not make use of
it to create them, lest men should ascribe an honor to it, which he reserves
for himself. Genesis 1.
Indeed we observe in Scripture, that the fruits and flowers, the trees and
plants, which owe their preservation to the beauties of the Sun, were created
two days before this glorious Luminary; that all nature might learn that if it
were their Preserver, it never was their Creator.

The second Quality which God by no means communicates, is, that of the last
end: He is so jealous, that he will not have us stay at the creature; it is a
fault in our Religion to be in love with them: Our love that it may be
innocent, must aim directly at God; and whatever action a Christian does, he
sins if he propounds himself any other end then his Principle. All the sins of
the world are derived from this disorder; men become not Criminals, but because
they close with the creature, and of means designed them by God to arrive unto
him, make their last end, and their supreme felicity.

The cause or occasion of this Error comes from this, that the perfections of
God are shed abroad in his creatures: For he delineates himself in them when
they are produced, and has been pleased to make them his Pourtraitures or his
Images. The Sun is an effusion of his Light; The Heaven which encloseth the
Universe is an image of Immensity; The Earth which is centred upon its own
weight, represents us his Constancy; the fields laden with fruits and adorned
with flowers, are the marks of his beauty; and all the perfections that are
dispersed in the several works of his hands, are the rivulets of this Ocean, or
the rays of this Sun. Thence it comes to pass, that sinners preserving in the
root of their inclinations an appetite for the supreme good, fasten upon every
thing that represents it; and preferring the Copies before the Original, court
the creature, and keep at distance from the Creator.

But if their blindness make them wander, their misery reclaims them, and they
learn by woeful experience that God only can cure them of their maladies. Man's
desires arise either from his weakness or from his want; he covets what he
stands in need of, nor has he ever recourse to wishes, but when the things
that he has a mind to are out of his power. Both these appetites cannot be
satisfied with the possession of the Creature: If the beauty that sparkles upon
a face please our eyes, it cannot charm our ears; if riches protect us from
poverty, they cannot secure us from grief; if glory have a powet to draw an
ambitious man out of infamy or contempt, it cannot deliver him from obloquy or
envy; and if Crowns and Scepters exempt Kings from servitude, they cannot guard
them from death: Thus in whatever condition men find themselves, they are
obliged to ascend above the creatures, to seek for him, who being the Fountain
of all good, is also the remedy against all evil; and with David to beg of him
their cure and deliverance, De necessitatibus meis erue me.

Being the supreme Power, he can free them from all their infirmities; being a
Light without the least shadow, he can dispel all darkness; being the the Prime
Verity, Jam non novimus bonum nisi promereri Deum and ad illa produci quae
promisit: nec f^icitas hujus saeculi facit nos Beatos, nec adverfitas miseros.
Aug. in Psalm. 128.
he can disingage them from Error and Falsehood; being Fountain of Life, he can
draw them out of the bosom of death; and to conclude all in one word, being
the supreme Felicity, he is able to deliver them from all their miseries: When
they hope for him, they are courageous; when they desire him, they are
reasonable; when they possess him, they are happy. The sight of his Divine
Essence satisfies all their wants, remedies all their evils, and contents all
their desires; the belief they have by faith, the expectation they conceive by
hope, begins their felicity here below: It is true that as the supreme Good
cannot be fully known upon Earth, neither can happiness be perfect here; and
being never entirely possessed in the region of mortality, there are always
miseries to be undergone and languishings to be endured.

The Second DISCOURSE. That the perfect Felicity of a Christian cannot be found
in this world.
HE was not much mistaken, who considering that the Earth stood between Heaven
and Hell, said, it held something of both these extremes: Indeed Pleasure is
here mixed with Grief, Light confounded with Darkness, Plenty attended with
Want, and men are happy and miserable both together. But certainly we must
confess, that since the Earth was cursed for the sin of man, it partakes more
of the qualities of Hell then of Heaven: For besides that all things here are in
a confusion; that the seasons are irregular; that the Elements bid us battle;
that the wild Beasts either persecute us or despise us; it is certain that
Felicity is not to be met with here below, and that man is exceedingly more
miserable then happy.

All the world confesses that Beatitude consists in the knowledge of the
Supreme Good, and that no man can be truly content who is not acquainted with
this prime Verity from whence all the rest flow as from their Fountain. Profane
Philosophy says the same concerning this Maxim, neither has she any Masters or
Scholars, who make not this confession, that as the mind is more noble then the
body, it is in the operations of that, not in the senses of this that Beatitude
is to be sought for. In the mean time Earth is the habitation of obscurity; we
know God but in an Enigma; we have only doubts and conjectures of his
Greatness; and though we are fully persuaded of his Existence, we are
altogether ignorant of his Essence.

If we consult our senses, they cannot inform us of his Divine perfections; and
having neither shape nor color, our eyes nor our ears cannot tell us notice of
him. If our spirit reflect upon it self, and elicite some act to know its
Author in knowing it self, it finds that the images it produces are but Idols
or phantasms, and that the apprehensions it conceives of him are only mistakes
and falsehoods. If Faith step in to the relief of the Understanding, and
obliging it to renounce its proper light, clarify it with what she brings,
it is with so much obscurity that it has more merit then satisfaction in its
obedience. I know very well that this virtue raises man, abstracts him from
sense, gives him admittance into the light of God himself, neither can he
complain that reasoning is denied him being prepared for an Intelligence: But
certainly she pays him these advantages with usury: For he believes without
knowing, gives his senses the lie, condemns his reason, and obliges himself to
die for those truths he cannot yet understand. Thus man is never happy in this
world, and whatever certainty he have of the mysteries of our Religion, he will
never attain to an evidence of them.

From this misfortune there arrives a second, which is no whit less
considerable; For inasmuch as the Understanding is the Gandle of the soul which
enlightens the will, Nolunt homiues facere quod justum est, sive quia latet,
sive quia non delectat. Aug.
and this blind faculty loves things according to the rate she knows them; she
never fully embraces the Supreme Good, because she never perfectly knows it.
There is something always wanting to her love, and to her happiness; her
possession is continually imperfect, nor are her desires ever without
discontent: whatever taste she has of felicity, it rather sets an edge upon her
love then any way appeaseth it; and whatever pleasure she finds in transitory
and perishable goods, she feels by experience they may possibly divert her, but
no ways content her: Their scantness causes her indigence; she continually
changes objects, striving to find that in one which she cannot meet with in
another; she is like the Bees who sip upon all flowers to taste the dew that
drops from heaven; and being wearied with the various turnings and windings of
the world, is obliged to confess that Beatitude is found no where but in God,
but he is neither met with, nor enjoyed upon Earth.

I proceed, and say, that should he suffer himself to be seen by his creature
in the condition whereto sin has reduced him, it would prove rather a ground
of fear and astonishment, then of love and satisfaction. There is so little
proportion between God and Man, that the one must needs be abased, or the other
greatly exalted, that there may be some commerce between them: The Majesty of
God must be clouded by some allay of condescension, and man's weakness strongly
heightened by some gracious endowment; or certainly, the presence of God which
is the felicity of the Angels in Heaven, would occasion the misery of man upon
Earth. The Scripture tells us, we cannot see him and live, his aspect is
formidable, his splendor dazles our eyes, his greatness chides our curiosity,
neither can we behold this Sun but we are in danger of losing our life together
with our sight. The righteous in the Old Testament repent their seeing him, and
though he temper his Majesty to accommodate it to our weakness, they conceive
this favor must be followed with their death: Deum vidimus, moriemur.

But should his Almightiness be proportionable to our misery, and this Divine
Sun like that of the Poets, Vbi metus est, ibi nulla vera felicitas. Sen.
lay by his rays that we may approach it, the state of Earth would not suffer
his presence to make us happy: For our felicity that it may be true, must be
constant; if we are not sure to keep the good we possess, the apprehension of
losing it traverseth our contentment, and mingles restlesness with our
pleasure. Fear more afflicts us then the enjoyment can delight us; we resent
misery in the midst of felicity, and we find our happiness of the nature of
those colors of the Cameleon, that perish with the object that produces them.
So then, there is nothing durable in the world; the noblest creatures are all
subject to change; whatever is possessed, may be lost: The Soul, though Immortal,
is not Immutable; she that cannot die, can sin: and though Grace be an
emanation of Glory, it has neither its constancy nor duration: it is a kind
of Miracle that God works in favor of his Elect, Qui se putat stare, videat ne
cadat. Phil. 2.
when he confirms them in Grace: and though he give them assurance of their
salvation, he exempts them not from our miseries and infirmities. And this is
the last Reason I intend to make use of, to let you see that the Earth is not
the habitation of the Blessed.

All those that form any Idea of Happiness, acknowledge that as it comprehends
all Good, it ought to exclude all Evil: did it not include all of one sort, it
would not be perfect; and did it not expel all of the other, it would be
miserable. In the mean time, the Earth is the region of Poverty: Goods are very
scarce, but Evils come in crowds: He that possesses Riches, languisheth after
Honor; he that raigns in a Kingdom, does not always bear rule in his Person;
and if he triumph over his Enemies, he seldom triumphs over his Passions: He
that bathes himself in Pleasures, is drowned many times in Sin; and he that is
upon good terms with Fortune, is for the most part at odds with Himself. Thus
all men are miserable, because they are indigent; nor does the condition of
their present life suffer them to associate all good things together, to
compose a perfect felicity.

It happens also, by a necessary consequence, that there are a thousand Evils
from which they cannot defend themselves: Their souls and their bodies are
equally disposed to grief: these two Delinquents, which forsake not one another
in the Sin, share in the Punishment; and Earth, preventing Hell, torments them
both for company. The Body bears an enemy in the bowels of it that devours it;
the natural heat that inanimates it, consumes it: This wretched mother brings
forth two Maladies, which, though natural, are notwithstanding mortal, if there
be not some speedy remedies applied: For Hunger and Thirst are punishments that
cannot be avoided; these two executioners harrase all the children of Adam: and
when the Son of God was incarnate, he suffered their assaults: he was hungry in
the deserts, thirsty in Samaria; and the blood which the stripes and nails drew
from his veins, made him utter that word upon the Cross which expressed his
Thirst as well as his Love, Sitio.

The evils which arise from our Constitution, are accompanied with others that
arise from the confusion of the Universe: Heat and Cold persecute us, Summer
and Winter bid us battle; the Seasons grow irregular to make us suffer, and the
Elements jar to destroy us: Our State is nothing now but a Country of enemies
or strangers; our Subjects either know us not, or contemn us; and this place,
which was heretofore the Threatre of our Glory, is now the Scaffold of our
Punishment.

Inasmuch as the Soul is more culpable then the Body, she is also more
miserable; Corpus hoc animae pondus est, and poena premente illa urgetur, in
vinculis est. Sen. ep. 65.
she suffers her own evils, and those of the body too; she resents her own
pains, and those of her slave: her Temple is changed into a Prison; her Host is
become her Enemy; nor is she less busied to subdue her Senses and her Members,
then to guide her Passions and her Faculties: whatever attempt she make to
procure peace in her State, there are four miseries which she can never provide
against. The First is the revolt of the Passions, which always disturb her
rest: Love and Hatred appear without her leave; the first gets up by desires,
and hopes to be joined to the object that gives it birth: If he meet with any
opposition to his designs, he makes use of Anger and Boldness to master it; if
he be victorious, he triumphs with Joy; if defeated, he falls into despair, and
is wholly given over to grief. Hatred imitates Love; she calls in the Passions
to her aid that hold of her Empire; and having discovered her enemy, removes
for fear, if too weak, or sets upon him with anger, if she conceive her self
strong enough: When her enterprise succeeds well, she triumphs as well as Love;
and when her endeavors are frustrated, she also sinks into despair and
sadness. But that which is most troublesome in all these disorders, is, that
they rebel in spite of Reason, and the soul is forced to suffer these
insurrections which she cannot help.

The Second misery she is sensible of, is the irregularity of her actions:
though she consult with Prudence and Justice, though she keep a mediocrity
which constitutes Virtue, she steps aside many times from her duty, and, under
specious pretenses, falls into vicious extremes: Sometimes she is too
indulgent, or too severe in punishing: sometimes she is too reserved, or too
lavish in her presents; sometimes she is too cowardly, or too hardy in her
combats: Non est expectanda sinceritas veritatis a sensibus corporis: nihil est
enim sensibile, quod non habeat fimile falso. Aug.
so that many times it falls out she commits a Crime, when she thinks to
practice a Virtue.

The Third misery which she can hardly avoid, is, Error and Illusion: For
being a prisoner in the Body, seeing nothing but through the Senses, and so
compelled to make use of these unfaithful messengers, she is oftener engaged in
a lie then in truth; and is so badly informed of what she ought to love or
hate, that for the most part she confounds Good with Evil, Vice with Virtue.

But the Fourth misery, inseparable from her condition, and contrary to her
felicity, is, the weakness she resents in all her enterprises: if she think to
conquer Temptations, she sinks under them; if she thinks to mount up to heaven
by holy contemplations, her body like a clog weighs her down to the earth; if
she strive to combat her Inclinations, she finds her Senses favoring their
party, and that she has as many Enemies as she believes her self to have
Subjects. In the midst of so many miseries, she has only one consolation,
that Grace is sufficient to make her victorious: Sufficit tibi gratia mea: But
these words that comfort her, teach her that the earth is not the mansion of
Happiness, because it is the Pitched Field where we must win the Victory to
deserve the Triumph.

The Third DISCOURSE. That the Christian tastes some Happiness here below.
THough the earth be not the habitation of rest, and all the children of Adam
are condemned to labor since the sin of their father; yet fail they not to
taste some Pleasure among their Sorrows. The Divine Justice tempers its
Chastisements with some Graces; Mercy steps to the relief of these wretches;
and the merits of Jesus Christ obtain favors for them, which are not only the
Pledges, but the Antepasts of Felicity: Enjoyment is mixed with Hope in our
souls; the same advantages that make us hope for Glory, give us a title to
possess it; and the Virtues which make us Saints, render us in some sort
Blessed.

Faith is the first virtue that unites us to Jesus Christ; she that initiates
us into his Mysteries, that enrols us of his Family, makes us the Subjects of
his State, and the Members of his Mystical Body: It clarifies our
Understanding, in subjecting it; imparts some Flames together with its Lights
that warm our Will, and gain our consent to the belief of those Verities that
surpass our apprehension. But its principal and most wonderful effect, is, to
make Jesus Christ present in our souls, and to give us a taste here below of
the felicity of Angels: for these Spirits are therefore happy, because they
are the Thrones of God, lodging their Sovereign in the innermost recesses of
their Essence, Ambula per fidem ut pervenias ad patriam; species non laetisicat
in Patria, quem fides non consolatur in via. Aug.
and are most intimately possessed by him who is infinitely distant from the
Wicked. Now the Faithful partake of this happiness with them: Jesus Christ
dwells in their hearts by Faith; and S. Paul tells us that those that believe
in him possess him: Christum habitare per fidem in cordibus vestris.

S. Augustine, who so happily expresses the words of this great Apostle,
assures us that this virtue has the power to fill us with Jesus Christ; that
it makes Heaven stoop, and Earth ascend; and uniting the Faithful with the
Beatified, in some sort equals their different conditions. It is a kind of
Miracle, that Faith, which believes only things distant and obscure, should
make us see and possess them, enlightening us by their darkness, and giving us
an approach to them by their remoteness. For, as S. Augustine says, when we
believe in Jesus Christ, we have Jesus Christ in us: This virtue makes him
present in our souls; and the belief we conceive of him, is his other self in
our hearts. Thus the Believer is happy because he possesses the Son of God;
and is possessed by him as long as he preserves a virtue which so closely
unites them together.

Hope, which is bred with Faith, increases this happiness, and makes our
condition more resemble that of the Blessed: For, that which seems most to
separate them from us, is, that they enjoy that happiness we expect, that they
languish not as we do, and that they have received seisen of the Supreme Good
we still hope for: They feel the truth of that speech the Scripture has
recorded for our consolation, Intra in gaudium Domini tui. Their Desires
disturb them not; and Fear, which always accompanies Hope, troubles not their
content: They are above all their wishes; and being in full possession of the
Supreme Good, have neither Miseries to fear, nor Blessings to desire.

It is true, the Believers enjoy not all these privileges; neither does their
condition suffer them to live without apprehensions and longings: They work out
their salvation with trembling; Ille been novit in miseriis exterioribus
subsistere qui scit de spe interna semper gaudere. Greg. Mora.
and as they possess not all that they love, they give themselves leave gently
to consume away in the flames and desires of their Love. But withal, we must
confess they have a part of this felicity: for all Philosophers know that Hope
is the flower of Pleasure, that it gives a taste of the pleasure it promises,
that, to stir up the appetite of our Soul, it indulgeth a kind of sense of the
felicity prepared for us, and that the strength she inspires us with, proceeds
from the sweetness she charms our expectation with. I know profane Authors
affirm that the overtures of Hope are but pleasing Lies, Spes vigilantiu^
somnium. Plut.
that she engages us in dangers with vain promises; and finding us over-easie,
abuses our credulity: But the sounder sort of Philosophers acknowledge that
Hopes animates us, sowes pleasures amidst our pains, nor ever carries men on to
generous and difficult actions, but in making them taste a part of the
recompense she promises.

But admit this Passion had not all the power attributed to her, we must by no
means question it as belonging to that Hope which is grounded upon the words of
God: This confers things in promising them, makes us feel the happiness we
expect: and as the Air and the Winds carry the Odours of Arabia into the
neighboring Provinces, we may say that this virtue carries the felicity of the
Beatified into the very heart of the Faithful. Thence it comes to pass that
Saint Paul many times in his Epistles mingles Joy with Hope; as if he would
teach us, that we cannot hope but we must possess in part what we hope for; Spe
gaudentes: and in another place, Gloriamur in spe gloriae filiorum Dei.
Finally, if it exclude not all Evils, as Beatitude does, at least it sweetens
them, and turns them into remedies: S. Gregory goes further: for he will have
it happy, because certain; and wiping away the tears of Christians, crowns
them with a joy which comes near that of the Angels.

Inasmuch as Charity is nobler then Hope, she contributes more liberally to the
Happiness of the Faithful: For, besides that it makes the holy Trinity present
in their souls, renders their Exile a Paradise, she unites them to God, and by
a happy Metamorphosis finds out an expedient to transform them into him. All
the world knows that love is the tie of hearts, and that his principal effect
is to unite together all the Subjects that live under his Empire: To accomplish
this design, he equals their conditions, debaseth great persons, and exalts
mean ones, enricheth the poor, and impoverisheth the rich, sets slaves at
liberty, and makes Masters slaves: But Charity effects all these things more
happily then profane love; she humbles the Almighty without interessing his
Greatness; obliges him to comply with our weakness; Quis me amavit and non ad
me pervenit, quisquis me quaerit cum ipso sum: ipse amor tibi praesentem me
facit. Aug.
and reduces him to a condition wherein he enters into commerce with us, not
dazzling us with his light, nor astonishing us with his Majesty: He infuseth
himself into our souls by grace, is linkt to us by his love, and in this union
communicates to us all his Divine Qualities: For he lifts us above our selves
to transform us into him; draws us out of our misery to make us capable of his
happiness, and takes from us our own affections, to give us admittance into his
inclinations: when we are arrived to this height of perfection, we behold all
earthly things under our feet; we breath nothing but Heaven; we discourse only
of the subject of our love; and we are so perfectly filled with him, that we
may say without offense, our desires are alike, our conditions equal, and our
interests common.

Though all Christians cannot pretend to this high degree of Happiness, it
seems yet that having the Grace of Jesus Christ, they have one part of that
felicity which the Saints possess by Charity: For in the judgment of all
Divines, Grace is Glory begun, Glory Grace consummated: the former gives that a
being here below, which the second finisheth above, and maugre all the miseries
that afflict the children of Adam, makes us find Happiness in the midst of our
sorrows: It Is perhaps upon this ground that Saint Paul calls Grace Eternal
Life, Gratia Dei vita aeterna; and insinuates to all Christians, that being
Saints here below, they are already Blessed. Beatitudo in quodam illapsu
Divinae Essen. tiae intra animam consistit. Henri. a Gau.
Indeed Essential Felicity consists in a certain emanation of Divinity into the
substance of the soul; when she as the iron by the fire, is penetrated
therewith, she happily loses her own qualities to assume those of God; she is
swallowed up in this Ocean of Glory; and having no longer any thing of mortal
nor humane, is entirely Immutable and Divine: What Glory operates in the
Blessed, Grace works proportionably in the Faithful; she sheds abroad the
Divine Essence in their souls, communicates to them a new being, and changing
their nature and condition, makes Gods of them which may die indeed, because
they may sin, and being not inseparable from the Supreme Good, are not yet
fully impeccable.

Nevertheless Divines confess, that as Grace is a participation of the Divine
Nature, it communicates Immortality as well as Sanctity, and the life it
produces in our souls, carries along with it no principle of death. The life
of the body is not a true life, because the same elements that preserve it,
destroy it; and the corruption that accompanies it, leads it insensibly to a
dissolution. But the life of Grace is exempt from this misfortune; it carries
Eternity along with it, and were it not engaged in a subject changeable and
obnoxious to mutability, it would be as Immortal as it is Holy.

Let us add to this advantage that Grace cannot be taken from us against our
will; it is a treasure we never lose but by our own default: Perishable goods
cannot be preserved with all our care; cunning or violence may rob us of them;
and whatever prudence we use to keep them, we are many times constrained to
fear or feel the loss of them: Calumny takes away our good name; Injustice or
misfortune spoils us of our riches; a disease deprives us of health, and death
of life: All these goods though precious, cannot avoid the disasters that
threaten them: The Innocent lose their honor as well as the Guilty; The rich
are as much afraid of sickness as the poor; nor are Kings more secure from
death then their Subjects. But Grace is a good which cannot be taken from us
without our consent; Potes aurum perdere, and nolens, potes and domum: bonu^
autem quo bonus es, nec invitus accipis, nec invitus amittis. Au.
There is no violence can plunder us of it; and men though in league with the
Devils, cannot make us lose it, if we favor not their design by our weakness.

This is the difference Saint Augustine has put between earthly goods and
heavenly: Those are many times lost in spite of the owners, these are never
lost but by the fault of those that neglect them: so that the condition of the
Faithful is very little inferior to that of the Blessed; because that if the
one be certain their glory shall never have an end, the others are sure their
Grace shall never be lost, unless they will not preserve it out of malice, or not
consent to secure it out of cowardice: Indeed inasmuch as they know that their
wills are impotent, and their inclinations bad, they place all their confidence
in the mercy of God; they hope that he that converted them, will make them
persevere; and having assisted them in the combat, will crown them in the
trumph.

The Fourth DISCOURSE. That Happiness consists not in Pleasure, but in Grief.
OF all the Sects which have opposed Truth, the most dangerous is that of the
Epicures; For though base and unjust in that it gave the Body pre-eminence over
the Mind, and Pleasure the right hand of Virtue; Nevertheless it surprised men
at first sight, and seduced them by a name which bears some analogy with that
of felicity: For whatever Idea men fashion of this, it is impossible to
separate it from Pleasure, and very casie to confound them together. We cannot
imagine such a thing as the supreme Good, but we must conceive it agreeable;
nor can we persuade our selves that there is felicity where there is not
content.

This has procured more Disciples to this shameful Sect, then to all the rest,
and made it triumph over the reason of the Academicks, and the supercilious
vanity of the Stoics: Allsinners took part with this Philosophy; Christian
Religion which destroyed Idolatry, has not been able to ruin this, and the
Church bears those in her bosom who boast themselves Christians, but are
indeed Epicures. The whole world courts pleasure by different addresses; It Is
the Idol that has most Altars, and receives most Sacrifices. The Ambitious are
her slaves, they adore Voluptuousness under the name of Glory, and suffer
themselves to be charmed by the allurements that attend a great reputation: The
Covetous are her Votaries, they offer Incense to this false Deity; they seek
for pleasure in the arms of profit; nor do they so much dote upon riches,
because profitable, as because agreeable.

Indeed the Supreme Good is inseparable from pleasure; and as you cannot see
the Sun but must be enlightened, no more can men behold the Supreme Good without
being charmed. Delectatio ex fruitione summi boni necessario sequitur. Aug.
If delectation be but a consequence of Happiness, as some Philosophers affirm,
it is at least necessary; and I account it no more impossible to see God, and
not love him, then to love and see him without receiving contentment in him.
Therefore the error of the Epicures consists not in placing Beatitude in
Pleasure, but in placing pleasure in the body, because man being compounded of
a body and a mind, ought to be happy in both these parts. Let us combat this
Monster, which against nature destroys not men, but because he flatters them;
nor is dangerous, but because he is over complacent.

There is no body but confesses that Beatitude consists in a union with God,
by means of the understanding and the will: we must renounce reason to oppose
this truth, and cease to be men to doubt of a Maxim authorized by all profane
Philosophy. God is the Ultimate End of his creatures, and consequently their
perfect Happiness; The Understanding and the Will are the two noblest faculties
of the soul, the wings that make her soar aloft, and the chains that fasten her
to the object she loves; so that she is never more happy then when united to
the Supreme Good by Knowledge and Love; whatever hinders this union, is
contrary to it; and whatever separates or removes her from God, is the enemy of
her felicity.

It is easy thence to infer that sensual pleasures cannot cause our felicity,
because they suffer not our souls to be united to God, and imbark her so
strongly in the flesh, that she seems to have lost all the qualities of a
spirit. Impurity produces store of miseries in the world, nor can we invent
too many invectives against a sin that defiles a man, and of an Angel makes a
Beast: But the greatest of its enormities is, that it inebriates our soul with
its poison, and makes us lose the remembrance of all Divine things: Nothing
pleases the slaves it tyrannizeth over, but sensuality; whatever affects not
the senses, seems not true; they take the pleasures of the mind for mere
illusions; and as if the glory of Heaven were but a fable, or an imposture,
they are less affected with the consideration of them, then reasonable men with
the reading of Romance.

This misfortune produces another; For as pleasure separates men from God, it
fastens them to the creatures their inferiors, and debasing them below
themselves, Quisquis quod seitso est deterius sequitur, fit and ipse de. erior.
Aug.
communicates the bad qualities of the things they dote upon. Love is a kind of
medley, it confounds those subjects it unites, and by a wonderful Chemistry
makes them pass one into another. Thence it comes to pass that Kings become
Slaves when they love their Subjects, and renounce their power when abandoned
to dalliance: They fall from their Greatness when they engage in an affection;
and as the noblest metals lose their purity when mixed with those of a baser
allay, Sovereigns quit their Majesty when allied with their Subjects. Thus the
man who gluts himself with the pleasures of the body, renounceth the
privileges of the mind, betrays his duty and his dignity, despoils himself of
the inclinations of Angels, and puts on those of Beasts; and without changing
his shape, changes condition and nature.

But inasmuch as most men are led more by interest then reason, and those that
are the slaves of pleasure are more sensible of grief then shame and dishonor;
it will not be amiss in this Discourse to let them see that the pleasures
after which they so eagerly run, are very tragical, and contrary to their
intention, are turned into punishments. The Divine Justice which leaves no
crime unpunished, has been pleased that diseases should be natural penances,
and that the Stone and the Gout should be the recompense of our debauches:
Seeing sensual pleasures are commonly criminal, they are for the most part
irregular; having shaken off the yoke of reason, they cast men into excess,
and persuade them that it is a kind of injustice and base servility to prescribe
Laws to their desires: abused by these false sophisms, they pursue their
inclinations without keeping any measure in their diversions; they are drowned
in delights, are lost in voluptuousness, and draining their strength and their
substance, fall many times into diseases and poverty: Thus by a just judgment
of Heaven their disorders become their torments, Ipsos voluptas habet, non ipsi
voluptatem; cujus aut inopia torquentur, aut copia strangulantur; miseri si
deseruntur ab illa, miseriores si obruantur. Sense.
and they find sorrow where they expected felicity.

If to defend themselves from this misfortune, they observe some rules in their
pleasures, they feel another punishment: For these pleasures being short, their
soul is always languishing; they have scarce done with one, but they long for
another; and living always in expectation or inquiry, can neither be secure
from restlesnesse nor discontent: Those who to remedy this evil, endeavor to
associate pleasures, undertake an impossibility: For whether nature intend to
punish us, because we are culpable, or whether Grace be not willing to expose
us to danger, because we are weak, Pleasures hold not so good intelligence as
Pains: These set upon us in a full body, and join companies to render us
wretched: the Stone, the Gout, the Colic, and the Palsy, conspire together to
exercise our patience: whatever opposition these diseases may have, they agree
to ruin us; and we many times behold distressed spectacles who have no part of
their body free from torment: But Pleasures are divided; Self-love, with all
its subtilties, cannot reconcile them; the Birth of one is the Death of
another; and experience teaches us, that we have more strength to endure
Griefs, then to support pleasures: when these slow in upon us with full tide,
they stifle us; when they succeed, they make us droop and languish; and when
they recompense their shortness by their excess, they reduce us to complaints
and groanings.

From all this Discourse we may conclude, that bodily pleasure is an enemy to
our happiness, that it removes us from God, engages us in the Creature,
obliges us to partake of their imperfections, and is followed with misery and
indigence. Therefore, following the rule of Contraries, we shall not have much
ado to persuade our selves, that Felicity may be found in Grief, and that the
Christian is never more happy then when he is afflicted for Christ's sake.

For the understanding of this Paradox, we must remember that all earthly goods
are only mediums whereby to gain those of heaven: that which leads us the
safest way thither, is the best; neither is the Christian ever nearer his
happiness, then when he is in the way that soonest leads him thither. Now there
is no man so little skilled in our mysteries, but knows that Grief is the
surest and the speediest way to arrive at heaven; Cohaeredes aute^ Christi; si
tamen compatimur, ut simul and conglorificemur. Romans 8. Si sustinemus and
conregnabimus. 2 Timothy 2.
it is the path Christ has marked out with his Blood, that whereby he entered
into his Greatness, that which all the Martyrs have gone: and the Scripture
teaches us in a hundred places, that Glory is dispensed according to the
measure of Sorrow; that they that have suffered most upon earth, shall be the
happiest in heaven.

One of the most remarkable differences between Christian Grace and Original
Righteousness, is, that this guided man to his happiness through a way strewed
with roses and lilies; the means were proportioned to the end, and seemed as an
Antepast or Earnest thereof; He arrived to Glory by Honor, to Pleasure by
Delights, to Plenty by Riches: He had reigned over Beasts, before he reigned
with Angels: he had passed from one Paradise to another; and had been happy
upon Earth, before he had been so in Heaven. But now Providence has changed
its conduct over men; and, whether it have a mind to chastis their Rebellion,
or to wean them from the World, or to make them conformable to their Head, it
leads them by difficult ways, through paths rugged with thorns, and environed
with precipices: The means it indulgeth to bring them to their end, are
contrary to it; and, to make its proceeding admired, they are guided to Life
through the valley of Death, to Liberty through Servitude, to Light through
Darkness, to Pleasure through Pain. All the Morality of a Christian propounds
nothing but Crosses; its Virtues are austere, its Counsels difficult, its
Commands harsh; and had it not found the means to sweeten all these anxities by
Charity, it would reduce the Faithful to despair: For it obliges them to hate
Themselves, and to love their Enemies; orders them to forsake their Riches and
their Parents; Fides non habet meritum, ubi humana ratio praebet experimentum.
Greg.
to believe without knowledge, obey without discerning, love without interest,
pardon without resentment, live without pleasure, and die without regret.

All the Maxims of their Master confirm this Truth: for he prefers the Poor
before the Rich, declares the Afflicted happy, canonizeth them that suffer,
and promises his Kingdom to them that weep: he practiced what he taught; his
whole life was spent in labors, or affronts; he was born in a Stable, died
upon a Cross, lost his Honor with his Life: nor did his Father glorify him,
till his Enemies had loaded him with reproaches and sorrows. All his Apostles
followed his steps; they preached his doctrine with the hazard of their lives,
signed it with their blood, sealed it with their death, rendered up their souls
among torments; nor is there any torture the cruelty of men has not invented,
to weary their Patience, and trample upon their Courage.

All his faithful disciples seek for Grief in the Rest of the Church; they
find Persecution in Penance, are their own executioners, and their whole life
is an imitation of Martyrdom: they provide for the Prison by Solitude, dispose
themselves for Banishment by removing from their Country, prevent the loss of
their goods by Alms, grow hardened against Stripes by Discipline, grow
acquainted with Hunger by Fasting, and learn to die in Torments, mortifying
themselves by Austerities. Nothing more heartens them then the example of their
Head; his Agonies sweeten their Sorrows; they count themselves happy to suffer
for his glory who suffered for their salvation; and observing his whole life,
find their strength in his death, and their recompense in his resurrection.

The Fifth DISCOURSE. That Happiness is rather found in Poverty then in Riches.
THe inclination we have for the Supreme Good is so strong, that sin has not
as yet been able to deface it: The Privation there of increases the desire;
and as Health is never more lovely then in the region of Sickness, neither is
Happiness ever more acceptable then in the confines of Misery: Nevertheless we
must not always take counsel of this, nor follow the advice it always gives us:
for when we lie under an affliction, we are easily persuaded it is ever more
dolorous, and the good it deprives us of exceedingly more considerable. Thus we
see those that are fallen into disgrace, look upon Glory as the supreme
felicity; those that live in Poverty, imagine Riches the true happiness.

Thence it comes to pass that Poverty being a very common misfortune, the
opinion that places happiness in Plenty is an ordinary error. All men would
be rich; this passion steals into all different conditions; and those that
speak most pompously of the contempt of earthly goods, Est intolerabilis res
poscere nummos and contemnere, and pecuniam sub gloria paupertatis quarere. Sen.
are those that most greedily cover them. It seems the evils that Want has
clogged them with, provokes their desires; and the fear of realpsing makes them
of all men most penurious: Rich men sooth themselves with this belief, out of
another consideration: and because they see that Riches are the means to
satisfy their desires, that they open the gate of Honor with a golden-key,
corrupt the integrity of Judges and the chastity of women with silver, they
erect altars to a Goddess that prospers all their unjust designs. Morality
furnishes us with Reasons to ruin this error; and Religion will afford us
Maxims to persuade Christians, that if there be any shadow of felicity upon
earth, it is rather found in Poverty then in Plenty.

One of the most splendid conditions of the Supreme Good, is, that it is the
center of our Love, and the end of our Desires: That which leaves us any thing
to wish, is not true; and because it fully takes not up our heart, it
possesses not all perfections: This obliges us to despise riches, and to
condemn those worldings that would establish their felicity in them. For if
they bear the name of Goods, it is an unjust title they usurp, because for the
most part they are means Nature has furnished us with to procure what we stand
in need of. The use of Riches is for Commerce; we give them in exchange for the
commodities we would have; and if sometimes we keep them, it is to make use of
them in our necessities. Thus Riches are extremely different from the Supreme
Good, which, being once possessed, is never forsaken; and is so the last end of
Man, that it can never be a medium to arrive at any other more excellent.

All Philosophers confess that Felicity is a thing so intimately annexed to the
Creature, that it penetrates him thorewout; and so closely united to him, that
it cannot be separated: If it have not these two conditions, Man will never be
perfectly happy; there will be some faculty of his soul which unsatisfied will
remain languishing; and when they shall all enjoy a contentment, he will still
be liable to fear, lest happily he may be despoiled of the Good he possesses:
Now Riches want one of these two conditions; they surround us but no ways
inform us; they are in our coffers, but enter not into out hearts we commit the
keeping of them to our servants; and we are constrained to aband on our
felicity as often as we take a journey.

This misfortune causes another: For, being not under safe custody, they are
exposed to pillage: Injustice and violence may plunder us of them: and though
Gold be the sinews of War, it is in his power that has the best Sword to take
it from us. Thus Riches create Fear, expose their masters or their slaves to
danger; and whatever succor they promise, procure us more ill then they bring
good.

But should they be as good as their word, and were it easy for us to keep
them, yet could they not give us a protection from the evil whereof they boast
themselves the remedy: Cum dicitur nihil illi deest, attend; si nihil cupit
nihil deest; si autem adhuc cupit, accesserunt divitiae ut egestas cresceret.
Aug.
For if there be any misery in the world which Riches can cure us of, it must
be Poverty: It seems, as soon as they enter into a house, they banish Want; and
that it is impossible to be rich and poor both together: In the mean time,
experience teaches us that Riches introduce Poverty, that they inflame our
desires, sharpen our disease under a pretense of mitigating it; and, for our
punishment, beget indigence in our hearts, at the same time that they occasion
plenty in our house. All profane Philosophy has acknowledged this Truth; and
the Stoics have confessed it, that the most biting poverty was that which we
suffer in the midst of our Riches.

This just judgment has two causes: The first is the capacity of man's heart,
which none but an infinite Good can fill: the second is, the scantness of
riches, which increase our appetite in stead of allaying it, and, like a
handful of water thrown upon a great fire, serves only to make it scorch more
violently. Thence may we conclude with the Philosopher, that the richer a man
is, the more miserable is he; that his riches impoverish him, if Grace do not
instruct him how to moderate his desires: so that what he looked upon as a
remedy, is a second evil more dangerous then that he would cure.

This conceit discovers another, which makes it evident, that in the condition
whereto sin has reduced man, Riches are more pernicious then prositable: Every
one knows that the inordinateness of our Passions is one of the severest
punishments of our transgression: there is scarce one that is not rebellious
against Reason, and which attempts not the violation of his authority: All our
Desires are unjust, all our Hopes interessed, all our Affections criminal:
every Passion produces a sin, if not withheld by Grace; and whoever gives
himself up to his inclinations, is sure to wander from his duty. In the mean
time, Riches side with these rebels against their Sovereign; they flatter all
our desires, serve as ministers to all our unjust designs, and furnish us with
means to make us more culpable, under a color of rendering us more happy.
They promise pleasures to the Wanton, Inflant animos divitiae, superbiam
pariunt, invidiam contrahunt, luxui serviunt. Sen.
and conspire with him to corrupt Chastity: they furnish Arms and Seconds to
the Furious, to take vengeance on their enemies: they raise the Ambitious to
offices and employments; and complying with all Passions, engage men in all
kind of impiety. Therefore he judged aright, who said, that, to give a sinful
man Riches, was to put a Sword into a mad man's hand or present poison to a
Desperado; because not being under the command of Grace, he will make use of
them only to satisfy his ambition, or to content his brutality.

So that the Philosophers preventing the Divines, rightly discovered that
Poverty was more Innocent then Plenty; and that it was easier for men to
preserve their liberty in the leanness of want then in the affluence of riches.
For besides that they wed us to the earth, Multis parasse divitias non finis
miseriaru^ fuit sed mutatio. Senec. Epist. 17.
they expose us to a thousand accidents which can neither be foreseen nor
avoided, and give fortune game at our person. Therefore is it that Seneca said,
Those that will be happy, must either be poor, or like those that are so; they
must possess their goods without being possessed by them; and use them as
Stewards rather then Proprietaries; and they ought to be always ready to part
with them, because they have them but in trust: Religion out-bids Philosophy,
and requires far other dispositions from her Children, then this does from
her Disciples: For she will have them acknowledge that in Adam all is lost; that
they are fallen from their rights by his sin, and being guilty are become
miserable: Persuaded of this Truth, they live in the world as in a strange
Country; they possess riches upon Loan; and since their Goods were confifcated
to their sovereign, they enjoy them merely from his mercy: Though Jesus Christ
re-instate them in their goods; and being made Coheirs with him, may dispose
of heaven and earth as their Inheritance; yet are they obliged to regulate
themselves by his Example, and not to make use of their rights till after the
general Resurrection.

He carried himself thus during his life; though Heir to his Father, he
disposed not of his estate, a Cratch received him at his birth, and a Cross
served him for a Deathbed; he lodged in a borrowed house, and was buried in a
strangers Sepulcher: If he wrought some miracles for the Glory of his Father,
he did none for his own Interest; when he created a piece of money in the mouth
of a Fish, it was to pay Tribute; and when he commanded his Disciples to take
the Ass which served to carry him in his triumph, it was with the consent of
the Owner. Paupertate Christi non additur pecunia sed justitia: Divitiae verae
immortalitas: ubi enim vera copia, ibi nulla indigenti^^ Aug.
He put not his absolute power in execution, till after his Resurrection; nor
did he enjoy the privileges due to his Birth, till he was entered into Heaven.
The Christians tredding in his steps, pretend nothing in this world, but
reserve the fruition of their right for the next: They are content with the
promises of Jesus Christ, and living here upon hope, expect the effects thereof
in glory.

During this time, they look upon Poverty as an innocent Usury, which gives a
value to what they give or part with here for the Son of God; for they know,
says S. Bernard, That Jesus Christ who is a New Man, is come down here below
to teach us new things; and that those that obey him, find rest in labor,
liberty in servitude, and abundance in Poverty. Their Goods are multiplied in
being distributed; and as the husbandman casting his seed into the earth,
promises himself a hapgy harvest; the Christian in communicating his goods to
the Poor, expects a great recompense at the general Resurrection. Till then he
comforts himself with the advantages Poverty bestows upon him: for he perceives
that if riches have their good use, they have also their bad: They acknowledge
the Custody of them troublesome, the love of them contagious, the loss of them
sensible, and if there be pain to get them, there is more to keep them.

This made some Philosophers rid themselves of such attendants, and gave
comfort to others whom injustice or fortune had made bankrupt: for as Seneca
says excellently well, We gain much in losing our riches, if with them we lose
our covetousness; and we fail not continually to gain something even when we
lose it not; because the subject that entertained it being taken away, there is
some ground to hope either that it will dye for want of nourishment, or at
least do no hurt for want of power. The Poverty of Christians is happier in
this point then that of Philosophers: for being inanimated with Grace, they
lose the desire of evil with the means of doing it; nor are they innocent only
out of impotency but out of deliberation. They make their Poverty meritorious
in making it voluntary; if they choose it not, they endeavor to accept it, and
a misfortune or a chastisement they husband into a virtue: The loss of their
Goods causes the assurance of their salvation, and the rest of their souls;
they cease to fear as soon as they cease to love, and they draw this advantage
from their poverty, that being no longer engaged to the Earth by their
affection, they are no more troubled with fear nor abused with hope.

But their greatest happiness is, that they learn from Scripture, that their
condition is a holy Asylum, and that heaven has promised a particular
protection to the Poor: Evangelizare pauperibus misit me. Luc. 4.
They know that Christ came down from heaven to instruct them; that his care of
teaching them is a proof of his Missions; that he has pronounced them happy in
his Sermons, chose them for his Disciples, has designed them his favors, made
them the objects of his love, and has so particular an affection toward them,
that a man must be poor in deed or in desire, to be taken notice of in his
State. Let us love Poverty then and despise riches; seek Felicity in want: and
if Nature has not brought us poor into the world, let us become like those
that are poor, either by unbottoming our selves of our Goods, or distributing
them; that raking part in the reproaches of Christ upon Earth, We may be
partakers of glory in heaven.

The sixth DISCOURSE. That the Happiness of a Christian upon Earth, consists
in Humility rather then in Glory.
THe Ambitious will hardly agree as concerning this Maxim, and it will pass
into their mind as an Error, rather then a Paradox: Merces virtutis gloria,
honos alit arts, omnesque incenduntur ad studia, gloria.
For they believe that Honor is the nourishment of Virtue; that she droops and
languisheth when deprived of this Cordial: And as servile souls are gained by
Profit, generous souls are won by Honor: They would persuade us, that of all
external goods it is the noblest, and the most faithful; the Noblest, because
it relates to the mind, and never descends so low as to the senses, as
Interest or Pleasure do; the most Faithful, because it never abandons virtue,
and accompanies men even to their Grave; Delights quit us with life; these
pleasing Syrenes bear us company till death, and at their departure leave us
nothing but shame and repentance. Riches are not more faithful then Pleasures,
and as they descend not with our Bodies into the Grave, neither do they pass
with our souls into the other world: But Glory is inseparable from Virtue, as
the shadow from Light; it is the only Inheritance the dead may dispose of,
that which makes them survive in the world, and preserves them from oblivion
after their dissolution. Finally, Honor and Virtue are so closely combined
together, that they cannot be divided without occasioning their destruction;
They are Twins whose destiny is so like, that the Death of the one leaves the
other livelesse, and the only way to banish virtue out of the world, is to
exterminate Glory thence, which serves her for a nourishment and a recompense.

But whatever the Ambitious would say, there needs but a little reason to
confess that there is nothing in the world more jejunely brittle then Glory;
nor that men ever treated virtue more injuriously then when they assigned
Honor for her Recompense. For if Glory be a Good, it is a strange one, and is
oftener the fortunate man's portion, then the deservings Honorary: It reaches
not always to us; and when dispensed with Justice, it rests in the mind of
those that know or publish our worth; so that we should be happy without
knowing it, and receive honor without any contentment.

But certainly, did we know it, our satisfaction would not be the more: For the
Good that produces Beatitude must be constant and immutable; if it be subject
to change, it is to loss; and whatever good may fail is not productive of true
felicity: Now there is nothing in the world that depends more upon fortune then
honor; it is the work of opinion, it is a rumor founded upon the Capriciousness
of the people, who look upon nothing but appearances, and in their Judgments,
for the most part, consult nothing but their interest or pleasure. If
Conquerors are unhappy because victories which are their master-peices depend
upon fortune, I account them not less miserable, because Glory, which is the
reward of their courage depends upon the opinion of the vulgar; and that in
this point their Subjects and their Soldiers become their Judges and their
Sovereigns.

If their Felicity be such that they can force men to render them that honor
they deserve, they ought to take heed least those that commend them deceive;
Qui laudant mendaces sunt, and qui laudantur vani. Aug.
and being Masters of their tongues, they be not also of their hearts. May they
not be afraid also, that the judgment of wise men is not the same with the
vulgar; that whilst they are adored by servile and mercenary souls, they are
blamed by free and generous ones, who more considering the actions then the
persons, prize virtue in a slave, and condemn vice in a Monarch?

But what satisfaction can they have in the midst of their Triumphs, if the
reproaches of their consciences give their commendations the lie? Plures magnum
saepe nomen salsis vulgi rumoribus attulerunt; quo quid turpius excogitari
potest? nam qui falso praedicantur, suis ipsi necesse est laudibus erubescant.
Boet. l. 4. de Conso.
will they not be extremely wretched amidst the acclamations of the people, if
they blame what others appland? and if they are conscious that in the managing
of a state, or in the Conquest of a Province, they have labored more for their
own Glory, then for the good of their Subjects? Are they not more worthy of
punishment then Honor, if they have preferred reputation before their Duty,
and have ruined their neighbors only to gain the name of Conquerors? But
admit for their satisfaction that their desires are lawful, their Conquests
just, the praises they receive true, who can tell whether the opinions of men
agree with those of Angels? who is sure that Heaven approves what the Earth so
highly values, and whether God prepare not punishments for those victories, men
solemnize with Triumphs?

True glory depends upon him that reads the heart, who sees the intentions in
the ground of the will: Therefore says the Apostle, That he indeed was
praiseworthy that received commendations from the mouth of God, Illuminabit
abscondita tenebrarum, and manifestabit consilia cordium, and tunc laus erit
unicuique a Deo. 1 Cor. 4.
and not from that of men: Men are mistaken in their words as well as in their
thoughts; as they judge not but by the appearances, they blame an obscure
virtue, and cry up a glittering vice: David therefore would not have his glory
depend upon the judgment of his subjects: He committed his Reputation as well
as his Crown into the hands of God; and protested in his Psalms, that as he
owed his Victories to the protection of the Almighty, from him also did he
expect glory as the recompense, Apud te laus mea. The Philosophers were of the
same mind, because that defining glory, they would not have it grounded upon
the opinion of the Vulgar, but upon the judgment of the wise, Gloria vera
bonorum consensus est. Senec.
and that he only was honorable, who by his worth had gained the approbation
of honest men.

But who knows not that virtue is too generous to seek her felicity where she
will not so much as look for her reward? she looks upon honor as her slave
rather then her master; and when she acts, she consults not so much her
reputation as her conscience: she is so noble that she looks after no other end
but God; and so just, that she requires no other witness but he that must be
her Judge. This Maxim is not so severe, but it has been embraced by
Philosophers: For though the Romans committed this outrage against virtue as to
subject it to Glory; and these grand Politicians, to animate their Citizens to
generous and difficult actions, had persuaded them that none entered into the
Temple of Honor, but through that of Virtue: yet Seneca rightly acknowledged
that there was injustice in this proceeding; that it was to subject the
Sovereign to his slave; and that sometimes there were occasions offered where a
man must betray his Honor to preserve his Virtue. Piety had taught the chaste
Susanna this Maxim, when seeing that she could not preserve her chastity
without the loss of her reputation, she sacrificed her honor to her duty, and
preferred the approbation of Angels to the opinion and esteem of men.

Glory then is not the true happiness of Christians, because they are obliged
to renounce it; and there is great reason to believe, that Humility has more
Analogy with Beatitude, because it accompanies the Blessed in the midst of
their Grandeurs. Indeed this virtue is the foundation of Christian Religion; it
is that which the Son of God came to teach us by his words and actions; The way
he held to come to us, and that we must walk in to come to him: Let us explain
these Verities, and make it appear that the true Glory of a Christian consists
in Humility. This virtue is so necessary, and withal so difficult, that God
was fain to become Man to teach it us: Philosophers who were informed with vain
glory, knew not the name of it; and if it came amongst them, it past rather for
a fault then a perfection. Aristotle confessed, that Modesty was a species of
Virtue, but consisting in a mediocrity, Magister noster per quem facta sunt
omnia, vocat genus humanum and dicit, discite a me quia mitis sum and humilis
cord. Forte putaebas dicturum, discite quomodo caelos feci and astra. Aug.
it suffered not man to debase himself below his inferiors or his equals: The
Son of God was united to flesh to read us this lesson; and confirming by his
words what he had taught us by his examples, has made it the principal subject
of his entertainments: He that knew all things, has propounded his humility
only as imitable, and he chose rather to make his Disciples humble then
learned. The Incarnate Wisdom opening his School upon Earth, taught us not the
secret to create worlds, to dart thunderbolts, to govern states, but to
mitigate our anger, to abase our pride.

Inasmuch as he became like us in humbling himself, we become like him laying
our selves low; and by a strange prodigy humility gives us access to him; as
Pride puts us at a distance from him, Man was ruined in striving to grow great;
his vanity gave birth to his misery; nor did he fall from his Greatness, but
because he would climb above his defarts: To draw him out of this abyss, the
Son of God threw himself into it, and to place him higher then the Angels, he
descended lower then Man: He was laden with their sins and languishings, that
by different degrees he might descend to the very Center of debasement. His
humility was the passage to his glory; his Father exalted him, because he
vouchsafed to be humbled; and his Cross, which was the last proof of his
Patience, became the Fountain of his Greatness. According to his example, we
cannot aspire to honor, but by humility; we enter into grace by lowliness;
arrive at glory by humility; and we find that this virtue producing its
contrary, restores us those high immunities Vanity had ravished from us.

If after death it lead us to glory, whilst we live it gives us some earnests
thereof, nor are we ever more content then when most humble. The Earth is not
the mansion of pleasure, because in it man is always exposed to danger; he
finds enemies in all places; and which way soever he turns, he is apprehensive
of detriment: Prosperity makes him insolent; the sweetness that flatters,
corrupts him; and this pleasing enemy has no charms which may not engage him
in sin. Frangitur adversis qui prosperis corrumpitur. Aug.
Adversity renders him a coward; its batteries slat his courage; and this
fierce enemy has no afflictions which are not sufficient to cast him into
despair. The virtues offer him their assistance in his need: Repentance, who
boasts her self the punisher of all offenses, and the protectresse of all
virtues, sets upon pleasures, and by its severities masters their allurements:
Patience suffers the pains of life, struggles with discontents, and mingling
tears with blood, triumphs over grief and death. Humilitas est maxima
disciplina Christiana; ipsa namque conservatur omnis virtus; nam nihil citius
eam violat quua^ superbia. Aug.
But we must needs acknowledge that these virtues without humility, would grow
insolent of their good success; and man would find his defeat in his victory,
if this faithful Confident did not mind him that his strength depends upon
grace; and that the Christian who is not humbled, cannot subdue Satan who is a
proud spirit.

To establish us in a virtue which causes our felicity upon Earth, we must
remember, that it is not true if it reside not in the will as well as in the
understanding; not perfect if it have not as much heat as light; and little
exceeds that of Devils, if it pass not from knowledge to affection; Therefore
he that means to be humble, must despise himself. Having made some good
progress in the practice of this duty, he must wish that others may despise
him; and being perfectly established in this disposition, he must find his joy
in contempt, ann his torment in honor.

The Seventh DISCOURSE. That Felicity is found rather in obedience then in
command.
IF there be any thing in the world, the possession whereof can promise us
felicity, we must confess it is the power of commanding: For Kings are Gods
Vicegerents, the Interpreters of his Intentions, Ego ex omnibus mortalibus
electus sum qui in terris Deorum vice fungerer: Ego vitae necisque gentibus
arbiter: quid cuique mortalium fortuna datum velit, meo ore pronuntiar. Sen. de
Clem.
and the Disposers of Life and Death: Fortune, says a Heathen, expresses her
self by their mouth, acts by their hands, and sheds abroad happiness or misery
through a state by their conduct: Their wills are laws, their aspects more
powerful then those of the stars, and as they please to dispense sweetness or
indignation, they make Cities happy or miserable. All their soldiers devote
themselves to death for their service; all Swords are drawn in their quartel;
Peace and War is in their hands; nor are there any Subjects whose loss or
safety depends not upon their orders: They dispense at their pleasure liberty
and servitude, content and sorrow; and all that hold of their Crown, confess
they are the Authors of their good or bad fortune. When they appear in public,
it seems they are Suns which fill the Firmament; when they speak, all the world
is attentive; when they are angry, they make their Kingdoms tremble; and when
they punish an offender, they astonish all Innocents.

The holy Scripture, which cannot flatter Sovereigns, and ranks them among
slaves, when compared with the Almighty; makes them pass for Gods when compared
with men; it prescribes no bounds to their power; allots them no Judge but
their Creator; and whatever exorbitance they have committed, teaches us, they
are to render an account to none but him from whom they hold their Crown: If
Priests have a power to reprove them, God only has a right to punish them;
and when they abuse their Authority, their subjects have only prayers and tears
to reduce them to their duty. Therefore it is no wonder if an absolute power
dazles the eyes of mortals; and if those who look only upon the bravery,
imagine it at least an image of felicity.

But certainly the more advised make not this judgment, and Politicians who
are acquainted with all the miseries of this pompous Majesty, Tibi soli peccavi
and malum coram te feci. Psalm. 51.
esteem it more worthy of pity, then envy: For besides that a great fortune is
a great servitude; that Princes who command, are bound to obey; that those who
incroach upon the liberty of others, lose their own; that those that strike
terror in others, are not free from it themselves; and that Sovereigns who
bear rule with violence, have as many enemies as they have subjects. Divinity
teaches us that the Earth is inconsistent with Felicity. For this, according
to the Idea we are able to form of it, is an absolute Good, which cannot be
transferred to another; it is Man's ultimate End, and which comprehending all
kind of pleasures, fills his wishes, and bounds his motions. Now Regal power
has not one of these qualities; it stirs up the desires of Monarchs, whose
Heart is larger then their State; it finds nothing that can satisfy it; and
as long as it has neighbors or equals, it cannot think it self absolute.

Alexander is a fair witness of this Truth: Never did Prince more enlarge his
Conquests, never did Sovereign behold more Crowns at his feet, nor ever did
Monarch see more different Nations subject to his will. Jam in unum Regnum
multa Regna conjecit; jam Graeci Persaeque eundem timent: hic tamen ultra
Oceanum solemque fertur, and ipsi Naturae vim parat. Senec. Ep. 94.
In the mean time, he accounted himself miserable in his Greatness, poor in his
Abundance, and confined in his Empire: He is troubled that there are some
people who have not yet felt the violence of his Arms; it grieves him that
there are any men who are not his subjects; nor can he belive himself a
Sovereign, as long as there are any freemen in the world. Finally, his
ambition persuaded him, that, to be Absolute, he must command the whole World;
and as the Heaven can bear but one Sun, no more can the Earth endure but one
Monarch.

Though all ambitious ones are not of the humor of Alexander, and can be
content with a part of the Universe, yet are they always forced to confess that
Felicity cannot be found in it; because, that it may be true, it must be
Eternal, Solid, and Unshaken: if any of these qualities be wanting, it will
ever be exposed to Danger, and threatened with Fear: Now there is no power in
the world that is not Short, Feeble, and subject to Change. Scripture tells us
that the life of Kings has its bounds as well as those of their Subjects:
Omnis Potentatus vita brevis: If they reign as Gods, they shall die like Men:
If their State be durable, their Persons are mortal. That sentence pronounced
against all the children of Adam, gives no exemption to Sovereigns: nay, it
seems that as their power is greater, their life is shorter then that of
ordinary men. Kings, says the Wiseman, live to day, and are dead to morrow;
they have no certain day; Death makes no truce with them; and when the moment
Divine Justice has assigned them, comes, it proceeds to execution, without
considering whether those it sets upon be Slaves or Sovereigns.

Their power is not less weak then it is short; and if Kings be miserable
because mortal, they are to be pitied because exposed to so many dangers:
Weakness is natural to them, and Puissance accidental: they cannot defend
themselves but with borrowed hands, and mercenary Arms: though their Soldiers
be their Subjects, yet may they be debauched; and whatever Oath they engage
them with to assure their Fidelity, they have reason to tremble as often as
they think that their State and Person depends upon the Courage and Constancy
of another. That Prophet, who is not less famous for his Eloquence then for the
Miseries he endured, has observed that Kings are never more put to it then at
the eve of a Battle; Terrebit eum tribulatio, and angustia vallabit eum sicut
Regem qui praeparetur ad praelium. Job. 5
because they see their Fortune in the hands of their Soldiers, and that the
same day which must decide their Differences, may give a period to their Life
and Kingdom. But me thinks this Fear never ought to abandon Sovereigns, and
that in Peace as well as War their Power depends upon the fidelity of their
Subjects: A Pestilence may mow down their States, and change the most populous
Cities into desolate Wildernesses: Famine may rage through a whole Kingdom; and,
notwithstanding all the care Husbandmen take to till the ground, two months of
Drought or Rain may render all their labors unprofitable, and the most
flourishing Kingdom of the world wretchedly miserable.

But admit these Evils, which are too common, prove not so formidable; and
Kings may find that among their neighbors which is not to be met with at
home; Who will deliver them from the just apprehension the instability of
Humane things ought to strike into the hearts of all the Monarchs of the earth?
What Prince is there that can promise that the violence of Strangers or the
rebellion of his Subjects will not snatch his Crown from his head? Who is
there, that, after so many Examples past and present, is not obliged to believe
that States perish as well as Sovereigns, that the Forms of Government change
with the seasons and humors of men, that Monarchies may be turned into
Commonwealths, and Commonwealths into Monarchies?

The Empire of the Syrians, was it not seized by the Medes? The Medes, were not
they obedient to the Persians? And the Persians, have not they stoopt to the
Romans? This vast Republic, which had swallowed all the Monarchies of the
world, did it not produce all our Kingdoms? France, Spain, and England, are
they not pieces of this great Wrack? and whatever is famous in Europe or Asia,
is it not from its dissolution? is it not enriched with its damage, and raised
by its downfall? What State ought not to fear, having seen the ruin of this
Colossus? and what Republike or Monarchy is there which can promise it self
Eternity, having seen the deplorable End of this City, which commanded all
Kings, and disposed of all Kingdoms?

But I will grant this Fear unjust, nor that men are to be afraid of a Calamity
which threatens the Universe; at least, Kings must confess that their Power is
a glorious Servitude, and that they bear not the Sword and Scepter so much to
be feared, as to cause obedience to Jesus Christ, Quem regnare delectat, uni
omnium regnatori Deo subditus haereat. Aug.
and to put his will in execution: For being but his Vicegerents, their power
reaches only to punish the Wicked, and reward the Good: They ought not to
accept the Authority, if they intend not to use it according to the designs of
their Sovereign; and they are unworthy to rule, if they have not courage enough
to stifle the Evil in the birth, or stop it in the progress: They are deceived,
says S. Augustine, if they persuade themselves they are raised to the Throne
only to trample upon the heads of their Subjects: they know not their
obligations, if, laboring to subdue men, they take no care to subdue vices;
nor are they victorious but in name, if having gained some advange over their
Enemies, they suffer themselves to be routed by their passions, or devoured by
their sins. I forbear to speak of the dangers that threaten their salvation as
well as their power: nor do I intend to make a Catalogue of the faults they
may possibly commit in Government, though it be an infallible proof that
Blessedness is not to be found in Royalty: I am content with the holy
Scripture, to say, That Kings cannot sin secretly; Their Devotion is a scandal
to the whole State, They authorize the Evil they commit; infect their subjects
by their examples; and as they are guilty of the sins they hinder not; so, do
they condemn themselves when they commit those they punish; and by their
actions give their Edicts the lie.

Thence it comes to pass that Christians finding more security in obedience
then in command, place their felicity in it, and never think themselves happier
then when they follow the motions of their Sovereign: so that they have this
advantage, in humbling themselves they are exalted, and submitting to God bring
all the Creatures under their subjection. For Man by submission enters into the
Sovereignty of his Creator, Magna utilitas est hominis jubenti Deo servire,
jubendo enim Deus utile facit quicquid jubere voluerit. Aug.
neither is any thing impossible to him, when he obeys him that is Almighty.
Thus we see S. Peter walking upon the water at the command of the Son of God;
how this Element became solid under his feet, respects his obedience, or
reverenceth Jesus Christ in his person: Man's Body could never pretend to the
glorious qualities of the soul, were it not subject to her will; but soaring
above it self in obedience to her commands, furnishing words to express her
mind, reports the meaning of others; and offers some kind of violence to it
self, to be subservient to her designs; she acknowledges the fidelity of its
services in Glory, and associating it to her own happiness, communicates to it
agility, light, and subtlety. Thus may we say, that the man who obeys God
becomes Divine, passes into the condition of him that commands, and despoyling
himself of his miseries, puts on the majesty of his Sovereign.

Transformation, which is accounted a principal effect of Love, is a
privilege also of obedience; we are changed into God by submission as well as
by Charity; and God takes as much pleasure to exalt his servants as his
Friends: He gives Empires to his people when they obey his word, and obliges
himself to raise them higher then all the nations of the world when they keep
his commandments: Si audieris voces Domini tui, faciet te excelsiorem omnibus
Gentibus. If man become God by submission, he degenerates into a beast by
disobedience. As long as Original righteousness subjected the spirit to God,
it subjected the Body to the spirit; Man felt no revolts in his person; and
though composed of flesh and blood, had none but reasonable inclinations: But
as soon as he lost the respect was due to God, his Body rebelled against his
Soul; he beheld irregular motions which made him extremely ashamed; and
wondered, that being still a man, he felt the disorders of a Beast. Finally,
Obedience is more acceptable to God then Sacrifice, and more honorable to man
then the highest Triumph: Melior est Obedientia quam Sacrificium. Though God
have reserved this Homage for himself, and there is none but he alone to whom
Victims are to be offered, yet he prefers the merit of Obedience before the
honor of Sacrifice; and accounts himself more hallowed by him that stoops to
his Word, then that offers him Holocausts. Nor are we to wonder at it, says S.
Gregory, because in our sacrifices we offer nothing but Bulls or other beasts;
but by our Obedience we immolate our wills and affections.

For this very reason is it more honorable then Triumphs, In armis militum
virtus, locorum opportunitas auxilia sociorum multum juvant: maximam vero
partem quasi jure fortuna sibi vendicat, and qu ic quid est prospere gestum, id
poene omne ducit suum. Cic. pro M. Mar.
because it procures us more signal victories then those we gain over our
Enemies. The world sees nothing more illustrious then a victorious Prince: The
Sun once stood still as a witness of the conquest of Joshua; and this glorious
Luminary which beholds all things but with a transient aspect, suspended his
motion to have the pleasure of considering the advantages the Jews had over the
Infidels. In the mean time there is no action wherein humane Prudence has less
part: Fortune presides over Battles, accidents occasion good successes, and
many times the Dust and the Sun rob the most Courageous of their victory: But
admit all these misfortunes which cannot be avoided, have no ways assisted the
Conqueror; he must necessarily confess that his Prudence is beholding to the
valor of his Soldiers; and in vain has he gallantly commanded, if he be not
honestly obeyed. But he that masters his Passions, shares his glory with none
but the Grace of Jelus Christ; Having subdued himself in the conflict, Hoc est
ex victoria sua triumphare, testarique nihil se quod dignum esset victore apud
victos invenisse. Senec.
all the honor is his own; and earth being unable to recompense him, he
promises himself a Triumph in Heaven.

The Eighth DISCOURSE. What is the Happiness of a Christian in Heaven, and
wherein it consists.
BLessedness has so much relation to God, that whatever is said of the One,
may be affirmed of the other. God is infinite, his Greatness has no bounds, he
includes his whole State within himself; nor does his power produce any thing
which is not contained in his Essence. Blessedness is infinite, and the
pleasure it promises is bounded neither with extent nor duration: God
comprehends all imaginable perfections; nothing is dispersed in the creature
which is not recollected in the Creator; and he possesses as well the brightness
of the Stars, as the beauty of the meadows and the fruitfulness of the fields.
Beatitude is an Epitome of all pleasures; nothing is wanting to him that enjoys
all things; and according to the opinion of Philosophers it is a coacervation
of all solid and true goods.

But inasmuch as God is so great that he cannot be conceived, that his divine
perfections raise him above our thoughts, nor can we praise him but by wonder
and silence; Blessedness is so excellent that we cannot so much as form an Idea
of it, we want words wherewith to express its excellencies; and the Scripture
tells us, That eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man to conceive the happiness God has laid up for them that
love him. This last condition would impose silence upon us, if the liberty we
take to speak of God, though incomprehensible, did not permit me to write of
Blessedness, though unconceivable: But as we cannot fail, when treating of the
perfections of God, we follow the light of Faith; I believe neither shall I
wander in this vast Ocean of Glory, Qui ducem sequitur, fidem a veritate
nunquam potest aberrare. Aug.
if I sail by that Star; and however, shipwreck is not to be feared upon a sea
where all those that are Drowned may boast themselves Happy.

Scripture, which is our guide in the mysteries of Religion, teaches us, that
Beatitude consists in the love and knowledge of God. For that which has
delivered these words, Haec est vita aeterna, ut cognascant te solu^ verum
Deum, has told us also, Qui manet in Charitate, in Deo manet, and Deus in eo.
Knowledge would cool without Love, and Love would be blind without Knowledge:
All the faculties of our soul must find their satisfaction in felicity; The
Understanding must see the Truth it believes; the Will possess the good it
loves; the Memory be filled with these two Things it has so carefully
recorded: Ita sunt potentiae in essentia anima inter se conjunctae, ut quicquid
unam laedit, alias laedat necesse est. Mars. Fisc.
If these Three Faculties be not content, something will be wanting to the
Christians felicity; and as they are united in one and the same soul, the pain
of the one would be the Torment of the other. When the Scripture seems
sometimes to give the advantage to Knowledge over Love, or to Love over
Knowledge, it is only more strongly to express the excellency of both; and to
make us comprehend, that as he that clearly sees God is happy, he that
perfectly loves him cannot be miserable.

Thence it comes to pass that the Fathers of the Church are divided upon this
subject, whereof some have taken the part of Knowledge, others that of Love. Del
visio sumnum bonum. Aug.
S. Augustine though the Panegyrist of Love, has notwithstanding so fully
expressed himself in many passages of his Writings in behalf of Knowledge, that
he seems to have forgotten what he delivered elsewhere concerning Love: For he
will have the End of all our Actions, and the repose of all our Desires to be
found in beholding the supreme Good: That as he is miserable, who knowing all
things, knows not the Creator that made them; he likewise is happy that knows
the Creator; nor is there any addition to his happiness, in that he knows the
creatures together with him. Finally, he says in another place, that the clear
vision of God is the whole recompense of a Christian, and that nothing can be
wanting to his happiness when he fully contemplates the Divine Essence.

But there are a thousand places beside where this Great Doctor places
Felicity in Love, and represents the Blessed to us as so many Lovers who find
their contentment in the possession of the Supreme Good. Thus, says he, true
Happiness consists in that joy which arises from Truth known, and Goodness
beloved: Beata quippe vita est gaudium de veritate, hoc enim est gaudium de te
qui veritas es. Aug.
He assures us that the Blessed have no other employment then to love God; and
that all the virtues are useless in Heaven except Charity: He teaches us, that
enjoyment, which is the Rest of Love, is also its Recompense; that as desires
disquiet Lovers, when they possess not what they long for, the Divine Essence
would be a torment to the Blessed, if from their understanding it past not to
their will; and if having illuminated them with its light, it warmed them nor
with its flames. Knowledge then and Love make up the felicity of the Saints in
glory; but both of them are very different from that which is found among the
Faithful.

Our knowledge is always mixed with darkness; faith though certain, is
notwithstanding obscure; and though an effusion of the light of glory, has not
its extent nor evidence. We see God but in Enigma's upon Earth; the species
that discover him, conceal him; These glasses are too narrow to give us a full
representation of his Greatness, and our spirits are too weak to bear the
luster of his Majesty: But in Heaven he fortifies the Blessed by the Light of
Glory, gives them a capacity to look upon him; and piercing their
understanding, is himself both the species and the image.

There are three things in the world which oppose our Happiness, and suffer us
not to know God perfectly: The first is his Greatness, which dazies or
astonisheth us; whence it comes to pass, that the Scriptures assign him for his
abode either light that hides him from us, or darkness that robs us of him: The
second is his absence; for though he be every where, yet is he at a distance
when he will; and as his presence is not fixed to the Earth which he fills; so
is it true, to affirm of him that he is no where, as to say he is in all
places; Nullibi est qui ubique est. The third is the weakness of man's soul,
which cannot suffer the presence of his God, and finds the condign punishment
of his pride, where he sought for the satisfaction of his curiosity: But all
these impediments are taken away from the Blessed; The Majesty of God is no
longer formidable; his Greatness which occasions our astonishment, gives being
to their felicity; and love having banished from their hearts all fear, they
treat with their Sovereign as with their Beloved. The absence of the Supreme
Good causes not their doleance; They are possessed by him whom they possess;
his Divine Essence penetrates their very souls, and they are so full of him,
that those who see them are obliged to reverence them as Gods. Finally, the
weakness of their faculties hinders not their contentment; the same fire that
burns them, inanimates them; the same light that clarifies, strengthens them;
and the same God that searches all their inward parts, preserves them.

If their Knowledge have this advantage, their Love has yet more, and their
Charity is much perfecter then ours: Whatever pains we take to love God upon
Earth, our Love is never without some notable defects which enfeeble it: It is
blind, because Faith that enlightens it, is a candle whose lamp is always
surrounded with a cloud or smoke: It is faint and drooping, because we possess
not the Supreme Good which we passionately affect; and being separated from
him, we are as well his Martyrs as his Lovers: It is divided, because self-love
is not yet extinguished; and the greatest Saints, if they manage not their
intentions well, rob God of all the Love they indulge themselves. Finally, it
is almost ever interessed; Quicquid creatura sui amori concedit, hoc amori Dei
eripit. Bern.
we love not God so purely as not to seek our own pleasure with when his glory;
and we are more earnest with him for riches or honors then for graces, we make
it appear that Concupiscence bears a greater part in our prayers then Charity.

But the Blessed have not one of these imperfections in their Love: It is not
blind, because they love him whom they see; and the brightness of glory that
enlightens them, is a ray dispelling all darkness of their understanding: It
languisheth not as ours does, nor spends it self in its own longings, because
they possess what they love; and being intimately united to God, are eternally
inseparable from him: It is not divided, because self-love enters not into
Heaven, but is quenched by the flames of Charity, or purified when the souls of
the Blessed quit the Prison of their body. Finally, it is not interessed,
because the honor of God is the end of their desires; and in felicity it self,
they seek not so much their own happiness as his glory.

From this Knowledge and this Love, is derived the resemblance the Blessed have
with God, which is the accomplishment of their desires, and the perfection of
their Beatitude: For though the Faithful be humble, aspire not to the vain
pomps of the world, and being conscious of his misery, knows very well that
Nothingness is his Original, and sin his work; yet cease he not to wish by
the motions of Grace what he sometimes coveted by the impulses of pride. He
would have the same thing that Adam would; like the Angel he pretends to be
like God; but he desires that with Justice which the two others did with
Insolence: The holy Scripture authoriseth his appetite, and the promises of
Jesus Christ make his hopes lawful: He knows very well that the Happiness of a
reasonable creature consists particularly in this point; and that being the
Image of God in Nature and in Grace, he ought to resemble him in Glory: The
beloved disciple comforts us in the expectation of this happiness, and speaks
so confidently of it to all the Faithful, that he seems rather to have received
the Earnest then the Promise of his Master. Scimus quoniam cum apparuerit,
similes ei erimus.

Though this similitude constitute our principal happiness, yet is it easier to
hope for it then to describe it; and being an expression of the felicity of God
himself, is as much unknown to us as his: Nevertheless we may say it is an
effusion of his Essence into the soul of the Blessed, an emanation of his
Divinity communicating all his perfections, lifting them above themselves; and
transforming them into him without destroying them, makes as many Gods as there
are Saints in Glory. The Fire which imprints all its qualities in the Iron it
makes red-hot; the Sun that communicates all his light to the Crystal he
penetrates; and the Persume which sheds its fragrant odor through all the rooms
it embalms, are but faint comparisons to express the intimate communication of
the Divine Essence to the Blessed. It is enough to believe in the simplicity of
Faith that all our desires shall be fully completed; that our happiness shall
surpass our hopes; and, raised to a higher condition then that the devil
promised our father in Paradise, we shall be Men and Gods both together.

Though we are not idle in so happy a condition, S. Augustine teaches us that
the knowledge and love of God shall be our sole employment: Tantum gandebunt
Beati quantum amabunt; tantum amabunt quantum cognoscent Deum. Aug. lib. Medit.
we shall find all our contentment in this one exercise; and as we shall
possess All Goods in the Supreme Good, so shall we taste all Felicity in this
one diversion: The good works we have been conversant in upon earth, shall be
banished from Glory; and Mercy shall be useless in a state whither Misery
cannot approach: we shall have no need to visit the Sick, where Immortality
provides for the Health of the Blessed: There will be no burying of the Dead in
the land of the Living: Hospitality will not be practiced where there are no
Pilgrims: We shall not clothe the Naked, because the light of Glory will be the
garment of the Saints: We shall not be troubled to reconcile Enemies, because
Peace shall reign there eternally: We shall be no longer obliged to instruct
the Simple, because the Beatifical Vision will eliminate all Ignorance.

If the works of Mercy be useless, all actions wherein Necessity engages us
will then be superfluous. The miseries of life compel men to till the earth for
their nourishment, to build houses to defend them from the injury of the
weather, to make clothes to protect them from shame and cold: But all these
employments shall have an end in a Kingdom where he that governs is both the
Nourishment, the Clothing, and the Habitation of his Subjects: His Goodness,
which penetrates them, is their Aliment; his Glory, that invirons them, is
their Apparel; and his Essence, which includes them, is their Lodging: They
need fear nothing in a condition where the possession of All Good necessarily
produces the exclusion of All Evil. We shall have no apprehension then, says
S. Augustine, that Hunger or Thirst shall persecute us, because we shall lodge
in the house of a Lord where there is plenty of all things, where we may bathe
our elves in the River of his Innocent Pleasures. Nor Heat nor Cold shall once
dare to annoy us, because, by a strange wonder, the same Sun that shall shelter
us with his shadow, shall warm us with his heat: Weariness shall not weaken us,
because God shall be our strength: we shall not be forced to sleep, because
Labor shall never need repose; nor shall the night ever draw a curtain over
the day: There shall be no Commerce, because we shall possess All in God: there
shall be no Servitude, because all the Subjects of this Kingdom shall be
Sovereigns.

If you ask me, says S. Augustine, what we shall do then in a place whence
pain and travel are banished: I will answer with the Prophet, that the whole
enployment of the Blessed is to think of God, and to rejoice in his glory.
Vacate and videte, quoniam ego sum Deus. This meditation shall altogether take
them up; it shall produce all pleasures, and constitute all their virtues:
Every Beatified person shall imitate Mary Magdalene; and as with her they shall
have but one Object, they shall make use but of one Virtue; Porro unum est
necessarium. The calamities of the Earth oblige us to employ successively all
the Virtues: sometimes we borrow aid from Prudence to dissipate the darkness
wherewith we are blinded, or to scatter the dangers that threaten us: sometimes
we call in Continence to our relief, to defend us from pleasures that tickle
us: sometimes we demand help of Fortitude, to combat griefs that assault us:
sometimes we throw our selves into the arms of Justice, to deliver us from
enemies that oppress us: But in Heaven all these Virtues are idle, only
Charity is active, and yet rests in acting; her action is to love what she
sees; her rest to possess what she loves; and her felicity to know that she
shall never lose what she enjoys. If you cannot suffer, says S. Augustine,
that the Virtues to which we owe Heaven be banished thence, imagine them there
more for your ornament then defense: never conceive that they fight, but
persuade your selves that they triumph; and, having vanquished all their
enemies, enjoy a Peace which shall endure for all Eternity.

The Ninth DISCOURSE. That the Christians Soul and Body shall find their
Perfection in Beatitude.
MAn is such a hidden Creature that he cannot well be known without Faith: He
is mistaken as often as he intends to pass judgment upon himself; and the
errors that have appeared in his own definition, have given us occasion to
conclude that he was ignorant of his own essence: when he consulted his Sense,
he believed he was nothing but a Body; and if there were a spirit that informed
him, it was perishable and mortal: when he consulted his Pride, he conceited
himself a pure Spirit, which, either for his penalty, or for his trial, was
included in a Body as in a prison, from which he should be delivered by death.
These two errors produced two grand disorders in the world: The first engaged
Man in the love of his Body, and the oblivion of his Soul: he made no account
but of sensual Pleasures; and knowing no life but the present, never troubled
himself about the future: He was of opinion that Death was the end of his
Being; and that nothing remaining of him after his dissolution, he need fear
neither any Punishment, nor expect any Recompense. The second error made him
so mightily undervalue his Body, that he repined at it as a Slave, and handled
it as a Rebel: he had recourse many times to Death, that being delivered from
this enemy, he might mix with pure Intelligences, and reign with Gods or Devils.

Faith, which corrects our errors, obliges us to believe that Man is neither
an Angel nor a Beast; that he is compounded of a Body and a Soul; and if he
have the First common with Beasts, he has the Second common with Angels: The
same Faith persuades him that Death deprives him of his body but for a time
only, that at the General Resurrection it shall be reunited to the soul, to
partake of its good or bad fortune. Therefore, treating here of the felicity of
Christians, I am necessarily to speak of the two parts that compose them, and
of the different happiness the Divine Justice prepares for them respectively.

Inasmuch as the soul is the noblest, she is also most happily provided for,
and her Beatitude infinitely surpasses that of the body. Tunc nec falli nec
peccare homines possunt, veritate illuminati, and in bono confirmati. Aug.
When she quits her prison, and is purified of all her imperfections by the
grace of Jesus Christ, she enters into Glory, and receives all the advantages
which are due to her dignity and condition. Ignorance, which is a brand of sin,
is quite defaced by the brightness that enlightens her: her weakness is
fortified by a supply, which, being much more powerful then that of Grace,
raises her to a condition wherein she cannot desert the good, nor embrace the
evil; and where, as Saint Augustine says, she is in a happy impotency to
wander from her duty, and estrange her self from the Supreme good: Assurance
succeeds in the place of fear, rest in stead of conflicts, triumphs after
victories: she is no longer constrained to resist the motions of the flesh,
because this rebel is become obedient; and losing in the Resurrection whatever
he drew from Adam at his Birth, has now none but just and holy inclinations.
The Spirit is no longer busied to maintain a war against sin, because this
Monster cannot enter Heaven: he groans not now under the revolt of the
passions; and as all the virtues are peaceable, they find neither enemies to
subdue, nor rebels to tame: Her knowledge is no longer accompanied with doubts
and darkness; she learnes without labor; is not afraid to forget; and drawing
light and wisdom from the very Fountain, knows all things in their Principles.
In this happy condition there remains nothing for the Christian to wish for;
his soul is penetrated by the Divine Essence; his understanding clarified with
the light of glory; his will inflamed with the love of God; and all his powers
and faculties finding their particular perfection in one object, he confesses
that the promises of God exceed his hopes.

Though his body have been polluted by his birth, and corrupted by death, it
finds life in the Resurrection, and Purity in Glory: For as soon as the Trumpet
of the Angel shall have declared the will of God, every soul shall reassume her
own body; and reuniting her self with it, shall give it a part in her
happiness: The greatness of this wonder has found no belief in the minds of
Philosophers; though they were persuaded of the Immortality of the soul, they
would not consent to the Resurrection of the body; and having seen it made a
prey to wild Beasts, or fuel for the flames, they judged there was no power in
the world could restore it again: The spirit of man has favored this error,
and believing his eyes rather then his light, could not find in his heart to
place that part of man in heaven which he saw committed to the grave; he was
afraid to weary the power of the Almighty, if he should oblige him to so many
miracles; and not comprehending how a body reduced to powder or smoke, could
take its primitive form, chose rather to leave it in the Earth, then draw it
thence with so much violence.

But had he thought of the Creation, he had never doubted of the Resurrection;
and Reason her self had persuaded him, that seeing God was able to find the
body in Nonentity, where it was not, he might very well find it in the waters
or in the slames where there was yet some remainder thereof. If Nothing were
not rebellious to him, Nature cerrainly will not be disobedient; and if he
could make that which was not, he may as easily repair what now is not. Nothing
perishes in respect of the Creator; the dead are not less his subjects then
those that never were born; and if he could make Nonentity hear him, he may
well make death obey him. The miracle of Resurrection is perhaps attended with
more pomp then that of the Creation, but there is less difficulty in it; and he
that could vanquish the distance between Entity and Nonentity, will have no
great matter to do to master the opposition between Life and Death.

Finally, our Creator never loses his right over his creatures; they are at his
disposal in what place soever they are: Their changing of form makes them not
change condition; and because they pass through three or four Elements, they
depend not less upon his Omnipotence: The body of man is always the work of
God; and he may after its corruption restore its beauty, and reunite it to the
soul, like a wise Artist having reduced a statue to powder, may by his skill
restore it to the primitive form. All the difficulties our spirit can suggest
in this miracle, are easily mastered by him that can do all things; and having
well weighed the wonders of the Creation, it will be no hard matter to
comprehend those of the Resurrection.

Inasmch as the body receives life in this, and is reunited with the soul, it
is happily delivered from all the miseries it had contracted in its birth or
during its life: If Nature were mistaken in forming it, the Author of Nature
corrects the faults in raising it: He gives it its just dimension, its lawful
proportion; and retrenching whatever was superfluous, makes it a complete
piece. But because it is not enough to take away the defects to render it
happy, God gives it advantages in glory which it had not in innocence: For
although the body before it was infected with sin, was not rebellious against
the mind, nor subject to grief and death; it was nevertheless capable of
corruption; The Natural heat consumed the substance; and the waste it made, was
to be repaired by nourishment: Though he were obedient, yet was he an Animal;
and though he felt no disorders, yet was he liable to infirmities: his weight
would have hindered him from following his soul to Heaven; he could not walk
upon the water, nor penetrate the Crystal; and had he not prevented hunger and
thirst by eating and drinking, he had never held out against grief and death:
Finally, though he enjoyed the privileges of Original Righteousness, he wanted
those of Glory; and though innocent, was neither incorruptible nor illuminated.

But in the Resurrection he shall receive all these qualities; and as the soul
is now corporeal, because wholly engaged in the body; by a happy retaliation
the body will be spiritual, because perfectly submitted to the soul; and as the
soul, says Saint Augustine, though corporeal, cease not to be a spirit; the
body, though spiritual, cease not to be a body: It will change condition,
though it change not nature, and will have advantages which shall set it free
from all the miseries it now endures. Its subtilty will surpass that of the
light; will penetrate all solid bodies; nothing shall be able to withstand its
desires, and being no longer the Prison but the Temple of his soul, will find
no obstacles that stop it, nor chains that entangle it. Its agility will be so
great that it will outstrip the winds and lightning; will fly without wings
through the spacious regions of the air; will walk upon the water and not sink;
and in a moment passing from one end of the world to another, will be no longer
the clog and torment of the soul. Its impassibility will free it from all the
injuries of the Seasons and Elements: the natural heat which now consumes him,
shall no more corrode the natural Moisture; The Contraries that compose him
will agree; and being no longer tormented with hunger and thirst, will stand in
need neither of meat nor drink.

He will be in a state of consistency, wherein he will have his just
proportion; nor will he expect from time, his youth or old age; he will enjoy
an eternal spring of years which will never wither; he will see the days
pass on, and never feel any declension in himself; his budding verdure will
fear no winter; the Lillies and the Roses of his countenance will keep their
freshness: and as original righteousness served for a Garment for innocent man,
glory will be instead of a robe to the blessed: His brightness will surpass
that of the Sun; the rays which dart from his eyes will dim those of this
Glorious Luminary; and he will cast such lights and flames, that the least
glorified Body will be able to illuminate the Universe.

His immortality will be the Crown of his Happiness. That pitiless monster
which exercises his rigor upon all men, pursues them into the Grave, reduces
them to powder after the worms have devoured them: This Cruel one, I say, will
have no more power over the Blessed; he will discharge his fury upon the damned
in Hell; he will make a league with life to torment them Eternally; and that
which endures here but for a moment, will last for ever in that dismal
habitation, to lengthen their pains according to the obstinacy of their crimes:
But he will respect his Conquerors; and beholding the Blessed as the Members of
him that has defeated him upon the Cross, will not dare to set upon them
afresh, nor so much as appear in their presence. Then shall the happiness of
men be perfect, when a glorified soul shall inanimate an immortal Body; and
mutually communicating all their advantages, the soul shall be happy in the
felicity of the Body, and the Body happy in that of the Soul. All their
differences shall be composed in this General peace; the Soul shall forget all
the Revolts of the Body, nor shall the Body any more complain of the severities
of the Soul, but both of them remembering only the Good offices they have done
each other; they shall reign in Heaven in a Community of Glory, as they lived
upon Earth in a Community of Merits.

But to arrive to this Happy condition, the Spirit must war against the Flesh,
and Repentance give the faithful those Privileges Glory instates the Blessed
in. For though there be nothing more opposite to Rest then a Conflict, yet is
it the Conflict that gains us the victory, Ex bello pax; pugna enim nos
praeparat victoriae; victoria nobis obtinet triumphum. Chry.
and the victory that procures us the peace: Though there be nothing more
contrary to Happiness theu Pain; it is notwithstanding austerity that subjects
the Body to the Soul, and makes us see in our Banishment a perfect Image of
Glory.

For if it be true that the Blessed feel no Rebellion in their person, and if
their Body be perfectly subjected to their mind, we must acknowledge that the
Christian cannot pretend to any part of this advantage, but by the help of
repentance: It is this virtue that tames the Pride of the flesh; this faithful
minister of the Divine Justice which makes Charity reign in spite of
Concupiscence; and all the peace we have in the earth, we owe it to the zeal
and austerity of crucifixion. If the Blessed be disengaged from the world; if
their condition be separated from ours; and, if finding all things in the
Divine Essence, meat, clothes, and lodging be useless to them, it seems
Repentance puts us in the same Liberty; and reducing us to things absolutely
necessary, rids us of superfluities: This is it that confines the Anchorites to
their pulse, that gives them sackcloath for a garment, a Den for a Lodging, a
Mat for their Bed: This is it that enricheth them, by making them poor; makes
them find Liberty in servitude; and equalling their condition with that of
Angels, frees them from the need we have of the Creatures.

If the Blessed have no communication but with God; if they have quitted Earth
to live in Paradise; if the Love and Magnificats they bestow upon God be their
whole employment; and if in this one object they find all their Happiness and
their Diversion; Penance and Solitude procure the same privileges to the
faithful: Their heart is no longer in the Earth; they mount up to heaven by
their desires; converse more with Angels then with Men; and already enjoying
the privileges of the Resurrection, lead a new life in their Banishment, and a
happy life in their wilderness. Let us imitate their holy Examples; fit our
selves for Glory by Austerity; and subjecting the Body to the soul, and the
soul to God; set us to shake hands with the world, that our Conversation may be
with Jesus Christ.

The Tenth DISCOURSE. Of the Miracles which are found in the Beatitude of a
Christian.
AS Nature and Grace have their extraordinary proceedings, so have they their
Miracles; Haec utique Deus potestatis suae proponit signa, suis in solatium,
extraneis in testimonium. Tertul.
and in Both of them we behold changes which require the endeavors of an
absolute omnipotence. When the Sun stands still in the midst of his course;
when the Earth cleaves from her foundations, and opens her bowels to devour her
Children; when the sea passes his bounds, and makes inquisition after
Delinquents beyond his Banks; There is no body but looks upon these
irregularities as Prodigies, and who conceives not that the author of Nature
disorders her to punish us. Though Grace be so powerful, and its victorious
sweetness so often triumphs over the liberty of sinners, it many times
produces occurrences which pass for Miracles: When it converted the Doctor of
the world, disarmed his heart and his hands, and changing his will in a moment,
of a Persecutor made him an Apostle, it seems so strange a proceeding may well
be ranked in the number of prodigies: when it touched that Comedian who laughed
at the Ceremonies of our Religion, enlightened his spirit upon the Theater,
made use of the water he profaned, to make a Sacrament, and by a wonderful
conduct made him find his salvation in his very sin; we shall not offend its
power, if we call this effect a Miracle.

If Nature and Grace have their Prodigies, Glory, which is their perfection,
may boast of those it has: and as its order is the highest, so is it most
miraculous. Therefore did the Great S. Bernard confess, That there were Three
Unions that ravished him: The first, That of Virginity with Pregnancy in the
person of Mary: The second, That of the Humanity with the Divinity in the
person of the Word; and the Third, That of Glory with the spirit of Man in the
person of the Blessed. For he could not comprehend how it came to pass that the
Creature was not dazzled with the brightness of the Creator; that a drop of
water should not be lost in an Ocean; and that an Atome should be preserved in
the Abysses of a Divine Essence: But certainly he that shall well consider the
state of Glory, will find it a perpetual Miracle; and that the Circumstances
that accompany it are so many Prodigies, whereof the first is, that God
communicates himself entirely to every one of the Blessed.

The Goods of the earth are such scantlings, that they cannot be divided
without being diminished: we ravish that from our neighbor, which we possess
our selves; we cannot grow rich, but must inaccommodate him; and whatever care
we take not to deal unjustly, we find by experience that our Plenty is an
occasion of Misery and Indigence to others. Monarchs cannot enlarge the borders
of their State, but must encroach upon those of their Neighbors; they cannot
widen their own Kingdom, but must make a breach in that of their Allies; and
all worldly things are so small, that, being shared, occasions the division and
poverty of Families. But inasmuch as the Good which the Blessed are in
possession of is infinite, it is communicated to all without being divided: The
Felicity of one is no hinderance to that of another; and as Virtue, though
common, is nevertheless chaste; the Divine Essence, though wholly shed abroad
into a man, cease not to be entirely infused into an Angel: It takes not from
the Cherubims what it indulgeth the Seraphims; and communicating it self
indivisibly to all its Subjects, occasions neither Jealousy nor Envy.

Great Goods have this advantage, that they never suffer by division: Magna and
vera bona non sic dividuntur ut exiguum in singulos cadat, ad unumquemque totu^
perveniat. Sen. Ep. 73.
They make some rich, without making others poor; and as they are conferred in
full weight and measure, every one is content, and none miserable.
Covetousness, which has divided Sea and Land, has not yet divided Time: That
which measures the life of Kings, measures that of their Subjects: every one
possesses it in common; and though we make diverse uses of it, it runs along
equally to all people. Ambition, which has cantonized Honor, has not yet
found out the Secret of parting the Light; this daughter of the Sun never
thinks she sullies her purity by rendering it common; she equally shines upon
all Nations; and did not the Earth interpose between the effusion of her
brightness, she would banish Darkness from the face of the Universe. The Divine
Essence, whereof the Light is but a shadow, is shed abroad into the soul of the
Blessed without being divided; is not parted by being communicated: All Angels
and all Men fully possess it; and if it make some difference in their
happiness, it is without want or jealousy.

The Second miracle of Glory, is, that one and the same Good produces all
kind of content, and satisfies all sorts of desires. Seeing the Creatures are
but weak rays issuing from God, as from their Sun, there is none of them that
possesses all perfections: Nullum est bonum praeter summum, quo vere possimus
esse boni aut beati. Aug.
They are bounded in their Qualities, as well as in their Essences: They cannot
relieve us in all our necessities; and had not sin made them rebel against us,
there was not one of them could remedy our evils: Light enlightens us, but
cannot warm us without its heat: Meat nourishes, but clothes us not: Garments
cover us, but cannot feed us: Gold enricheth, but cannot defend us: Iron
defends, but does not enrich us. One Good produces but one single commodity:
that which serves for one use, does not for another; and the remedy which cures
a Disease, cannot give consolation to a Discontent. But the Blessed have this
advantage, that they find in God whatever is necessary for them: having all
Perfections, he fully contents their desires; and one sole Good infused into
their souls, satisfies all their wants: He that enlightens them, warms them; he
that feeds them, clothes them; he that lodges them, protects them; he that
imparts his perfections in several portions to the Saints here below,
communicates them all together to the Blessed; and, to express my self in the
words of Saint Paul, and S. Augustine his disciple, God is All to All in Glory;
nor can we form any wishes whereof we find not the accomplishment in his
possession.

The Third Miracle is, that the desire is not restless in heaven. Those that
are well acquainted with our Passions, confess there is none more cruel then
Desire: For though it seem to supply us in our need, we may say that the Remedy
is more troublesome then the Disease, and that it were better to retrench the
most part of worldly things, then to be troubled with longing for them. This
Passion puts us not upon the search of Good but by means of Grief; it is a spur
which wounds us to make us go, a needle that goads us to make us run, a
transportation of the soul which renders us miserable to render us happy.
Thence it comes to pass that Divines, agreeing with Philosophers, profess that
Desires are the chiefest torment of the Damned; that these delinquents are
therefore wretched, because their desires are hopeless, Est in eis desiderium,
nec poenam generat, quia desiderium omne transit in gaudium, dum praesto est
quicquid optatur, and qui quid deside ratur abun^at. Aug. aut Greg. Mag.
and this viper which they conceive in their bowels, gnaws and devours them
eternally. But, by an unconceiveable wonder, the Blessed desire, and are not at
all disquieted; they enjoy what they long for, see what they hope; and as the
Goodness of God occasions their wishes, his Presence begets their felicity: The
Good they desire, is not absent; the Good they possess, is not wearisome; and
mixing Desire with Fruition, they are everlastingly happy. They long, says S.
Augustine, and their longing causes no doleance, because, as soon as formed,
it is turned into joy; and the presence of the God they covet, banisheth pain,
and causes content.

This Miracle produces a Fourth, which makes the Blessed find a possession
which never disgusts them. Duo sunt tortores cruci atum alternantes, dolor, and
timor; si been es times, si male es doles. Aug.
Men cannot avoid being upon Earth; and as Grief and Fear are two Passions
which succeed to give them no respite, Fruition and Desire are two states which
alternately torment them. Desire is always attended with Restlesness: every man
that makes Vows, and puts up Requests, declares publicly his want and misery;
and though raised to never so high a pitch of Fortune, tells all the world that
he suffers because he desires. Fruition, which seems the period and
acquiescence of Desires, and which, by a necessary consequence, ought to banish
Grief out of the soul, begets a sapless cloying of the appetite, and condemns
him to a punishment whereof he has no right to complain, because himself seems
to have courted it. In the mean time, this misfortune is so common, that there
is no body but experienceth it: and the goods of the Earth are so mean and
beggarly, that we cannot have them, but we must despise them. Their absence
troubles us, and their presence cloys us; we make some account of them at a
distance, but when we approach them, and taste the fruition of them, we
discover their imperfections, are ashamed, or disrelish them: so that in
whatever condition Fortune place us, we cannot choose but be miserable. But the
happiness which the Blessed enjoy is so great, that as their Desires occasion
not their Impatience, neither does their felicity nauseate into a distaste;
They daily discover new beauties in this infinite object; they find more
sweetnesses then were promised them; and confess that their happiness exceeds
their hopes. The Faithful have less love, because less light; present things
distract them; their senses which are at agreement with what they see, seduce
them; and, because they can form no noble Ideas of the Supreme Good, the
desires they have toward it are faint and languishing: But inasmuch as the
Blessed know all the advantages it is attended with, their love increases with
their light; their pleasure is augmented by fruition; and far distant from
conceiving any disrelish, their desire continues in the height of possession,
and they wish without pain, what they possess with assurance.

But the last miracle of glory, and which is no whit inferior to the rest, is,
that the difference of conditions causes no jealousy. The variety of the
world is one of its rarest ornaments: Tota Naturae pulchritudo aut certe
praecipuae in sua varietate sita, est nec abest a varietate utilitas. Mars.
Fisc.
The slowers which checker a walk imbellish it; The Stars which make a hundred
several Figures in the Firmament, set a luster upon its beauty; neither does
any thing make a Country more pleasant, then the diversity of the parts that
compose it: Our eyes are ravished to behold rivulets creeping along the
Meadows; Fields stretching themselves out of sight; Valleys which sink as low
as the Center of the Earth, and Mountains which strike Heaven with their tops.
The Riches and Beauty of a State depends upon its diversity; if all Subjects
were of the same condition, there would be neither diversion for strangers, nor
accommodation for the Naturals: The Ornament and Advantage of the Body
Politic, appears in this agreeable mixture of Poor and Rich, Artists and
Husbandmen, Soldiers and Merchants, Magistrates and Priests. But it falls out
by an inevitable misfortune, that this difference of conditions which begets
its beauty, breeeds jealousy among the subjects: For as their goods are not
common, because their conditions are different, one is jealous of what the
other possesses: The Grandees are proud, and despise their inferiors; the
mean men are envious, and murmr at the Optimacy; Cum erit Deus omnia in
omnibus, qui minus habebunt non abhorrebunt; ubi enim nulla est invidentia,
concors est differentia. Aug.
Every condition carries its own torment along with it; Greatness is tortured
with Pride, and Misery afflicted with Envy: But in Heaven the difference of
conditions produces their beauty, and gives no occasion of jealousy. All the
Saints hold different stations, their merit is the measure of their glory,
their crowns are proportionable to their labors, and there is more variety in
the Blessed then among the Stars. In the mean time Peace bears rule in the
diversity of their conditions; Charity, which unites them, renders their
contentment common, though the Justice that rewards them makes their condition
different: Every one is glad of another good fortune; and without interessing
any one, they find that the felicity of particulars contributes to that of the
Public.

But it were to injure their dignity, Non Nobis sufficit quia Christianum nomen
accepimus, si opera Christi non fecerimus. Illi prodest quod Christianus
dicitur qui castitatem diligit, ebrietatem fugit, superbiam odit, and invidiam
respuit. Aug.
should we strive to express it; silence and astonishment are the only
commendations we can give them, because the Holy Scripture teaches us, that
the Happiness God prepares for those that love him, is unconceivable: Let us
content our selves to wish what we cannot comprehend; and finishing this Work
with the Beatitude of Christians, let us strive to merit it by the precedent
advantages: Let us profit by the Birth we received in Baptism; follow the
motions of the Holy Spirit that inanimates us; imitate the examples of that
ever to be adored Chief that governs us; obey his Grace that masters us; make
use of those Virtues that assist us; Entertain our life by the nourishment, and
our piety by the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: Do nothing
that may dishonor our Qualities; and endeavor to make our selves worthy of
that Glory which is promised to all true Christians in the other world.

FINIS.

