THE NATVRE and DANGER OF HERESIES, Opened in a Sermon BEFORE THE HONORABLE
House of COMMONS, January 27. 1646. at Margarets Westminster, being the day of
their solemn Monthly Fast.

By OBADIAH SEDGVVICK, B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Covent Garden.

2 PET. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness: but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

Die Mercurii 27. Januar. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Sir Peter Wentworth do
from this House give thanks unto Mr Sedgewick for the great pains he took in
his Sermon preached on this day at Margarets Westminster before the House of
Commons, and that he do desire him to Print his Sermon. Wherein he is to have
the like privilege in printing of it, as others in the like kind usually have
had.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I Appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print this Sermon.

OBADIAH SEDGEVVICK.
Febr. 19. 1646.


TO THE HONORABLE The House of COMMONS now assembled in Parliament.
HAving received your commands to preach, that which first presented it self
unto my thoughts, was the subject of this ensuing Discourse; A Theme (if I do
understand the present posture of these times) both seasonable and necessary.
There are some points of difference which are of an inferior consequence, and
stand farther off from the foundation; these being but Judicia domestica, I
meddle not with: But there are other positions which pull hard at the very
foundation, and which do subvert the faith, dogmata salutis devoratoria, as
Tertullian styles them; and Religionis Christianae Carcinomata, as another
speaks: against these I held it my duty, as a Christian, as a Minister of
Christ, and as your servant to declare my self; And I beseech you before whom
was it more fit to open those ulcerous sores, then before your selves (Right
Honorable) who under God are our most choice and tender Physicians?

If any Reader should now be so unhappy in his charity as to calumniate this
discovery of heresies and blasphemies to be an arrow subtly designed against
holiness and good men: to such a one, all that I would reply is this; 1. The
surest friends to holiness have been the sharpest enemies to errors; Christ
and his Apostles were so. 2. That I never yet have learned what direct
advantage did at any time redound to true sanctity, by a patient endurance of
heresy and blasphemy. 3. Nor can I be so uncharitable as to think, that any
person sincerely holy, or incending the progress of holiness, durst be a
friend to such damnable and soule-destroying errors. The design which I would
commend to all in this time of Reformation, is this, That truth and holiness
(which are so naturally combined, and so mutually interested) may be
conscientiously promoted with equal zeal: encourage holiness, but contend for
the truth too: maintain the truth, but countenance holiness too: he who
pretends holiness, but regards not truth; and he who pretends the truth, but
regards not holiness, neither of these is a cordial friend either to truth or
holiness. For your parts (Right Honorable) be you pleased to go on (as you
have begun) in the strenuous support of them both: Both of them have a
necessary respect to Gods glory: both of them have a necessary respect to man's
salvation: both of them have a necessary respect to our present Reformation:
both of them will prove the Kingdoms safety, your consciences comfort, and the
crown of all your long and great labors. For both these you have the prayers of

Your most unworthy, yet most faithful Servant, OBADIAH SEDGVVICK.

THE NATURE and DANGER OF HERESIES.
REVEL. 12. 15, 16. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a Flood
after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the Flood.

And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
up the Flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth.


THis Text is a seasonable Text; Seasonable to the times wherein we live, and
seasonable to the work of this day, which should be humbling work, and
reforming work; The parts of the text are two: 1 A new Danger, v. 15. 2 A
renewed Succor, v. 16.

I. The New Danger is set forth in four particulars. The Division of the Text.


1. By the Author of it [And the Serpent] There is a former danger mentioned in
v. 12, 13. And that was managed by the wrathful Dragon: And here is a New
danger, which is contrived by the cunning Serpent: Open cruelty is more
dreadful, but subtle policy is more pernicious: The cunning Devil is a more
mischievous enemy to the Church of Christ, then the raging Devil: Nero and
Dioclesian were sore enemies to the Church, but of all, the Emperor Julian is
reputed the worst.

2. By the Engine of it, [The Serpent cast out of his mouth] It is a question
amongst the Schoolmen, whether peccataoris may not be worse then
peccataoperis? Sure I am, that the danger which comes out of the mouth of the
Serpent, far exceeds that danger which depends upon the sword of the Dragon.

There is a mouth of truth, and that is Gods mouth: there is a mouth of peace,
and that is Christ's mouth: there is a mouth of prayer, and that is the good
man's mouth: there is a mouth of cursing, and that is the wicked man's mouth:
there is a mouth of mischief, and that is the Serpents mouth. When the Devil
wracked Adam and Eve, then he used the mouth of the Serpent: And when he
deceived Ahab, then he became a lying spirit in the mouth of the false
Prophets: And when he would deceive the whole world, then he falls into the
mouth of the Beast to speak great things: And here intending to destroy the
Church, he uses the mouth of the Serpent.

3. By the Matter of it: [And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a
floud] It is not said, that he did cast out water only, (and yet even that
dropping out of the mouth of a Serpent had been sufficiently dangerous) but he
did cast out water as a flood: Floods in Scripture are the periphrases of
extremest dangers; when the danger is sudden, high, violent, quick, it is then
expressed by the metaphor of a flood: David speaks of floods of ungodly men,
Psalm. 18. 4. And the Prophet speaks of the enemies coming in like a flood,
Esa. 59. 19.

4. By the scope or intention of it, [That he might cause the woman to be
carried away of the floud] There was a flood which did bear up the Ark, but
here is a flood to overwhelm and drown the Ark: which way soever the Devil and
his Angels attempt against the Church of Christ, not less then the utter ruin
of it is still the aim and project: when the Devil rages as a Dragon, then his
intent is utterly to wast; and when he acts as a Serpent, then his design is
utterly to sink the Church.

II. Thus you see the Churches New Danger: but now behold the Churches Renewed
Succor: And indeed it is very remarkable, that this Chapter is as full of
succors, as it is of dangers; In v. 7. you may read of the Dragon and his
Angels appearing in the field and fighting, but then you read of Michael and
his Angels succouring even to victory, v. 8, 9. Again, in v. 13. you find the
Dragon persecuting the woman which brought forth a man-child; but then also you
read, that there was given to the woman two great wings of a great Eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness, v. 14. And here you see a flood cast out
to carry away the woman, but withal you read of a gracious and present
succor; [And the earth helped the woman by opening her mouth, and swallowing
up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth.]

Thus you have the distribution of the Text. Now I proceed to the Propositions
which may be observed from it. The whole state and sum of this Text may be
resolved into these three Conclusions.

1. That the mischief which Satan cannot compass by The Observations from the
Text.
open cruelty, he will assay against the Church of Christ by subtle policy:
when he fails as a Dragon, then he will try what he can do as a Serpent.

2. That the Serpents flood is the chiefest and the worst of the Churches
dangers.

3. That the Lord has still raised fresh succors for the Church, against the
fresh dangers of the Church.

Concerning the first of these, I intended to have demonstrated both the truth
of it, and the practice of it in all ages of the Church, as also the several
methods, wiles, stratagems, and designs of Satan upon, and against the Church
of Christ: and the reasons of shifting his hand, and making use of his mouth,
of desisting from open cruelty, and of falling to his wiles of policy: And then
also the wonderful mischief which has redounded thereby, that whereas his
cruelty has killed thousands, his policy has slain ten thousands: where also
might have been discovered, 1. The advantages of policy above cruelty. 2. The
general receptivity or capacity in men to be catched by the policies of this
Serpent. 3. The usual inadvertencies rather under the workings of the Serpent,
then of the Dragon. 4. The specious ways of insinuating his mischief in the
ways of policy: But I was taken off from my purpose in the handling of this
point (though as to my own opinion, very necessary and excellent) because I
should thereby check my self in the handling of the second point, which I
desired chiefly to discourse upon this day before this Honorable Auditory: And
therefore omitting other things, I address my self unto that Proposition which
shall be the only subject of my present pains: The Proposition is this,

That the Serpents flood, is the chiefest and the worst of the Churches
dangers: [The Serpent cast out of his mouth a flood to carry away the woman.]

Interpreters are carried away with several conjectures concerning this flood
which is cast out to carry away the Church: There is a flood of tears, and a
flood of reproaches and slanders: That is a flood wherein we should drown our
sins; this is a flood wherein men drown our names: And there is a flood of
persecution, and a flood of invasion, and a flood of Several opinions
concerning this flood.
erroneous opinions: which of these three latter it is, may be questioned.
Some, by this flood of waters, understand the flood of blood let out by the
Pagan Praesertim Maxentii and Maximini edicta, rescripta, mandata tabulis
insculpta, and passim suffixa de Christianis toto orb tollendis, extirpandis.
Emrors: A red sea was that flood; they endeavored all they could to drown the
Church in its own blood: But this opinion is not very probable, because the
former danger in the practices of the Dragon comprehended this flood, and it
seems clearly to be mentioned already in v. 11. where it is said, They loved
not their lives unto the death.

Others by this flood, understand the irruption of the Franks and Vandals,
Hunnes and Longobards, who about the year 400. brake in upon Asia and Europe
like a tempest, and a swelling inundation, and in a sort overwhelmed the
Christian world: This I confess was a flood, but whether that which is implied
in the Text, I much doubt, because the Text speaks of a flood cast out of the
mouth of the Serpent: But in the irruptions of those forementioned people,
there was neither the Serpent, nor the mouth: It was a plain, public,
notorious cruelty, managed by the hand, not a danger managed by secret
subtilty, and in the mouth.

Viegas by this flood understands a strange kind of Antichrist, who shall send
out his Army into the wilderness, and by his Satellites (surely he means some
Pursivants or busy Emissaries) should search caves and dens to find out the
faithful, whom the earth (in a literal sense) should swallow up as it did
Dathan and Abiram: but this fancy is not worth the confuting, only this let me
subjoyn, that some Interpreters do fasten this flood upon the true Antichrist
of Rome, and questionless virtually it will reach him as to the practice; but
whether it will reach the Text as to its principal scope, I question.

But not to trouble you with more conjectures, the best Interpreters which I
have met with, unanimously David Chytraeus. Bullingerus. Pareus, etc.
expound this particular flood of waters, to be those notorious errors,
heresies, blasphemies, (dogmatum portenta) and schisms, which Satan by
several instruments did cast out to the infection of the Church, and to the
subversion of the faith, immediately under the Christian Emperors: when the
Church of Christ obtained a little respite from the cruel sword, and began to
enjoy some breathing tranquillity, then on a sudden, there brake out, 1. That
flood of the Arian heresy (even in the time of Constantine the great) wherein
the Deity of the Son of God was oppugned and blasphemed. And this flood rose so
high, and ran so swift, that in a short time it overwhelmed the East, and after
that the West, so that (in a manner) the whole world turned Arian. 2. And after
that another flood brake out, the Macedonian heresy, opposing the Deity of the
holy Ghost: soon after this the Pelagian heresy, against the whole Gospel: And
the Nestorian and Eutychian heresy, against the verity of the person of
Christ, which floods continued upon the Church for near 300. years; and what
mischiefs did accrue unto the Church of Christ by every one of them, you may
abundantly read in Eusebius, Socrates, Euagrius, Sozomen, Theodoret, and others.

So that now we are come (in some good measure) to perceive what this flood
cast out of the mouth of the Serpent is: namely, erroneous, false, wicked,
heretical doctrines, cast out of the mouths of corrupt and corrupting
seducers; opposing the truth, and endangering the very esse, or being of the
Church of Christ: Concerning which, favor me with your patience, whiles I show
unto you,

First, the nature of heresies and erroneous doctrines which the Serpent does
cast out of his mouth.

Secondly, the danger of them to the Church of Christ: that they are perilous
and hazardous.

Thirdly, the greatness of that danger, it is the chiefest and worst.

Fourthly, some pertinent useful applications of all this to our selves for
our present humbling and reforming.

1. Of the Nature of heresy.
To find this out, you may be pleased to know, that the word heresy, admits of
a threefold signification and use.

1. Sometimes it is taken for any new and select opinion, contrary to the
common and usually received opinions of other men: in which respect the word
(heresy) may sometimes bear a good construction, For after that way Acts 24.
14.
which the Jews called heresy, did Paul worship the God of his Fathers.

2. Sometimes for any false opinion whatsoever, wherein a person recedes from
any divine truth, and thereby foments divisions, sects, contentions: in which
respect, dihaereticon with Isidore, is all one with divisivum.

3. But strictly amongst Divines, it is taken for some notorious, false, and
perverse opinion, opposing and subverting the faith once delivered to the
Saints, as Jude speaks, or overthrowing the form of wholesome words, as Paul
speaks: and it may be thus described:

Heresy is an erroneous or false opinion, repugnant unto Heresy what.
and subverting of the doctrine of faith revealed in the Word, as necessary
unto salvation: And obstinately maintained, and pertinaciously adhered unto by
a professed Christian.

1. Heresy is an erroneous opinion, falsasententia, or falsum dogma; there is
a difference 'twixt malum opus and haresim: an evil work is one thing, heresy
is another thing: In the work which a man does, there may be sin, very much
sin, but properly there is not heresy: Erratum it may be, but error it is not,
unless it resides in the understanding: The works of hypocrisy, and of
profaneness (as murder, injustice, adultery, theft, etc.) have much
wickedness in them, but unless these become the objects of opinion as well as
of practice, they are not heresies. Indeed, if beside the moral practice of
them, any one rises to an intellectual opinion, that the practice of them is
lawful, and not repugnant to the Word of God; now such an opinion, erroneous
opinion of them may come to an heresy: yea, let me add a little more, though
many practical works be acted conscientia repugnante (as Alfonsus a Castro in
this case speaks) yet the works (simply considered as works) are not to be
reputed heresies; For then every sin against knowledge should be heresy: no,
it is not light shining and working against an action or work, which raises it
to be an heresy, but it must be light in the Word shining against an opinion,
which must denominate it to be heresy.

2. Heresy is an erroneous opinion concerning matters of faith. There are
quaestiones (...), and quaestiones (...), as one well distinguishes: every
erroneous Greg. Nazianz. Oral. 14.
opinion is not heresy: If the error be of matters praeter fidem, it is not
heresy, let the error be what it will; to make the erroneous opinion amount to
heresy, two things must concur.

One, that the error be circa fidem: although a man does err in his own
opinion within the proportion of objectum scibile, as against the rules and
principles of several Sciences, (as Geometry, Astronomy, Natural Philosophy)
yet this error is not heresy: For heresy is an erroneous opinion, not circa
scibile, but circa credibile; not about matters of humane Science, but about
matters of divine faith; But if the error be about the matters of faith
revealed in the Word, as that Christ is not God, or is not Man, here now the
error will rise to heresy, for here is dogma fidei.

Another is, that the error be contra fidem: against the faith, as well as
about the faith: If it be an opinion contrary to sound doctrine, overthrowing
the foundation, this will make the error to be heresy: An opinion may be
contrary, not only to the Church of Rome, and many particular Traditions, but
also to the judgment of some godly men, yet is it not therefore an heresy:
but then is it heresy when the opinion is contra fidem Traditam, contrary to
the faith, to the doctrine of faith in the Scriptures. Nevertheless here we
must carefully consider, that an opinion may be said to be contrary to the
Faith in a double respect, 1. One is, when it is not concordant to every truth
whatsoever, which is revealed in the Scriptures. I dare not say, that every
error in this respect is heresy, there may be many mistakes, many incauti
errores, (as one speaks) perhaps dissonant to the true Chronology, to the exact
and full history of some places, yet these presently are not heresies. 2. The
other is, when it is repugnant to that truth, or any truth which is necessary
to salvation, and here questionless, the error contra fidem will prove to be
heresy: Heresy is opinio perversa and adversa: there may be opinions diverse,
yet none of them be heresies: In the Interpretation of the Scriptures there is
frequently a variety of opinions, but as long as like the lines of a
circumference they do meet in the Center, as long as every one of them unites
and harbors within the analogy of faith, here is no heresy, though some
variety: But then it is heresy, when the opinion is adverse, is contrary to,
is subversive of the faith revealed as necessary unto salvation: which the
opinion may be, either

Explicitly: As when the error is manifestly fundamental, it does expressly
pluck up the foundation: It is not a problematicall canvasing of a truth, but a
plain Gunpowder-plot, an error which blows up a fundamental truth: It does not
blow off the tiles of the house, but blows up the bottomes and supports of the
house; As when a person denies the Godhead of Christ, redemption by Christ,
salvation by Christ.

Or Reductively: As when the error overthrows that which being denied and
overthrown, the foundation thereupon, and thereby, is by an inevitable
necessity also denied and overthrown; or maintains that which being maintained,
a fundamental truth must necessarily and unavoidably be subverted: As if any
person should maintain, humane satisfactions to be sufficient to merit and
procure salvation: this error would necessarily subvert man's salvation founded
upon the merits of Jesus Christ only.

3. If the erroneous opinion be against any one particular doctrinall necessary
truth, even that particular error will amount to heresy: Indeed number (if I
may so speak) is requisite to apostasy, but any particular necessity of a
truth to our salvation (if opposed) is sufficient for heresy: The Apostate
turns his back from the whole truth, the Heretic grapples with some truth,
but denies other truth: And therefore though a person still retains an assent
consonant to many truths, nay to most truths, nay to all except one necessary
truth, yet if his erroneous opinion be subversive of that one, his error will
come to heresy.

4. To make the erroneous opinion to be heretical, it is necessary (as to the
person who holds it) that he be a professed Christian, one who is vinculo fidei
obstrictus, as some do word it: It is a question put by Schoolmen and others,
whether Infidels, Pagans, and Jews, who hold opinions contrary unto, and
subversive of the faith, are to be reputed Heretics? Unto which it is
answered, that one may be styled heretical, either, 1. Materially, as when his
opinion for the matter and substance of it, is contrary to the faith, and
subverting of the foundation; 2. Or else formally, as when not only the
substance of the opinion is heretical and opposite to the Christian faith, but
also it is maintained by one who has formerly engaged himself to the
profession and maintenance of the faith; In the former consideration, Infidels
and Jews may be reputed Heretics; but in this latter consideration, only he
is so to be reputed, who was reckoned amongst the number of Christians
professing the faith: If the Infidel and Jew deny Jesus Christ to be a Savior
of sinners, though this be a great sin, yet it is not (strictly considered) an
heresy, because neither the one nor the other ever embraced or professed the
Gospel: But if a Christian professing the Gospel does this, in him it is
heresy.

5. But lastly, to make up heresy, there must be obstinacy or pertinacy joined
with that erroneous opinion which is contrary to the faith: He who is an
Heretic must adhere or inhere, he must obstinately adhere or cleave unto his
erroneous opinion: I confess that it is a very quick case, Whether pertinacy
be so essential to heresy, that the opinion cannot at all be reputed
heretical, unless the professing Christian (who holds it) appear obstinate?
Concerning which case I will only deliver my opinion (submitting it to better
judgments) that where the erroneous opinion does ex natura opinionis, appear
grossly and notoriously exitious to the rasing of the foundation, it is
heretical; A denying of Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, or a denying of
salvation by him, such an opinion in the very nature of it is pernicious,
ruinous, and damnable: yet ad plurimum, and in the ordinary way of discovery
and process with Heretics, I humbly conceive, that pertinacy must be an
ingredient to constitute the person to be heretically erroneous: And therefore
in this point of Heresy and Heretics, Divines do distinguish inter
Infidelem, and dubium in fide, and Haeretico credentem, and Haereticum.

There is Infidelis, one who never entertained or professed the faith, yet is
obstinately and most violently carried against it. This man may be a
persecutor, but he is not an Heretic, notwithstanding his opinion, and
notwithstanding his obstinacy.

Again, there is dubious in fide, one who is doubtful in the faith: one who is
wavering and reeling (anceps and fluctuans) his anchor does not fasten, he is
not quite on, nor quite off, but staggers and totters: the equal apprehensions
of truth and falsehood do so poise and balance the one against the other, that
he comes not up fully and determinately any way: Now although some do affirm,
that even dubious in fide is Haereticus, yet I dare not to assert it; Thomas the
Apostle did dubitare in fide, he was Incredulus, yet surely not Haereticus;
Indeed as Austine speaks, he who does dubitare does errare: for the man does
err who approves falsehood for truth, or disallows truth for falsehood, or takes
uncertain things for certain truths, or certain truths for uncertain
conjectures: error here is, but not heresy.

There is also Haeretico-credens: one who is rolled up, wrigled in, packt up
into a dangerous error: misled, seduced, follows his leader: holds that which
really is contrary to the faith, and destructive: yet not out of obstinacy of
mind, but upon an imagination of truth: not out of deliberation, but by
surreption; he is utterly deceived by taking upon trust: his erroneous opinion
is not fortified with pertinacy, but only crept into him by his simplicity; And
therefore being heartily dealt with, and being admonished, he contends not, but
yields, and wheels about to the truth: as the bow when the string is taken off
returns to its own posture again, so upon admonition the seduced person quits
his error, and submits to the faith.

But then there is Haereticus, the very Heretic; and he is one who does not
only (male sentire) err in his opinion, but also does (fortiter tenere)
obstinately maintain that error: he does not only hold (fidei oppositum) that
which is contrary to the faith: but also he does hold the same (animo
opponendi) with a pertinacious spirit: There is in him definiendi temeritas,
and tuendi perversitas too; But here now falls in that difficult and knotty
question; namely, when a person is to be reputed obstinate or pertinacious in
holding an error contrary to the faith: The Apostle, I think, resolves us in
this, where he says, An Heretic after the first and second admonition,
reject. So then, when Titus 3. 10.
there is a due proposal of the truth manifestly revealed in the Scriptures,
and yet the erroneous person adheres unto his error our of a very pravity of
mind, and will not suffer his understanding to be captivated unto the truth,
this person is pertinacious in holding of his erroneous opinion, and is
manifestly an Heretic.

Beloved! when an erroneous person maintains his opinion contrary to clear
light, so that he must necessarily deny the truth of God or revoke his error:
or when he cannot maintain his wicked error, but he must necessarily overthrow
some other article of faith, which yet he would not do: or when the person
cares not to trample down another truth to uphold his error against a former
truth, makes one article a footstool to pull down another; or when the person
steps from one error to a more gross one, cares not what error he plungeth
himself into, so that he may maintain his error: or when all solid reason is
silenced; nay, if reason and conscience might speak, they do (concurring with
the truth against his error) secretly condemn him, and having nothing to
reply, he falls unto proud scorns, bitter virulencies, miserable shifts; surely
such an erroneous person is obstinate and pertinacious in his corrupt opinion.

And thus briefly for the first question, which contains the Nature of
Heresies. I now come to handle the second particular, which respects the Danger
of Heresies.

2. Of the Danger of Heresies.
That heresies, or erroneous doctrines and opinions are dangerous, cannot be so
much as a scruple to any Christian upon the earth, unless he be turned into an
Heretic or into an Atheist. For,

First, the Scriptures do in terminis charge sin, and perniciousnesse, and
damnation upon them. S. Paul reckons up heresies amongst those works of the
flesh which shut persons out from inheriting the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 20,
21. And Saint Peter calls them pernicious and damnable, and such as bring swift
destruction: and speaking of the Authors of them, he says, that their
damnation slumbers not, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. A man's opinion makes him sinful, as
well as his practice; and a man may be damned for a corrupt opinion, as well as
for a corrupt conversation. I will not put it to a dispute, whether a sin
against the rule of faith may not (caeteris paribus) be far more sinful and
damnable then the sin which is against the rule of life? But let it (for the
present) suffice, that if heresies and heterodoxies be such sins, be such locks
as can shut up the gates of heaven against a soul: If they be such bars as can
break up the doors of hell, and bring damnation: surely that man is not
himself, who doubts whether they be dangerous or no.

Secondly, let us consider unto what dangerous things, heresies and corrupt
doctrines are compared in Scripture, and by what dangerous creatures heretics
and false teachers are expressed, by them you may judge whether heresies are
dangerous yea or no.

1. For heresies, they are compared in Scriptures sometimes to a Gangrene or
canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17. Their word will eat as does a canker: The canker is an
invading ulcer, creeping from joint to joint, corrupting one part after
another, till at length it eats out the very heart and life. Sometimes to a
shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Hold faith and a good conscience, which some
having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck: In what a condition are
the miserable passengers, when their ship is split asunder by the Rock? All
their goods are lost, and all their lives too. Christ calls them leaven, Paul
calls them a bewitching: Learned writers call them a leprosy, poison, fire, a
tempest, our text, a flood.

2. And as for Heretics, they are expressed by creatures very dangerous and
hurtful; sometimes they are styled foxes, Cant. 2. 15. The foxes which spoil
the grapes; sometimes they are called dogs, rending dogs, Phil. 3. 2. Beware of
dogs, beware of the concision; sometimes they are styled wolves, grievous
wolves which devour the flocks, Acts 20. 29. Sometimes they are in effect
called very mountebanks, and cheaters, such as beguile unstable souls, etc.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ, and his Apostles do give special charges and caveats
against them, to take heed and beware of them, which they never would have
done, had they not been dangerous, Mark 8. 15. Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, Matthew. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, Matthew. 24. 4, 5. Take heed
that no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ,
and shall deceive many, Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
beware of the concision, 2 Pet. 3. 17. Beware lest ye also being led away with
the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness: Certainly all these
things do clearly prove that there is a danger in them.

But that is not all: danger is not all, there is yet more then mere danger in
them, which will appear in the resolving of the third particular.

3. The greatness of danger by Heresies.
Heresies are the greatest and highest of dangers to the Church of Christ: you
will imagine that the sword, and prison, and exile, and dispersion, and
spoiling, and torments, and tortures, and the most cruel deaths which befell
the Church in the Primitive times, were extremely dangerous, and so they were;
but yet not half so dangerous as the floods of heresies and corrupt opinions
are. The Church ever gained by the former, grew more in purity, in unity, in
prayer, in zeal and courage: But did it ever get so by heresies and erroneous
doctrines? Unless by accident, and after much striving, and physicking for
recovery.

I will go no farther then the Text it self, to set out unto you the exceeding
mischief and danger which comes by heresies and erroneous doctrines. They are
in the Text styled a flood cast out of the mouth of the Serpent: Now seriously
consider,

1. They are a corrupting and defiling flood; Any flood is so, it presently
defiles the pure waters, spoils the grounds, leaves filth and slime and mud
behind it: But surely a flood that comes out of the mouth of a poisonous
Serpent is so: And there are 4 precious things, which wicked errors or heresies
do poison, corrupt, and defile.

The first is, the souls of men: And is there a more noble and choice thing in
man, or belonging to man then his soul? Our soul is of more value then all the
world: But heresies and wicked doctrines corrupt the soul, nay many souls: It
was the heavy Indictment against Babylon, that in her were found slaves and
souls of men, Rev. 18. 13. Heretics in one place are called Merchants,
(making merchandise of you with fained words, 2 Pet. 2. 3.) In merchandising
there is something bought for a certain price: In this merchandise, the souls
of people are bought for fained words, for base metal, only for a corrupt
error: Every heretical opinion buys a soul, or stabs a soul. It stabs the
soul of him that maintains it, and still it trades on to murder more souls: It
lifts off the soul from the foundation upon which the salvation of souls is
built. What will become of an house whose foundation is removed? And what will
become of a soul whose bottom for salvation is denied and rejected? Damnable
heresies make us to deny the Lord that bought us, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Oh what is this!
what will follow upon this, when a poor sinner comes to deny the Lord Jesus who
bought him!

The second is, the leading faculty of the soul: There is more danger to
corrupt a Captain, then to corrupt many private Soldiers, and most danger to
corrupt a General, who leads the whole Army: It is capital in some places,
and at some times, to cast poison into the spring; this will poison all the
streams: Heresies corrupt the great leader of the whole soul: The Judgment of
man is the General, the Admiral, the Shepherd, the Overseer, the Guide, the
Eye, the Primum movens for the rest of the spheres in man; If the light in man
be darkness, how great is that darkness? If the Judgment be infected, how
dangerous is that infection? Beloved! If there be the darkness of ignorance
from inapprehension in the mind, the soul hereby is in an ill case; If there
be the darkness of misapprehension by error, it is in a worse case; But when
that misguiding error befalls the leading faculty of all the soul, and this
error falls point blank against a truth necessary unto the man's salvation: and
moreover this error is stiffly adhered unto by that leading judgment: it does
mislead, and it will mislead: Oh now in what a desperate condition is the whole
soul hereby? If it does not recover of this error, it dies for it, and it can
never be recovered, til the judgment be altered; And when will that judgment
be altered, which perversely affronts and rejects the light of truth, which
only can carry it off?

The third is, the most active faculty of the soul; they do defile and corrupt
the conscience: Now this is amazedly dangerous. A wicked errrour is blinding,
whiles in the judgment only: but it is binding when it slips to the
conscience also. It is a wrangling Sophister in that, but it is a working
Jesuit in this; Diseases falling amongst the vital spirits, are most quick,
and most dangerous; Errors are never more pernicious, then when they drop into
the conscience: for whatsoever engages conscience, the same engages all, and
the utmost of our all: If the conscience of man be made a party against the
truth, now all that a man has, and all that a man can do, will be made out
against the truth too: Now the person will with Paul grow mad, and desperate
against Christ: for Paul being engaged by an erroneous conscience, consents to
the death of Stephen, yea could he (in that condition) have met with Jesus
Christ himself, he would have done the like against him.

The fourth is, The conversations of men: Heresy is seldom or never divided
from Impiety; Hymeneus, who 1 Timothy 1. 19.
made shipwreck of faith, made shipwreck also of a good conscience: Those whom
Paul called dogs, he also calls evil workers. And in another place, speaking of
Phil. 3. 2. Tit. 1. 15, 16.
some whose minds were defiled, he adds, and reprobate to every good work. Our
Savior speaking of false Prophets, says, you may know them by their fruits:
The lives of men are consonant to the judgments of men: Truth and goodness
are reciprocal, and so are falsehood and wickedness: The doctrine of faith is a
doctrine of holiness too: And the doctrine of lies, is the doctrine of
profaneness too: He who falls from truth to falsehood, will quickly fall from
piety to wickedness: Truth is of a reforming virtue, as well as of an
informing nature: It salts and seasons heart and life both: but that error
which putrifies the heart, will putrify the life also: the plague will at
length rise and break out into bla^es and botches.

They who write the story of the Anabaptists, begin Sleid. etc.
it with error in their judgments, but end it with wickedness in their
practices: And Cyprian writing long since of Novatus, (that pestilent
Heretic) says Epist. 49. ad Cornelium.
thus of him: That he was (rerum novarum cupidus) one who itched after new
notions; (avaritiae inexplebili rapacitate furibundus) and beyond measure
covetous, (arrogantia and stupore superbi tumoris inflatus) intolerably proud;
(curiosus semper ut prodat) no man so prying, no man so treacherous; (ad hoc
adulator ut fallat) he would commend you before your face, but cut your throat
behind your back; (nunquam fidelis ut diligat) as false a person as lived; (Fax
and ignis ad conflanda seditionis incendia, turbo and tempestas ad fidei
facienda naufragia, hostis quietis, tranquillitatis adversarius, pacis
inimicus) a very firebrand, cared not what became of truth or peace, turned
the world upside down, so that he might carry on his opinion.

The Apostle speaking of Antichrist (who is the Antesignanus of all Heretics)
calls him (...), that man of sin; no such sinner as he: Lyranus expounds it, one
totally given up to sin; and Theophylact, the ringleader of sin: And truly, it
is most just with God to give them up to corrupt lives, who rejecting his
truth, have given up themselves to corrupt errors and lies.

2. Heresies are a drowning and overwhelming flood: a flood (you know) is such
a collection, such an heightning confluence of waters, as swells the rivers
above their bounds, and lays all under water. Now there are three things which
heresies do overwhelm. See 2 Pet. 2. 2.
One is, the glory of all glories: the glorious Name of God, the glorious Name
of Christ, the glorious Name of the holy Spirit, the glorious name of divine
truths, Heresy turns the glory into a lie: It gives God the lie, and Christ
the lie, and the holy Ghost the lie; For it gives truth the lie, the Scriptures
the lie, which are the glory of God, and Christ and the holy Spirit. He who
makes the Word of God a liar, makes God himself a liar; O sirs! what is God
without truth? and what is all the goodness of the Gospel without truth? and
what is all the fabric of man's salvation without truth? Truth is as it were
the pin, the clasp, the knot that ties all; pull out that, untie and break
that, the excellencies of God, the glories of Christ, the sweetness of
promises, the souls of men, the salvation of men's souls, all are dashed, are
broken, are gone: And such work does heresy make, it does dissolve the bond of
all glory; yea, it does resolve God into worse then nothing: No God is better
then a false god, there is an open or secret blasphemy in all heresies: No man
can contemn the truth of God, but in that he must likewise condemn the God of
truth.

The second is, the glory of Religion: Religion is clipped and darkened: It grows
low and beggarly, when it is patched with error: It is a debasing of the gold
to marry it with any metal of a courser birth; All Religion is by so much the
more excellent, by how much the more of truth it has; but when once it is
adulterated, when once it is tainted and leavened with damnable errors, now
the silver is become dross, the glory is departed from it: when a Religion is
like the feet of Nebuchadnezzars image, which were part of clay, and part of
iron, now it becomes low and contemptible: If the mixture of humane inventions
abates of its glory, what an impairing is the mixture of corrupt, and
poisonous, and faith-subverting doctrines?

The third is, not only the dignity, but also the very vital entity of a
Church: Truth is the soul of that body, and falsehood is death unto it: Schisms
do it much hurt, but nothing like vile doctrines: Schisms do only rent the
coat, but Heterodoxies do rent the heart: those pluck up the fence, but these
pull down the building: those do tear away the childrens lace, but these do
bereave the children of their bread: those are a turbulent sea, these are a
dead sea: those do scratch, but these do kill: Men talk much of un-churching,
and of Antichrist, and limbs of Antichrist, but a Church is never more near to
give up the ghost, then when it is most near to give up the truth: It is never
nearer to be un-churched, and to be essentially Antichristed, then when the
truth fails, and when abominable heresies and corrupt doctrines swarm in it:
Mark seriously that place in 1 John 4. 3. Every spirit that confesses not that
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is that spirit of
Antichrist: I, this is that spirit of Antichrist. The spirit of error and
false doctrine, this is that spirit of Antichrist.

3. Heresies are a suddenly rising flood: A flood is no sober or quiescent
puddle, no grave or slow-paced river; but it is a quick and extemporary
collection and inundation: And truly herein lies the greatness of the danger
unto a people and Church by heresies, that they are quickly conceived, and
quickly brought forth: quickly born, and quickly thriving: though truth gets on
very slowly, by reason of that incapacity of the judgment for supernaturals,
and by reason of that natural opposition in man to the things of God, and by
reason of the subtle interposition of the Prince of darkness, who blinds the
minds of men, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, yet
erroneous and false opinions do break out with ease and spread swiftly: they
are like the plague which is a flying arrow: there needs no preparation of the
ground for nettles; if the seeds do but drop down, you may soon have a full
crop: yet the ground must be prepared again and again to receive good seed: the
hearts of men are naturally disposed to suck in errors, as they are to send
out wickednesses: the tinder is so prepared to catch the fire, that it is but
the striking of the flint, and the work is done; The Scriptures do compare
false doctrines to leaven, O how fast does a little leaven sour the lump? Paul
wondered that the Galatians were so soon removed to another Gospel, Gal. 1. 6.
The good man slept but one night, and the field was sown all over with tares
by the wicked and envious man: How quickly did the world turn Arian? How
suddenly did the Anabaptists endanger Germany? The Vines which have been some
months in growing, are in very few hours torn down and destroyed by Foxes and
wild Boars. Now if erroneous doctrines be in themselves so highly pernicious,
and in their operation so speedily diffusive, then certainly they are of all
other things the most dangerous to the Church of Christ: A plague which
suddenly infects many families, is therefore the more dangerous: and heresies
which can suddenly infect many souls, are therefore the more dangerous evils.

4. Heresies are an increasing and swelling flood: A flood at first makes the
river only to look big, and to run a little thicker and faster: but after a
while it causes the river to be unruly, to break in pieces, to superabound,
the waters contribute on every side, and at every corner, to raise and mount
it, so that there is no passing: False doctrines at first seem to be modest,
they will be but scruples and quaere's, and then they come to be probabilities;
and then they come to be Like the spreading Leprosy.
tolerable conclusions; and then they rise to be unquestionable tenets: and
then fit to be made public articles: and then necessary to be held; and then
the contrary not to be maintained or spoken for, nay to be disdained and
reproached.

But this is not all neither: For as false opinions rise thus and increase in
their direct line of particular magnitudes, by way of intention: so do they
likewise enlarge themselves in diverse breadths by way of extension: They are
like circles in a pond, one circle begets another, so does one heresy beget
another, a lesser begets a greater. As one moral sin is but a staire to step
down lower, so this intellectual sin of heresy, it is but a staire to help
up to higher and worse errors.

If you will consult Historical Antiquity, it is wonderful to behold the
great flames bred out of small sparks: what monstrous opinions have been built
upon errors which seemed but little at the first: how one error has hatched
a greater: they who write of them can distinctly tell us where the man was
first planet-struck, (what his first error was) but after a while they are
non-plussed in the account, the number of errors have doubled and trebled;
such a maze and labyrinth is error; It is like a whirle-pool which first Dato
uno absurdo, mill sequuntur.
sucks in one part, and then another, and never defists until it draws in and
plungeth the whole body. Besides ancient examples, we may see this swelling
growth of erroneous opinions in the Church of Rome, where one error still
advanced to more errors, and those again to higher errors, and these still
running on, until a general corruption ensued from all the particulars: compare
the first defections and corruptions with their last and present, how little
then, how total now, how particular then, how universal now, and you will
easily acknowledge what increasing floods erroneous opinions are; The points at
first were rather about private interests of precedence, but they have been so
increased unto all doctrinals, that they are scarce sound in any: Their errors
about the Scriptures, and Traditions, and the offices of Christ, and humane
satisfactions and merits; and invocation and adoration of Saints; and of
justification and faith, and good works, and free will, and Sacraments, etc.
are evident to all the world: I could give unto you an instance also in the
Anabaptists in Germany, whose first Author there (says David Chytraeus in his
Dedicatory Epistle to Ericus King of the Swedes) was Nicolaus Pelargus Cygneus
about the year 1523. his erroneous doctrines though bad enough, (for they were
laid in the contempt of the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and rejection
of the Civil Magistrate, and in nova ac coelesti luce immediate accensain
cord (as my Author expressly relates) yet were not formerly so numerous, but
when these opinions descended unto Thomas Munzerus and Andreas Carolostadius,
now they began to swell both in the quantity of the opinions, and in the vast
number of disciples too.

Lambertus Danaeus in his Annotations and Explications of Saint Augustines Book
De haeresibus and quod vult deum, adds to that account, the many derivations
and enlarging propagations of heresies from age to age: showing exactly the
several heresies flowing from some one capital and original heresy, as from
Simon See his Arborem Haerescon, as himself styles it.
Magus's heresy: and from that of Valentinus, and that of Cardo, and that of
Artemon, and that of Novatus, and that of Arius, etc. In which elaborate work
of his, you may read of such a strange growth of heresies, that they never left
multiplying and breeding, until they had (as much as in them lay) overthrown
and cashiered every person in the Trinity: All the Scriptures, Law and Gospel;
every distinct moral commandment, every particular article of faith, every
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, Preaching of the Word, Baptism, Lords Supper, etc.
There are 4. general heads unto which (usually) we reduce Christian Religion:
1. To the Decalogue of the Law. 2. To the symbol of faith. 3. To the Lords
Prayer. 4. To the Sacraments. And that learned See him in ^pusc. indice tertio.
p. 142. etc. printed at Geneva M. D. LXXXIII. in folio.
Author does by name instance the several heretical and erreonous teachers
who have invaded every one of these, and in every particular comprehended in
them: By all which, it does most clearly appear how dangerously mischievous
heretical opinions are to the Church of God.

5. There is one thing more which I would add in the last place, by which it
shall be manifested, that these heretical opinions are more dangerous then any
other floods, and that is a diverse quality in them: other floods are quickly
up, and quickly down: although they grow high and perilous, yet there is a
sudden transiency in the height and peril: their principles are unconstant
though violent, and being spent, these ordinary floods sink and famish for want
of supply and feeding. But the floods of false and erroneous doctrines are
such, as quickly rise, but do very slowly abate: They are in this respect worse
then the great deluge in the days of Noah, which continued many months, but
then did slack and sink, and fell quite away. It is not so with heretical
errors, but they are like diseases which come upon us flying, but go away
from us creeping: some erroneous opinions have been kept up for forty years
together; nay above 100. years together: some of them 300. years: nay, some of
the Antichristian heterodoxies have been kept up above a 1000. years together.
O Brethren! men do extremely dote upon their own fancies, they are exceedingly
pleased with their own brats, especially with the new conceptions of their own
minds, they dearly like them, and love them, and foster them: For one Heretic
who has been poisoned in his judicials, you may find a thousand of others
converted and reduced who have only been stained in their morals: Heresy, or
the heretical opinion is stilted up by all the parts, arguments, shifts,
learning of carnal reason; and it is born up by an haughty, and disdainful,
and proud spirit; and it is so fallacious and fraudulent when you come to
handle it, and (which is not the least) it is so rammed in with obstinacy and
peremptorinesse, that it is almost a miracle to work effectually upon an
Heretic.

Every Heretic is odiously proud: All other men who dissent from him, are far
below him; and one says very truly, That no proud man can endure to be
accounted a fool or a knave: So simple as to be deceived, or so base as to
deceive: one of which the heretic thinks he must take to his share, if at any
time he recants his heretical and seducing doctrine.

I should now come to show unto you the reasons why Satan makes use of this
dangerous flood against the Church, and why especially at some times more then
other: He well knows that there remains in professing Christians many
advantages for him as to erroneous opinions, much ignorance, much pride, and
self-conceitednesse, much itching vanity, much vain glory, much fraternall
envy, much carelessness and inadvertency, etc. but I must wave this, and
conclude all with some seasonable applications unto our selves.

Are heresies, erroneous and false doctrines such a dangerous Ireland. 2. The
flood of cries from poor widows and orphans. 3. The flood of needy and wounded
soldiers; and there is yet another flood, a worse flood, the flood of heresies
and blasphemies: one deep calls for another, the flood of wicked and ungodly
opinions does call earnestly for a flood of sorrow and lamentation.

We are (by Gods mercy and goodness) indifferently rescued from the cruelty of
Dragons; O but now we are as much endangered with the flood of the Serpent: the
bodies of people are (in some good measure) secured from the edge of the sword:
but what of this, whiles the souls of people are hazarded with the poison of
errors? If the danger flies from the body to the soul: if the corporal danger
be exchanged into a spiritual danger, where is our happiness, what is our
safety by this?

Beloved! there are 4. notable reasons of our most Note.
solemn humiliation for the spiritual wickednesses, for the false and
abominable doctrines, which (like a flood) are now overflowing this Nation.

1. The account or height of some of them: They amount to no less then
execrable blasphemies: to ignominious, contemptuous, disgraceful reproaches of
God, and Christ, and the holy Scriptures: Believe me, blasphemy is a daring
sin: It presses very close and too sore upon God: He that blasphemeth the Name
of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death, Lev. 24 16. The words according
to the original are, He that strikes through the Name of Jehovah: Blasphemy
is that bold sword which is hacking of God himself, which is as it were
cleaving of him asunder: The Schoolmen tell us, that blasphemy breaks out 3.
ways.

1. Cum attribuitur Deo, quod ei non convenit, when we affirm that of God,
which is unbeseeming of God, which is incompatible with his holy and divine
Nature: As to make him a creature, or a liar, or cruel, unjust, unmercifull,
sinful, or the cause of sin.

2. Cum a Deo removetur, quod ei convenit: when we deny that to God, which
indeed belongs to God: It is called blasphemy in the King of Assyria, when he
said, that the Lord was not able to deliver Jerusalem out of his hand, 2 Chronicles. 32. 17.

3. Cum attribuitur creaturae, quod Deo appropriatur: when we put that upon a
creature, which is proper to God: Thus when the Israelites had made a molten
Calf, and said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt; it is
added, and they wrought great provocations, Nehem 9. 18. In the Hebrew it is,
and they committed great blasphemies.

Now compare this short discourse of the kinds of blasphemies, with the many
expressions let fall in the speeches of some, and set down in the writings of
others, and then judge whether some of our modern errors rise not as high as
blasphemy. Viz.

1. That God is the Author of sin: Not only of the actions unto which sin
does cleave, but of the very sinfulness it self: of the ataxy, pravity,
irregularity.

2. That the Saints in this life are fully perfect, as omniscient as God.

3. That the fullness of the Godhead does dwell bodily in every Saint, in the
same measure as it did in Christ Jesus, whiles he dwelt here on earth.

4. That when the fullness of the Godhead shall be manifested in the Saints,
then they shall have more power then Christ had, and do greater works then he
did, and that then they shall have divine honor.

5. And one has been complained of, for saying, that Jesus Christ was a
Bastard.

6. Another, that himself was Jesus Christ, the Messiah.

7. That Jesus Christ is not God essentially, but nominally.

8. That his humane nature was defiled with original sin as well as ours.

9. That he is not of an holier nature then men.

10. That it is as possible for Jesus Christ to sin, as it is for a child of
God to sin.

11. That there is no such thing as the Trinity of Persons.

12. That the Scriptures are but of an humane invention, a mere shadow, a false
History, and ought not to be the foundation of any man's faith, more then the
Apocrypha, and other Books, etc.

When Hezekiah heard the blasphemies of Rabshekah, he rent his clothes, and
covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord, and sent
to the Prophet Isaiah, saying, This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of
blasphemy: That day of blasphemy was a day of trouble and vexation to him:
though the blasphemy was from an Assyrian, yet it was a day of trouble to him;
and what should the day be unto us, when it is a day of many blasphemies, and
that not from professed Assyrians, but from professing Christians? what
Christian can hear, can bear such indignities and reproaches cast upon his God,
and his Christ, without a bleeding and rising spirit?

II. The breadth or number of false and erroneous opinions: so many, so
grievous, as quis fando temperet a lachrymis? verily they grow so thick, so
abundant, that they will leave us neither Church, nor State, neither Ministry,
nor Ordinances, neither duties, nor worship. There are some who have printed
large Catalogues of them, I will but pick a few of the more notorious of them,
and spread them before you this day, viz.

1. The Scriptures of the Old Testament do not bind us Christians, nor those
of the New neither, any farther then the Spirit (for the present) reveals unto
us, that such a place is the Word of God.

2. That God never loved one man more then another before the world, and that
the Decrees are all conditional.

3. That there is no Original sin.

4. That the will of man is still free, even to supernaturals.

5. That the Saints may fall totally and finally from grace.

6. That Christ died alike for all: yea, that the salvificall virtue of his
death extends to all Reprobates, as well as to the Elect: yea, to the very
Devils as well as unto men.

7. That Jesus Christ came into the world not for satisfaction, but for
publication: Not to procure for us, and unto us the love of God, but only to
be a glorious publisher of the Gospel.

8. That God is not displeased at all, if his children do sin; and it is no
less then blasphemy for a child of God to ask pardon for his sins.

9. That Sanctification is a dirty and dungy qualification.

10. That the doctrine of Repentance is a soul-destroying doctrine.

11. That fastings and humblings are legal and abominable.

12. That the souls of men are not immortal, but mortal.

13. That there is no heaven, (to crown the godly) nor hell (to torment the
ungodly.)

14. That Civil Magistracy is Antichristian; and but an usurpation.

15. That the whole Ministry of the Land, as to their present Ordination and
standing, is Antichristian.

16. That it is as lawful to baptize cats and dogs, and horses, (which some
have done for some of them, if not for all and more) as it is to baptize the
infants of believers.

17. That there is no true Ministry, etc. this day in all the world; nor was
since the general Apostasy, which (they say) began since the death of the
last of the Apostles.

18. That there will be none neither until some Apostles be raised up and
sent: and when those Apostles come, then there will be true Evangelists also,
and Pastors, and not till then. Hearken O people, and judge O Christians,
whether the Serpent has not cast out his flood amongst us! Judge whether the
errors in our times do not call for more high thoughts, and more deep tears!

III. The length or peril by all these: If the peril were confined only to
the souls of them who are the craftsmen and founders of these opinions, yet
even this should move us to lament; but the flood is running, the water is
spreading: The plague is not only begun, but wasting: the contagion grows to
be general: It is got into the City, into the Country, got into that (other)
chief University: the poison is dropped into the springo: It is got into many
leaders of the people, who do themselves err, and cause others to err, It
breaths, and walks, and rowls up and down. It is spreading over the whole
Kingdom: It surpriseth place after place, infects family after family: The
sword of late was not so swift to conquer bodies, as errors now are to poison
souls.

Truly Sirs! If blasphemies against God, if reproaches against Christ, if
decisions against the holy Ghost; If contempt of the Scriptures, if vilifying
of the Ordinances of Christ, if obloquies to our holy profession, If the
eternal hazard of souls, if all these cannot affect us, afflict us, I know not
what to say unto you.

IV. The special engagements which are upon us all, to lay all these things
with sorrow to our hearts. Beloved! we are Christians (let others think of us
as they please) we are covenanting Christians, (let others deride this as they
list) and we are, or should be penitent Christians (let others be what they
please) now.

Consider us as Christians, we take our selves to be the children of the true
and living God, and profess our selves to be the members of Jesus Christ; The
faith of Christ is delivered unto us: we are entrusted with it, we are
responsable for it: we are to be zealous for it. How then can we suffer our
God, our Christ, our faith, to be thus dishonourably injured and abused, and
not be troubled at all!

Consider us as covenanting Christians: so we have every one of us bound our
souls to God, (can any mortal creature here release us?) we have lifted up our
hands to the most high God (in our several places) to extirpate heresies and
false doctrines.

Yea, consider us as penitent Christians: fasting Christians should be so, they
should be mourning Christians: And Christians who penitentially mourn, will
mourn for the sins of others, as well as for their own sins. And they will
mourn most, when God is dishonored most: and can God be more dishonored, then
by blasphemies and damnable heresies? Put all these together, and then consider
whether these sins of heresies and blasphemies should not wound our souls with
grief, which have wounded our God with so much dishonor?

But I pass from this Use of Humiliation, unto a Exhortation; and it is this;
Since there is such a flood cast out of the mouth of the Serpent to carry away
the woman, let us carefully improve the following words in the Text [And the
earth helped the woman, and opened her mouth to swallow up the flood:] Before I
distribute my Exhortation, let me premise a distinction or two.

There is a twofold opening of the mouth concerning this flood: One is to speak
for damnable errors and opinions and such as vent and maintain them; O that
the mouth of any Christian should ever open it self in the behalf of those
who dare open their mouths in blasphemy against their God and Christ! Should
the welfare of a corrupt and poisonous seducer be dearer to thee, then the
glory of thy God, then the truth of thy Savior? But there is another opening
of the mouth, and that is against damnable errors and blasphemies: we can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth, says Paul: Contend earnestly for
the faith once delivered to the Saints, says Jude: Hold fast the faithful
Word, for there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, whose mouths
must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, etc. So the Apostle in Tit. 1. 9,
10, 11.

Again, there is a twofold swallowing up of this flood; one by way of
impression and furtherance, of imitation and countenance: as when the fish does
swallow the bait: too many swallow up the flood in this sense: The Prophets
prophecy falsely, and my people love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. There shall be
false teachers, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, and many shall
follow their pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

Another is by way of hinderance and repression, so as to make the danger of
this flood to sink and cease; O bring in your help, bring it in fully, bring it
in speedily (thus) to swallow up the flood: Believe it, if you do not
carefully swallow up this flood, this flood will ere long swallow you up, and
the Kingdom too.

Now there are two sorts of men especially, who may help, and who ought to help
to swallow up and suppress the present flood of heresies and blasphemies.

1. You (Right Honorable!) and the rest who are Christian Magistrates. It was
but the scornful speech of Tiberius, that the gods alone must remedy the
injuries offered unto them: O no! you are custodes utriusque tabulae: you are
designed to be Nursing Fathers: you have received the sword to be a terror to
the evil. Pious and learned Amesius, speaking to that question, Whether
Heretics are to be punished by the Civil Magistrate? Answers thus,
Magistratus locus and officiu^ postulat ut reprimat improbos turbatores In cas.
consc. l. 4. c. 4* q. 6.
gladio, vel potestate publica and externa si opus fuerit: It is his place and
duty to repress them, and restrain them, if they be noxious and turbulent:
yea, and he adds more then every one will be patient to hear: namely, that if
also they be manifestly blasphemous and pertinacious, they may be cut off
supplicio capitali: according to that in Levit. 24. 15, 16. But I will not fall
upon the discussion of that at this time: all that I would humbly suggest unto
you, is this, That you may help against this dangerous flood 9. ways.

1. By a peremptory abhorring, and crushing of that floud-begetting maxim,
viz. a Catholic liberty and toleration of all opinions: There was a Religion
(as one once spoke before you) omnium Deorum, of all Gods amongst the old
Romans: and there is a Religion omnium Sanctoru^, of all Saints now amongst the
Papists: and if the Serpent could but wriggle in a Religion omnium opinionum,
of all opinions amongst the English, he needs to desire no more: If men can
step from one Religion to all, they will soon fall from all Religion to none.

2. By a public declaration against all heresies and blasphemies, known to be
spoken and printed; When Ostorodius and Vaidovius started out their Socinian
Heterodoxies in the Low Countries, the States General packt away those
seducers with exile, and publicly condemned and committed their pestiferous
books to the fire.

3. By making some standing Laws against such opinions, which can be proved to
be heretical and blasphemous; Serviunt reges terrae Christo (says one) etiam
leges ferendo pro Christo.

3. By setting up your Church Discipline with full power, that so it may reach
these heresies and blasphemies, which (if any sins) then they do plainly fall
within the Verge of it: If the discipline were fully and generally established,
you should not have an heresy or blasphemy, or any erroneous opinion creeping
out in any part of the Kingdom, but there would be a timely discovery of it,
and likewise a spiritual remedy to recovererring persons, and to prevent their
further spreading.

5. By encouraging and heartning the godly, orthodoxe painful Ministers of the
Gospel, in their assertings and vindicatings of the truths of Christ: and in
their oppugning of wicked, dangerous and damnable opinions: Not suffering
(therefore) to be snibbed, abused, reviled, scorned, slandered, disturbed,
hazarded, because they do oppose the adversaries of truth, and those Serpents
which do cast out floods amongst us: why should the Shepherd be discouraged,
because he keeps off Wolves from the sheep? or any man be checked, because he
would quench the flying fire?

6. By using your prudent Authority, in a timely causing to be sent forth
faithful and able Ministers, such as are thoroughly tried, and well approved to
be sound in the faith, and skillful to convince gainsayers and seducers; The
more you help truth, and the servants of truth, the more help do you therein
contribute against errors, and the enemies of truth: No better help against
darkness, then light.

7. By a tender and watchful eye unto the Universities, one of which is lately
fallen into your possession: take care it may not fall into the possession of
any seducers: you have heard (I doubt not) of a late Disputation in Oxford;
where some body undertook to maintain (besides in private) diverse strange and
dangerous opinions in public; I humbly entreat you to take care, that the
Serpent gets not in his body, before there be any planted to bruise his head:
Truth by right is the firstborn, and should first inherit: do not put the
truth to play an after game with error; Other Garrisons, if lost, may easily
be reduced: but that which is surprised fast by error, is not so easily
recovered.

8. By injoyning a solemn day of Humiliation through all the Land, for the
dishonours redounding to God, and Christ, and the Truth, by the present errors,
heresies, blasphemies; You did so lately for the floods of rain which
endangered the Com: O that it might seem good unto you so to do, for the flood
of errors which endanger souls! This humble request I presume to leave with
your pious zeal and prudence.

9. By using you Coercive power with such methods and propertions (...) the
real safety of truth and souls does require, and the repression of dangerous
errors does need: So managing the distributions thereof, that under the notion
of restraining heresy, you by no means injure real sanctity, nor yet under
the pretense of sanctity, you do not favor the growth of heresy: O what an
happy people are they, amongst whom errors are losing, and truths are
graining! where piety thrives, and wickedness blasts! where all who are good
can join against all that is evil, and in lesser things, whereas yet they
cannot (through weakness) clasp opinions; yet (for the truth and peace's sake)
can clasp hearts and hands to promote Gods glory, and the common salvation of
souls!

2. I have a word also to say unto you who are Ministers of the Gospel of
Christ: Come you forth from your long silences, neglects, and reserves: and
help the Church of Christ, in swallowing up the flood which the Serpent has
cast out of his mouth: when Jesus Christ is blasphemed, it is not a time to
fear, but to cry out, so spoke Luther to Staupitius; Men will say that you are
moderate and discreet, but what will Christ say to you, if at such a time you
be silent in his Cause? O my brethren! you are the husbandmen, take heed that
none sow tares in the field, whiles you sleep: you are the builders, O be sure
to preserve the foundation safe: you are the Shepherds of the Flock, O beware
of the Wolves, lest they break in and destroy the sheep! You are the
Vine-dressers, and keepers of the Vineyard, O have an eye to the Foxes, which
else will spoil the tender Grapes! You are the Stewards of Christ, O be
vigilant on what provision the household does feed! You are the Watchmen, O look
out, lest the enemy slip in and surprise the City! You are the Fathers, be
sure that your children have not a stone given to them in stead of bread, or a
Serpent in stead of a Fish.

You must help with your most fervent prayers: as Alexander once did, and
prevailed against Arius: You must help with your counsels, with your watchings,
with your preachings; You must bona docere and mala dedocere, as Austine
speaks; You must be defensores, and debellatores, stand for truth, and
withstand errors: You are (in a singular manner) entrusted with truth and
souls. O watch, O pray, O preach, O do all that faithful Ministers should
do, when a flood breaks in: You read of Eliahs zeal against the false
Prophets, and of Paul's zeal against false Apostles: You have read of the zeal
of Athanasius against the Arians: and of the zeal of Cyprian against the
Novatians: and of the zeal of Austine against the Donatists, against the
Manichees, against the Pelagians: You have read of the zeal of Hierome, of
Chrysostom, of Nazianzen, and many others in ancient times: You have read of
the zeal of Luther, and Calvin, and others in later times: You have showed your
zeal to the Kingdom in our dangerous times; I say no more, remember your first
works, remember your engagements, and be zealous: If you who are the Angels of
Christ, the Ministers of Christ, the Stewards of Christ, if you be drowzie, if
you be silent, if you stop your own mouths, when mouths are opened against your
Christ, whose mouth can we expect should open it self to swallow up the flood?
It was a brave answer which Cyrill gave to Theodosius, that in our private and
personal injuries we should hold our peace: but when the truth (or faith) is
endangered to be corrupted, we ought to speak, else we must give an account to
God of our unseasonable silence.

I have but one use more: Has the Serpent cast out such a flood of errors and
false doctrines amongst us, then

1. Let every one take heed, lest he be carried away with any part of this
flood: I say, take heed: For erroneous times, are trying times, and proving
times, as well as bloody and persecuting times: God has tried your fidelity to
this Kingdom (of late) by a flood of blood: and God is now trying your
fidelity to the Kingdom of his dear Son, by a flood of errors; Take heed lest
you be carried away by this flood: There are seven things which are very apt to
be carried away by a flood; 1. Light things. 2. Loose things. 3. Weak things.
4. Low things. 5. Rotten things. 6. Tottering things. 7. Venturous things. O
take heed,

1. That you be not light or proud Christians: errors are most apt to breed in
a proud brain and a graceless heart: and no man is more likely to be
overturned by error, then he who has overturned himself by pride; the proud
and blasphemers are joined together, 2 Timothy 3. 2. The proud man is exposed to
most temptations, to most falls, and to most errors: It Is the proud man who
consents not to wholesome words of Christ, but dotes about questions, 1 Timothy 6.
3, 4.

2. That you be not loose Christians: If ungodlines be in the heart, it will
not be hard for error to get into the head: A loose heart can best comply with
loose principles: Truth is searching and reforming, but error is more quiet
and gratifying: it is grace which settles the mind, and stablisheth the heart.

3. That you be not weak Christians: weak stomachs are most longing: A
Christian whose faith is implicit, and leaning on man, does often trust out his
judgment and soul: The weaker light you have of truth, the more easily may you
be cheated with errors in stead of truth.

4. That you be not low Christians: a worldly heart is a very low heart: It is
of all other the cheapest, it will be bought and sold upon every turn to serve
its own turn: The truth can never be sure in that chest, which any error with
a little golden key can pick. If thou be the servant of truth for gain, thou will be a slave to error for more gain.

5. That you be not rotten or hypocritical Christians: they were given up to
believe lies who did not receive the truth in the love of it: How just is it
with God, that he should fall into real error, whose heart did never love
real truth? that the deceitful heart should at length be a deceived heart? Is
it difficult to set him against the faith, who never had a sound faith?

6. Take heed that you be not tottering and unstable Christians: when the
judgment is not balanced and solidly fixed upon the truths of Christ, but
reeling and wavering, and like them in Eliahs time, halting between two
opinions; it is usually in danger to be poised with error: He whose mind is
but indifferent about a truth, is more then half on his way to error.

7. That you be not venturous and soul-tempting Christians: Julian sipt in his
Apostasy by going to hear Libanius: The Devil is ready enough to tempt you,
be not you found to tempt him: Eve lost all by hearing one Sermon from the
mouth of the Serpent: If you will be trading amongst cheaters, it is no wonder
if you be cheated: we are sure to go by the worst, when we venture upon our
own strength: the man who will expose himself to hear new truths, does often
times come back with old errors newly dressed.

2. Let every one strengthen his soul, that he may stand and withstand, and not
be carried away, etc. The house built upon the Rock stood when the flood came:
Take all in a word; a judgment solidly principled: an heart sincerely renewed:
a faith truly bottomed: Truth and love of it cordially matched: profession and
practice well joined: a fear of our selves and dependence on God still
maintained: Gods Ordinances and the society of humble and growing Christians
still frequented: watchfulness and prayer still continued, are the best
directives (that I can deliver) to keep us in the truth, and the best
preservatives (that I do know) to keep us from errors.

FINIS.

