ENGLANDS CONDITION PARRALELLD WITH JACOBS For

Troubles. Salvations. Hopes.
Laid open in two Sermons, lately preached at Marlborough in WILTS.

By John Sedgwick, Batchelour in Divinity and Pastor of the Church at Alphage
near Cripplegate, London.

MICAH 7. 8. Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall arise
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. LONDON,

Printed by R. B. for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1642.

To the worshipful Philip Smith, and John Franklyn Esquiers, Members of the
Honorable House of Commons, now assembled in Parliament.
Increase of Courage and Constancy of Spirit.
SIRS, Those who chose you unto your places of great trust and toil might have
justly (by nativenesse of soil, expressions of Love, and earnestness of
desires) challenged the dedication; yet they being many, and you their
representative body in an eminent and public way, I hope it shall neither
displease them or trouble you, that the ensuing Sermons do pass under your
names to the public view: I wish them in their printing their happy success
in their preaching, they were words in season to the best, and words of
vexation to the worst; Our ministry cannot please the one, but it must
displease the other; How ever its sit, that every one have his portion; It is
my comfort that by the happy success of the Gospel in the hearts of the
people, Marlborough is a Town honoring and cleaving fast to the Parliament;
they chose not Burgesses either to disgrace or to desert them; neither you nor
they come under the censure of Solon's Law to the Athenians who adjudged him to
die, and unworthy to live that in time of civil Garboyles (as careless of the
weal public) withdrew himself, and became a Neuter: As you have not been
drawn into unfaithfulness by the ill examples of Revolters from their
fidelity to their Country: so they have not been betrayers of their own
liberties in joining with any persons (th^ugh great in place) in any illegal
courses of division twixt King and people.

If these Sermons had an influence on them, why may they not have an effect on
you? The times are increased in their troubles, the Cloud is grown blacker and
bigger; some men are desperate, others despair, most see their dangers, few
can believe and hope for deliverance: Out of my general respect to the Times
Lamentation, and for the raising up of yours, with other men's spirits, under
our sad conditions I have gathered up my scattered Meditations, which for
substance are what I then delivered, though they have received their further
additions.

Sirs, I will be no further troublesome to my self or you: know; that the eyes
of many are upon you, the prayers of many are for You, Nay there are more with
you, then against you; as you have begun well, so end well, and the great God
who is the King of Kings, even the supreme Judge of all the world, hold up
your spirits against all discouragements, and carry on your great works unto
perfection, against all oppositions, giving unto you reward with himself, so
daily prays for you,

Yours in the Faith, and Truth, John Sedgwicke.

ENGLAND'S Troubles.
JEREM. 30. ver. 7. Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is
even the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.
THis Text (so suitable to our times) may not be unfitly resembled to that
Cloud by which God led the Israelites through the dreadful and desolate
Wilderness; as that, so this has in it.

First, a dark side: viz. a dismal time for trouble and misery, the face of
the times gathered blackenesse; the cloud of trouble appeared, and calamities
did so come on and increase that nothing else could be found among the Jews
but troubles, great troubles even such as no age could parallel, or foregoing
president equal: which makes the Prophet to cry out, Alas, for that day is
great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of Jacobs trouble.

Secondly, A light side: viz. a gracious promise for salvation and deliverance,
though for the present they were as men in graves and deeps under many
pinchings and pressures by miseries yet a day and time shall come wherein the
Lord would be light, and life and salvation unto them, but he shall be saved
out of it.

I might from the conjunction of the parts spend much time in opening this
excellent truth.

That out of the same mouth proceeds both threatenings and Threatening of misery,
and promise of mercy conjoined.
promises to the Churches of God; a Christian has but one GOD, though many
conditions: and as God has one heavy hand upon, so has ^ee another easing
hand under his Churches; as he strikes, so he strokes them: as he does sad,
so he does cheer them; seldom or never shall you find the Prophets in their
messages to Gods people more terrible then comfortable; where they threaten
misery, they also promise mercy. The wise Physician roles his bitter pill in
sugar;

In the dark side whereof we may take notice of these two things.

1. The deep impression which he troubles of the Church made upon the heart of
the Prophet, laid down in the word, alas! a word of sorrow and compassion, all
one in meaning, with woe is me! misery has befallen me! it does even melt and
mourn my heart within me. I am a man undone to think of those evils, which
shall befall the Israel of God. The spirit of pity was not divided from the
gift of prophecy; o that we could be inwardly afflicted! and greatly affected
with the miserableness of our times! it is to be feared that most men do
want sympathizing and grieving spirits.

2. The Rhetorical expressions of the trouble: Troubles will make men
Rhetorical; The Prophet is full, and fit, high, and elegant in his openings of
their sad condition in and under their captivity. 1. He calls it a day, noting
the manifestation and duration of the season, which was allotted for their
sorrow and suffering: 2. It is that day, not an ordinary but a notable and
remarkable day, even a day anciently decreed, and frequently threatened. 3. It
is great and that in respect of the wrath which should be powered out, and in
respect of the miseries which were to be endured, both, upon that day should,
for measure be intended, and for length extended. 4. There is none like it;
this phrase sets the day by ^. Sorts of days. 1. Natural. 2. Sinful. 3.
Sorrowful.
it self, as having no fellow: Natural days do equal one ancther; but
sinful, and sorrowful days do many times run unequally; though men may
commit sin enough in one ^ay to make them eternally miserable, yet one days
wickedness both materially and circumstantially, may exceed all the rest of a
man's days; and though sufficient to every day is the sorrow thereof, yet some
days of misery may exceed all other days for bitterness; here is intimated
unto us, that their misery should be unmatchable by any foregoing president of
misery, if that they should call to mind what they endured in times past, and
compare it with the present suffering, it should seem as nothing, and indeed
they found it to be so: for the people under their captivity Lam. 1. 17.
are brought in thus complaining, Is it nothing to you, all yet that pass by?
behold and see, if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, which is done unto
me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

5. It is even the time of Jacobs trouble: whether we take the A twosold Jacob.
words personally for the man Jacob, or mystically for the Nation of the Jews,
the seed of Jacob and the Church of God, we cannot fail of the mind of God in
the Text; It is true that Jacob in his own person from the womb to the tomb
was a man of troubles, himself says, few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been. And had the time of their captivity been filled up
Genesis 47 9*
with those kinds of trouble wherewithal God exercised Jacob they should have
had misery enough: and it is as true that the Churches and people of God wanted
not their troubles when they were carried into captivity; troubles entered them
into, and troubles continued with them under their captivity.

There are these ten things which will make evident unto us that the time of
Jacobs captivity was a troublous time. 10 Things making the time of Is^aels
Cap^ivity, a time of trouble


Warring and fighting times; it was a day of battle, a time of Sounding the
Alarm, striking up of Drummesand of arming one Nation against another: on came
the Babylonians and the Caldeans with a mighty Army against the Nation ^ Kings
^4. 10, 11
of the Jews, and they did actually wage war with them; Now we know that
where God raises up War, there the times must needs be full of trouble; it
was said of old Tubellum causa malorum, all evils are conceived in the womb
of War; alas! for the day of War, for in those times there was no peace to
him that went 2 Chro. 15. 5, 6.
out, nor to him that came in; but great vexations were upon all the
inhabitants of the Country, etc. When coveteousnesse, pride, discontent,
malice, envy, and desire of revenge shall bring in that unruly beast, Bellum a
b^ll^a dictum: Silent leges inter a^ma.
War, what can be expected but R^^^ sid^s pietasqu^ v^^^ q^i castra seq^^^tur.
that Laws should cease, Religion it self be laid aside and all manner of
villainy be committed.

affrighting and trembling times; even times overwhelming and fainting the
spirits of me and women: I say that in the day of captivity the people were
terribly shaken, God did appoint over t^em t^rror as a judgment; Now Levit 26.
16. ^^a. ^3. 1^.
their hearts did meditate terror: the noise without begat terror within, now
their stout spirits did fail and faint, being as the heart of a Woman under
her pangs; they stood shivering and Ierem. 4^. 22.
quaking before their misery, and were enclosed with terror as was Pashur who
was terror round about; now trembling and fearing times must needs be troublous
times. Ierem. (...)


flying and pursuing times; the Jews were as a Partridge hunted by the Fowler
upon the mountains. As they could not withstand the strength, so they could
not endure the Iamen. 1. ^.
sight of their enemies, Jerusalem was made to hot for them, they were forced
to leave their own houses, and their own Country, and to flee from place to
place, and knew not whither to betake themselves for safety, the enemy did so
^agerly pursue them; now being in this flying posture it could not but be a
troublous time.

scattering and dividing times; their captivity was their dispersion; now
husbands were divided from Ierem. 40. 12.
their wives, fathers from their children, and one friend from another, and
knew not what was become one o^ another; one runs East, another runs West, a
third North, a fourth South, wandering up and down, and it may be never seeing
the faces each of other again, this makes it a trouble in deed, when Husband
and Wife, Father and Children shall be all under one roof, and in one Town
and upon a sudden (when they least think thereof) to be parted one from
another, and to be no way helpefull one unto another, and it may be never to
hear one of another.

rebuking and scorning times: now Jacob lay under the reproachand contempt of
the foolish. The children Job 30. 8, 9.
of fools, and the children of base men that were viler then the earth made
the Jews their song and by word, such as did sit in the Psalm 69. 12.
gate spoke against them and they were the song of the dru^kards the enemies
laughed th^^ to scorn, and had them in derision all the day long; they abused
them by word and gestures and actions; O what gybing and jearing! What nodding
of heads, making of faces, hissing of voices, and clapping of hands was to be
heard and seen among their enemies; the brethren tell Nehemiah that Nehem. 1.
3.
they Were in great reproach, and the History tells us; that all that passed by
the way did clap their hands at them they did hiss and Lamen. 2. 15, 16*
wagge their heads upon the daughter Jerusalem, saying is this the City that
men call the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole earth?

slaying and killing times; times of blood and death, wherein multitudes lost
their lives by the sword of the enemy, the very streets were filled with dead
bodies, and the blood of the Jews was shed like water round about Jerusalem,
Psalm. 79. 2, 3. Now when the enemy enters with a drawn sword casting off all
pity and mercy toward old and young, when they fall to cutting of throats,
ripping up of bellies, strangling, hanging, and the like, this makes it to be a
time of trouble.

wasting and spoiling times; even days of such destruction and desolation,
that Cities and houses were consumed with fire, Come trod under foot, Cattle
consumed and the whole land devoured and turned into a Wilderness, mark the
expression; your Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt ^^ay 1. 7.
with fire, your land strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate
as overthrown by strangers, and the daughter of Sion is left as a Cottage in a
Vineyard, as a lodge in a Garden of CuCumbers, as a besieged City.

oppressing and evil e^treating times, now things were not carried by right
according to reason and the law of justice, but by might according to tyranny
and injustice; the Jews had wrong done to them, and they durst not to
complain thereof, or if they made complaint they could find no redress, the
enemies were heavy handed, and cruel h^arted toward them, daily robbing and
spoiling them, and did so weaken them that they made their lives tedious to
them.

spirit imbittering and soul sadding times, even days of such unquietness,
that they were bereft of all pleasure, they enjoyed not one merry day all the
while they were in captivity, now their feasts were turned into mourning, and
all their songs into Lamentat^on, it was a bitter day as the Prophet
threatens, Amos 8. 10 the day was dark and cloudie wherein not only (...)
the light of Gods countenance but all other outward and inward comforts were
with drawn, it was night unto them, and the day was dark over them.

treacherous and betraying times; their enemies would sometimes falsely accuse
and slander them giving out that they were rebels and traitors, anon the Lion
would put on the Foxes skin, and pure enemies to their Religion would come in
among them in sheep clothing; by and by they would be conspiring and
confederating against them, always they were plodding of further mischief
against them; so that where ever they were, and in what ever they did, they
were laid wait for, which makes the time to be such as the Prophet speaks of.

Now if to all these things we do east our eyes upon the removing Lamen. 1.
10.
of the Candlestick, the denying them the free and pure use of the Ordinances,
their beholding of their Idolatries and evil manners, this would make it to be
the time of Jacobs trouble in a more spiritual way. Having given unto you this
light into the Text, I come to the doctrinall result, which is this.

That as the Churches and people of God may have their outwardly Doct. 1. Gods
Church have extraordinary troublous times.
peace full and prosperous times, so they may, and oftentimes they have their
wondrous troublous and miserable times. It is with the Church for state and
condition below, as it is with the natural day, each day has a morning and an
evening; or as it is with the revolution of the year; each year has its
Winter and Summer seasons: Even so the Church has; first, days and seasons of
grace, times of tranquillity and stability, wherein the Candle of the Lord may
so shine upon them, that they may enjoy many outward and inward comforts and
contentments, every man may sit down under his Vine and Fig Tree, eat the
fruit of his labors, and no man rise up to make him afraid: Next, days and
times of misery, called evil days, and in my Text, the time of trouble; the
great day none like it; Time in Troublous times what.
it self, and as it is a Creature is quiet, trouble is accidental to it; now
it is said to be troublous, as peace is withdrawn from it and a Cloud of
misery drawn over it; when peace takes its leave, and disorder or confusion
does approach and appear, this is that which makes time to be troublous and
miserable.

Further you may note that there are two sorts of troublous Sorts of troublous
times.
times which may befall the Churches and people of God.

inward, wherein Soul and Conscience may lie under wounds and much
disquietnesse; if God desert and withdraw from David, now he is troubled, Psalm
30. 7.

Outward which is, 1. Personal. 2. Local, or National.


I mean this sort, and do say that the Churches of GOD may meet with Land
wasting, house burning, Women ravishing, Children killing, State devouring,
Religion scorning, Ordinances casting down, heart trembling, and liberties
overthrowing times; in one word times may be greatly miserable and afflicting
to them; and so full of sadness and confusion, that they may not know what to
do with themselves, or which way to turn themselves.

That outward troublo^s times are of two sorts.

1. Ordinary and common, even such as are usual, happening to all sorts of
people in their times.

2 Extraordin^ry and unusual, even such as are extended and intended and
cannot be equalled by any president, I say that sore trou^le, great trouble,
yea unmatcheable trouble may be the portion of the Church and people of God.

Further we do not conceive troublous times only to be probable and possible
to the Churches, but actual, it is not only true, that they may have troublous
times, but it is also true that troublous times do befall them: which truth
has.

1. The testimony of these Scrip^ures in one place it is said, it is a day of
trouble, and of ruin, and of perplexity, by the Lord of Esaias. ^^ ^.
Hosts in the valley of vision breaking down the City and crying to the
mountains. In another place Hezekiah sends the state of the Church unto the
Prophet in these words; This day is a day of trouble Cap. 37. 3.
and of rebuke, and blasphemy for the Children are come to the birth and there
is no strength to bring forth: add to this that prophecy of the mis^ries of
the Churches under the cruel persecutions of Antiochus, when there was a time
of trouble, such as never was, since there began to be a Nation unto that same
time.

2. The strength of these grounds; if any man will be satisfied in the causes
of the Churches troubleous times, they are these:

Meritoriously troublous times do spring from the 4. Causes of the Churches
troublous times.
sins of the Churches of God; as the needle draws on the thread, so our
sinful days being upon us our miserable days; there is nothing which does
enter men into sorrows more than their sins; sin is the mother, and trouble
the daughter; there had never been a bad day or sad hour upon earth, had not
man sinned; this is the Achan that troubles Israel; when Israel sinned then
Psalm. ^8 32, 33
God consumed their days in trouble, and brought them down: Ahab meeting
Elijah, calls him the troubler of Israel; the Prophet deals plainly and
roundly with the King and tells him to his face that it was he and his Fathers
house in forsaking the commandments 1 Kings 18. 18.
of the Lord, and following Baalim that troubled Israel: Hence is it that God
says, Make a Chain, for the Land is full of bloody crimes, the City is full
of violence, wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall
possess their houses, I Ezekiel. 7. 23. 24, 25, 26, 27.
will also make the pomp of the strong to cease, and their holy places shall be
desiled; destruction comes and they shall seek peace, and there shall be
none; mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor shall be upon rumor --
the King shall mourn, and the Prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the
hands of the people of the land shall be troubled, I will do unto them after
their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them.

furtheringly troublous times do flow from the Malignant Party, Satan and his
angels: Satan himself is full of rage and malice against the Church; the glory
thereof is his envy, and therefore he does put out himself in the power of
the Dragon, and in the policy of the Serpent, to create what trouble he can
to the same; he is the great kindle Coal; he it was that stood at the right
hand of Josuah the High Priest standing Zech. 3. 1.
before the Angel of the Lord to resist him: he it was that stood Rev. 12. 4.
before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour the Child as
soon as it was borne; and he is that Serp^nt ver. 15.
which cast out of his mouth wter as a flood after the woman that he might
cause her to be carried away of the flood: when Satan is let loose, and has
his hour, he will set the whole world into combustion; Nay, we have another
Malignant party, who are Rev. 2. ^^.
the spirit and spawne of Satan; men of profane hearts and lives, who do act
over the Devil, and work that business for him, which he cannot work for
himself; I am sure where grace is wanting, and prophannesse reigning, there
the spirit of spite and misery of disturbance is to be found, men desperately
set on sin have imbitterd spirits against the quiet of the Church, yea such an
enmity is there between the two seeds, that wicked men are always bending
their wits, laying their plots, and putting out themselves to disturb the
quiet in the land; these are so set on sire of hell, that they decline peace,
and delight in blood and War; Ishmael like, they must have their hands
against every man, and Salamander like, they love to live and lie in the fire:
Whence did all the tumults and uproares in Thessalonica arise? Acts 17. 5, 6.
did not the unbeleeving Jews, who were moved with envy take unto them lewd
fellows of the baser sort, a company of vagabonds and wicked fellows! These
are fit instruments to trouble a Church and State, and Kingdom; I have
observed that there are six things in wicked men making them troublous to Gods
people.

1. Their ignorance of the ways and Religion of God: These ^. Things make
wicked men to betroubl us. Ioh. 1^* ^^.
things will they do unto you for my names sake because they have not known
him that sent me: And again, They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the
time comes that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service,
and these things will they do ^ ^. 16. 2*
unto you because they have not known the Father nor me. Paul was then a
persecutor when he was under ignorance, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

2. Their Pride of spirit; a spirit of pride is a spirit of contention, a proud
heart will set Kingdoms on sire; if Haman cannot get the knee from Mord^c^i,
he will devise a bloody decree against the Jews; if Herod and Domitian fear
the loosing of their Crowns and Honors, they will command that all those who
are of the stock of David in Iwry be slain; and if proud and accursed
Prelates be put off their Cushions, and cast out from honors, what mischiefs
will they not further? They will sell themselves to their shirts to recover
their places; through pride comes contention.

3. Their exceeding Covetousness of heart; filthy luker and horrid cruelty are
seldom disjoined, when Demetrius and the crafts men saw, that the hope of
their gain was gone now they stir against Paul and Sylas, and raise a mighty
storm in Maccdonia, Acts 16. 19, 20, 21, etc. can you imagine that those
covetous wretches whose godliness is their gain, are idle at this day and do
not blow the Coal? Certainly Covetousness which is the Root of all evil,
must be the cause of much trouble.

4. Their envious spirits; it was the spirit of envy in Caine 1 John ^ 12.
which made him to murder his brother Abel; and the Caldeans and Courtiers
envying the advancement of Daniel and his fellows above themselves, devised a
means to destroy them, Dan 3. 8, 6, 3, 4.

5. Their pronenesse unto Idolatry; heat is not more inseparable to sire then
cruelty is unto idolatry; the love of Idols in all ages has been the Churches
trou^le, what stickling was there at Acts 19. 28. 34.
Ephesus for Diana? and we know that Iezabels Idols disturbed the kingdom of
Israel.

6. Their contentedness with formality in Religion, when men must have
Religion in man's dress, and are taken up more with forms of godliness then
the power of it, this makes the times to be troublous and perilous, 2 Timothy 3.
1, 4, 5.

Out of all this you see, that troublous times are from wicked men who never
cease from troubling until they dye, these are Job 3. ^7.
the earewigs and the biting Fleas still troubling the state of Gods people.

inflictingly the Churches troublous times arise from the wrath of God let fall
upon them; and his displeasure conceived against them; when God is angry his
Churches are troubled; Thou hid^st thy face and I was troubled, and again, by
Psalm. 30. 7.
thy wrath are we troubled. This you know that a little fire causes 90, 7.
a great deal of trouble, say that there be but a finger burned or an House
on fire, does it not occasion a great deal of trouble and unquietness? how
much more shall Churches and people be disquieted through the angry
countenance of God?

finally Churches have their troublous times for these ends and purposes!

1. For trial and manifestation both of soundness and of graces, 3. Ends of
the Churches troubles.
troublous times are trying times, it is not times of peace, ^ut times of
War, which tries the mettle of a Soldier, all the while the Ship lies on
the shore, or is in its harbor, its strength to bear its burden is not
known, but when its put out into the Sea, meets with blustering storms, and
is tossed and tumbled, if it now hold out, then its strength is manifested; we
have many Trees with fair tops and make a goodly show in calm seasons, which
topple down in blustering weather, for want of firm rooting in the earth; the
case is the same with men in the profession of Religion. Multitudes seem to be
Religious, own the Gospel, and go for Christians in days of peace, who in
more troublous days will quit their ground, and forsake their Captain,
whereas now well ^ooted and thoroughly sanctified Christians will keep their
standing, and rather die then them Jesus Christ; grace in truth, will be grace
in trial, here is the faith and patience of the (...)
Sain^s, q. d. if men have faith and patience indeed, troublous times will
manifest it.

2. For the manifestation of wickedmen; their madness and malignity of spirit
would not appear and be evideat unto men, and they would not show themselves
in their colors, if there were no troublous times: in peaceful days enemies
seem to be friends, and with the Viper they hide their teeth in their gummes,
but when troubles appear then they will spit out their venom making that the
opportunity for their dealing cruelly with Gods Saints.

3. For the correction of abused peace, when Christians do not well use their
peaceful times God does punish them with troublous times.

Arc of Noah, and Militant as an Army that is in the field beset with an
enemy; having so many malicious enemies she cannot be long quiet, and she may
better be discerned by lasting trials, and troubles then by constant peace;
Gregory the great, speaking of the Church says, Ecclesiaest haeres orucis: the
Church is heir to the Cross, and I would demand of papists what outward peace
had the Church in Egypt under Pharaohs oppressio^s? what peace had she in her
forty years travel thorough the Wilderness, which was a place of
temptations, journeyings, War, and many other straites and inconveniences?
tell me sadly had she not many encounters by enemies in the Land of Canaan?
where was her outward durable peace whilst she was under 70. years captivity
in Babylon? and whilst Antiochus Epiphanes did waste and spoil her in her
Ordinances and members? what means the three hundred years persecution by
the heathenish Emperors? could these things happen to her, and yet is the true
Church discernable by out ward and durable peace? by this very note we can
disprove Rome from being the true Church; for when Rome was burnt by the
Goth^s, sacked by Charles Duke of Burbon in the days of Pope Clement the
seventh, nay when their Popes were glad to fly and hide themselves, yea were
banished and imprisoned, where was the outward peace of that Church? We deny
not but sometimes outward peace may be the portion of visible Churches but
that always they have the same, only ignorance and impudency must affirm.

Times are and will be troublous upon four occasions.
fulfilled; the times are troublous, the Lord in mercy look upon us, yet let
us not think it strange, no new thing is happened to us; let me tell you that
upon four occasions times will be troublous.

When Dagon is to go down.
When Dagon and Baal is to go down: no great and prevailing evil can be
hindered or cast down without much trouble and tumult, if Gideon cast down the
Altar of Baal and cut down the grove by it, the men of the City keep a mighty
stir about it, the man they must have that did it; and die he must for it, or
it shall cost blood, read the History, lud. 6. 28, 29. if the Goddess Diana
be in danger, what a noise and uproare is there in the City, they shout and
make a hubbub, Acts 19. 28, 34.

I conceive thus much, that England has many bad tennants who having gotten
possession and can plead prescr^ption (though no Scripture title) for
themselves are resolved not to go out without blows and blood; neither can it
be imagined (unless a miracle be wrought by God, as was in the case of the
Scots) that so many proud Prelates, so many idle scandalous Non Residents, and
so much Rubbish of humane invention crept into Gods worship, will ever be cast
down or carried out without troubles; can you conceive tha^ Satan will loose a
Kingdom and never wag his tail; believe it, brethren; there are many thousands
in the Kingdom so set upon Idolatry, Superstition and the ways of formality
that they cannot be quiet if these things be taken from them.

When the Temple is to go up.
when the temple is to be reedified: No great and good work can be carried on
to perfection without much trouble; this is certain that God has brought us
to Church reforming times and these always have been troublous times. The
Angel said to Daniel, the street and the Wall shall be built in troublous
(...)
times.

Out of which Text I note these two things.
1. That when the Church begins to go up, then troubles begin to come on. 2.
That though troubles come on, the Church shall go up. The (...) was (...) the
Temple was (...)

I conceive that the times were very troublous when the City and the Temple was
in building upon these eleven reasons.

First, They were mocking and scorning times to the Jews, as is plain in
these words, But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the servant the
Ammonite and Gesh^m the Arabian heard it, they langhed us to scorn, Neh. 2.
19. These fellows fell a jearing the Jews, thinking thereby to dash the work
out of credit and the builders out of countenance.

Secondly, They were false accusing and slandering times to the Jews: the
enemies did not only give it out among themselves that they were Rebels and
Traitors, but they did accuse them to the King and their own faces of
Rebellion, and yet they were not able to prove the same as you may read, Ezra
4. from v. 6. to v. 16. and Neh. 2. 19. What is this thing that you do; will
ye rebel against the King?

Thirdly, They were hindering and inhibiting times to the Jews: The Lord
Chancellor Re^um, Secretary Shimsai, and the rest of their companions so far
prevailed with the over credulous ^^ing Artaxerxes that he gave command that
they should cease building, and by this means there was a stand put unto the
work for many years, Ezra ^. 17. to 22.

Fourthly, they were insinuating and dissembling times to the Jews, the pure
enemies to the work of building came unto them with tenders of their service,
as if they had been willing to bear part of the charge and to do some great
work for the building up of the Temple; let us (say they) build with you, for
we seek your God as you do, etc. Ezra 4. 2. Neh. 6. 2.

Fifthly, they were conspiring and confederating times against the Jews, now
the enemies held a Council, and called a convocation to see what was to be
done to hinder them in this good work, and at last it was resolved upon; that
they should try all their ^^inds, send out into every County to gather together
tag and rag and no man were he never so base and vile in condition that would
come in and join with them should be put by; as you may read Neh 4. 8.

Sixthly, They were treacherous and betraying times to the Jews; when their
enemies saw that they could do little harm to them whilst they were a party
united among themselves, they practice a most perilous attempt, namely to
divide; that so they might have a party among them: and to this end they bribe
Judah, and Levi, certain of the false hearted Nobles and superstitious
Prophets, which became a disgraceful snare to themselves and a mighty
hinderance to the work: Now Nehemiah had much to do to keep up the hearts of
the people and to hold them together for that great work. Consider, Judah
comes in thus playing his part: The strength of the bearers of the burdens is
decayed, and there is much Rubbish, so that we are not able to build the Wall,
and Neh 4. ^^, ^1.
our adversaries said they shall not know n^r see till we come in the midst
among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. Was not here a fair
disheartning tale which might easily take with such whose spirits were lazy and
fearful, might not the lazy ones have thus reasoned amongst themselves, I
promise you these men speak reason, this works makes my shoulders to ache, I
have carried out so many burdens already, and what a deal of carriage does
remain yet; toil and moile who will, I will be an Issa^ar no longer, seeing
I may have my ease and the Nobles like well of it I will accept it; work who
will work for me, and if the Temple be not built up until I further it, it
shall never be built might not the fearful ones have thus reasoned, what
shall we die and be slain? build who will for me, Skin for skin and all that
a man has will he give for his life: join to this the carriage of the
prophetess Noadiah, and Shemajah the son of Delajah, they Neh (...). 12, 13
shut up themselves and preach to the people, get into the house of God within
the Temple, and shut the doors of the Temple, etc. was not this a taking plot
to have grave and learned men come in with their Counsels, caveats, and
arguments? might not the Jews have said surely the danger is great, there
cannot be all this smoke without some fire? come let us take warning in time
and give off working, we have heard and seen the sayings and doings of many of
our Nobles, men great in birth and blood and see which way they incline, but
now the Prophets who are men inspired of God they come with a warning from
Heaven to us and if we shall slight them also, shall we not be guilty of our
own death, if we shall continue in this work of building.

Seventhly, they were opposing and withstanding times to the Jews: the enemies
were not always in deliberation and speech but they proceeded to action, we
read that Tatnai Shethar-Bosnai and their adherents came to the heads of the
Jews, and did questi^n them by what authority they did build up the City and
(...)
make up the Wall: and not contented with this they begin to raise an Army that
they might come and fight against Jerusalem, (...)
and with the utmost of their power they did set themselves against the
building.

Eighthly, They were self desending times to the Jews; Nehemiah was forced to
divide the servants, half wrought in the work, and the other half of them
held both the spears, the shield and the bows and the Habergions: Nay the
builders of Neh. ^. 16. 17. 18, 21, 22, 23
the Wall, and the bearers of the burdens were but half handed, for in one
hand they held the Trowell and in the other hand the Sword: further the Jews
were forced to their no small trouble and cost to keep a strong guard about
themselves day and night.

despising and undervaluing times; the enemies in reproach of their work said
what do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they
sacrifice? will they Nehem. 4. 2.
make an end in a day, will they revive the stones out of the rubbish which are
burnt? when the Army of Samaria had thus spoken, Tobiah the Ammonite makes his
scoffing speech. Saying, Even that which they build, if a Fox go up he shall
even break down their stone wall: as if they should have said.

What do these silly and self deceiving men intend, do they imagine that
they are considerable to go forward with this great work, they think to
carry all clear before them, that they shall meet with no adversaries or that
we will stand by as lookers on holding our hands; no such matter, we will warrant
them, they shall find stout men among us, yea ten for their one, who will
oppose them. What do they imagine to have their old sacrifices, solemn days
and assemblies, in this they are mistaken; see how early they rise, how lustily
they work, and how late they leave off, as if all the building should up,
before any body heard of it; let them go on the work which they have taken in
hand, they shall never be able to effect it. For we will hold their noses to
the grinstone, and they shall find it to be another manner work to finish then
they look for: see how these doting men are glewing the old stones together
again, as for new ones where will they get them let them alone; suffer them to
go on, see what they will do, and when they have done the most and the best
that they can, they shall but build Castles in the air, yea so weak shall be
their work, that if a Fox come up he shall with his feet overturne all, we
are sure that we can overthrow all at our pleasure.

self justifying and clearing times: the Jews were forced to bring out the
Kings authority, and to show quo warranto, they did enterprise the work, we
read of many self acquitting Orations which were made by them, Ezra 5. They
were forced to plead their own loyalty to their Sovereign and to testify
their own innocence to the world.

enemies answering times: Sometimes Sanballat Nehem. 6. 21. verse 2. to 9.
and Geshem sent messengers for meetings and conferences, they sought by
Parliances to hinder them from going on in their building, which when they
could not obtain (though requested four times) then they fall to writing of
letters, some of them containing unjust charges, other some expressing
unreasonable demands, all which took up much time in their reading and
answering, which could not but be a great trouble to Nehemiah and very delaying
to the work.

By these instances you see how heavily the good work went on, and how justly
I affirm that a Church can neither be founded or reformed, but the times will
be very troublous; if God be casting a Corner stone upon which he intends to
raise up a spiritual building, and if he call together a company of laborers
to forward that work (as he has now done among us by those worthies in
PARLIAMENT) resolve upon it, that the Dragon will wagge his Tail, and the
times will be very troublous.

When enemies are to go down
3. When enemies are to be defeated and destroyed: troublous times may then
happen to Gods Churches, when either the disappointing, or the destruction of
wicked and malicious enemies is at hand; this we find that when Pharaoh and
his Host were nearest unto their ruin, then was the trouble of Israel
greatest; in the Churches storms wicked men many times suffer shipwreck; their
own stirrings against, and strivings with the Churches have been the means
of their own ruin and trouble; Haman went down in the time of the Churches
trouble; and this is observable, that the greatest troublers of the State of
England and Scotland have been thrown down in the times of the Churches
trouble; had we not had our troublous times, we had not seen so many Lucifers
cast down among us! What times have more discovered enemies, what times have
more crossed enemies, nay what times have been more destructive to enemies then
the times of the Churches trouble? these winds blow them no good, they always
presage their downfall, if you look that great enemies should fall down th^n
expect troublous times for mine own part I do verily believe that all the
troubles in Ireland and in England will end in the shame and confusion of many
powerful and politic enemies; such who begin the Churches trouble must
perish ere the Church has peace.

When mercies are at hand.
When the Church is nigh to the enjoying of some great and unexpected mercy:
this is observable, that the Churches greatest mercies have sprung out of the
greatest troubles; She has not enjoyed such mercies in her calm seasons, as
she has in her blustering times, the nearer the woman is to the time of her
delivery the quicker and the sharper are her pangs and pains, when the frost
is nearest to its breaking, then is the air sharpest in its pinching; the
Churches good is not divided from the Churches trouble, under tossings and
tumblings she is not only expecting but prepared and fitted for mercies, the
cross going of the wheels does further the right going of the Clock, the
fruitfulness of the spring is it not hindered by the sharpness of the Winter;
the Churches troubles are far from hindering the coming in of mercies, the Sun
will shine though the winds blow, and the stronger the gale of wind is the
quicker is the dispatch of the ship unto the desired haven; we see that when
Pharaoh was in his greatest rage, then Israel was nigh unto deliverance; out of
that troublous womb came their greatest quiet; if there were no war there
would be no victory; though troubles create not mercies, yet they occasion and
antecede mercies, and it is Gods manner to give great mercies in troublous
times, I am verily persuaded that England which is now in great trouble is
big with child of some extraordinary mercy, we may not think that these
troubles shall end without a blessing, even that longed for reformation both of
Church and Commonwealth.

Let the consideration of these things stay your thoughts and settle your
minds under the apprehension and sense of these present troubles.



England has at this day.
Motives to prepare for troublous times.
First, time troubling sins; it is the sins of a people that troubles
times; and brings down disquietnesse; that which is the trouble of Heaven, and
the trouble of the heart, will be also the trouble of a Nation: I say that
sins of all sorts, and in all sorts so abounding amongst us as they do,
cannot but bring with with them much and great trouble unto the whole Land:
have we not among us all Land wasting, and Land weakening sins? most of our
Pastors are either ignorant and blind, or corrupt and unsound, or scandalous
and wicked; so far from reforming themselves that they are enemies unto the
much desired Reformation, They see vain and foolish things, and do not
discover unto Lamen. 2. 14.
the people their iniquity to turn away their captivity; may not God say, Many
Pastors in England have destroyed my vineyard, Ierem. 12, 10. 11.
and trodden my portion under feet, they have made my portion a desolate
Wilderness, they have made it desolate and being desolate it mourns unto me?
Many of our Rulers and great ones, are Idolatrous, Adulterous, full of pride,
and idleness, leading many thousands into wickedness by their evil example
following the footsteps, of Jeroboam who made Israel to sin; and as for the
people of the Land, the pride of Moab, the cruelty of Edom, the formality of
Israel, the Apostasy of Judah, together with the abundance of all sins takes
hold of them; we are an exceeding sinful people before the Lord and what can
we expect should be the issue but troublous times?

Secondly, Troublous times warnings, God has fired many Beacons, and shot of
many warning pieces among us, which do tell us that troubles are coming
toward us, not only Germany, and Ireland are all on a fire and flame, but we
have the breakings out of the same among us by most unhappy divisions between
Prince and people; O for the divisions of Reuben there should be great
thoughts of heart.

Thirdly, Time troubling enemies; we have lodging and lurking among us men of
no Religion, (swarms of Atheists) men of a false Religion (a great Popish
party;) men of no rank and quality whose mouths are full of scoffs and hands
full of blood, unworthy and base Cavaliers whose only hopes lie in this that
shortly they shall ravish our virgins, defloure our wives, cut our throats,
and divide our estates; what means the countenancing and maintaining those
vermin and of-scouring of the Land, but that troublous times are at hand?
certainly the kingdom cannot vomit out these frogs or quit it self of these
Locusts without much ado.

Fourthly, time troubling opinions: all heresies are bitter springs and can
produce nothing but troubles within a Church, when the Heresies of Arrius,
Pelagius, Arminius, Socinus, and others crept into the Churches they did not a
little increase the troubles of the eastern and western parts of the world,
and for mine own part I cannot believe but that the like effects will follow in
this kingdom by men's deserting of old truths and embracing of new errors; when
people turn Anabaptists, Eatonists, Tra^kites, Antinomians, Familists and what
not; this will fill a Land with trouble and division.

Fifthly, time troubling actions; men study nothing more than how to be
unquiet; each man is full of discontent, and set upon thwarting and crossing,
who almost among us is not for his own will and way? and so that their egg
may be roasted, they care not though the kingdom burn for it.

Finding these things among us we have great cause to fear that God is going
about to make our times troublous.

put away the evil day from us, as did the Jews; few persons do think of
Amos 6. 3.
troubles before hand and most will not believe that they shall have troubles
though they see nothing above them, but a cloud of blood, and behold nothing
beneath them but a red Sea.



My advice is this.

Keep fair quarter with heaven; let not God be your enemy or one that
frowns upon you when troubles come; acquaint 10. Preparatives against
troublous times. Job 22. 21.
your selves With him, and be at peace, and thereby good shall come unto you:
if men are in covenant with God and reconciled unto God in and through the Lord
Jesus they cannot be und one by troublous times; the favor and love of God
will be security enough to Christians in evil times, this was Noah's Arc that
he found grace in the eyes of God; he had a friend in heaven.

preserve purity and peace within; let not Conscience be filthy or unquiet;
the meeting of a foul Sea, and blustering storms do make the passage of the
ship very troublous, and thus it is when a man's conscience is filthy, and
defiled by the love and power of lusts that there are seven abominations in it,
if troubles come he cannot tell what to do with himself, for now conscience is
more unquiet then the times; believe me in this, that if troublous times, and a
troubled conscience do meet together, you will be of all men most miserable: O
therefore make it your work, to get your Consciences pacified, and purified
through the sprinkling of the blood of Christ; labor that Conscience may
learn to read its own acquittall from the guilts of sin, and that it may be
very holy and spiritual, and then though you are cast into the Seas and do
meet with the greatest of dangers you are well provided for, if conscience be
not your hell, you are well enough for heaven.

Affect not a life of ease and delicacy; could we now me our selves to
hardness, we should the better endure troublous times: if we shall daily
pamper our bodies, and remain under our wonted niceness, being all for
pleasure and ease; if the meat that we are to ease is never sine enough, if
the wine and bear we drink can never be strong or sweet enough, if the beds
whereon we are to lie are not soft enough, and the clothes that we are to put
on fashionable enough to us: pray tell me, what shall we do in troublous
times? Good Christians consider, how will you be able to run before a bloody
Cavalier without stockings and shoes for ten, twenty, or thirty miles
together to save your lives, if you use now your feet to that niceness, that
you c^n scarce endure to tread upon a stone? how will you be able to make the
field your bed, or a stone your Pillow, if that you do not now use your selves
to hard lodgings? I pity most of you who now put your heads in a bag and must
have hoodes for your faces, and what not for bravery and pleasure, Alas! should
God bring many of you into the condition of your poor sisters in Ireland what
would you do? how could you endure to be stripped of your clothing, to hide your
selves in dens and caves, to drink up puddle water, and to make acornes a
feast unto you! o that I could prevail with you, now to inure your selves unto
hardness! it would put you into a fit temper for troublous times; it is noted
of holy Bilney that being persuaded he should be burned for the Gospel, he
would often put his finger into the Candle to see if he could be able to endure
the fire before he came into the fire; I wish that in England, this point were
more pressed and thought upon.

Get quit of the Creature, in point of heart interest: this you shall find,
that those waters which are running down to the maine Ocean are more unquiet
then waters that are narrowed up in a well; and of this I am certain that a
worldly temper is most unfit for a troublous time, if troubles should come,
then to have a Child in the heart, and an estate in the heart, will prove a
greater trouble to a man then the trouble it self; O then get the Moon under
your feet, and the world out of your hearts! Seek not great things, and
engage not your hearts to worldly things! trouble not the little world by the
great world! be as was the holy Martyrs, who made nor Wife, nor Children, nor
Estates a block to them in the way, and could cry out farewell world, and say,
Bavaria is not so dear unto me as my Wife and c^ildren, yet for Christ's sake I
will forsake them chearefully; when Carpenter.
a man has little or nothing to loose he can the better endure the sight of a
thief, but when he has great sums of money about him the coming of the
thief is terrible to him; In this last years trouble at London, many had not
been so much troubled as they were, had they not been so rich as they were;
they then were as much taken up where they should hide their wealth as in times
past how they might get their wealth; he was in a fit travailing posture, that
said I have my learning in my head, and my staff in my hand, and as for the
world take it who will. This I conceive, the world is for use, not for cumber:
we are to hold it i^ our hands, and to keep it from our hearts, if we mean
well to pass through troublous times.

take not Gods work out of his hand: he that will meddle of Gods part and not
do his own duty shall never bear u^ in troublous times, that, I intend is
this, most people do trouble themselves about issues, and in mean time never
keep close to duties; Oh! say some, Sir, for mine own part I could well pass
over these troubles, but that which does most trouble me is this, what shall
become of my poor children when my throat is cut, or my life taken from me?
who shall take care of them, and see that they be not brought up in the Popish
and Idolatrous Religion? ah poor creatures! do not issues belong to God and
duties to man? what, is that God on whom thou reliest void of care and
providence? Oh that we could make a deed of gift of all our Children to God,
and that we could bequeath and commit them to God, trusting him withal, and
over all leaving the success in his hands, who knows how to do his own
work better than man can direct him.

Make sure your harberous and hiding places: Every si^ly creature will provida
it self of a place of refuge against the storm comes, and should not
Christians fore seeing evil times get themselves hiding places? Sure I am of
this; that the name Prove. 18 10.
of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous run into it and are safe, nay
God calls upon his people thus: Come my people enter Esaias 26 22.
thou into thy Chambers and shut thy doors about thee: hids thy self as it
were for a little moment until the indignation be overpast; these places do
show unto us that there are harbors to be had, o that we could now be
securing the presence of God with us and the attributes of God for us, if God
be with us and for us we are sure to do well enough; in the world you shall
have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace: if we are once united to Jesus
Christ, (...) 1^.
and are found in him then, we shall be safe, Christ will be sanctuary and
Tower of defense unto all that trust in him.

(...)
as our heads if we have the promises to seek when we are to suffer we are
undone.



1. Faith which may keep up your confidences upon the truth and goodness of
God in the promises.

2. Patience which may enable you to stoop to the will of God in taking up the
Cross.

3. The spirit of Prayer by which you may open your mind unto God, bring down
seasonable succors and assistances from GOD or be able to commit your selves
into the hands of God.

the best doing Christian will prove the right suffering Christian.

Be sitting of your selves for the best of ends, and then you are well prepared
for the worst of times; if men did think more frequently and seriously of
death, and were daily putting themselves into a dying posture, they would be
well prepared for troublous times, for he that is in case to die, will be in
case to suffer; here is our fault that we think of troubles, but we do not
think of death, or we look upon troubles, as be falling us before death,
whereas God knows many of us may be dead before the troubles come, as well as
many of us die by the troubles when they come.

Learn to be sensible of the times of Jacobs trouble: Use 4.
Let them have the same impression upon our spirits which they had upon the
spirit of the Prophet; he cries out, alas, for that day is great, etc. so
should we, times of the Churches desolation should be ti^es of the Christians
Lamentation; as the sins so the sorrows of the Church should work us to
much inward pity and compassion and to extraordinary and continued mourning and
weeping.

Evils among men.
look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor Esaias 2^: ^.
not to comfort me because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people: and
another Prophet says, Let mine eyes run down with Ierem. 14. 17.
tears night and day and let them not cease for the Virgin daughter of my
people is broken with a great breach; good Nehemiah sits Nehem. 1. 4.
him down and weeps as if he would have wept his heart out when he heard of
the distresses and distractions of his brethren: This is the great sin of
England that men look upon the troubles of the times with a regardlesse eye;
Irelands miseries, and ENGLANDS miseries are not laid to heart; there are these
evils under the Sun, I wish that I could not charge them upon many.

1. One is to grieve at the Churches prosperity: Ezra 4. Nehemiah 4.

2. A second is to rejoice in their misery, as Psalm 137. 3. Obad. ver. 12.

3. A third is to be given to mirth and pastime when the Churches are in
heaviness, as it is written; that the King and Haman sat down to drink, but
the City Shusan was perplexed: Hest. 3. 15. It is noted of the French that when
the Goths came in upon them, they were without sense and feeling of their
brethrens calamities, the Historian says, Confundebatur vox morientium, and
^alv^anus de dei ^ubernati, lib. 6.
vox bacchantium, and vix discerni poterat pl^bis ejulatus qui fiebat in bello
and sonus populi qui clamabat in circo, etc) the voice of the dying could
hardly be distinguished from the rorings of the drunken (then when the people
who were without the City cried out for fear of the enemy, those who were
within the City made a noise at their sports;) I doubt that we have too too
many like those Gallants of old who would Crown their heads with rushes. when
the Kingdom and Commonwealth was in great troubles; our feasting, and dancing,
and gaming does witness against us.

4. A fourth, Is not to mourn for the Churches miseries, men have hard, and
stony, dead and senseless hearts, even like to the Priest and Levite, who
passed by the wounded man, and had no compassion on him.

5. A fifth, Is to seem to mourn and yet not to mourn for the troubles of
the Churches; we have too too many funeral, and formal mourners among us, men
who are Clouds without waters; happily upon notice of the Churches troubles
they can weep, but they do not mourn, always tears from the eyes do not
argue mourning in the heart; Ishmael could weep as he went, and yet ^erem. 41
^.
he grieved not at the miseries of Sion and Jerusalem; and it is recorded that
Julius Caesar did shed tears for Pompeys death which he himself caused: it
is no new thing for to find a tear in the eye, and joy in the heart; surely
most of us are too sudden, too shallow, too short, and too open in our mourning
which does show it to be wholly formal; beloved, let me entreat this of you:
let no Church of God bleed, but do you bleed with them, weep with them that
weep, weep over Ireland, weep over England, go and say with the Prophet, I
will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked, I will make a wailing like
the Mich. 1. 8. 9.
Dragons and mourning as the Owls: for her wound is incurable, for Means to
be mourners.
it is come into Judah, he is come unto the gate of my people even to
Jerusalem: and that you may do this, get a soft and tender heart, a heart that
can truly mourn for your own sins.

2.
cause and condition its own.

This may work upon us to take notice with thankfulness of the peaceful
times which God has continued unto us of this Land, when other Nations and
kingdoms have had their trembling and troublous times, we have (by free grace)
enjoyd Halcion M^ns sin a^^ peaceful time
days; had we laid under the miseries of Germany, France, and Ireland we would
this day have prized our peace at an high rate; this is our great sin.

1. That we do not take notice of our own times of peace, and look upon the
same as a great outward mercy which continues many choice things unto us.

2. That we do not make a right use of our long enjoyed peace, we have abused
our good days by running into all manner of riot and falling into several
divisions and contentions; England has made her peaceful times her sinful
times; the mildest Winters and Springs do not more bring forth the worst and
most of weeds, then our peaceable and quiet times has occasioned the
committing of most foul and terrible sins, we have tainted our selves
exceedingly, in so much that God might say of us, ease Prove. 1. 3^.
slays the foolish; and the prosperity of fools destroys them, it is a sad
thing to have peace, and to grow weary of it, or worse by it, this will soon
expose a Nation unto troublous times.

Let us take heed of hastening our selves unto these troublous times: o that we
could in Jacobs troubles see what may befall us; cui-vis potest accidere quod
cuiquam potest, althings fall a like to all, and it has never been the
happiness of any one particular visible Church long to stand in outward peace
and beauty, I think God has made this kingdom the miracle of the world for
standing peace, and may he not make it as miraculously miserable by times of
trouble? and what if God should do^ so? Oh the misery of England, my heart
bleeds to think of the greatness of that day, as wars and troubles come in;
all outward mercies and comforts would go out; the withdrawing of the Sun
makes the night; the absence of a good temper casts the body i^to weakness,
and if our peace be gone, then the high ways will be un-occupied, the
travelers will walk in by ways; (...) 5. 7.
Towns will not be in^abited, Cities will be left desolat^, and the (...)
W^^es of Sion will lament, because no man comes to the solemns feasts, now
the Church will be under a Cloud, scarcely visible, and Religion will run in
ward, as the juice and sap does into the root in times of winter; now Parents
shall be deprived of Children, Children of Parents; Husbands will be scattered
from Wives, and Wives from Husbands, the enemy will sack, and spoil, rob and
slay, ravish and desloure; nothing shall be our own but heaviness and
distress; with Germany we shall be a field of blood, and with Ireland a
spectacle of misery: Oh what mournings will be in our streets, and what
sadness in our hearts, what blackness in our faces, and what desolations in
our kingdoms, you may think more than I can speak, a sad Tragedy will
beacted. Oh that we would fear these troublous times before we feel them,
and that now we would take that course which might prevent the falling down of
this bloody cloud hanging over our heads; Brethren learn,

1. To get off the guilt of all those Land troubling sins which Means to
prevent troublous times.
are among you, you must overthrow that which will overthrow all our mercies,
and all our hopes, if the guilt of Englands Idolatry, Cruelty, contempt of
Ordinances, unfruitfulnesse under the means of grace, Carnal security,
embracing and entertaining errors against the foundation, formality in
Religion, decaying in her first love, want of compassion to other bleeding
Churches be not expiated in the blood of Christ, England will be an undone and
miserable Nation; What peace so long as the whoredoms 2 Kings ^. 22.
of they mother Iezabell and her witchcrafts are so many? O that we could
tender up JESUS CHRIST unto God for Englands sins.

2 To be much in National humiliation; the whole Land must be mourned for, o
that we could weep over England, and grieve for the sins of England; surely
the whole Land must mourn and grieve, or it cannot long stand a Nation.

3. To desire and further a National reformation; there must be a purging of
the Church from its dross, there must be the setting up the power and purity
of Ordinances, every man must strive to reform and amend else the Kingdom
will soon fall asunder.

4. To cast out the endangering enemies of our Kingdom, if you shall suffer
men of blood and cruelty, enemies to God and Religion and not do justice upon
them, the kingdom cannot but be ruined.

5. To give off your daily course of sinning, if God find us a people set on
our sins, and that we will not give off the love and practice of iniquity he
will not spare us, how can we expect the avo dance of troublous times, or the
continuance of peaceful times, when we fill up the times with iniquities.

Let us be far from procuring troublous times unto the Churches of God, I
know that it is a great sin to be an efficient malicious cause of trouble to
the state of GODS Church, the Apostle does wish them cut off that were Church
troublers, and Iosuah proceeding to judgment against Ach^n Galath. 5. 12.
said, why have thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day Josbuah
7. 25. it is no small crime to be a troubler of Israel; and here give me leave
to acquaint you with the truth, for I find that you are abused by the false
suggestions of some who bear no good will to the Parliament or the welfare of
Sion.

There are some who are said to be the troublers of the State of the Church
and Kingdom among us, who are no more guilty of that charge then holy Elijah
was, its not those worthies now assembled in Parliament who seek to their
utmost to preserve Gods Religion and all your liberties, and estates that have
troubled the state of our times, was it ever known that right Protestant
English spirits did ever repute their chosen Knights, Burgesses, and Citizens,
(who are the repairers of their breaches, and the restorers of paths to dwell
in) troublers of Church and State? Did you know but the fidelity and Loyalty of
their hearts to the KING and kingdom, and behold their constant pains and
diligence for the good of us and all our posterity, you would bless God for
them, and account (as they do indeed deserve) worthily of them.

There are others who are real and actual disturbers and troublers Who are so
troublers o^ our times.
of our times, namely, 1. Proud and discontented Prelates, together with their
idle and scandalous followers, whose spirits are swollen so big that they
scorning reformation have thrown PETER'S Keys into Tibur, and have taken Paul's
sword in their hands, setting on that war in the Land which may truly be
called Bellum Episcopale: 2. Papists and popishly affected persons, who having
received the mark of the beast do seek to maintain Idolatry among us, and
for their idols resolve to fight, tanquam pro aris and focis; believe me that
it is the smoke which comes out of the Popes Kitching, that's ready to choke
the Church, and does make so many aching he^rts and weeping eyes among us, and
our War is bellum papale. 3. Guilty and convicted persons, who having
formerly by unjust courses, illegal patents, and other ways of oppression
deceived us in our meats, drinks, and apparel, do now fear the sentence
and lash of the I aw and seek rather to imbroile the Subjects in war then to
yield them a just satisfaction. 4. And in a word many endebted and upstart
Nobles with other beggarly and discontented Cavaliers; men without callings and
Conscience, even birds of prey who flutter up and down, drinking healths to
the Devil and their own damnation, if they overthrow not the Parliament, and
hang up the Round Heads by whom they mean the truly godly of the Land; these
and the like are the malignant and molesting party, into whose secret, let none
of your souls come, with them have no confederacy, nay rather, discover their
plots, resist their persons, and according to your Protestation join with
those (who are ready to live and die to do you and yours good) to bring them
to condign punishment.

Thus when we have done our utmost to prevent troublous times if God shall
bring in troubles among us we shall enjoy the peace of our Consciences and may
expect in his own time the promised salvation and deliverance laid down in
the next part.

Englands Salvations.
But he shall be saved out of it.
HEre we have the light side of the Text, viz. the promise of salvation out of
their great trouble and misery, times of deliverance should follow times of
trouble, we know that there is a threefold Salvation belonging to GODS Churches.

1. One spiritual which is the souls salvation from the power A Threefold
salvation.
of sin in the sanctification of their natures, when men are sanctified, then
are they saved.

2. Another eternal which is the delivery of soul and body from hells
damnation in the glorification of their persons, when men are brought to heaven
then are they saved.

3. A third is Temporal which is their freedom from outward miseries into
which their sins have cast them; of this salvation our Text speaks. The sense
is this, that though they were for the present under many and great miseries by
their captivity, yet a time was designed and decreed by heaven for their
deliverance, they should not always be bondmen in the hands of the Caldeans
and Babilonians, there should come the year of Inbilee, when the prisons
should be opened and the prisoners set free enjoying themselves and their
ordinances and their wonted peace and privileges: whence I gather this point.

That God has his times and means wherein, and whereby he Doct. 2. Gods
Churches have salvation.
will save and deliver his Churches out of their great and desperate troubles.
Consider, From
troubles, they are exempted from destructions; Noah is saved when the old
world was drowned, and Lot was saved when Sodom was burned; there was 7000.
saved from Iezabels fury;UNIT="In" and we read of a remnant that escaped: save
his servants in In
their troubles; though they are involved in the common miseries of others, yet
care is taken for them, that they shall be safe, Jeremiah was taken prisoner,
and carried captive into Babylon yet God so orders the matter that not a hair
falls from his head, he was in more safety among the Heathens, then he could
be among his own people: Sometimes God does save (...)
his people out of their troubles; when he shall let them fall into great and
sore troubles, that their case seems to be desperate, even such as threatens
death and ruin unto them, and out of which no possibility of deliverance by
ordinary means does appear even now when they are as a Lamb or Sheep in the
mouth and paw of a Bear or Lion; shall salvation come in upon them, and a
door for deliverance shall be opened to them.

2. You must know that God does save his out of troublous 2 Samuel.10. ^^
times and conditions, sometimes immediately by his own mighty arm and power
no creature being used, sometimes mediately by the hand and help of those
creatures, whether Angels or men whom he is pleased to make choice of, not out
of any necessity that he has of them but to show his Sovereignty over them and
that readiness of disposition that is in them to obey his will and help his
Churches; we read of salvation by Angels, and of salvation by Josuah and the
Judges whom God raised up to be both Typical and temporal Saviors and
deliverers unto his Neh. 9. 2^
people.

3. You must understand that salvation out of troubles being a temporal and
outward mercy is vouchsafed to Churches in general and unto Christians in
particular upon Gods terms and conditions, that is. 1. If God see it to be
good for them; there are certain times when God though he can by his power,
yet he will not in his wisdom save and deliver his out of troubles, v. g.

1, When the truth is to be sealed and ratified with the blood of his Times
when God will not save his out of misery.
Saints; the Lord will sometimes have his own people to bear witness unto
the Gospel by dying.

2. When the Church is to be enlarged; the blood of the Martyrs ganguis
martyrum (...)
is the seed of the Church, and when God will have it grow and increase he
does sow and water it with the blood of his Saints; the Church before and about
the times of the tyrannical Heathen Emperors when they slew ten thousands,
and hundred thousands of her members did more increase them at other times.

3. When enemies are preparing for, and hastening unto their fearful
destruction; God will give them time to ripen and fill up the measure of their
sins, to act out and over the wickedness, and poyion that is in them, which
they cannot do if the Churches should have their present deliverances.

4. When Christians are to be manifested a sacrifice of sweet Savor unto God
and the world; we know that perfumes are sweetest when they are thrown into
the fire, and spices do send out their smell when they are bruised in the
mortar, and Christians do send out the sweet f^vour of their graces, then when
they lie and die under their troubles.

2. Then when God sees it to be best for them: Gods time for deliverance and
salvation is the best time, always outward deliverance is not best for
Churches and Christians; many times we would have our mercies before that we
are fitted for our mercies; all unseasonable deliverers would be hurtful
deliverances; GOD Es^y 60. 22.
says, I the Lord will hasten it in his time: our times are in Gods hands, and
all our conditions for their kind and degree and time; he does set down when
Israel shall go into captivity, and how Times when the Churches shall be saved.
long she must remain under it before she be saved out of it; this I conceive
that Gods times for his Churches deliverance out of troubles are these.

1. When misery is come to its height, man's extremity is Gods opportunity, in
the Mount will the Lord be seen: when things Genesis 22. 14.
to sense are as bad as may be, so that there is little or no hope of amendment
appearing, then shall deliverance come and salvation appear, and that in a
s^eciall and remarkable way; when miseri^s do seem to enclose and encompasse
Churches, that they are as a City besieged round about, having all its passages
stopped up, when miseries do press and oppress the Spirits to their misery;
yea when miseries are lengthned out, and have boiled out themselves to their
utmost, then men can scarcely see how a Church or people can be more
miserable, this is the time which God takes to save his Churches, as may
appear in the salvation of Israel in the Red Sea, and of the Jews in Hamans
time.

2. When enemies are judgment ripe: God will let wicked men alone in their
work for a while, they shall have their day and year wherein they may fill up
the measure of their wickedness as did the Amonites; and this being done the
Church shall have salvation according to that saying of God to Abraham, But in
the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full^: wicked men have much (...).
wickedness to commit before the Churches come to be delivered.

3 When Churches are humbled under sins and well prepared for deliverance:
God, He never brings Churches out of miserabled evils, till they are humbled
for their sinful evi^ls; An unhumbled people are sure to be an afflicted
people; but when the spirit of a people is brought down and laid low before
God in all humility, when a people is thus fitted for deliverance it is at
hand as we may see in Manasses and the Israelites. (...) 12, 13. (...).


4. When prayers are sounding: usually the Lord does make the spirit of prayer
the John Baptist, to the work of deliverance; I mean he makes men to be much
and mighty in prayer; he gives them enlarged hearts in prayer, they shall
strive and wrestle with him in prayer, and then salvation shall come in; we see
that Daniel was much in praying when the Church was near unto her deliverance,
and the Christians met in prayer the same night that Peter was delivered.

3. In that way which se m^th good in his own eyes: God will go his own way in
the saving of his, sometimes he will effect their salvation ordinarily in an
usual and common way of providence; sometimes he will give them silvation
extraordinarily in a marvail us and miraculous way of providence, even by weak
means, no means and against means, as may appear in Isreal's deliverance out
of Aegrpt, and at the Red Sea, and in the deliverance of the three Children out
of the fiery furnace, and Daniel in the Lions den together with many others.

The truth of this proposition will appear unto us.

1. By the witness of these Scriptures; Blessed art thou O Israel, who is like
to thee O people, saved by the Lord? The Lord is my Deuteronomy 33 ^^. Exodus (...)
Psalm 9^, 12.
streagth and song, and he is become my salvation: God is my King of old,
working salvation in the midst of the earth; when the Angel had spoken unto
Daniel of the greatness of the miseries of the Church under Antiochus, he
says, and at that time thy people shall be delivered

2. By th^se confirming grounds.

First, In God there is every thing which may make for the salvation of his
people out of troublous times: As,

1. Might and power, he is one able to save, Esa. 63. 1. Our God whom we serve
is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace; Daniel 3. 1^.
Yea so omnipotent is God that nothing is able to withstand his power in saving
his out of trouble, and therefore it is often said that with a mighty and a
strong hand even as it were by force of Arms he brought them out of the house
of bondage.

2. Mercy and Love unto his Churches and people, God does not cease to love his
when they are in Captivity and Calamity; his bowels are troubled for them and
therefore he will surely have Ierem 31. ^^.
mercy upon them and deliver them; had God no love in him, not love unto his
Churches, then they might lie and rot in the prison, but we know that he loves
them with an unchangeable love, they are his darlings, dear and tender unto
him, and this makes him to arise to their deliverance; Israel is my son even
my first b^rne Exodus 4. 12. 13
let my son go says Moses to Pharaoh.

3. Will and desire, God is willing to save his people; Lo this Esaias 15, 9.
Daniel 3. 17.
is our God, we have waited for him and he will save us, and he will deliver
us out of thy hand O King: God has a readiness of min^ to succor and save
his children out of troubles, and what can hinder their salvation?

4. Wisdom and skill, the Lord knows how to deliver the godly ^ Peter 2, 9.
out of temptations: all ways and means for salvation are to be found in God.

5. Faithfulness and truth: God has undertaken to save, and promised
deliverance; but upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance Obadiah v. 17. Zech. 8.
7, 8.
and there shall be holiness, and the house of Jacob shall possess their
possessions: and again, thus says the Lord of Hosts, behold I will save my
people from the East Country, and from the West Country, and I will bring them,
and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and they shall be my people;
and I will be their God in truth and in righteousness,

6. Care and providence; as the general care of God goes along with all his
Creatures, so his special care and providence is held over his Churches and
does compass them as the hills do compass Jerusalem; hence it was that Noah
had his Arc and Moses his basket or Cradle of Bulru^hes

7. Name and Title, God is styled in one place the Savior of Ierem. 14. 8.
Psalm 40. 17. 1 Chro^. ^6. ^^. Psalm 65. 7.
Israel, in another place a deliverer; and in a third place the salvation of
his people, now these Titles are made good in this Act of freeing his people
and taking them out of their miserable conditions.

8. Sovereignty and dominion; God is Lord and King; the ruler and over-ruler of
all persons and actions, men and devils, death and the grave, heaven and hell
are at his disposal: every condition (...) 45 ^
of peace and trouble, light and darkness are his creatures: all things stoore
to him, and are ruled by him; now having this absolute command over all, he can
with a nod, or a word make the Seas to give up their de^d and command
deliverances for Jacob, the creature shall be so far from resisting and
opposing his will that it shall further and hasten the same, and therefore it
is that the Churches have their deliverance.

In the Lord Jesus, who is the great and mighty Savior and one that saves his
Churches spiritually and eternally; be having saved them from the greatest
danger by sin will also set out himself to save them out of the less danger
by misery; he is one that goes along with Jacob in all his troubles; he it was
that was Daniell 3. 25.
in the burning furnace with the three Children; he was in the Ship with the
Disciples upon the Seas, and he is that Michael, the Daniell 12. 1.
great Prince which stands up, and stands for the Children of thy people:
We may not conceive the Church to be under misery and trouble, but Jesus Christ
puts himself into its condition: in their affliction he is afflicted; Christ
is persecuted when they are Isay 63. 9. Acts 9. 6. Hebrews 4. 15.
persecuted; he is an High Priest touched with our infirmity: and he will
arise and show himself to be on his Churches side, and does never fail them
in present assistance, and seasonable deliverance; all the dangers of the
Church are but the awakenings of Christ, and the calling of him forth unto
their succor, he will now be working for their good, he says for the
oppression of my Church, I will arise; they shall not always lie among the
pots, be in the graves, and burn in the fire; I will not always stand looking
Psalm 12.
upon their miseries, but will come down rebuking their enemies, and
delivering their persons, for they are my flesh and bone, even such whom I
tender as a man does the apple of his eye.

In the enemies and troublers of the Church: I know that there is no will in
them to further the Churches deliverance, they are their oppressors and would
still detain them under bondage as we may see in Pharaoh, yet there is a
necessity in respect of them that the Churches be delivered, For

1. The ^ride of their heart must be taken down.

2. Their projects and purposes must be broken in pieces.

3 They must return with shame and dishonor.

4. They must have their spirits filled with vexation and indignation. Psalm
112. 10. Prove. 11. 8.


5. They must come into misery themselves: and in a word,

6. They must be made to confess that great is the truth, and it Zech. 12. 3.
will prevail; strong is Christ, and he will overcome; heavy and burdensome
is Jerusalem, even such a stone, that all that burden themselves therewith
shall be cut in pieces.

In the Churches themselves, to make this clear to you, Note, 1. That the
Church of God is not made only for misery, but misery is made for the Church:
miserable conditions are the proper portion of wicked men: dangers are
accidental to Gods people and brought upon them for an end better and beyond
troubles and therefore they must not always lie under troubles.

2. That the Churches of God under troubles and dangers are very praying; we
see that the Israelites under Pharaohs bondage cried to God and plied him with
prayers, now this very practice of theirs did not a little further their
deliverance from Pharaoh; I sought the Lord and he heard me: and delivered me
from all my Exo. 2 23, 24, 25 Psalm 34. 4. 6.
fears: again, this poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him
out of all his troubles.

3. That Gods Churches and people must be revived, and restored, and sweetly
refreshed after their storms and sufferings; thou which have showed me sore
and great troubles shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from
the depths of the Earth: Psalm 7. 20.
Again, I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I will lead him Esaias 57.
18.
also, and restore comforts unto him and his mourners: one more, I Ierem. 30.
17.
will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds says the
Lord, because they called thee an outcast, saying this is Zion whom Esaias 57.
16.
no man seeks after: how could this befall them if that they were not saved
out of their miseries? if they were still held under, their spirit would faint
and fail within them.

4. That the Church of God must have the free and comfortable (...)
use of Ordinances, when they were in a strange Land they (...)
could not sing the Lords Song: the very sacrifices of the Israelites were the
abomination of the Egyptians.

5. That Songs of praises for deliverance must be found in the mouths of Gods
people, according to that saying of David, Thou (...)
art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou shall compass
me about with Songs of deliverance: Sclah. which could never be unless they
received salvation from the Lord.



(...). 1.
as well as the godly, and how then do you make the Churches deliverance such
a privilege?

I answer that wicked men are many times kept from, and Sol. (...).
delivered out of dangers, but yet they have not the deliverance of the Church,
For

1. They are delivered as creatures not as Children.

2. They are delivered by common providence, not by any special promise made
to them, or applied by them.

3. Their deliverance is so far from being a blessing that it is turned into
a curse unto them, it were far better for them to lie in Chains, and to die
under misery then to be delivered, for by their deliverance they take an
occasion to be more free and forward to commit ungodliness; it is to them a
very snare, and does mightily enthrall them into the hands of Satan.

4. Their deliverance is not out of any love or respect which God does bear
unto their persons, but under deliverances they are hated and abhorred of God.

5. They have only an outward deliverance, for in the mean time they want all
spiritual deliverance, and shall never enjoy an eternal deliverance; though
they escape from Babylon they shall never escape hell, whereas the Church is
delivered by the Covenant, yea and all their temporal deliverances were but
types unto them of their spiritual and eternal deliverances.



To this I answer.

1. Sometimes the Churches may have deliverance, and will Sol. Hebrews 11. 35
not accept thereof, it is written that they would not be delivered because
they looked for a better resurrection.

2. That though the Church in its parts and members have not always
deliverance, yet in the whole it is saved and delivered; an Army may be said
to escape though many Soldiers which made up the body thereof are slain, we
may not imagine that when God makes this promise of deliverance unto Jacob
that none of the Jews died or perished in their Captivity; Jacob in the
general was saved out of it, though not every particular Israelite.

3. That though God does many times deny actual deliverance from troubles unto
his, yet he does equal and exceed that deliverance in giving them delivery
from sins power, which is a greater mercy then a thousand outward
deliverances or in giving them strength and grace to endure death, and thereby
translating them unto heavenly glory; But Israel shall be saved in the Lord
Esaias 45. 17.
with an everlasting salvation.

Extra (...). (...).
as Paul said in another case, except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be
saved: the same say I to you, if that you desert and disclaim the Church, ye
cannot be saved; deliverance goes along with Jacob, the Churches side is the
strongest side, and the surest side, because its cause is the best cause; O my
brethren what mean you to meditate a flight, and now to turn politicians,
even a people so shie and subtle in your Religion, as if that your policy not
your piety should secure you? I conceive that Church leavers and Church
forsakers are in the greatest dangers, its not your disclaiming from the
Saints, that will save either your estates or lives* I have read a story how
that when the Papists in England were complotting with the Spaniard abroad to
bring in their cried up Armado; the time drawing nigh for their coming over,
the English Catholics sent over to the grand contrivers of that design to
know what course they had taken for their safety, unto whom this answer was
made, we know you to be Catholic, but we fear your goods will be Lutherans: no
further security can we Vos catholici, (...) vestra Lutherani.
undertake for; it is no security to men either to be of no Religion; or to be
of a false religion; if you will be safe be of the true religion, be with such
who have the promise with them; I know that every man wishes his own and his
families safety in these times, now our safety is by cleaving to the
Parliament, not by joining with the Cavaliers; the former are men of piety,
fidelity, gravitie goodness, and loyalty: the latter a base, swearing,
whoring, stealing, and murderous company, who stink in all places where they
come, being the abominations and burdens of all the Northern parts; can you
imagine that the safety of you and your posterities is bound up any where then
within the walls of the Parliament? Loose this Parliament, and all is lost,
Religion is lost, Liberty lost, estates lost yea and the glory of England lost.

Jacob,in a praying and believing way, what though the Churches miseries are
great grievous, and of long continuance yet be not dejected; neither do you
despair your hearts: Remember what is written; O my people, ye shall know that
I am the Lord, when I Ezekiel. 37 1^
have brought you out of your graves: stand still, fe^re not, behold Exodus.
14. 13.
the salvation of the Lord which he shall show unto you this d^y: when were
these words uttered? was it not then when they were going into the Red Sea?
Brethren pluck up your spirits: deliverance shall come to the Church; God will
make a way for our escape: Oh that we could now set our prayer and faith on
working; our times are fitted for prayer and faith: had we not these two
pillars for our u^holding, I know not what we should do: come therefore into
the presence of God seeking the Churches salvation and deliverance, say with
David redeem: Israel O God out of all Psalm 25. 22. 13. ^1. Esaias 62. 4.
his trouble, remember David and all his troubles. Oh that with the Prophet we
could say, For Zions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I
will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and
the salvation thereof as the Psalm 53. 6.
lamp that burns: Let this be the daily wish of our souls, Oh that the
salvation of Israel were come out of Zion: further be you entreated to exalt
your faith in believing that the Church shall have deliverance, that the earth
shall open and bring forth salvation; and ^say 45. 8. Esa^ 26. 1.
that God will appoint salvation for walls and bulwarks, what though the times
do threaten ruin and destruction, yet know,

1. That God is above all the troubles of his Churches, and does command them:
so that they shall never exceed his will and power, though dangers are great
yet God is greater then all dangers.

2. That God has all deliverances in his hand, and can command Psalm 44. 4.
deliverances for Jacob, the Lord says, I form the light, and create Isay 45.
7.
darkness, I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things:

by whom shall Jacob arise? Amos 7. 5. Esaias 33. 2.
for he is small. Look upon God who is, our arm^ every morning, our salvation
also in the time of trouble: do not reason unbeleevingly, can these dry bones
live or Churches under such deep dangers be delivered? I assure you brethren;
that dry bones shall live, and miserable Churches shall be delivered; Say not
that you see no means for deliverance? all means are shut up in God, and he
has means beyond our sight: what men either cannot, or will Esaias 63. 4.
not do that God can and will do; mark what God says, the year of my
redeemed is come: and I looked, and there was none to help: and I wondered that
there was none to uphold, therefore mine own arm brought salvation to me: do
not stand objecting the many blocks that stand in the way, or the many
improbabilities and impossibilities for deliverance! but know that God makes
his way through the Seas, he is omnipotent; a wonder working God to whom
nothing is impossible, remember what is written who art thou O great mountain
before Zurabbabel, thou shall become a Zech. 4. 7
plain, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings crying
grace, grace unto it: be not a disheartened people under the Churches trouble,
but lift up your eyes to the hills whence salvation comes; say with Dan, I
have waited for thy salvation o Lord: Genesis 49. 18. Psalm 3. 8. Esaias 49. 8.
Psalm 69. 35.
Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and he will help or raise up his Churches
in a day of salvation; God will save Zion and build the Cities of Judah that
they may dwell there and have it impossession.

Jacob? go out in your might and help the Lord against the mighty; have you
no Silver or Plate, or bodies that are serviceable, then help the Church with
your prayers, and tears go to God and mind him of his promise, put him to it,
give him no rest night nor day till he establish and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth; o let none us be Esaias 62. 6, ^
Neuters, let none of us sit still; let us up and be doing, and no doubt but
God will be with us, and for his Churches.

FINIS.
ENGLANDS HOPES.
HOSEA 2. 15. And the Valley of Achor for a door of Hope.
IN this Chapter we have a double representation of Israel, and a double
representation of God:

First, Israel is represented unto us, under,

1. A sinful condition; She was idolatrous, adulterous, unmindfull of, and
unthankful for mercies: She sinned under, against, and with mercies, we read
of her whoredoms, adulteries between her breasts, playing the harlot, going
after lovers, not knowing that God gave her corn, and wine and oil,
multiplying her silver and gold which she prepared for Baal, she had her days
of Baalim, and times for lewdness.

2. A sorrowful condition; She was divorced, stripped naked, made as a
wilderness, set as a dry land, slain with thirst, deprived of mercies, hedged
in with thorns, and made every way miserable.

Secondly, God is represented unto us, under,

1. Acts of severe justice: He does quickly epsy, sharply rebuke, terribly
threaten, and miserably punish Israel for her sins, she is left to enjoy the
recompenses of her lewdness, and made to feel the fury of an angry God.

2. Acts of sweetest mercy: In the midst of wrath God remembers mercy, under
her afflictions he makes her promises, notwithstanding her sins which she had
committed, and her miseries which were to be endured, God does tell her that
he will speak to her heart words of comfort and pardon; and whereas for her
sins she was justly stripped of all outward and inward comforts, yet he would in
his own time, and by his own free grace; make a full restitution of all good
things unto her, it was not the misery of her condition which should hinder, or
keep out the coming in of his mercy; From thence I will give her her Vineyard:
even from the wilderness: and whereas her heart under her miseries might
gather fears, and doubts, that God had quite forsaken and forgotten her, and
that the tide should never turn: the Lord in the words read, undertakes to
give her upholdings of spirit, saying, And the Valley of Achor for a door of
hope: q. d. Though my people by their sins have forfeited all my mercies, yet
my mercy shall give them mercies, and whereas their miseries may make them
fearing and despairing. I will give to them such matter and ground of
confidence, that they shall have strong hopes in me, and of my mercy and love
unto them.

The words you see are a branch of the promised mercy of God unto his sinful
and afflicted people, wherein we may take notice of two things:

1. The thing, or the mercy that God undertakes to give them, and that is a
door of hope.

2. The sign, or token, or the means which God takes up for the assurance of
this mercy unto them, and that is the valley of Achor.

For the first part, in brief I shall say thus much; That in the 4. Sorts of
doors.
Scriptures I read of several doors, as 1. of Speech and utterance, which is
an open and free mouth to preach the Gospel; Praying also for us, that God
would open to us a door of utterance Col. 4. 3.
to speak the mystery of Christ: 2. Another of faith, which is the doctrine of
the Gospel, opening Christ to men, and entering men into Christ: God has
opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles. Acts 14. 27.
3. A third of opportunity and liberty, which is a time and season put into a
man's hand for the edifying of others; and thus Paul says, A great door, and
effectual is opened unto me, 1 Cor. 16. 9.
and again When I came to Troas to preach Christ's Gospel, and 2 Cor. 2. 12.
a door was opened to me of the Lord. 4. A fourth of hope, which is the opening
of a way for the raising up of the heart to an expectation The door of hope,
What?
of mercy and relief, notwithstanding the contrary desert of sin, and the
present sense of troubles, when the soul is made to know, that though its
condition and state for the present is very miserable, yet it is not only
within the compass and possibility of mercy and relief, but shall in Gods
time be admitted to the throne of Grace, and Cities of refuge, yea, and it can
look out, and look up to God in a waiting way for mercy, this is the maine
nature of the door of hope.

In the second part, we may take notice of 2. things.

1. What is this valley of Achor? this Achor was the first place of ground into
which the Israelites came, being gotten over Jordan, as they went to take
possession of Canaan, we may read where it did lie, Jos. 15. 7. It was that
valley wherein Achan (that troubler of Israel) was stoned, as you may read,
Jos. 7. 24 and verse 27. the word properly signifies, a valley of
consternation, or trouble; and here is one thing notable in this Achor, what it
signifies.
expression, it is not said that I will give them a door of hope in the valley
of Achor, (that had been a wonderful mercy) but I will give them the valley of
Achor for a door of hope: a speech fit for God to utter, and which God only
can make good.

2. How this valley of Achor became a door of hope? which The valley of Achor
a door of hope in 5. Respects.
I conceive thus:

1. As it was the first place on which they did set foot at the entrance into
the hoped for Land, when God brought them into this valley, then their hopes
began to be raised up, that surely they should pass through the length and
breadth of the Land of Canaan, God having brought them hitherto, he would also
bring them further; the beginnings of mercies are pawnes of further, and
greater mercies.

2. As it was a place of rest and pleasure unto them after their troublesome
passage through the Wilderness, and their trembling passage over Jordan, this
Valley was fruitful and pleasant, as we may read in the Prophet, Sharon shall
be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie
down Esa. 65. 10.
in, for my people that have sought me: if God bring his people to pleasant and
fruitful conditions, this must needs make them to pluck up their spirits, and
fill them with hopes through believing.

3. As it was a place of divine pacification: in this valley, upon Josh. 7. 27.
that act of Ioshuahs, and the peoples, in stoning of Achan, God is said to
turn from the fierceness of his anger manifested toward Israel, and at such
time when God cease to be angry with his people, the heart cannot but gather
hope.

4. As it was the place wherein all the overthrowes of the Israelites by any of
the Kings which came out to fight with them ceased, for after they went out of
this valley, they conquered in all the battles which they fought.

5. As it was the place of divine encouragement unto Ioshuah, Josh. ^. ^, 2.
here it was that the Lordsaid to Joshuah, fear not, neither be dismayed, take
all the people of War with thee, arise and go up, etc.

Out of the whole I shall raise up this conclusion.

That God does give unto his Churches and people a door of Doctr. The Church
under its troubles has a door of hope.
hope in their most miserable and distracted conditions.

As there is one door which enters them into their sorrows, and miseries, so
there shall be another door which shall raise up their souls to an
expectation of good and comforts. God does so order the matter with his, that
however their pressures are heavy, and distractions many, yet divine help and
comfort shall appear in a bending and bowing way toward them, notwithstanding
all that they shall suffer and endure, the return of good and comfort shall be
both probable and possible unto them.

Note,

1. That it is one thing to fear more evil under the feelings (of some evil,
this door of fear is the portion of the wicked) and another thing to hope for
good, when men do feel miserable evils.

To look upon evil, is enough for fear, there must be good, else there can be
no hope.

2. That it is one thing to apprehend divine grace and mercy to be, and that we
are such who greatly need it, and another thing to conceive a possibility of
the same to a man's self: many may look upon mercy and help, in an absolute and
simple way, but few look upon the same in a relative and reflecting way: it is
not enough to hope, to see the thing that is good and relieving, but it must
withal see it as the thing which they must share in.

3. That the door of hope is not made by any creature, it is God that does
create and bestow it: And fourthly, to one man this door stands more open, and
is larger, unto another man it is straiter and narrower: some there are who
have much ado, and do stir mightily to bring themselves under the hopes of
pardoning and succouring mercies, so great is their coming in, and on of their
fears, that they are ready to despair, saying with doubting David, One day I
shall fall by the hands of Soul, it may be many days and years are spent in
trouble and heaviness before they can receive any hopes of their acceptance
and deliverance, others there are, who can more easily look up, and quickly
epsy the bendings and bowings down of mercy and relief to themselves, they
can considently without scruples and doubts conclude the performance of
promised mercy to themselves: O the large hopes that are begotten in many
Christians who do lie under much misery.

Now that they have this door of hope in troublous times, we might clear in
Abraham; had he not the door of hope, when he said to Isaac, My son, God will
provide? Moses had a Genesis 22. 8. Exodus 14. 13.
door of hope when he spoke to Israel, Stand still, fear not, see the
salvation of the Lord which he will show you to day: This door of hope was
given to Paul when he was in great danger upon the Seas, In the seven and
twentieth Chapter of the Acts verses, 22, 23, 24, 25. The Jews had this door
of hope, for Shechaniah tells them, that there was hope in Israel concerning
Ezra 10. 3.
this thing.

And it cannot be otherwise, for,

First, Gods name is the hope of Israel, as well as the Savior Reas. 1.
thereof in time of trouble. Je^. 4. 8.


turn your selves to your strong holds, ye prisoners of hope. Zach. 9. 12.




Strabo reports of the river Silias, wherein all things sink to the bottom,
and nothing floats: the heart of man, if it were left without hope in times of
misery, would be as a nail cast into the water, or much after the manner of
one who is cast into the deepes, that cannot swim: his spirit would fail; we
have a proverb to this purpose, were it not Esa. 57. 16.
for hope the heart would break.



which is the loadstone of all endeavors, despair cuts off the use of all
means, and makes men to quit all duty, if there should appear no way open for
escape, if there were no backdoore to get out at, to what purpose should men
pray, and fast, and believe, and humble themselves, and stick to God for help
and succor: My Brethren, God will have his people to be in no condition
wherein they shall not be dutiful and serviceable to him, or neglect to use
those means whereby they may do themselves good.

This truth,



1. A door of presumption; they may build upon deliverance The ungodly man's
doors in sinful and sorrow full times.
and comfort, without ground and reason; I know none more ready to promise
themselves good, then men who have no title to the promises; the world is
filled with a dead, and dark, and dreaming hope: Some of the Philosophers
called hope the dreams of waking men, and I may truly say, that most men's
hopes are but dreams; as he said of lovers, Sibi somnia fingunt, they fancy
every thing shall be, because they would have it so: so may I say, when I look
upon the sluggishnesse, and carnal walking of most men in times of danger and
trouble, and hear them say, that they hope for mercy and succor from God:
Truly these men do build more upon imagination then reality; alas poor
creatures, your dreams may cheer you whilst you are asleep, but they will
terrify you when you awake: O miserable creatures, when you have hoped your
hopes, it shall be with you, as it was with Ixius, who hoped for Juno, but
instead of her he had a cloud that did all to bewet him, or as it was with the
Heathen, who offered Sacrifice to Hercules to drive away their Wolves, and he
tormented them more then their Wolves; my meaning is, you may look long enough,
but no good shall come to you.

2. A door of desperation; in the sense and apprehension of judgments and
calamities they may, 1. Make a determinate judgment upon the impossibility of
any good and mercy belonging to them, they cannot conceive that safety and
deliverance should come, nay they make it a thing impossible to attain to the
Haven and rock. 2. Miserably sink down in their spirits: oh, there is no hope,
my punishment is greater then can be borne, so heartlesse are they, that they
suffer shipwreck presently, and suffer themselves to sink lower in their
spirits, then they are in their troubles: O faithless and hopeless creatures,
why do you give off your God, and fall down into the deepes? it is just with
God to deny those a door of hope in times of misery, who do slight him in
times of prosperity.

But how is it with the godly? How? they have a door of hope standing before
them: such can say, I expect and look for good from God, notwithstanding all
the evils I feel and suffer.

But happily you will object and say, Sir, have godly men always a door of
hope in distressed times? Remember whose speech was that, My hope and strength
is perished from the Lam. 3. 18.
Lord, and again, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we Ezekiel. 37. 11.
are cut off from our parts.

Sol. I have considered of these Scriptures which speak out the Saints
infirmities, they do not say that they had no door of hope, but they show the
weakness of their faith to apprehend the same: the Well of water was nigh to
Hagar, yet until her eyes were opened she could not see it: the question is
not how clearly Christians do see the door of hope, or how strongly they are
able to raise up their expectations, but whether they have not a ground for to
hope for good in evil times: wicked men can neither actually nor habitually
hope, for they have no ground: the godly have a constant ground and cause for
hoping, and when they cannot actually, yet they can habitually hope.

Use 2.
comfort and confidence: it is true that we have a door of great misery
standing very open before us, there is a threatening and a trembling door
setting up in the Land, it may be such a door which may enter us into a bloody
and civil War, the very beholding whereof may strike us with sadness: Let me
now tell you for your comfort:

Grounds of comfort.
any door which shall enter us into misery, but such as the good Lord whom we
love, and fear, and serve shall permit and suffer; God must suffer all our
sufferings, it is not all the power, plots, and projects of our revolted
Nobles, and Malignant party that can set up a door of misery at their
pleasure, God who has the hearts, and the preparations thereof in his own
hands, has the hands of them all in his hands, even to check, control, and
turn them at his own will.

2. That if ever God suffer men to set up a foredoore of misery, he will bestow
upon his a backdoore of hope; God is as able as willing to set up doors of
hope for his.

Doors of hope.


The door of the promises
The full and precious promises of mercy and succor; abundant is God in his
undertakings to relieve distressed Christians? And what are all those
engagements of God for good unto his, but the letting fall of some hints of
mercy before the soul to raise up hope; had we no promises, we could have no
door of hope, Remember (says David) thy word unto thy servant, Psalm. 119. 49.
upon which thou have caused me to hope.

Object. But we have no particular promise of deliverance, and therefore how
can we make the promises a door of hope?

Sol. It is the promises of God in general that are the door of hope, so that
if we can find our particular condition in them, we may expect mercy and
deliverance.

The door of experiences.
Experiences of former times; this was David's, and Paul's 1 Samuel 17. 36. 37. 2
Cor. 1. 10.
door of hope, and we should make it our door of hope; what God has done at
one time, he can also do at another time; nay, he puts out himself at one
time, that future Ages may make him their hope at all times: Could we look
into days of old, and recall the years of the right hand of the most high,
and see what God has done for miserable Churches, and distressed Christians
before us, nay, could we but live upon our own particular experiences of the
many passages of God among us, I think we should have as wide a door of hope
as ever any people had.

The door of prayer.
Enlargement of spirit: God has poured out the spirit of prayer upon the
people of the Land, some, nay, many thousands there are who come to the Throne
of Grace, and do mightily and daily wrestle with God for a blessing upon
England; and this is a strong door of hope* it is that which keeps heaven
doors open: we usually say, that when the Cock begins to crow thick, then the
day is nearest breaking, and this is my hope, that England shall not miscarry,
because she has such a p^aying people in it, go into all the corners of the I
and, and you shall find many Jacobs, many Daniels, and many Nehemiahs, who do
exercise themselves in praying, surely a child of so many prayers cannot
perish.

The humbling daydoore.


The door of utterance.


The door of ac^^p^ation.
Manoah was afraid, and thought that he should die, because that he had seen
God, his wife does comfort him, saying, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he
would Judge. ^3. 23.
not have received a burnt offering, and a meat offering at our hands, neither
would he have showed us all these things, neither would he have told us such
things as these, q. d. Man, what talkest thou of dying, so long as God is
accepting.

The door of Reformation.
out much of the old rubbish, cleared in great measure the foundation, and
brought in place many good materials, tending to the beautifying of the Church,
I dare say, that is laid in, which all hellish opposition shall never be able
to overthrow.

The door of the Parliament.


The door of opposition.


The door of assistance.


The door of heaven.
Samuels Stone, which was called Eben-Ezer, that is, Hitherto 1 Samuel 7. 12.
has the Lord helped us: Certainly, there has been the least of man, and the
most of God discovered in the late passages, that ever Nation beheld, yea, and
our God is constant with us, though men and times change, yet God changes not,
you shall find him in his old place, even when men, great men and false
hearted men, who have deceived the Kingdom in their trust, do slip their
necks out of the collar, and seem to turn Renegadoes.

The door of Achor.
Achor: Now is the day and time of consternation and trouble, the tide is at
highest, the night is at darkest, our miseries are such as threaten nothing but
ruin and destruction unto us, and therefore we may hope, I say that our very
miseries may be unto us a door of hope: Psalm. 56. 3. Psalm. 130. 1.
What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee: and Out of the deepes have I
cried unto thee, O Lord: David's searing times were his believing times, and his
dangerous times were his praying times; our greatest dangers cannot put us
beyond our hopes: The Athenians when they were in great danger at Sea, were
wont to cast out that great Anchor which they called the holy Anchor.

Sacram anchoram solvere dicimur qu ando ad extremum praesidinm Erasmi Adaz. ex
Lucia.
confugimus: If the Heathens were not without hope in dangers on the Sea, shall
Christians (think you) be lest without hope? nay, so long as Christians have a
God to look upon, and a promise to rely upon, they shall never fail of a
door of hope: it is not all the blustering in the North by great ones and
Cavaliers, which can hinder God from setting up a door of hope for his
servants in England.

4. Signs of such who have a door of hope. Psalm. 39 7.
more and greater troubles; let none of those things discourage you, under all
rumors of War, and approaches of trouble, say, And now Lord what wait I for?
truly my hope is even in thee: speak out, yet God is good to Israel (...)
, these things will not endure an age N^be^ia est (...).
: It is but a shower that will soon pass over. 3. Look for more than you have
in hand, your present mercies are not all your mercies, there is much more
behind, God has raised up the hearts of his, to expect great and wonderful
things: and as we must be thankful for what is done, so we must wait upon God
for that which is yet to be done, reputing all our receipts to be so many
pledges and pawnes of further and future good. 3. Go on with your work, you
may not expect great things, and cast off duty: our hope for mercy and
deliverance will make us industrious and endeavoring in our places to praise
and please God in all things. 4. Puzzle not your selves with disorderly plots,
do not seek to piece heaven and earth, and to compound humane and divine
helps, know what man cannot, God can, and will do, and that things many times
are better for us in the promise, then in our own hands: We cannot think of,
or find out always the best means to do our selves or the Kingdom good:
Flesh and blood will be often at a stand in its advice.



To this end:

1. Make not your thoughts the measure of Gods strength; Ubi des^nit humanum,
ibiincipit divinum auxilium.
where humane help fails, there divine help begins, if it be a work that
man can do, it is not a work fit for God to do.

2. Make God, who is the God of nature, the orderer and over-ruler of all
second causes, and outward impediments, all 6. Ways of keeping open the door
of hope.
things must stoop to God, and that in an instant, oh how suddenly can God dry
up, and divide the Sea? how wonderfully can he command the hearts of Kings? and
how quickly can he turn into foolishness the counsels of all Achitophels?
All things are too weak to frustrate Gods purposes and promises: Clouds and
storms may be in the air, but not in the highest heaven, the waters may carry
down a planke, but the rock remains still, nothing can hinder the Almighty
God, he has the Malignant party under his command, as much as he had Rabsh^kah.

3. Keep open the door of heaven, cease not praying day and night: if we keep
up our spirits in prayer, the door of our hopes will be kept open.

4. Advance the grace of faith to liberty of working: as the promise goes
before faith, so faith goes before hope, the expectation of good arises out of
an apprehension and persuasion of good; the truth is, that hope does so depend
ex judicio fidei, that if men believe not, they shall not hope, even as the
inferiors do move at the motion of the Superiors, so hope rises, is
furthered and continued in its working by faith: Well then, would you keep open
the door of hope, exalt faith, and let it act into the promises, whilst faith
is feeding and fastening it self upon the promises, a man shall have hope in
the darkest night, as well as in the lightest day.

5. Provoke not God by sinning: There is nothing but sin which can shut up the
door of our hopes, if that at such times as these, wherein God is promising,
and we are expecting mercies, we shall be an unreformed people, and discover
our iniquities: what can God do less then to shut the door again, saying, I
would have cured and reformed England, yea, I gave them fair hopes for the
same, but lo her inhabitants are proud and idle, they swear, and whore, and
lie, and steal, and are drunken, and therefore now I will not give them my
mercy and grace.

6. Be prudent in seeking the public Reformation; Let every man keep his
standing, and move to his own Orb: Though all Christians should have public
spirits, yet they have not public places, if men will be discreet and quiet,
things will be best amended, indiscretion may shut the door aster then most
men are aware of: Think of these things, warm your spirits by them, confer of
them as you ride home from the Market, and say to your friends and
acquaintance, Yet there is hope in Israel, even in England.

FINIS.

