A second Part of the Religious DEMURRER; By another Hand. Or, an ANSWER to a
Tract called The Lawfullnesse of obeying the present Government.

By a lover of Truth and Peace.

To the READER;
IT is the unhappiness, of these last times especially, that men are apt to
run, from one extreme to another. As in matter of Religion, we see it evident;
we are fallen from superstition, to profaneness: So in the State, from
Miss-Government, to Change of Government; and sometimes, from one kind of
Tyranny, to another; from Regal, to Popular; from Tyranny under a lawful
power, to Tyranny under an unlawful power. And, which is worst, is not hard to
determine, inasmuch as a single Tyrant, is better then many; Regal Tyranny,
better then Martial. And this is the yoke, that at present, people most
complain of; which, it were well, if wise men would study how to remove; not
how to fasten it, unavoidably, upon the necks of this Nation. But this is most
just with God (we humbly acknowledge it,) that seeing, we would not bear the
easy, silken yoke of Jesus Christ; he is now putting on us, an iron yoke;
which, neither our fathers were, nor we are, nor our posterity will be able to
bear. Amongst those that assist to the effecting of this (whether ignorantly or
intentionally,) this Gent. is one of the first, that undertakes, to persuade
this people, to bear this yoke as if we were populus ad servitutem non nati,
sed destinati; and with our own hands, should help to put this yoke, upon our
own necks, and rivet it fast for falling off: which certainly we do, if once
we can be persuaded, that not only we may voluntarily (because sinlesly, as we
are made believe,) but also, must necessarily, for conscience sake (not mere
coaction) obey an unlawful power, by the command of God. It is a very sad
thing, and dangerous, for a man to be engaged once, in any sinful design, or
act; in that, scel^re tuendum est scelus, one engagement draws on another: And
it is a very great snare (we see,) for men to be possessed of great estates, and
places of profit, by that power, which can as easily divest them of it, if they
oppose or assist not their wicked designs. If the world be not mistaken in the
Author of this Tract, they fear him entangled in such a snare: otherwise (say
they) he would never undertake the patronage of so bad a cause; or countenance
it, by acting, or assisting the Authors of this change, especially being
engaged to the contrary (as they yet think) by so many Oaths and Covenants.
What mischief this Tract may do (the rather for the worth, and authority of
the man,) with persons fearful, or loath to suffer loss, or punishment, is
not easy to say: If this Answer may give him any light, to see his error; his
Retractation of it, by writing or his Retreat from the present power, and
actors in it, may (if speedily done) help to Antidote, or expel the prescribed
poison. Which that it it may be done, is the desire of a friend of his. The
Lord give it a good Issue.

Question.
Whether, Those whose Title is held unlawful, yet being possessed of Authority
may lawfully be obeyed.

THere are two great questions now in chase and agitation, 1. Whether the
present power be just and lawful? 2. Whether, supposing them unlawful, they
may not lawfully be obeyed? The first of these is waved by this Gentleman, as
undertaken by others; with what strength or weakness, let others judge. The
second is the subject of the present debate. The Gentleman speaks of a
Declaration published, wherein the grounds of settling the present Government
are expressed. But for ought I hear, few rational, conscientious men are
satisfied with that Declaration; considering those Vows, Oaths, Covenants,
whereby the Authors of it, stood before engaged. And whatever the people may
do, in submitting to obey this power of the new Government, I fear they that
altered it, and those that act it on, or they that abet it, cannot be innocent.
But let them look to that; We shall not, at present, discuss the lawfullnesse
or the unlawfullnesse of their power, and proceedings, but consider how far we
our felves may submit unto them, without sin. For this purpose we shall first
consider how the Gent. has stated the question. And we observe that he lays
it only upon the Lawfullnesse, not upon the necessity of our obedience; For so
he says, Though the change of a Government were believed unlawful, yet it may
lawfully be obeyed. Not it must necessarily, but may lawfully be obeyed; and
yet his text produced, Romans 13.1, etc. is pressed with this inference,
Wherefore ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. Now
some there are, who are of opinion, that though such an unlawful power may be
obeyed, yet it need not for conscience sake be obeyed. if a man will hazard the
punishment annexed, and submit himself to suffer it. But it is otherwise in a
lawful power in lawful things; a man is bound to active obedience unto them,
and it suffices not, to satisfy conscience, to suffer the penalty, but is a
resistance of the ordinance of God, which in lawful commands, requires active
obedience, in unlawful, passive. What then is the difference between a lawful
power and an unlawful, both commanding lawful things? but this, That a man
may, if he will, obey the one, but must obey the other; not only passively, by
suffering, if by ignorance, or weakness he neglect the command, but also
actively, in acting that command, or else he sins. And to this purpose the
Gent. adds, page. 2. If the powers in that time were ordained of God, and were
to be obeyed for conscience sake, etc. where he takes it for granted (as well
he may, if the powers were ordained of God) that be the powers never so
unlawful; yet they must be obeyed for conscience sake. Yet the question runs
only of the lawfullnesse. That Is first.

Secondly, For the clearer stating of the question, we must necessarily
distinguish, in many particulars, which the Gent. has either omitted, or
confounded.

1. We must distinguish of a Government: A State may be considered, either as
constituta, long settled, or constituenda, as yet in settling: A people may
perhaps, lawfully obey a Government, when there is no probability of recovering
their lost Government; whereas while it is yet in settling, they may suspend
obedience.

2. A people also may be considered, either as free to settle upon what
Government they will, as having no Government yet settled, or the line of
succession being expired: or as bound by Oaths and Covenants to a former
Government, or Governors, who are oppressed in their right, by violent
usurpation. In the first, a people may obey an usurping power; but the question
is of the latter.

3. A Tyrant also who is an usurping power is of two sorts; First, by Title, or
rather without a Title; Secondly, by oppression; or as the Gent. himself
expresses it, page 6. A Tyrant in regard of an unjust Title, or in respect of
Tyrannical oppression, when his Title is good. Now the question is, whether a
Tyrant by an unjust Title, not only may, but must be obeyed, when he commands
lawful things; And whether, as when a lawful power commands unlawful things,
he may justly, yea must be disobeyed; so, when an unlawful power commands
lawful things, he must be obeyed?

4. Obedience is differenced, into active and passive. The latter may be
yielded, when the former may not, at least needs not: As when a lawful power
commands unlawful things, a man must suffer, not do: so when an unlawful
power commands lawful things, a man perhaps may obey, but not necessarily
must; at least this is the question now in hand.

5. Because we have occasion to look at impossibility, in this discourse, we
must difference it also here, it is either Present, as when there is at present
an overruling power which we cannot withstand: or else Absolute, when there is
a total cessation of all hopes of recovery of the former Government; the
heirs, and lawful successors, being either all naturally dead, or unnaturally
extinct, and slain; as it was supposed to be, in Athalia's case: the people
thought she had slain all the Royal seed, and perhaps upon that ground,
knowing of none surviving, they submitted to her Government; but as soon as
they knew Ioash, one of that Line, was alive, they shook off their obedience to
her. These things being thus premised, we consider the strength of his
Arguments.

The first basis of all his building, is taken from the Scripture, Romans 13.1,
etc. The Apostle (says he) treating of purpose, upon the duty of obedience to
Authority, lays down this precept; Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, etc. and hereupon infers; wherefore you must needs be su^ject, not only
for wrath, but for conscience sake, etc.

In answer to this; Let it first be observed, that he concludes more then he
undertook to prove: His question was of the lawfullnesse, but his proof is for
the necessity of obedience, active, as well as passive; Now I would gladly
know, what difference there is, in our obedience, to lawful powers, and to
unlawful powers, The word is (...) not (...) lawful authority not usurped
power. Script. and Reas. page 5, 6. Page 4.
if it be necessary to both.

Secondly, The question is, in this Text, of what power the Apostle speaks; of
Lawful, or Tyrannical; and if of Tyranicall, whether of a Tyrant by a^ u^ju^
Title, or a Tyrant in regard of oppression; and the judgment of very able
Divines is, that the Apostle speaks of a legal power; not of a Tyrannical, in
either sense: This latter, is learnedly and largely discussed by the Author of
that Tract; called, Scripture and Reason for Defensive Arms: who asserts, and
proves, the text is not meant of any powers whatever, but of Legal powers, not
Tyrannical at all. His Arguments are these from the context: 1. If I be bound
to be subject to Tyranny by virtue of the commandment here; then Tyranny is the
Ordinance of God (for the Apostle argues for subjection, from Gods ordaining
the power) But this is false: Therefore so is that, that I should be subject to
Tyranny. 2. He brings many Arguments against this Gentleman's Interpretation.
Page 9.
1. The Magistrate that must be obeyed is the Ordinance of God. 2. Not a
terror to good works, but to evil. 3. The Minister of God to thee for good.
But a Tyrant is not the Ordinance of God; is a terror to good works: is not
the Minister of God for good; Therefore not to be obeyed. I confess he carries
it all along, of a Tyrant by oppression, whose Title is lawful and just; and
he speaks (more then we argue for) of Resistance of such a Tyrant; whereas we
plead only for non-obedience; or against necessity of obedience, to a Tyrant,
in regard of unlawful Title. We say then the Gent. misinterprets, and so
misapplies the text, which speaks only of a lawful power, not of an unlawful.

But he goes on, to prove his assertion, that the Apostle meant it of a power
unlawfully gotten; by applying it to the then present Roman powers: It was
either Claudius, or Nero, that then ruled: who were both made Emperors by the
Soldiery, against the Wills, and Resolutions of the Consuls, and Senate, etc.

Where first, he takes it for granted (which cannot well be proved) that
because the Apostle writ in their times, therefore he meant it of those powers,
that they were ordained of God: not by his permission only, but approbation
also. Whereas the Apostle might mean it (and we have heard, did so mean it) of
any legal power; abstractedly, from the Roman, or any particular State. 2. But
grant it meant of them, yet it is known, that Caesar had gotten the consent of
the Senate, and people: and they succeeded upon the same Title, and so might be
lawful powers. 3. This Argument is of no force in our case; for though it hold
parallel, in the Instruments of settling, or rather changing of the Government,
the Soldiery; yet not in the Ratification of it by Senate, and people. Mark
the words of the Historian, englished by the Gent. page 3. This sentence of the
Soldiers, was followed with the consent of the Senate; and then it was not
scrupled in the provinces: That is, it was consented to by the Generality of
the people. But ours has neither consent of Senate (in its true and full
Authority) nor people, but the Renitency, yea Abhorrency of both, for the far
greater part. If indeed the two Houses freely and fully sitting, had consented
to it, and the people Generally submitted to it, the case might seem easier to
resolve. Butstill this scruple would remain, whether both Senate and people
could consent, without sin, to the change of Government, lying under so many
bonds and engagements, to another Power: of which more hereafter.

The Roman State then will not help him: let us see our own: Many persous
(says he) have been settled in Supreme power, by mere force, without Title of
Inheritance, or just Conquest, and obeyed by the people of this land: and Laws
made by forced Parliaments are still in force and obeyed: so that the voice of
the Nation, with one consent, seems to speak aloud, that those, whose Title is
held unlawful, may lawfully be obeyed.

There are many answers to be given to this: 1. Those times were very dark, in
prevailing of Popery, and therefore no presidents for a Reformed State to
imitate. 2. Those people were not perhaps precluded, by so many Oaths and
Covenants, from alteration of the former Government, as we of this Generation
are. 3. The question is not de facto, but de jure, whether they did will, in so
doing. The scruple is justly made, Whether they ought not rather to assert (as
far as in them lay) the right of the true Heir; than to close with the usurper;
especially if under our engagements: It they ought in conscience to assert the
Right of the true Heir, they ought not to obey (actively) any other, commanding
in his prejudice. If they were not bound, by want of power, to assert that
right, yet the question is, Whether they might either directly, or indirectly,
do any act, which might affirm the right of the usurper, or deny, but so much
as interpretatively, the just Title of the Heir, without being guilty of the
sins of lying, treachery and falsenesse; if not of perjury and Vow-breaking: In
suffering, I confess, if a thief take my purse, I cannot help it; if I must
part with that, or my life, I choose to lose my purse; not for fear least I
break the filth or eighth Commandment, but least I break the sixth, and be
guilty of self-murder: yet rather than say, he has authority to take it, I
must lose my life. In point of protection, If I be in the hands of thieves, I
will desire some of them, to preserve me from the violence of some others: yet
must I not (to obtain that protection,) say, that their robbery is just, or
good, much less, join with them in robbing others, or be an abetter to their
actions, though the denial of such abetting, endanger my life. 4. As for our
present submitting to those Laws, first made by usurpers, and forced
Parliaments; we say, they have been often ratified (being thought wholesome
Laws) by succeeding lawful Parliaments, and so make nothing to the case in
hand: and, perhaps, till then, not to be judged valid Acts. See that Ordinace
of Aug. 20 1647. Declaring such Votes passed, to be null at the time of the
passing, because the House was the under a force.


And hereunto (says he) Divines and Casuists give their concurrence, Azorius,
Navarr, Alsted, Paraeus, etc.

In answer to these we say, 1. Its one thing to claim justice of a Tyrant (for
necessary subsistence,) by established Laws not yet repealed (which perhaps may
justify those that are forced to prosecute suits under the present Courts,)
wherein we consent to the power of the former Laws, which are our birthright,
not properly, but by accident, to the power that manages them at present. 2ly
The reason given by the first, is this, The Commonwealth tacitly consents in
this, that though he have no right or Title, yet he may administer Law, to
Citizens subjected, facto, not jure, as if he were a Competent Judge, and
lawful Superior: But this varies the question two ways; 1. That there is a
tacit consent of all. 2. That he administers the old Laws established, not any
new ones of his own, to the overthrow of the old, which we have sworn and
covenanted to maintain. 3ly The reason given by the second, is scarcely sound;
because (says he) they that seek the administration of justice, do endeavor
to free him from a greater sin; that he that sind by usurping jurisdiction, may
not also sin, by pretermitting the administration of Justice. This perhaps, is
but a popish nicety; for the question is. Whether in so doing, he be not guilty
of his former sin of usurpation, by complying so far with him, as to stablish
his jurisdiction thus usurped; and whether he ought not rather to suffer loss,
than sinupon himself. 4ly But Paraeus is of most credit, and so of most weight:
It matters not (says he) by what ways or acts Nimrod, or Jeroboam, or others,
got Kingdoms; for the power is one thing which is of God, and the getting, and
the use of the power is another. Another more plainly, when a question is made
whom we should obey, it must not be looked at, what he is that exercises the
power, or by what right or wrong he has invaded the power, etc. To this we
say, first, Paraeus may be understood, to speak of an usurpation over a free
people; engaged by no Oaths or Covenants, to another Government: such I
believe was Nimrods case; or if otherwise, the question is, Whether a people do
not sin, in submitting to such a power, as in Ieroboams case; the people
revolting from Rehoboam. 2. I see not how that others words can well be
justified: is it not to be looked at, whether it be Jack Cade, or John of
Leyden, that exercises the power? Is not this (if literally taken) a way, to
open a doer, as to insurrections and seditions, if men can but get power to
suppress the Legal Authority: so to dispense with Oaths, etc, when such an
usurpation is made? not only, that such may, but must be obeyed, heartily, and
for conscience sake? may we, or must we obey every one that has gotten power,
though never so wrongfully? might not some infer from this ground, Satan, the
prince of this world, having usurped power, over the sons of disobedience, must
be obeyed, as the ordinance of God, forasmuch as there is no power but of God,
etc.

But he gives his own reason for it. And how (says he) can it be otherwise?
for when a person, or persons have gotten supreme power, and by the same
excluded all other from authority, either this authority, must be obeyed, or
else all authority fall to the ground, and so confusion be admitted (worse than
Titular Tyranny.

I confess this is a very hard case, to natural reason: but perhaps, it is
not hard to a Christian; whose rule is, Ye must not do the least evil, to
prevent the greatest misery. But is there no remedy, in the whole body of a
people, to prevent this? If they would all, in conscience of their Oaths and
Covenants, be constant to their duty; either in resisting, or not complying, or
suffering; what could that power do? whereas if they willingly, and readily
comply, with every usurped power, do they not confirm Tyrants, and fasten
Tyranny upon themselves? and by such compliance make themselves guilty of that
usurpation? If, as is asserted, we may lawfully; nay must necessarily, obey
such usurped power in all acts materially good, then is it impossible, that any
one, whose Title is once wronged, can ever be lawfully righted; for it will be
always sinful, to help the weaker party, and it cannot, without help, be
other then such. And supposing it lawful, and our duty, to obey such usurpers,
it will be unlawful to rescue our selves out of their hands, for it being
lawful to submit, and we bound in conscience to obey, in what is lawful, we
are bound in conscience so to submit, without endeavoring to get our liberty,
or to become the stronger party; which without endeavoring it can never be,
and so we are bound to be perpetual slaves.

That of the Masters Mate, throwing the Master overboard, etc. is not every
way parallel with ours in hand: The necessity not alike absolute: But if the
Mate would command the Mariners, by any word, or act, to acknowledge his
violence to be just, and his Government lawful, ought they not rather to die
then sin? But when we comply, actively, to the ratifying and settling of an
usurped power, with wrong to the right Heir, we sin; and so much the more, if
bound by Oaths and Covenants, not to assist, or comply with any others,
neither for fear, nor favor, deserting our engagements (which are the words of
the solemn Covenant,) Not suffering our selves, directly, or indirectly, by
whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to be withdrawn from this
blessed union etc. but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same,
according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever, etc. All
which, whether it can so easily be dispensed with, as this Gent. seems to hold
forth, I leave to every conscience to consider.

And whereas (says he) some speak of a time for settlement, they indeed do
rather speak for a time of unsettlement, etc.

They mean, if a Government be once settled, by the generality of the people,
and no power appears to bring it back to the former state, they may better
comply with it; In repub, constituta, not constituenda: And this is no
unsettlement, unless it be an unsetling of an usurped Government, which men in
Covenant, ought to endeavor to their utmost power; and however, to be rather
passive in, than active to the settlement of it; which if it were generally
done, might (by the blessing of God upon faithfulness to a right Heir, and to
our Oaths and Covenants,) perhaps prevail, to make the usurpers think of some
better way, of reducing the Government to the ancient channel: Whereas this
way of compliance, fastens and settles them, in their sin and Government
together: And whereas he says, that may be called a settlement, when there is
such a way settled, that men may have justice, if they will; and may enjoy the
main end of Magistracy, to live a peaceable life, in godliness and honesty. I
answer, Such a settlement as is pleaded for, is not the way to enjoy the main
end of Magistracy, etc. For how can a people, consenting readily together, to a
violation of so sacred a Covenant, and Oath, ever be like to live a peaceable
life, in godliness or honesty?

And indeed (says he) when one is in possession by power, and another pretends
a Title, what can the body of a Nation do, in this case? they cannot judge of
Titles, etc.

True, in some doubtful cases they cannot; but in our case, who is so simple
that he cannot judge of the Title, where it is, and where it is not? who has
not, or may not hear, of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? who has not
heard of Parliamentary Declarations for the right and Title? Whatever it was in
former times, the Title is now clear to every eye; and if it were doubtful,
our engagements are gone out into all the world.

To that he answers: Surely Oaths are sacred bonds, and reverend obligements,
etc. yet there are faults on both hands: on the one side, the slighting of an
Oath: But we find some part of the Vow and Covenant, to speak of all the days
of our lives etc. True it is, the obligation of some things may end, as that of
the Kings Person, etc.

To which and the rest we say; the Kings Person in England never dies, says
the Law; such a King we are bound to preserve. Suppose the King had died in
wars, or a natural death, and his Son had been in Arms at his death, would not
our Covenant have reached, to bind us to the preservation of the Sons person,
as well as of the Fathers? whatever men think now, I am confident, two or three
years ago, most men would have been of this mind. 2. It is indeed impossible,
to preserve that Kings person, yet (says the Gent.) We find some part of the
Vow and Covenant, to speak of all the days of our lives, as to extirpate
profaneness, heresy, blasphemy, and for Reformation. All which it were well
if the Covenanters would remember to observe. But I shall remember him of more.
To preserve the rights and privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the
Kingdom, etc. Are these things impossible now to be preserved? and if not, do
they not still bind us, to endeavor them? 2. His words are worthy to be
printed, and printed again, Will any man that understands, and favors Religion
and piety, say, that the clauses, which concern Religion and piety, are
expired? Did we promise to God, in our several places and callings, to
extirpate profaneness, heresy, blasphemy, and to endeavor a Reformed life,
in our selves and ours, only till our enemies were overcome, and then to make
an end? (Say the same of our promises, to preserve the rights and privileges
of Parliament, and liberties and Laws of the Kingdom,) What were this, but to
say unto God, if thou will deliver us, we will be bound to thee, till we are
delivered, and no longer, etc. Surely this is too like that course of carnal
Israel, Ps. 78.14, etc.

But he goes on; Here it were good to consider, whether there be any clause, in
any Oath or Covenant, which, in a fair and commonsence, forbids obedience to
the commands of the present Government: much less, when no other can be had,
and so the Commonwealth must go to ruin?

We answer, yes, there is, by necessary consequence: that clause in the Oath or
Covenant, that commands obedience, and faith, to the King, his Heirs and
Successors, and to the Laws established, forbids obedience to any other power
or Authority, raised up against them. Nor will that salve it which he adds
(when no other can be had) for another may be had, and might perhaps have been
had, ere this, if some men in place had not complied with that force put upon
the Houses and Kingdom. If they did it upon antecedent consent, they are deeply
and hainously guilty; if upon persuasion, or terror (contrary to their
engagements in the Covenant,) yet are they too guilty, to be excused, as
accessaries post factum, to say no more.

But says he, If the Kings Heirs be not his Successors, how does that Oath
bind? either the word Successors, must be superfluous, or else it must bind
to Successors, as well as to Heirs. And it hindes not to a Successor, that is
not an Heir, how can it bind to and Heir that is not a Successor?

In answer we say, 1. Who keeps the Heir from being a Successor? They that made
the Act against succession; to which this Gent. perhaps gave his Vote; or at
least, complies and acts with those, that did so Vote; in acting for a
Republike in opposition to it. 2. The word Successor, is not superfluous: for
it is put, by way of exposition of the word Heir; who ought to be the
Successor. And it matters not, how Successor is sometime taken; In the Oath of
Supremacy or Allegiance; it is not meant of any Successor, but a lawful
Successor; as the words expressy are. If then, any force debar the succession
of the right and lawful Heir, let him consider, whether they that took that
Oath, are not bound to resist that force, if they have any power, and to help
to settle the Heir: or if they want power, yet not to submit willingly to that
force, in opposition to that right, and in violation of that Oath. Though the
Covenant speaks not of the Allegiance to Heirs and Successors, yet the
Protestation refers unto it, in terminis. And that (we suppose,) binds us, to
endeavor the succession of the Heir: Else how could the Lady Jane be a Traitor
against Qu Mary? whose claim of the Crown, an tecedent to the others enjoyment,
could only be a crime, because it prejudiced the Heir, in hindering, as much as
in her was, the succession. Nor could any thing be Treason, which is only
derogatory to the succession. And if such, as at any time have power, debar a
rightful Heir, they must not be punished afterward, when the other is
stronger, because the strength of the former made it no crime, at the time when
it was done. However, the many obligations to Monarchy, as well as to the
partia^^^^ Monarch, are obligatory though there were a doubt, concerning the
person. We cannot close with such a party (we think,) but we become
accessaries, post sacsum, to what perhaps it is impossible, at present, to be
helped.

At last he puts a quaerie, While the Son is in the same posture with the
Father, how comes this Oath to plead for disobedience in regard of the Son;
that was asleep, and silent, in regard of the Father?

The answer is, 1. The Son is not altogether in the same posture with the
Father: for the Father was in Arms against a lawful, and coordinate Authority
of the Kingdom; but the Son, now, is claiming his own right, as Heir to the
Crown; has a good cause (so far) and a just claim; opposing, not the same
power (as some think) but unlawful Martial usurpation, over his own personal
rights, and over the three Estates (the sundamentall Authority of this
Kingdom.) the King, Lords and Commons. 2. The Father himself was under those
pretended crimes (for which he was put to death) then, and before the Covenant
was taken, to preserve his person: and the King, the Law (...) never dies, 3.
Disobedience was not pleaded, to his Authoritative will, but his personal
will: and so the objection was neither silent nor asleep in regard of the
Father; but all things being acted is the name of the King and Parliament, his
Title was both acknowledged and asserted; which is now otherwise, when in
regard both of the Son, and of Monarchy it self, it is disclaimed. 4 If the Son
were in any crime, equal with the Father; yet the right or Title to the Crown,
upon his Father dea^^ does quit him from all stain, by the Laws of the Land.
Therefore obedience may be due to him, and the Oath may stand up, to plead for
disobedience to usurped power, in regard of the Son, which was asleep, and
silent, in regard of the father,

For a conclusion of all: If men were as sensible of duty, as they are of
danger, and more af^^^^ to sin, than to suffer; I am very confideut, that such
weak shifts, as large consciences can find, (...) help them swallow a Cammell,
who heretosoth strained at a gnat; and such consulting with (...) and blood,
would have no place with them: I shall only make two requests; One, that the
Auth^^^ of the Tract, would consider seriously, whether the maintaining, and
abetting those, that (...) with the fist of wickedness, be the way to peace?
The Other, That the Lord would guide all L^^^^ of truth and peace, into the way
of peace (which is Righteousness,) and that be would grant (...) all the
people of the Land, faithfulness to their Oaths and Covenants, and sincerity
and uprightness of heart, that they may have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

FINIS.
EPHESIANS 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them.

1 TIMOTHY 5.22. Neither be partaker of other men's sins.



