SCRIPTVRE A PERFECT RVLE FOR CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT Delivered in a Sermon at
Margarets Westminster, before sundry of the House of COMMONS.

By William Seigwich Minister in Farnham in Essex.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill near
the Exchange.

SCRIPTVRE A PERFECT RVLE FOR CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT
Isaiah 9.6. The Government shall be upon his shoulders.


THE text is a Prophetical solemnity of the incarnation and inauguration of
Christ, and sets forth his birth and reign, Christ in the womb and on the
throne. The second is expressed very fully, in a stately and lofty style, apt and
fit to the greatness of the matter: every word swells with royal and Princely
excellencies, so full of evangelicall glory that the Septuagint were astonished
at the Majesty of it, and therefore durst not express it, but render it in
their translation veiled and obscured: but Christ by his coming has expounded
them to us, and we see them a very excellent, plain, and full description of
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, showing to us.

1. His regal office, to govern; the government.

2. The burden and weight of this office, it was not honds, but onus, not a
crown upon the head, but the government upon his shoulders, the part employed
with bearing heavy and pressing burdens.

3. His propriety to it, it lay upon his shoulders alone; he had no help from
others; he suffered and reigns alone.

4. After this there comes a troop of titles setting forth those royal graces
which do adorn and assist the crown of Christ.

The first showing the nature and kind of this government; it is not an
ordinary, vulgar, or a carnal kingdom, but wonderful, mysterious: other
states have some mysteries in them, this is a state of mysteries.

The second shows how it is assisted with wisdom and counsel, the great
support of states; and that too within himself, he needs not go to others
for it, and therefore the more faithful and safe; he is the counselor.

The third title sets forth his power: he is wise to prescribe laws, and as
potent to execute them, able to defend his Laws and Subjects in their
obedience to those Laws; the mighty God.

The fourth sets forth his love: he can do all things, but his love limits
him, and sets his wisdom and power on work: his government is not
tyrannical but paternall, his Subjects are his children, he is the everlasting
Father.

The fifth shows the success of it: a government so well assisted and
composed must needs be very peaceable, the Print of peace.

The sixth shows the continuance: what is peaceable will continue, war
either open or civil being the ruin of states; and of his government shall be
no end.

We will take only the head of all, the subject of these excellent properties,
the government. And concerning it observe but these considerations by way of
explication of the text, and we shall draw up our conclusion to be insisted on.

Christ's power extending to internalls and externalls. By the first he rules
internally in the Souls of men by grace and holiness. By the second he rules
externally, the outward man together with the inward in his worship.

We omit the first, although the more excellent and glorious, and aim at the
second, as more seasonable, the external government. That this is here
included as well as the former (beside the extent of the word, reaching to all
in which Christ exercises dominion) two acts of his government expressed verse.
7. show.

1. He orders it, which is properly a right disposing of things externally.

2. To establish it with judgment and justice, etc. and an act of justice is
properly ad extra: and therefore though it be not only understood, it cannot
be excluded, external government.





These three considerations laid down, the conclusion naturally flows from
the text.

That Christ has left or constituted an external government, or a government
in externalls for the Church under the Gospel.

Before we come to the proof of it, two things need explaining. 1. What the
Church is that is the subject of this government. 2. What this government is,
and what is the extent of it.

Act. 19.32, 39, 40.
and is in Scripture taken sometime in a good, sometime in a bad sense. It is
used in spiritual things variously. Acts 19 32.39.40.
We will not trouble you with the several acceptions of the word Church in
Scripture, but take it in its common and most ordinary use, and that which
accords best with the original use of it in the new Testament, It is a
particular or congregationall Church, which is a similar part of the
Catholic, and has the nature of the whole entire, viz. immediate fellowship
with Christ, and right to all the ordinances.

The Church is visible or invisible; a distinction not of genus into several
species, but of the subject into the several adjuncts; for the same Church may
be and is visible and invisible. We are to consider of the Church only as
visible, for so it is the subject of that government we are to speak of, a
visible and external body for an external policy. It is ordinarily defined
thus, to be a company of believers joined together in the name of Christ to
enjoy fellowship with God and each other in all Gods ordinances according to
the word.

The matter of this Church must be Saints, faithful men; such whereof Christ
may be the head: Art. of Church of England 19.
they must all be members that make up a body, (i.) visibly and in appearance.
These materials cast into a visible union knit together in one body: in
Gospel Order, whereby they are apt and fit for communion with God in holy
things: and that in the name of Christ this is a Church called his house and
family, Jun. de Eccl.
his City and Kingdom in Scripture.

I shall not need to spend much time in showing what this Church is. It will
conduce much to the business in hand to prove that there is a visible
political Church whose government is distinct from the invisible, instituted
by Christ; And this will appear,

1. From the word Church, applied to particular congregations in many places of
Scripture, to the Church of Corinth, Antioch, the seven Churches in Asia.

2. 1 Cor. 15.24. The Apostle speaks of a Kingdom to be delivered up to God
at the last: which is not the invisible Kingdom of grace, for that is
perfected in the end, and so to continue for ever; nor the external Kingdom
of the Jews, that already is dissolved: but this ministerial and evangelicall
dispensation of ordinances: which agrees with that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.13.
Those offices and administrations must stand till we all come in the unity of
the faith, etc. For as the coming of Christ in the flesh abolished the
Leviticall Church, so the coming of Christ in glory shall thrust out the
evangelicall.

3. Hebr. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom let us have grace, etc. It
cannot be meant of the internal, for that consists in grace: the Apostle
argues from this Kingdom to grace, which were absurd if they were but one. The
consequence is not good any otherwise but thus, having a visible and glorious
Church, let us have grace to enter into it, and to walk worthy of it. And
that the external Church is meant, is apparent from the antithesis that it
has with the Jewish Church, verse. 18. etc. For nothing is opposite to the
external Church under the Law, but an external under the Gospel.

4. Many places in the Gospel where Christ speaks of this Kingdom to come can
be meant of no other. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Matthew.
4.11. and 10.7.
Christ intending to set up his government, prepares materials, converts
Saints. And Matthew. 11.11. he compares the ministry of John with the ministry
of the Gospel, which he calls a Kingdom. He that is least in the Kingdom, etc.
i. e. He that is the weakest Minister in the Church under the Gospel is greater
then John. And that Christ has instituted such a society and Kingdom, such a
visible Church, reasons prove it.

solus in civitate, alone in a multitude; to be political or in society, is to
be united to families, Cities, Kingdoms. So this spiritual fellowship is not
with Christians as Christians, nor many Christians within a same walls, but
with Christians united together in one body spiritual, 1 Cor. 12.20. Psalm.
122.3. Ephesians. 4.16.
and that rightly compacted and fitly joined together, Minister and people,
etc. such as are to exercise offices, and to administer to each other. Now the
reason why God would have such a fellowship is,

1. For himself, that he might enjoy the perfection of mankind, which is men
in society: political is a step above reasonable. By this his service is more
rich and glorious, having the grace and strength of many in one. That we may
with one mind and one mouth glorify God. It is a goodly and beautiful service
that is thus presented to God, Romans 15.16.
and is very acceptable, as that Psalm is interpreted, How good a thing it is
for brethren to live together, etc.

2. For us, Psalm. 133.
there is as great necessity of communion in divine as civil things. First, in
respect of our weakness. It is not good for man to be alone, was Gods
judgment of man in innocence; and now man cannot be good alone. When we are as
scattered Sheep the Lions will devour us: while we are as ears of corn
growing alone, Jer. 50.17.
we shall be carried away with every wind of Doctrine: against which tossings
this is a remedy. Ephesians. 4.14.
Church Fellowship having a Kingdom of sin and darkness to fight with, we
need the power of a Kingdom to resist them. Secondly, in respect of our
graces. God that gives us grace, gives us it to profit with. A man cannot be
happy alone, 1 Cor. 12.7.
nor good alone: grace will fade and wither if it want objects to work upon,
and is never so glorious as in propagation. God that has given us grace, has
given it for others as to our selves; as a faculty in a member is for the whole
body: the eye sees for all, the ear hears for all, etc. And therefore there
is a necessity of communion, and so necessary there should be a Church.

There must be a Church that there may be ordinances. For clearing this,
consider but these two things. 1. That a Church is a chief ordinance; 2. That
the Church sanctifies and upholds all other ordinances.

First, that it is the chief ordinance. It is Gods Temple under the Gospel, 1
Pet. 2.5. Heb. 3.6.
called his building, and house, therefore the greatest.

1. Compare it with the Temple under the Law in whose place it comes, and under
which this is prophesied of familiarly in the Prophets: that was the greatest
under the Law, so this under the Gospel.

2. Compare it with the substance, Christ's body, which is the Temple of all
worship. Destroy this Temple. In whom the Godhead dwells bodily. Joh 2.19. Col
2.9.
That which serves to so high a use as to represent Christ, and in the maine
work of Christ to bring us into the presence of God, must needs be the
greatest.

3. It is fullest of Christ, many believers shining with the graces of Gods
Spirit, each having some of the divine nature, all united in one body. It sets
forth the glory of God, and in them Christ is complete; so full of Christ that
it obtaines the name of Christ.

4. Other Ordinances were made for the Church, not the Church for them: Man was
one made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for Man; so other ordinances for the
Church. Therefore as under the Law the Temple was greater then the gold of the
Temple, so the Church is greater then the Ordinances of the Church. 1 Cor.
11.12.


Secondly, other Ordinances subsist not but in the Church. The ministry of the
word; a steward is not a steward but to a house, a Pastor is not a Pastor but
to a flock. How can a man Preach except he be sent? Romans 10.14, 15. and a true
mission does require an external call. Discipline is not exercised but in the
Church; 1 Cor. 5.12.
What have I to do judge them that are without? The Churches censures reach
not till they be within the Church, the keys are nothing without a Kingdom.
All the Ordinances and Sacraments, they are not due to Christians as
Christians, nor as members of the Catholic, but to Christians in society, in
relation, ministers and People: therefore there is and must be an external and
visible Church distinct from the internal. And hence it is that there are
distinct callings to the internal and external Church. 1 Cor. 1.2. He writes
there (...), which is a company called out; and afterward (...), called to be
Saints, a calling seperatim, and a calling conjunctim, as Junius, and verse. 9.
called to the fellowship of the Saints. Expositors observe a double calling
from the words. One to be members of Christ and of the invi^^ble Church; and
another of a particular Church: to believe, and to be added to the Church. So
that as a man is considered as (...), and as (...), as reasonable, and as
political; so a Christian may be considered as a Christian or member of
Christ, and as a member of a visible Church. We have, been large in this,
being a special means to clear the whole truth: and the ignorance of this
causes much mistake in the world about Church Matters.

The second thing to be explained is the government of this Church. Being a
Kingdom, or City, or Family, it must have a policy; being not a worldly but a
spiritual Kingdom, it must have a spiritual policy; and being a visible
Kingdom, it must have a visible policy: such as the body is, such must be the
government of it. To show what this is,

Ephesians: 2 14.
the policy of Israel: and what that is the Philosopher tells us, (...), it is
order, the word used here, verse. 7. and Col. 2.5. their faith and order. So
that by government we understand, that order left by Christ to the Church for
the administering of Church affairs or holy things.



1. The order of the parts of the body, 1 Cor. 12.14.
called the tempering of the body, a right disposition of the parts every one
in their place; Pastors, and Elders, and Deaeons, every one in their ranks.

2. The order of the administrations and services of these parts to God and to
each other, as Prayer, Word, Sacraments, Discipline, and all the holy things of
God. And that we take in the largest sense too, including the matter and
manner; for both come within this policy: Christ commands the things
themselves, and the rites and ceremonies belonging to them. For,

1. Christ would not ordain ordinanecs, and leave, them confused, imperfect,
and half composed, and subject them to humane skill to receive their form and
beauty.

2. All things that God made in the world were perfect, and every creature
brought its shape into the world with accidents suitable to its being; and sure
God would not leave his holy ordinances and this second and more glorious world
of the Church imperfect.

3. If man were to prescribe the manner man had ( i.e. to command that we
should enjoy them in their manner or not at all) a negative voice, which is a
greater power then God ever left man in his own ordinances to admit and refuse.

4. Christ has left rules for them; not only for Preaching, but by whom, and
to whom; so in Baptism and the Supper, how they should be administered and to
whom, only admit of this distinction. Some things, viz. such as are religious,
and immediately and particularly belong to the nature of the things themselves,
are peculiarly commanded: such as are more remote, as natural and civil
things, are only in general rules prescribed. How these are distinguished, we
shall see hereafter.

For the extent of this government we shall lay these two grounds.



1. For matters of Doctrine, and faith, and inward sanctification, there are
Word, Sacraments, and Pastors and Teachers to administer them.

2. For matters of conversation, there is watching, admonition, etc. for which
there are Elders to join with the former, as helps of government.

3. For matters of charity, there is collecting and distributing of Alms, and
for that are Deacons appointed. For these externalls are as the bark of a
tree, or as a vain in which the blood runs, in these the inward life of
grace is conveyed, and to these three heads are they by Authors reduced.

good Law, to contain all and leave nothing to the Judge but the interpreting
of such Laws and the executing of them. Christ the King of his Church has
made as many Canons as need: all that is left for the Church is to execute
these rules, and in cases of doubt or difficulty to draw out the rule to
particular occasions. Or, to conclude this point, the government laid down by
Christ, is ordinances of divine service, or a liturgy, a complete way of
serving the Lord in all his ordinances, so called, Hebr. 9.1.

Having explained these two maine terms, we proceed to prove the point. The
point will be sufficiently proved in demonstrating these five propositions.

1. That it is necessary there should be a government of such an extent, with
all the rites and ceremonies belonging unto it. 2. That it is necessary that
Christ himself should prescribe it. 3. That Christ has actually done it, and
that sufficiently. 4. That this government so commanded is perpetual. 5. That
neither the Church, nor any other has power to alter any part of it, or to
add any thing to it.


1. Necessary by the Law of nature to the Gospel as a Religion: for there never
was a Religion without such. The Egyptians, Romans, Turks, had their Priests,
Temples, Rites belonging to them, and shall Christ be defective in that which
even nature requires? Nature requires some, Christ prescribes what.

2. Necessary by the natural Law, by the second Command. The affirmative part
of a command is of the same nature with the negative, the negative denies
external devised manners of worship, therefore the affirmative requires a form
of Gods devising. The Jewish ceremonies did append to the second Command. With
out a prescribed form the Law is imperfect, therefore there must necessarily
come a Law of service in the place of that which is abolished, to supply the
room of it: for till that be added, a rule of external worship, the command
binds in affirmatives but potentially, viz. to worship God in his own way when
he should prescribe it.

3. Necessary to our natures consisting of soul and body, both created by God
and redeemed by him, 1 Cor. 6. ult.
therefore God must be worshipped by both.

4. Necessary to t^^ Church as a Kingdom or City, for policy is (...) the life
of a City: and without a Law for officers, and duties and bounds and limits for
them, it is ananarchy, not a policy. Christ should leave a miserable City
without a policy.

5. Necessary to the Church as visible and external: for being visible, it
must have something visible to knit it to the head, Christ. For as the
invisible is knit to Christ by faith, so is the external united to Christ by
these external things: neither is there any means, any ligaments to ty the
body to the head, or the members to each other externally, but these prescribed
by Christ. The Apostle, Colos. 2. being to deal upon this subject against
humane impositions and will worship, he brings his maine argument from Christ
and our union to him; which were no argument if these did not knit us to
Christ, verse. 7. we are rooted and built on him. By these we are knit, as the
tree to the root, not only by the body, but by the bark. And verse. 19. they
that set up any other worship or order then that which Christ prescribes, they
hold not the head, they quit Christ; which sets a high price upon these things,
and makes them necessary. By them the Church does immediately close with
Christ, and in them the fullness of Christ is seen, and the life of Christ
conveyed, and therefore necessary as nerves and sinews to the body.

6. It is a necessary part of the Gospel: by the Apostle accounted a principle,
and a fundamental one, Hebr. 6.2. setting down the principles, he counts this
as one, laying on of hands, which is a part of this external policy, a
ceremony belonging to ordination; and if a part be fundamental, then the whole
is. I am not ignorant, that some interpreters carry this another way, viz. for
confirmation: but there is little reason for it.

1. Because confirmation is not commanded in any one Scripture but this, and
therefore not likely to be a principle in Religion that has footing but in one
text.

2. Confirmation has nothing fundamentally distinct from baptism being but to
confirm the same, and not to add any thing new.

Some esteem it exegeticall, as an ^^position of baptism going before: but
that were not agreeable to the Apostles intent, being to set down a brief
epitome of the principles of Religion. Yea laying on of hands, is more dark
then baptism, and therefore cannot be an exposition of it. Therefore it is
meant of that laying on of hands in 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. etc. a part of
ordination. So not only the Sacraments, but ministry, calling, ordaining with
the ceremonies of them are fundamentals of the Gospel. Do not mistake me, I
count them not absolutely necessary to salvation; For, he that believes shall
be saved. Nor are they all necessary to the being of a Church; a Church may
subsist without part of them; a Church gathering and beginning, or a Church in
persecution, or a Church corrupted and lame, and declining, may be a true
Church without some of them: but necessary they are necessitaee praecepti, as a
rule for every Church to walk by, and to the been esse of a Church. They are
necessary with the same necessity as the Leviticall rites were to the Jews,
they were bound to perform them, and incomplete in the want of them: but when
they were in Babylon and deprived of them, or through negligence had lost them,
yet then they were a Church: So is it in these things under the Gospel. But
being necessary so many ways, either Christ has left them for his Church, or
else he has not left all things necessary.



Cor. 12.5, 6. Many ministrations, but one Lord. The only husband of the
Church, and Lawgiver, the only captain, head, King; and therefore the Church
ought, not to subject hen self to any but Christ: Isa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12.
she is his Spouse, and so not (...), not to be her own rule, nor may any
other lord it over her.

Jun. de Eccl.
the being of the Church is relative, (...), two or three gathered together in
the name of Christ, and therefore from him only can come the operations of
that being: all the actions flow from the form, Quod dat esse dat operari: and
therefore the essence of the Church being divine, all that the Church does as a
Church must be divine. In relatione hac magnified omnia divina, Jun. in Psalm.
122.
In this divine relation all things are divine. And the same Author, Quicquid
tangit, audit, etc. Id. ibid.
Whatsoever the Church touches, hears, sees, enjoyes, ought to be divine.

Romans 12.1, 2. That it is meant of service or worship, the last word of the
first verse shows. That it is external, we see in the sequel of the chapter:
(...).
the Apostle is upon Church Officers, and their manners of administration. In
the verse there is sacrificing, an external rite, and that of the body. So
that it must be understood of external worship, that cannot be excluded. Of
this he required it should be,

1. Living; being to serve the living God, it must not be dead service, there
must be nothing dead in it. And therefore of Christ, for no man can give
natural life, much less spiritual. It is the word that quickens. Man may
shape a service, but he cannot give life unto it, it will be vain and dead.

2. It must be holy; now nothing that is holy can come from man that is
unclean; none but Christ can ordain holy things: the things in themselves
must be holy, whatsoever infirmity be in the doing them. He that erres in the
weak performing them, erres in the doing of his duty; but he that invents some
of his own, erres more then he needs; what we invent we must justify; Christ
will warrant no more then he commands, what his wisdom commands, his
righteousness shall make good. Therefore the Pope to make good his authority
in enjoining Church Matters, claims an unerring faculty, and so he had need.

3. It must be acceptable to God, and therefore according to his own mind, as
in the second verse: now who knows the mind of the Father, but the Son? or
what do we know of God more then is written? Therefore Christ only is able to
prescribe such service as God would have, living, holy, acceptable, and
consequently able only to prescribe a policy in his Church. And sure he did
what belonged to him to do.



You will say, here is the great work, prove this and we have done. We might
prove it undeniably by producing the particulars, and set them up before you:
And if I should, you would say as the Jews said of Christ, He has done all
things well, he has well provided for the government of the Church, and that
it is so perfect, it needs no addition. But that were a task neither
befitting the time, nor my weakness. I shall labor according to my power to
prove there is one; and then I hope you in whose hands the work lies, will
employ more able men to find it out. It will be so full and satisfactory, that
no man will find a place to add any thing to it, and therefore the best
confutation of humane policy. The Epistle to the Hebrews being well searched
will afford abundant proofs, it being the maine business of the Epistle to
persuade them to leave the Jewish Ordinances, and to accept the Ordinances of
the Gospel that came in the place of them: note this through that Epistle. The
government of the Gospel is said to be a better Testament, and a more perfect
Covenant. It is not meant of the internal, for that is the same, Christ
yesterday, to day, and for ever; but of the externalls that were brought in
new, they are said to be better.

1. In their use, they present Christ to the Soul more lively and clearly,
more feelingly and spiritually, more fully and abundantly. 2. In their end,
they end in heaven, the coming of Christ to glory; whereas they of the Law had
their period in the grave of Christ. 3. In themselves, this is a more perfect
Testimony; the rites being fewer, the questions and controversies are not so
many as did arise concerning the legal ceremonies.
First, A Plain place it Heb. 7.12. There being a change of the Priesthood,
there is necessarily a change of the Law. The Basis of that text is this, that
a Priesthood and Law are inseparable, and indissolubly united. Cornel. a Lap.
in loc.
Every Priesthood must have precepts, promises, punishments and ceremonies
annex-to it; It must be so or else these holy things whereof he is a Priest,
must needs suffer profanation. That which he infers is this; the old
Priesthood is abolished, and we have a new, to wit, Christ the High Priest, and
Servants under him: (we confess there is not under the Gospel an expiatory
Priest, or a Priest of intercession, but Christ, but an Eucharisticall and of
oblation, which is nothing but a Steward or Minister of holy things.) Having a
new Priesthood we must have a new law, the old Law will not serve a new Order,
we must have a new one, and such a new one as was the old: that abolished
contained Ordinances, Sacraments, Rites, so must the new. The sum is this,
the Apostle would prove, that Moses and Aaron are met together in one Christ;
for he is not only a Priest as Aaron, but a Lawgiver as Moses, he did both
their works; a High Priest to succeed Aaron, and an Apostle to succeed Moses,
as Heb. 3.1. they are joined together: he is Aaron in sacrificing, and Moses
in prescribing Laws for holy administration.

Secondly, There is a plain place, Heb. 3.2, 3, etc. commonly urged to this
purpose, where the Apostle compares the faithfulness of Christ and Moses. To
enforce it, consider,

1. That their faithfulness was both in ^conomy or homhold government, one as
a Servant, the other as an owner, and this cannot be without external policy.
2. Their faithfulness is compared in those things wherein they differ, and so
it is more effectual. Christ was not faithful only in laying down that
which Moses did, viz. doctrine and internalls, but Moses was faithful in
setting down his legal service, Christ in setting down his evangelicall
service.
Moses.

not in the particulars of it, God laid the government upon his shoulder, that
he might appoint one in his Church. And in this text ( Heb. 3.2.) by commission
and designation of the Father: He was faithful to him that appointed him: and
by nature, verse. 6. he is the owner, the Father of the family, and therefore
the government of the family is naturally in him: naturally government is
seated in the Father, and so in Christ: Christ says he delivered what be had
heard and seen, and what he had received of the Father. Therefore could not
Christ be as faithful as Moses, if he had not prescribed and laid down a
government for his Church.

3. If we have so many externalls as do make an Image of Christ, and represent
Christ to the Soul, we have a sufficient platform in Scripture, but we have
such an Image. Heb. 10.1. For the Law being a shadow of good things to come,
and not the very image of the things. There are three things spoken of. (...).
1. The good things themselves, the truth, the substance, which is Christ and
those mercies that flow from him. (...).
2. There is a part ante, a shadow, or a rude inperfect picture, such as
painters draw with a coal. And 3. a part post, (...).
an Image, a more lively and complete representation of them: which Image is
in externalls, (for internalls are part of the good things) and it is composed
of the whole policy of the Church, all the administrations thereof. As the
shadow included all under the Law, so the Image all under the Gospel, Word,
Sacraments, and Ceremonies annexed to them. The Apostle expresses the
ministration external under the Gospel in this manner, 1 Cor. 13.12. Having
spoken of the Church and all her gifts and operations, he says, We see Christ
as in a glass, i. e. they do represent the image of Christ. So 2 Cor. 3.18.
speaking in the former part of the Chapter of the ministry of the Gospel,
uses the same expression. And these externalls being an image, they must belong
and appertain to the second Commandment, and are a part of it. Give me leave
for the clearing this truth, and the vindicating the second command, to
digress a little. We shall find in Interpreters that there are two things
forbidden under the name of an Image in the second Command. First, that great
Idolatry then in use among the Gentiles, worshipping of an Image. And secondly,
all feigned and devised ways of worship: as in other commands, viz. The
seventh forbids adultery and all wantonness, lasciviousness, etc. and things
conducing thereunto. And as two things forbidden, so two things commanded.

First, The first is Christ, the sum of that command: it is Zanchies opinion,
and there is good reason for it.

1. Because he is the true and express Image of the Father, H^b. 1.3. Col.
1.15. 2. He is the only medium of worship. In him the Father is found. He is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life: 2 Cor. 5.18. Phil. 2.10.
and in him shall every knee bow; i. e. all worship must be done by Christ and
in his name, to the Father by men and Angels. 3. Because of that diametricall
opposition that is in Scripture betwixt Christ and all false worship, Gal. 1.6.
Col. 2.8.
often in the old and new Testament. 4. From the strong fence set about this
command; Gods jealousy, his greatest, hottest, and most implacable rage: God
will propagate his wrath to the third and fourth generation, count them haters
of him that break it, and esteem them to love him that keep it, and binds
himself to thousands that observe it. God does not use to lay such words upon
matters of small moment: there is something more in it then ordinary, and what
can that be but Christ?
Secondly, but there is a second Image commanded, and that is that external
worship prescribed by Christ. As the way prescribed by Antichrist is called the
Image of the beast, Rev. 13.14, 15
so the way prescribed by Christ is his Image, which is that we have spoken of;
and is meant in this, Heb. 10.1. So that having an Image, such externalls as
do represent Christ fully, we need no more, but such an Image we have.

A fourth proof is in Act. 1.3. speaking of those forty days after the
resurrection of our Savior, he says, in them he taught them all things
belonging to the Kingdom of God. To parallel this with the forty days that
Moses was in the mount with God would little help us, (you may think) we
need it not. That by the Kingdom of God is here meant that visible Kingdom
that we have spoken of, is apparent.

1. From consent of other Scriptures, wherein we shall find that Christ's great
business after his resurrection was ordaining of Ministers, Matthew 28.18. Ma k.
16.
dispatching their commissions, prescribing them rules for that purpose.

2. Because the Apostle treating of things of this nature, 1 Cor. 14.37.
challenges this honor to his rules that they were Commandments of the Lord:
how did the Lord command them? not by writing extant in the old or new
Testament, nor by ordinary revelation or inspiration; for in another case in
that Epistle, giving rules for married Estates, and resolving some doubts
says, ^ Cor. 7 12.
This speak I, not the Lord, i. e. not the Lord in any part of the word then
written, but I, not as a private person, but as inspired by the Holy Ghost.
Therefore calling them the Commandments of the Lord, he must need mean those
orders left by Christ's mouth to the Apostles for the ordering of the Church,
and which by them were to be derived to the Church.

3. That which helps to confirm this, is, that Christ did but rarely touch
upon this point of his government in his life, but taught matters of faith and
holiness of life. The reasons were,

1. He was but a Minister of the circumcision, Romans 15 8.
and therefore would not prescribe Laws as a King. 2. The old government was
not abolished: and to teach a new before the old was displaced would have
caused a confusion and rent in the Church: he took away the old, that he might
set up the new. Heb. 10.9.
3. The people were not fit for this new government: he would not put this new
wine into old bottles; he therefore prepares them by the doctrine of repentance
for it. 4. His Kingdom was to be laid in blood: he must first triumph on the
Cross, and then on the Throne, and therefore he spoke Prophetically of his
government, of his kingdom to come. Matthew. 28.8.
After his resurrection he says, All power is committed to me in heaven and
earth; now go teach all Nations; therefore he left this part of his doctrine,
till this season after his resurrection.
Romans 12.1. That he speaks of outward worship has been proved already:
concerning this he requires it should be (...), both words prove a form
prescribed in the word.

1. It must be (...), service, and therefore commanded; for there can be no
other reason given of service to God but his commanding of it. Obedience is
better then Sacrified. 1 Samuel 15.
Obedience makes Sacrifice acceptable, and when Sacrifice is without obedience,
God disclaimes it; Sacrifice thou would not. Psalm. 40.
Nor can there be imagined a reason why God should favor any service, but
because God commands us to bring it him; there being no reason why God should
require service, but that we might show our obedience. Not because he needs
them; rivers of oil, Mic. 6.7, 8
the beasts of a thousand mountains are nothing to him. Nor because they are
beautiful; there is nothing beautiful but himself, and that which comes from
him; God is not taken with glory. Nor because it is chargeable to thee: if it
be thy body to be burnt, he cares not, if it be not commanded: worship not
required is no worship.

2. This service must be (...), it is translated, reasonable; this translation
will help us sufficiently; for what can be reasonable in spiritual things but
men's Christi, that is vera ratio, the rule of reason: neither may we think any
thing reasonable in divinity, but that which is according to the principles of
divinity, Christ's mind. But we may well wave that interpretation. (...) is
properly, word-service, or a service agreeable to the word, from (...). And so
the same word is used, 1 Pet. 2.2. (...), the milk of the word, and therefore
why not here, the service that is agreeable to the word? and Christ may not
require word-service, if the word be not a rule.

every good way, says Solomon. It will make the man of God perfect for every
good work. And this is a good work, the chiefest work of all, to have
fellowship with God in his ordinances. The Scriptures instruct us (as they did
Timothy) how to behave our selves in the house of God. 1 Timothy 3.16.
If Timothies religion will serve us, he had no other Canon; what need we?

All confess that Christ instituted part of this government, and why not all
of it; being of the same nature? What he did he did perfectly: and the Church
did retain all, till carnal ease, pride, and ambition wrought this strange
metamorphosis.

neither is that to be despised, Acts 20.20. The Apostle says, He kept back
nothing that was profitable. If there had needed any more, he would not have
suppressed it. And verse 27. he declared the whole counsel of God.

When we say, Christ has left his government for us in the Scriptures, we
mean the whole Scripture, commands, and examples; for both are binding rules
to us. 2. It is in Scripture either in plain words, or else in good and
suffici-consequence: either actually, and in the letter, or else potentially,
and by clear and good deduction: Although it be not laid down in one
continued methodicall discourse, but scattered in small pieces here and there
in Scripture: and although not obvious to a slight and superficial view of the
letter, but lies deeply and closely couched: yet it will doubtless be found by
those whose faithful labors God shall assist in the search of it.

This government is perpetual. We might take all Christ's institutions for
perpetual, and not seek a particular reason to entaile them upon the Church:
but there being a contrary opinion, we shall meet it with three or four
arguments.

1. From 1 Cor. 15.24. a place formerly quoted, and proved to be meant of the
external Kingdom which Christ will render up to his Father. If the Kingdom
stand, the policy will stand too. 2. Heb. 12.27. It is called a Kingdom that
cannot be shaken. Christ has set it upon such firm pillars as never to be
removed, till he come himself to pull it down by erecting a full Kingdom of
glory. 3. Ephesians. 4.12. etc. Those officers are to continue till we all come in
the unity of the faith, etc. That which the Apostle said of the Sacrament of
the Supper, is true of all the rest, It is to keep in remembrance his death
till he come.
Beside Scripture there is reason for it.

It is a Law, a Commandment, called so in many places: the word does
perpetuate it. See 1 Timothy 6.14. because a Commandment, therefore to be kept
till the appearing of Jesus Christ. What is made a Law, no authority can pull
it down but that which sets it up. Therefore the Apostle backs the command
with Christ's regal power, Who is the only Potentate, King of Kings, etc. a
sufficient reason to prove his Laws unalterable, because made by the supreme
and highest power: and therefore they are to stand till a greater then Christ
come.

1 Cor 4.17. and 7.17.
thus I teach. If the disposition of the subject had required a different rule,
the Apostle was very barren to ty all up to one: or the Church of Corinth
abounding with variety of gifts, and so richly furnished, might take it ill
that she should be kept in the same bounds with others, and have no state and
honor more then the poorest Church.



1 In their gifts. Ordinary officers have ordinary endowments, such as are of
perpetual use in the Church, as the gifts of Pastors and Teachers, To look to
the flock, to be apt to teach, to be wise, etc. but the gifts of Apostles were
extraordinary, the gift of tongues, miracles, etc.

2. In their employments and ends. Pastors and Teachers are to edify the
Church, to build us up in faith, a work of perpetual use, and cannot decay in
the Church; Ephesians. 2.20.
but to be the foundation, to lie in the bottom of the building, and to be a
Master Builder, this proper to extraordinary officers, 1 Cor. 3.10.
viz. Apostles. It is not hard to show; what is ordinary and necessary, and
what occasional and accidental.





1. For one Priest to serve two congregations, three if need be, is it not
better for a poor persecuted Church, then to maintain Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, and every one to have double honor, maintenance or allowance? Sure
Paul knew not this way of saving charges. Why should he that desired to free
the Church from burdens, and did labor with his own hands, to do it, not
suffer this new way of Curats?

2. For officers to dispatch business privately in a chamber, is safer a great
deal in bad times then to make a public business of it! Why did the Apostle
ordain all Church affairs to be public? 1 Cor. 4.5.
When you come together, cast out that person.

And that which they would thrust out, is fitter for times of prosperity.

1. It is a strict and exact way, close bands, that give not that liberty that
the other does, and therefore sit for such times wherein men are apt to
take the greatest liberty. Persecution is a discipline it self, and then men
may be left more to themselves: but profaneness is apt to grow in times of
pence, and then it is no wisdom to have the remedy (discipline) 20. or 40.
miles absent.

2. Mercies should make us better, not worse. If God gives Kings to be nursing
Fathers, shall the Church grow wanton upon such bounty? shall so happy a
blessing make us worse? We have a Christian King, shall we therefore grow
Antichristian? Men say, persecution was an occasion of the Apostles setting up
such a discipline, we are sure persecution has kept it out.



Caesar, and so died justly. But this is an old trick of the Devil, to set
Christ and Caesar at difference; a plot as old as abominable, and so gross
that a man may easily discern it. Not to speak any thing of the difference
between corporals and spirituals, between Moses and Aaron, King and Priest,
of so wide a distance that they cannot interfere, nor one endanger another.
States have stood entire without Church Government, yea without Christian
Religion: and the government of Christ has stood in all States without
molestation. Religion confirms what it finds in a Kingdom, meddles with
nothing that is civil to alter it. It makes princes better rulers, and people
better subjects, but changes neither. The government endangers Princes honors
and royalties no more then men's private estates. It requires nothing of Princes
but protection and favor, that they be nursing Fathers, and pays them again
in a more firm loyalty and zeal for their honor and safety.

Can these men make good their charge, that ever Prince was molested in his
government by the Disciplinarians? Did they ever conspire their ruin, combine
with their enemies, lift up their heels against them or their power over them,
as the Episcopacy has? Or has not the discipline been faithful to
heathenish Princes, having the chef throw a bowl of rabbit droppings at your
headom. 13.1
and will it prejudice Christian? Or do we think that Jesus Christ, by whom
Kings reign, will institute or allow of a government that shall by the
remotest consequence undermine it? Or, Christ being to carry the Gospel round
about the World, would he so compose the government of it, that he should
justle down the civil powers, or clash with them? These are odious
aspersions; and they that charge Christ's government with this, are guilty of it
themselves. It is easily proved they have been, and it is dangerous they will
ever be encroachers upon Princes rights. If any government endanger Monarchy,
it is Monarchical. The Ivy that pretends to uphold the Tree, sucks away the sap
of it: they that dare challenge so much interest in Thrones as to support them,
may come to challenge the disposing of them. By such ascents, the Pope rose so
high as now to come between heaven and Kings. Kingdoms depending lose part of
their glory. The Throne is established by God and Righteousness: and needs
not the help of a faction to support it. But these weak arguments do put
jealousies not reason into Princes heads; when it shall be considered that it
is Christ's, these aspersions will fall off, and his institution will stand
bright, clear, and perpetual. Thus much of the fourth Proposition.



1. For any man to do so, were directly against the command of God. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
and 12.32. He does not say, you shall add nothing to the Leviticall Law: but,
you shall add nothing to that which is commanded: so that the reason is the
same now, that it was then: and therefore confirmed Rev. 22.18, 19. as a close
of the Bible. For though that be particularly and especially meant of that
book, yet the reason of it concerns the whole Scripture.

2. Contrary to the second Commandment, that forbids all feigned worship and
manners of worship.

3. Contrary to Colos. 2.18. which forbids all voluntary or will worship.

4. The Church never had any power given unto her to command any thing in the
Church. The highest power that ever was in the Church, was but (...) Ministry,
Act. 1.17.
or Ministration: a step above that is to Lord it, and will be in danger of
that charge against Antichrist, 2 These. 2.4. to rule in the house of God.
Reasons there be strong ones.

1. If the Church may alter one, she may alter many; modo interponatur
autoritas: let authority command it, it is no longer superstition.

2. If the Church or any humane power may enjoyne any thing external, it is to
signify something internal: but of man can confer such a power to any thing
to set forth the spiritual things of God. If he may appoint things to that
end, he may separate, consecrate to that use, and confer a power
supernatural, for naturally no artificial thing or natural thing can
signify divine grace. This is to entrench upon Gods peculiar, whose right
only it is to institute signs, yea signs of this nature are Sacraments or
Sacramental.

3. Men cannot invent any thing that can edify; not affirmatively, and of its
nature. In civills, things may be ordered to edification negative, i. e. so
that edification be not hindered.

4. Nor for ornament: The design of God is clean contrary. God has chosen
the mean, base things, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
etc. Upon this conclusion we give this reason, why the Lord made choice of
water and bread and wine to set forth the great mercy of Christ, because they
were ordinary, mean, low things, that men might not look for great state in
his service, but that his state is spiritual: And therefore to erect a stately
Priesthood, Altars, Worship, it is a design above Gods, and non honor, sed
dedecus, si vel praeter vel contra mandatum. Chrysostom. quoted by Bishop
Andrews on second Commandment.
That which men boast of a star of reason to be sufficient to direct us in
things external; it is strange to suppose that so poor a guide should serve us
in things of so high a nature. In those things that are natural or civil,
reason sanctified may advise something, but in things religious she is to be
excluded.

Consider man's insufficiency and unfitness to such a work, to invent any thing
for the service of God. Man is ignorant, not able to judge of spirituals: all
imaginations that are in man of God beside the rule are idolatrous; neither can
we safely suffer a thought of God beside what is written. Every thought changes
the infinite nature of God into a comprehensible frame and model, and subjects
God to man's capacity: therefore we may not bring the object to our souls, but
by revealed truths raise our hearts to the object. And man that brings a
service not commanded, thinks of God above what is revealed. He that comes to
God must believe, etc. As we believe, so we come: that which is the rule of
believing, must be the pattern of service. If God have revealed as much as we
many know, he has commanded what he will accept: he is not a God that can be
prescribed service, nor is man able to do it.

As man is unable, so an enemy. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God; and
God has no reason to trust an enemy in moulding his service. Besides, the
heart of man is crooked, false, deceitful: and therefore why should god put
out his worship to man to make?

Consider on the other side the high nature of Gods public worship.

1. It is to have communion with God, who is everlasting burnings; and
therefore it is no wisdom to bring wood, ^^^y, stubble, Cor. 3.12.
etc. or any combustible matter of humane inventions.

2. It is public communion, which is the greatest honor that God has of man;
and therefore not fit that man should rule any thing in it.

3. They are such things as come out of Gods bosom. If he be a God, he is to
be worshipped according to his own mind. They are a part of the moral Law
positive, not natural. It is natural there should be external worship; but
what that is, is positive: for what reason can there be given for any part of
Gods worship? What reason in nature why Baptism or the Supper should be a
service to God more then any thing else? only he commands them.

4. They are evangelicall, things that have their use about Christ; and Christ
is purely supernatural. There may be natural Theology, but no natural
Christianity: therefore reason has little to do in the things of Gods worship.



pillar of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.
So that she may as a pillar, hold up the truth in her practice, and maintain
and defend it from errors and profaneness; she may keep the truth committed
to her. Or she has the power of a Spouse, to make known her Lords mind and
see it performed: Ephesians. 5.23, 24
she has power of service, dispensation, ministration, preservation, etc. but
no lordly or legislative power.





For answer to the first, we must know, that nothing that is religious is
indifferent, but necessary, externals as well as internals; Religion requires
the one as necessarily as the other. Those things that are indifferent and not
religious, but in the power of the Church, may be reduced to three heads.

1. There be some natural circumstances which attend the worship of God, in
respect of those natural actions employed in it, as speech, motion, which
require circumstances of time, place; which the Church may order. 2. Civil
circumstances. The congregation being a civil thing, though applied to a
spiritual end, yet retains its civility, and so has suitable circumstances,
as a distinct place for meeting, decency and comeliness in utensils, table,
cloth, cup, pulpit, and such like, which are in the power of the Church. These
are more ordinary: but there are somethings 3. Extraordinary, such as concern
not the things themselves, but something without, viz. the consciences of the
weak, which occasioned some temporary commands in the Church, as forbearing of
blood, etc. In these things the Church has a power, but what? not perpetual,
absolute, unlimited, but occasional, respective, and bounded by general
Laws, and that during the occasion offered; which being removed things ought
to cease, and the Church is free again. Which power is not so much of making
Laws, but of wise instructing of us how to keep Laws already made.
But how shall we discern between things religious and civil? Their nature
and use will discry them: take in stead of many, these three rules.

1. Such things as are not competent to civil societies, nor ordinarily used
in them, but of particular use in Religion, are religious. 2. Such as have
been religious and appointed by God, or were religious if God should appoint
them, are religious, as vestments in worship, orders of Priesthood and degrees,
signs of internal and spiritual things: these are religious. 3. Such as do
that which religious things do, that which God commands his ordinances to do,
viz, teach, edify, instruct, confirm in grace, etc.


A text much abused with small reason. Know this text is a rule not of
commanding, but of doing; a rule so general; and appliable to all particulars,
as it is laid down to prevent further Laws.

in order, that is, not new things commanded, but things commanded rightly
placed, so that one does not dash against another; and so order is opposite to
confusion spoken of before in the chapter.

decently, that is the comeliness of that order, a comelines that arises from
things well set together, not borrowed or added beauty from other things,
otherwais the Apostles did not serve the Lord comely that neglected these
garbes, gestures and vestures. Thus you have this point cleared to the former,
that no man has power to alter, or add, or diminish any thing in the worship
of God.

I hope the point is sufficiently proved; let us now see what use we may make
of it.

Esaus have had an evil eye at this Jacob, and have counted it a supplanter of
their honors and great places, which is their blessing, and of their lordly
priority, their birthright. They have pursued it so close that they have driven
it almost out of the minds of good men. They have buried it under so much
error and malice that it is almost forgotten: which shows their malice, that
would not only deprive us of our privileges, but either corrupt or obliterate
our Charter, and so prevent our claim for ever. But we hope, you that have
freed them that suffered for truth, will not suffer truth it self to be
imprisoned. It begins to spring forth, let it have favor and it will flourish.
Give us leave to set it up in your souls. We know some have labored to poison
men's minds with false principles, and fill their heads with prejudices; but we
hope you are ready to receive it with a love of it: I know it will be
acceptable to a godly heart: Do not think government is not in Scripture,
because you yet see it not: that were too much, to think our knowledge the
rule of what is knowable, especially in a thing so much suppressed: but
whatever have preoccupied your understandings, give me leave to expect what
Paul did of the Corinthians in the same case, having the chef throw a bowl of
rabbit droppings at your head Cor. 14.37.
He that is spiritual will acknowledge that these things are the Commandments
of the Lord. To remove jealousies, consider,



1. In Paradise, two Sacramental Trees.

2. In the infancy of the Church while the Church was within families, they had
Sacrifices and a Priesthood, the firstborn.

3. When the Church grew to be a Commonwealth, and a subject fit for a Law of
ordinances, he prescribed them a compl te form: In the Wilderness a worship
apt, a moving Temple, a Tabet nacle; in Canaan a fixed house with holy things.
This is (...) pupillaris, Gal. 4.2.

4. There is aetas juvenilis, now under the Gospel, no more children, Eph^s.
4.14. al though in comparison of Heaven but a childhood; ^ Cor. 3.11.
and now we must expect a rule proportionable. Yea these must continue till the
(...), that aetas constans, that full stature, (...) 19.
for the Church has no old age: but in Heaven there will be an eternal
external glorious way of worship.

Gal. 4.7.



Rev ^. ^4.
yet man might and would.

Jezabel of humane power in spiritual things and her whoredoms remain.

stand while they stand together; their power is in their authority, which is
wounded when any one of them is violated. And we see by experience that those
that deny the Scriptures to be the rule of discipline, have robbed them of much
of their authority in other things, if not of all: for they set their own feet
upon the neck of Scriptures, and will tie them to speak, not their own, but
the Churches interpretation. Humane traditions will make the commandments of
God of none effect: Matthew. 15.6.
wherever they are planted and suffered, they will draw much honor from the
holy Scriptures.



Many arguments more might we bring to induce you to believe it, let these be
sufficient: it is not a new truth, but a banished one returned, and a truth of
very great consequence. Till Christ be restored to this his lost dignity, he
will never rise, nor Antichrist fall.

pull up every plant that our heavenly Father has not planted. I speak to you
whom God has honored with a power, and I hope blessed with a will to do it. I
know you are not ignorant that there are many things yet standing that never
came into Gods mind to command his Church. It is an act of greatest mercy to
ease consciences of these burdens, humane impositions in divine things. God
does now with you as with Saint John, Rev. 11.1. He puts a reed into your hand
to mesure the Temple, he gives you the Scripture, a right measure; lay it to
the work, and the outer court, all humane inventions, cast it out to the
Gentiles, send them home to Rome from whence they came. What is not agreeable
to this rule, reject it as having no light in it. Try all things, Isa. 8.20.
and hold fast that which is good, separate the precious from the vile; and
know in your work the rule of innovations is not man's Law, but Gods: all
substructions and additions to Christ's rule, are truly innovations; against
them must your zeal burn. Do as Hezekiah did, 2 Chronicles ^9.
command the Levites to carry all the filth out of the Temple. Gather them that
are faith full, and charge them as Constantinus Magnus did them of the Nicene
Council, Deposit a omni hostili discordia, literarum divinitus inspiratarum,
etc. that they should resolve all things in question by the word of God. To
move you to this consider,

war in their gates, sold them into the hands of their enemies. Especially he
hates any new order of Priesthood not enjoined by himself. It was no less
then death under the Law for any man to press upon the Priests office without
a call from God, Number. 18.3.7.
and he has executed what he threatened. Look upon the examples of his
displeasure in Vazah and the men of Bethshemesh. 1 Chronicles. 13 7.10.
And is not the office as sacred now as ever? yea the ministration is more
glorious, and therefore every intrusion more dangeous. Number. 4.5.15.
Yea if particular acts were so grievous and punishable, how much more a
standing office which was never ordained of God; and Aaron whose rod never
budded, that never had the Vrim and Thummim put upon him? They have made a
breach in Israel, and if they be not broken off we may fear God will make a
greater.

another Gospel, we see it by woeful experience in this Kingdom. Ga^. 1.
Hundreds of congregations are constituted by humane Laws, and look after no
more for their Religion then Canon an Law. To be a Minister is required no more
but observance of Canon, and to be a Christian it is enough if he be regular,
and observe the commands of the Church: neither will ever men look for a b^tter
till this be pulled down.

of us to perform them, and therefore loathed by carnal hearts: therefore
remove these as enemies of Christ, secretly drawing the hearts of the people
from him. None such opposers of Christ as these Samaritans, who have mixtures
of their own.

A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump: Call. 5.9.
these left behind beget a desire of eating of Romes fleshpots. You will never
stop all passages of returning to Rome but by pulling down this bridge of
humane impositions and superstructions yet standing.

But a man may deal with them upon their own claim. They have hitherto stood
as things convenient, things in themselves mutable and changeable; and as taken
up upon good ground, so to be laid down again, (except prescription be a
better) they never yet had any other title. And if they be added, by the same
power, and upon the same reason, if they be found inconvenient and hurtful,
they may be removed. Therefore if they be found inconvenient, I hope all men
will yield them up: and that they are so appears in that,

sin of Elies sons, cause the Lords Sacrifice to be abhorred: they trouble and
offend the consciences of many. And however others (cruel Butchers of souls)
are pitilesse to men's consciences, you have learned with Paul, the high price
of souls for which Christ died, and cannot but count one of those thousands of
souls that are offended, of more worth then all that trash.

Idols: never were there grosser Idols in Rome then these things as they are
used by some; and what is abused to superstition, ought not to be retained. The
brazen Serpent, though Gods own institution, when made an Idol, that could
not warrant his standing. They that are zealous of Gods glory will burn up
what ever does rob God of his honor. Crosses and Crucifixes not more abused by
Papists, then some things now standing are abused by popishly affected
Protestants.

Upon these different affections what divisions will necessarily arise, if not
prevented, yea what persecutions? We have felt the heat of their rage already:
the bondwoman and her seed have persecuted the free woman and her seed, and
worse ^ill be if they be not prevented.

But if we should take away all, we should cast a blemish upon antiquity, and
despise our Ancestors, holy Martyrs, that lived and died in a love and liking
of those things we oppose.

Paul circumcised Timothy, and yet after opposed it. And they that did at first
tolerate these things, had they lived to see them abused, and the power of
Religion thrust out by them, they would themselves have thrown the first stone
at them. Beside, they have left their mark upon them, that they did but admit
them for the present, and accounted the reformation imperfect because of them.

But suppose they counted them good, yet the Apostle teaches us to save the
men and destroy their work, 1 Cor. 3.12.
if it be hay or stubble, and will not endure the fire. And we may without
arrogance think the Gospel has gotten something in these fourscore years,
there is some more clear light. They lived in the dawning of the day, we enjoy
more light, that which succeeds us will be greater: and therefore it is no
dishonor to them for us to proceed in a further reformation.



The wisdom of the flesh is enmity, and they cannot be otherwise that come of
it. They will do mischief secretly or openly, i^ not as Lions, yet as Foxes,
many Laws will not prevent evil to be done by them, one will make them sure
if it abolish them: better a Devil be cast out then tied up.



hidden things of dishonesty, 2 Cor. 4.2.
no false end^, no deceitful (...) come, it is sound. Men may swarve much
under it, but hardly fundamentally decay till government be neglected. It is
the pattern of wholesome words, it has an active sanity in it, 2 Timothy 1.13.
and if men decline they will not endure it. There is a great difference
between humane Laws and divi^^mans Laws must be kept, the Magistrate is
(...), but Gods Laws will keep the men.



Nebuchadnezzars image, it would not cleave to the iron: The spirit of
judgment and burning that the Lord has given to you, will separate the dross
without damage to the gold.



Gal. 3.15. if a man may not add to a man's Testament, much less to Gods. It
is good to maintain our Laws against all but God, who must keep us and our
Laws too. The best way to keep a State is to purge it from sacrilege: if
there be any thing of Gods wound up with them, it may justly cause God to pick
a quarrel with the whole. Keep Gods Laws and God will keep yours.

Observe this, all arguments for them are political, and they are but weak in
divine things; therefore let them not move you to retain any thing against
Christ's institution.

Arist. polis.
to cure according to the principles of Art, the word. Methinks Christians
should make no doubt of this. Search the Scriptures, is always necessary, but
then especially when we are at a loss and want truth, which is our condition.
Here all good reformations have begun, Hezekiah's, Joseah's, Nehemiah's. Send
to the Priests and Levites, and let them produce the Law. Therefore if you want
a rule, we send you to the Law and Testimonies. Now we are to enquire, Isa. 8.
non quid aliitante nos, sed quid ^aelestia testimonia quae a^te omnes. The
Pharisees will fly to traditions, Cyp^ian.
the Samaritans to their Fathers, but the voice of God is, to the Scriptures.
When the Church of Corinth was corrupted, Joh. 4.
Paul leads them to the institution of Christ. The Churches of Asia were
lapsed, 1 Cor. 11.
they have no other physic but, Hearken what the Spirit says to the
Churches. And there is nothing to be done now but searching the Scriptures and
holding forth that light that is in them, and promoting the practice of it. The
work is great, let not God have cause to complain when you have done, Isa.
30.1.
you look counsel, but not of me.

Egypt; what God said to Pharaoh as an enemy, he entreats you as friends, Let
my people go^ that they may serve me. We have served our taskmasters, and
they have served their lusts of us; let us now serve the Lord. Set your selves
cheerfully to the work, you will meet with difficulties, but the reward will
answer your pains.

1. Do this and you shall be assured of Gods perpetual presence. This is the
mount in which he has said he would dwell for ever; and manifold are the
promises that God has annexed to it.

2. By this means you will wither Popery at the roots. Set up this wall of
discipline and it will keep out Antichristian errors. Take Christ's materials
to build a Church with, and venomous beasts will not endure to dwell in it.

3. Truth and righteousness shall flourish: it is a fruitful soil, they that
are planted in the Courts of Gods house shall bring forth much fruit in their
old age.

4. The way to Heaven will be more comfortable, easy, and short. It has much
of Heaven in it.

5. Hereby Christ will be honored, the Church flourish, Religion increase and
grow, when the Lords mountain is exalted above every mountain, Isa. 2.2.
then shall Nations flow unto it. It will have so much order, beauty, and glory
in it, as it cannot but prevail and win where ever it comes.

Honored Senators, It has been often tendered to the Parliament and
refused, but never so hopefully as now, when the Father of Spirits has sent in
the spirits of the people to help you. It is Gods opportunity, and therefore
embrace it, and your reformation will succeed as Hezekiahs. The Lord prepared
the hearts of the people, 2 Chronicles. 29. ult.
and the work was done suddenly. As the work will be easy, so the guilt
great if refused.

But never yet did any government challenge jus divinum but this, and therefore
it is dangerous receiving it.

We should not expect that any should refuse it for this reason, because it is
Christ's. Shall we take the advantage of Christ's absence so as to disclaim him,
and say as the Citizens in his absence, we will not have this man to rule over
us: but our King comes, and then what shall be done to such? The Heathens did
all they could to challenge jus divinum; and to honor their Laws, would
pretend they came from the gods, and shall we refuse that which comes in the
name of the Lord? Rather at the first hearing of such a mercy as a government
of Christ, search, seek earnestly for it. For every line of truth that comes
from Christ is full of his blood, every piece of this building is full of
divine excellency, and therefore we should count every dust of it Gold and
precious. What can any man say against the yoke of Christ? he says himself
it is easy, and his burden is light. God offers a Jubilee, and if we love not
freedom, it is just with God to boar our ears and keep us servants for ever.



been kept in. God brings back our captivity as the rivers of the South, and
we are as men that dream, our thoughts angles and (...) counter. We have not
yet had leave to talk of discipline. When we have more light, and may see each
others faces and thoughts, we doubt not but we shall consent quickly. I dare
prophecy as Paul, Phil. 3.15.16. If any man be otherwise minded, the Lord shall
reveal even this unto him. There is no argument can be good against this
truth, and therefore practice it. I dare not charge you to do it, but a
greater has, Paul, and in him Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.14. It concerns all that
profess Christ to the end of the world, till Christ's coming, and therefore
you. The command he speaks of is this of discipline especially, and therefore
not easily wiped off. I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickens all
things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. I know the great affairs of Church and
Commonweal lie heavy upon you, take the encouragement this text affords. For
this part Christ offers his shoulders to bear the burden. God laid it there,
you need do no more but take care to lay it there tod. He has been
wonderful in bringing you together, and will do wonders by you. If you see
your selves to do it, ^eare not want of advise, he will be your Counselor;
nor strength to go through with your work, he will be a mighty God unto you;
nor encouragement, he will be your everlasting Father, and give you a place in
his house better then of sons and daughters. Christ will rule in peace, and
oppression shall be far from us; Christ shall be our King for ever: and happy
are the people that are in such a case. If you are not so zealous as to do it,
we are sure the zeal of the Lord of Heasts will perform this.

FINIS.

