THE LEAVES OF THE TREE OF LIFE: For the healing of THE NATIONS. Opening all
the wounds of this Kingdom, and of every party, and applying a remedy to them:
By which we come to a right understanding between King and Parliament. A
universal agreement and peace on all sides, and the Kingdom restored and settled
upon a sure and unmovable Foundation:

By the Light GOD shining upon WILLIAM SEDGWICK.

Do you not know that the Saints shall Judge the World?

LONDON, Printed by H. for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle, at the
West end of Paul's. 1648.

THE PREFACE TO THE WHOLE KINGDOM.
REad, and wonder, I know thou will, to see the Lord so soon upon English
ground: you are surprised, taken fast asleep: Awake, stand up, It Is the Lord: he
is come to save us: he was with us upholding our former prosperity, and we knew
it not; he is now with us fighting against our worldly state, in such a dark
cloud as we are more ignorant of him; he will now unvail himself, and you shall
see him in open face of love and Salvation, and say, This is the Lord. While
you are under him in the World, you will find his feet as fine brass burning
in a furnance:: His steps will be hard to break you in pieces; fiery to consume
you; yet fine, holy and just: suffer that and he will take you up into his
arms, and bind you to himself with a golden girdle of love, and show you a
face as bright as the Sun shinning in his strength, giving you rich love, life
and light: he is severe that will astonish; but merciful that will comfort: he
is very low in the bottom of your sins and miseries; there the flesh will
despise him, but your wants will rejoice in him and say, such a high Priest we
need: but exalted very high in the largnesse of lovingkindnesse, sure that will
please you, and the evil one only can be troubled at it: England it is thy
Shepherd, the Porter will and must open to him: and the Sheep will hear his
voice, while he calls them by their names, they will follow him, and he will
lead them out of their misery: and he goes before them (In every way of
suffering and deliverance he is first) sure you will not follow a stranger, but
flee from him: he says, All that went before me are thieves and robbers: they
are hirelings (and come for wages) they come not but to steal, to kill and to
destroy (so have all done yet) They are hirelings, and the sheep are not
theirs: But I am the good Shepherd, I lay down my life for the Sheep: I am come
that they might have life (after their death) and that they might, have it more
abundantly (then ever they had it) J will seek that which is lost, and bring
again that which was driven away; and will bind up that which was broken; and
will strengthen that which was sick: and J will feed them in a good pasture,
upon the high mountains shall their fold be etc. I know the narrownes of man's
heart will say, who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall
the earth bring forth in one day? shall a Nation be born at once? Will Christ
appear in the earth? or if in the earth, in a whole Nation? what Christ under
the sins of the Kingdom? his blood shed in a Nation? a Savior of the Earth?
and this in so short a season, all at once? To this I only answer: My thoughts
are not as your thoughts, nor my ways as your ways: but as far as heaven is
above earth; so far are my ways above your ways, says the Lord: This I do
rejoice in, and so will thou, that here is light to be seen, and eyes to see
with: that he can open and enlarge the minds of men, and bring them out of
prison, and make them able to receive the truth, This is truth, light to show
this truth in, eyes to receve it, and love to rejoice in it.

We have no enemy but the devil, and he will make all the resistance he can:
poor, weak man may doubt, fear, etc. but Satan will blaspheme, rage and say,
it is impossible, it is blasphemy, it is against God, against man: But thou enemy thy
discovery is thy ruin: thou shall not speak a word against this Lord but it
shall be manifest it is thou a murderer, a liar, a destroyer, that has no
portion in this thing, and therefore would destroy that that will destroy
thee, and deliver the Kingdom out of thy destroying hands: thou art cast down;
thy Kingdom of darkness is broken by the light of the day of God: thou shall
prevail no longer in this Kingdom: O Leviathan we now can draw thee out with a
hook, and thy tongue with a cord; thou shall now make supplications to us, and
speak soft words to us: we now take thee for a servant, play with thee as with
a bird, and our companions shall make a banquet of thee, etc. Therefore depart
thou as smoke before the presence of the Lord.

Here is one that has the Keys of David that can enter into the Kingdom,
bring forth the prisoners, judge them and save them from Satan's cruelty and
wrath: These are the Leaves, not the fruit of the Tree of life; the cure is
upon the Nation in general, that is the subject in hand; not men in their
particular and personal estate, that is yet to come: This is Elijah who comes
before the great and dreadful day of the Lord: to turn the heart of the
Fathers to the Children, and the heart of the Children to their Fathers; lest J
come and smite the earth with a curse: The Lord in the spirit of Elijah, the
dawning of the day upon the top of the mountain, washing and cleansing the
outward skin of the Nation, to prepare for further and greater glory, and to
remove the present curse of hell, and wrath that is devouring of you* I have no
more to say to you, but stand still and patiently hear your doom from the
Throne of God advancing it self in

WILLIAM SEDGWICK.

THE LEAVES OF THE TREE of LIFE, For the healing of the NATION.
Chap. I.
Showing the happy and flourishing condition in which the Kingdom of England
once stood, and the ground of it.

THE Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the world and all that dwelss
therein: For he has founded it upon the Seas, etc. The divine goodness delights
to bring forth it self in the whole creation: and upon all things stamps his
own likeness.

Especially the heavenly man, takes pleasure to bring forth a brief Epitome of
himself in his image man: The families of Heaven have engraven their likeness
upon the Families of the Earth: The new Jerusalem the City of God, bestows her
shape and beauty upon these Cities: But the highest glory of God in his
Kingdom, is drawn forth in the Kingdoms of this world, and therefore they are
above all, The Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

Above all the Nations, this of England (with her two sisters Scotland and
Ireland) is with peculiar favor separated from the World: Being an Island
embraced with arms and Seas of righteousness, peace, safety, and the
knowledge of God: The bosom of the earth where the divine glory chooses to
treasure up his richest Jewels: His private lodging whereinto he delights to
retire himself, and out of which he pleases first to arise, and thence to
proceed to visit the whole World.

Nothing here but is spoken by God; made by the Word of God; and does again
speak God. A fruitful and beautiful Earth, meeting with and married unto a
pleasant and powerful Heaven, in a healthful and temperate Spirit and Air
do bring forth abundance of excellent fruit: Especially those rich Flocks of
Sheep that cover the Earth, shows the Soil to be the Lambs, and to were his
Livery; and so to be his Storehouse, from whence he will cloth the world with
garments of Salvation.

In the disposition of the People of England shine many sparks and beams of
divine majesty, ingenuity and freedom; gentleness and mildnes; zeal and
devotion; gravity and wisdom; stoutnes and courage; noblenes, and greatness of
spirit; aptnes for general and high undertakings: which renders them feared,
honored and beloved abroad; and fit instruments of good to the Universe. As
other Nations are furnished with mines of Gold and silver: England with rich
minds full of true worth; indeed a Race and seed of heavenly Lords obscured
under earthly infirmities, yet so, as their luster does discover it self and
shine out.

But that which indeed exalted us to Heaven was this: That this excellent
People, in a happy Country, were by the Ministry of mighty Angels, molded into
a government after the pattern of the highest and perfectest glory of God; in
Father, Son and Spirit: Or to make England a happy Canaan, Father, Son and
Spirit agree together to dwell in it, and to bestow themselves upon it in their
several fulness: and do themselves, veiled and covered over with fleshly
forms, unite and govern us in righteousness and peace.

First, the Father advances the King in his own likeness, and by living in
him, makes him to be Pater patriae the Father of his Country: the Head and
Supreme: The Husband and Lord of the Kingdom. In him (as in God the Father) is
all the Majesty, Honor, Justice and Riches of the Kingdom.

1. In unity, bound up close in one Person: all in its Center: hence it comes,
and hither it returns. 2. In Head and Fountain; the original from whence
honor and justice flows. 3. In Priority or prerogative: in him as highest and
Supreme. 4. But more hid and deeply conceald, not so outward and visible as in
others.
Hence is the King the Anointed of God: God eminently: I said ye are Gods: in
nearest conjunction unto God: The greatest representative of God: His
Vicegerent: Next under God: in immediate fellowship with God: God and the King.

Secondly, The Son appears in the People (especially as they are formed in
one Representative the Parliament) and by his fullness, makes them the Body of
the Head: The Wife, the Spouse; And so gives them all the Majesty, Honor,
justice and Riches of the Kingdom: and that that is in the King to be in them.

1. Divided and multiplied; not bound up in center, but drawn forth into
circumference, and come forth in many. 2. In stream, and flowing forth for the
use and benefit of others. 3. In second place, in subordination to the first.
4. Imbodied and drawn forth into open view, more visible and manifest unto
others.
Thus are they the Kings yoak-fellows, a meet help and have what ever he has;
his Son and heir. And being raised into a Parliament by the Kings Writ, are
then fit mediators tween the King and the People: by whom the People offer up
gifts to the King, and the King gives favors, pardons, and privileges to them.

Thirdly, The Spirit the third Person, he by the Law, and by mutual Covenants
binds these two together, and is the marriage that joins them, or the house
of love in which they both live in peace and happiness with each other, and
disposes both into a just and equal distance; yet a perfect agreement; or give
them both to subsist in proper and distinct Rights, and both in union together;
that they both fully have what is due to them; and both have what each other
have: the same; and that equally without robbery; without injury or wrong to
each other. The Law gives to the King his Prerogative, his authority in unity;
in Fountain, etc. And diversifying or multiplying give the same in another way
to the body; and yet takes nothing from the King. So gives it to the King as is
most advantageous to the body; and so to the body as is most advantageous to
the head. The body has it best in the Kings having of it, with that honor,
safety and union as she cannot have it in her self. And the head has it best
in the bodies having of it with that fruitfulnes and strength that he cannot
have it out of them: Yea, in this Spirit and Law, in this bond of perfection
they both have it in each other; and could not, nor cannot have it long nor
well, if they have it not together. The Royalty of a King as a fountain, freely
giving it self into the Authority of Parliament, as a husband giving himself to
his wife: and the Parliament only being what she receives from the King; so
they mutually nourish, support and uphold each other; and being divided and
separated, they presently wither away and dye. They both have it and both give
it; the body gives it to the head, and receives it from the head in several
ways; and this is its life and perfection, that it passes by vines and
arteries from one to another, and are knit together by nerves and sinews; so
that what honor the King has, he gives to his People, and what riches and
substance the People had, they gave it to the King: the People honorable in the
Prince, and the prince mighty and strong in the People. The body breaths, sees,
tastes, etc. in the head; and the head works, walks, and digests in the body.

Thus the Trinity are truly The foundamentall Law and constitution of the
Kingdom; which is the cause of ability, strength and peace of the Kingdom: the
Pillars that kept it upright: the health and soundne of it, where by it was
able to subsist in prosperity, and flourish in it self, and to defend and
maintain it self against enemies from abroad.

In this estate we for a while flourished and enjoyed a heaven upon earth, or
an earthly heaven: a sweet figure or shadow of the Kingdom of glory: and but a
shadow; yet such a shadow as was in union with the substance: King and People
being knit together by the Spirit, and by the same spirit knit to God and
Christ. Such a figure as had the original living in it in infirmity and
weakness. It Was the true light shining in darkness; but the darkness
comprehended it not: We knew not our own filicity: God was nigh to us, the
Kingdom of God in all his glory was in the midst of us and we were not aware
of it. The Lord did Reign amongst the Children of men, and they knew it not;
while he was present, they set him of a distance; and would not receive their
own life: but in enmity did cover the face of God, the majesty and Kingdom of
God, and gloried in their poor shadow.

It Was a beautiful but earthly vessel raised up for a time, a temporary
greatness, a corruptible Crown: that we have seen standing and flourishing in
prosperity, but its period of happiness is come: and you shall now see it in
its declining, diseased, corrupt estate end falling.

Chap. II.
Showing the Kingdom of England in its corrupt and declining estate.

YOu have seen the fair inside of England; now you shall see the filthy outside
of it. The holy God took it into conjunction and fellowship: now casts it off
into rejection and reprobation. In the first, his glory shined: in this its
abominable wickedness and woeful ruin appear.

This Heavenly glory, being in love with the earthly shadow of it self, desires
to approach nearer unto it, and to dwell with it, in a more entire and perfect
union, and to swallow it up into it self, that it might no longer subsist out
of him, but be found in him: But as God approaches, this earth fled from his
brightness, being a fraid to be swallowed into its own Life: and being weak and
jealous of the great love of God; chose rather to continue its old form, and
its earthly happiness. The goodlines and majesty of God was clothed and hid
in this worldly Kingdom; as a treasure in an earthen vessel: It Was his pleasure
to break the vessel, to rend and tear the old garment, that he might come forth
and cloth that with his glory, that clothed him with its baseness: But the
Pot-sherd did strive with his Maker, and would not yield or offer up it self to
God: but doated upon it self and its own beauty: Therefore God threw it off
into a dark and inordinate idolizing it self: to a worldly and satanicall
separation from God; and love of it self: making it self the substance, and God
the shadow; and so grew to an earnest minding of its present happiness, and
threw off God into a strangeness and distance; not to be conversed with in
this world; but referd him to another; making those two which God has made
one. Hence grew in the whole Nation, King and People in all parts, an eagar
love of worldly things: and as God threatens to take it down, that he might set
up the heavenly, so much the more earnestly did they cleave to it, and fall
further and further from God, and more and more labored to load themselves
with thick clay; and so the whole Kingdom in opposition to the divine will,
are in ambition and covetuousnesse set to advance their worldly state: here is
the fatal breach betwixt God and man, twixt Heaven and England.

This breach is made by the Devil, the wicked one, the God of this World: by
which the Kingdom is become Satan's, and divided from God.

And being thus cut off from its head and life God, it cannot but fall into
divisions: The Spirit of God failing the band of union, it must quickly be in
distraction: There was a destroying in the whole; but it first appeared twixt
head and body: Thus.

All parts finding their foundation failing, and some disease and disturbance
in the body, each begin to stickle for it self and its own interest, as
distinct from the other.

The King having a misgiving that his greatness did not increase, but rather
sinck; thirsts after more absoluteness: thinks it a debasing to his Royalty to
have any in conduction with him: as good be no King as to be in dependence upon
others: and so grows weary of the Parliament.

The People finding their liberty and privilege sinking too, begin to be
jealous of their Prince; and accounting him a Tyrant, afraid they were going
into slavery; finding an obstruction in the body, that favor did not flow so
freely from the head as it use to do, disdaining to be kept at a distance from
Government and the affairs of States; growing impatient of the Princes ways,
censure his actions, and to have a longing itch after government.

Drawing thus several ways, there grows of head and members two factions.
The Count and Royal, and episcopal party: and the Country People and puritan
party: These two grow from jealousies and discontents to malignity one against
another; to watch for advantages one against the other, and to seek the
advancing themselves and the ruining of each other; laboring all that the
could to rob each other, and to pull and snatch from each other to strengthen
themselves; and so growing to a deadly enmity: and when the body meet in a
Parliament, and so head that party, they are strongly divided; and the whole
Kingdom being shaken and broken fall to pieces according to the working of
their several and various principles.

To the King goes men of honor, as the Nobility and Gentry much: whose honor
is predominate over their reason and Religion. The Episcopal patty being
Monarchical; growing out of the root of the King; and paternall much the
Fathers of the Church; men of implissit Faith, whose conscience is much
regulated by their superiors; men that are high and great admirers of
Kinglinesse; taken much with that Ordinance of a King. And a vast number of
loose men men of no Religion; but the King.

To the Parliament, men who of a lower state, and exercising their own reasons
in Religion: zealous and well-affected People; men of industry and labor, that
love freedom and to be something themselves: Men whose consciences are their
own and so strict in them: Cities, Corporations, Bodies; and men that highly
honor the Parliament; men zealous for general and common Good.

And by the access of these Parties to each other, they are strengthened in
their opposition of each other, and fitted for their mutual ruin.

Chap. III.
Showing the Kings Errors.

The Kingdom being divided into two parties, the King first carries away The
Golden ball of Government; who (though taken off, and separated from his true
Basis, The King of Kings) yet is assisted by a mighty Angel, by whose help he
rules awhile alone; and with more good, and less evil then those that
succeed: In which he appears in High and masculine virtue: as a Father,
mighty, severe, and terrible: The great and undoubted Image of God living in a
supremacy, beyond and above all questons; honored with fear and devotion: But
alas, being alone he soon declines, his good Angel leaves him, and so not able
long to manage the Scepter; But oppressed with his own guilt, and the curse of
GOD, quickly is forced to resign it to others.

It has been the Kings plea That he is accountable for his actions to none but
God; and therefore has frequently in his Declarations appealed from man to
GOD. And Divine justice has reserved your cause to Himself, and kept your
Parliament a long while from accusing you of any thing, only charging your
instruments. And when they attempted to bring forth any thing against you, as
they did in their Declaration upon their Votes to make no more addresses to
you: They were manifestly weak and mistaken; and not being to prove any thing,
they were forced presently to retract what they had done; and show they
produced nothing but their own shame.

You stand therefore before the Throne of God, and are found guilty of
transgressing against that foundamental Law from which thou hold thy Crown,
The majesty of God the Father, and have broke Covenant first, with God,
secondly with thy People.

First, Thou haft slain and killed thy Father, The Lord of glory; this is thy
Parricide; That the great King lies to this day buried in thee, as in his
Sepulcher. That in all thy Reign, thou have not suffered the Majesty of God to
break forth; but have smothered and denied his light to shine through thee
amongst men. Thou have owned the title and name of the Lords Anointed, CHARLES
by the Grace of God, but have not owned the substance of that Anointing and
that Grace.

Had thou known and owned that fountain of Divine light and wisdom which
lives in thy sacred Head and Breast, Thou would have understood the meaning
of that Principle, The King cannot Err; and so would always walk by a
certain and never-failing rule: But thou (forsaking, yea, professing against
that Spirit) have followed the false and crooked rule of thy own carnal
reason, and customs and examples of other Princes, and the dark counsel of
poor petty Politicians.

Had thou known that Immortal fountain of Majesty, that is in thee, thou
would have known the meaning of that position, The King cannot dye; and
would never through fear and jealousy fled from thy People and Parliament
because of Tumults: Was not that a turning away that Royal face of God that is
able to have allayed and stilled the raging of those waves? Had you known that
Divine power that is in you, you would have met such tumults, as Christ met
those that came to apprehend him; and said as he did, I am he, whom seek ye?
And then you had had the same effect, They would have fallen before you. Or if
you had suffered, you had laid down your Crown in dishonor, it would have been
raised in honor as his.

But to fly to a place of strength, Digbies counsel, who taught Majesty to
Dig, to earth it self into by and indirect paths of darkness. There Is no
place of strength equal to your own Royal heart: It was to teach the Sun to
hide it self in the earth for fear of clouds, or to depart from his sphere to
avoid mists. Or had thou lived in the Anointing that is in thee, thou had
not needed to have feared, or denied the high demands of thy subjects seeking
thy prerogatives from thee, or the diminishing thy greatness by it; but might
have freely powered forth to much honor as would have burst them if they had
been corrupt and wicked in their design; or it would have assured thee that
there is such a Sun of Majesty in thee, as could not be less by shining upon
them; and that Majesty is not in titles, names, customs, the power of a
Militia; but naturally inherent in thee, fixed and sure as God, and so
inseparable from thee.

It was meanness and poorness of spirit that did not give more fully then they
could ask, and so have overcome them; or if thou had made them Kings, thou
had been, as truly thy copy is, KING of KINGS; so that indeed thy Error
has been, Thou have not been Majesticall enough: or lived in the height and
absolutnesse of God.

Secondly, When thou hadest broken the bond of union twixt the Eternal and thy
Kingdom, by which thy Kingdom was become a Kingdom of darkness, a Worldly
one; and so ruled by the god of this World, the Devil.

Thou have in opposition to the judge of all men contended to the uttermost to
uphold and maintain that vain Idol, and false power, when the holy one has
sent out Watchers to destroy it, and have Pertenaciously refused to give it up
to be slain by Gods justice: The more God showed himself against it to break
it, the more did thou persist in striving for it: And not committing it to
him whose it first was, and from whom thou did receive it, have gone into
base, carnal and filthy ways to preserve it: This is the reason that a long
time thou have run a course of weak, dark and black ways, being lead about by
Satan at his pleasure.

It was this that sent thee in secret ways to beg aid and assistance of
Foreign Princes, and not of Princes only, but by thy agents have unworthily
sought to private persons for reilefe, the alms houses, called religious
houses.

Thou have been dealing in a close and underground way with the Bloody Irish
and that party; Have wandered from thy steadiness, to all interests and
parties in Scotland and England, and so been forced to most unstable and
unequal shifts, denying thy actions, false saying and swaring, to various
forms and shapes, to save thy Worldly Greatness from Divine justice.

Thou in pursuance of it have pawned thy word, engaged thy estate, thy Crown,
jewels, undone thy friends; and al these things eaten up with contending
against a curse doomd by God; not knowing yet, that he that saves his Crown,
shall lose it, and he that loses it now shall save it.

As thou have sinned against the holy God, so against thy People, and have
failed in thy Government toward them; not answering your heavenly pattern and
foundamentall Law.

First, Thou have not lived with thy wife, thy body, the People in the love of
a Head: Thou should have loved her as Christ loved his Church, and gave
himself for it, to sanctify it etc. It Is true thy spouse was unclean, proud,
high in demands, striving with thee; the true way to have washed her was to have
given thy self freely for her. Thy Majesty envied while detained from her; If
it had been shed-abroad amonst them would have heald their distempers, and
pierced and overcome their hearts.

Thou have slighted and neglected thy body, not honored her; and have
withheld thy self and thy favor from thy People in General, and have
narrowed thy self into a few friends, and have heaped all thy favors upon
them. Thou have broken the Marriage knot, and have accepted others into thy
wives bed to be sharers in thy Government. Thou have refused thy Parliament,
and have admitted into thy bosom and heart of Government, thy Wife, a Woman a
Stranger; thy minions, favorites and friends, That's thy own and her Adultery:
Heerin thou have prostituted thy Royalty to every flatterer, and given the
swaying of the great affairs of your Kingdom, to private and inferior
persons, who have brought forth, instead of Noble and Righteous Laws, a brood
of low juggling tricks, a rabble of Monopolies, Pattents and such brats. True,
thou have exactly served thy personal relations, a loving Husband, a tender
Father, a constant Friend; but have been short in thy Office as a Prince; the
greatness of a KINGS heart has been shrunk up and withered into the nature
of a private man: And thy private and Domestical state has drowned thy
Public and Royal.

As thou have been defective in love and faithfulness, so in sufficiency and
ability of a Head: Thou have not dwelt with her as a man of knoweldge. There
has been in the Nation many high and strong workings of spirit toward a
greater perfection in Religion and Justice, which (though mingled with many
unholsome vaporus, and clogged with great weakness) might by an able head have
been digested (the evil being purged out) into good spirits, advantageous for
the further grouth and increase of the body; These are spilt, and for want of
wisdom to manage them, the Kingdom spilt with them.

This Nation was of a fruitful and teeming constitution, apt to bring forth
gallant and noble increase of light, knowledge, government; great improvement
in virtue: which you in weakness of fear and jealousy labored to stifle, and
in a superstitious opinion of former times, confine this age to their example:
And being shy, and not understanding the ways of God, have left the body to
her self, or to other persons; whence arises this hideous and misshapen birth,
in Church and Common wealth. This universal disorder and confusion, which the
wisdom only of the Head, and Father of the family can, or could, prevent.

I Will but add this one, When thou had provoaked thy Parliament into a
distemper by thy mis-government, and estrangeing thy self from her; then
un-naturally, un-Kingly, irrationally, un-christianly, to forsake her, and
betake your self to force; an act so full of folly, revenge, so unbelieving,
so unlike God as along time durst not look up, would not be confessed: This
cropped the sweet flower of Englands peace, broke that great vein from whence
such streams of blood have flowed.

In sum, The majesty, justice, mercy and goodness of the great God has not been
held forth in thy Government: but hid and buried in thee: their appearing
visibly in thee nothing but the weakness, inconstancy, injustice, and oppression
of vile man.

Your evils have been great, and so are your Judgments: you are fallen into a
deep pit of misery: the chief offender, and the chief sufferer: great now in
nothing but in loss and affliction.

You have slain the Kingly glory, or the true glory of a King; and therefore
your Authority and dominion must needs die: you have labored to save an
earthly greatness against Heavens displeasure; the only way to have it
ruined: to expose it to a multitude of strokes of warth.

You have divided your self from your People, your Parliament, and so they
become of a help, a plague to you, and are by others rent and detained from
you. You Idolized your Wife and friends, and are therefore separated from them.
Blasted and accursed in all your attempts. Your Kingdom is full of miseries,
and you the Center of them all, and must bear in all and for all: Become the
shame of the World, by horrid confusion and distraction. Deprived of all power
of dominion. Thy Revenue and dignity shared by others. The majesty of thy
Government like a Potters vessel dashed in pieces into Committees; etc. Thy
Mame wounded, yea, buried under foul and black oblique: become the scorn of
Pampletters: Thy Prerogatives and the highest privileges of the Crown, banded
and tossed about the Kingdom in the mouths and hands of common men.

When thou had left the Lord thy stabillity, see what a race of misery thou
have run: When thou did leave the Parliament, and wentest into the North; Thy
Sun set, and another rose in England: From that time its a dark night with
majesty; and Kinglinesse is laid upon a sick bed, and those Nobles and
gentlemen like blazing torches attending upon you: All your ways then were
weak, faint, sick-snatches at a Crown, unnatural and violent, striving after a
fading glory, while your Kingdom lay wallowing in its own blood: At last the
Lamp wants Oil, and Majesty dies and gives up the Ghost; when you left your
Regalia, your Seal* Crown, Council etc. at Oxford; now you indeed put of the
state of a King, and in the condition of a private person, wander as a spirit
in the Air, till at last found in the North Apud inferos: thrown amongst those
lean hungry hagges the Scots, who greedily devour this sweet morsel, a King:
and in their ambitious and covetous lusts prey upon him. Forced amongst those
that he had little before proclaimed traitors and enemies to his Crown and
dignity, and were devils in his thoughts to him. here he is for a while
tormented; mocked with the title of a King, but indeed a Captive; nipt, scurged
and lasht with their rebukes; tempted to blaspheme God in his own Royaltlty:
and at last valued at less then his quoin; sold for money into another hell.

He is resigned up into other hands, Commissioners of the Parliament, where he
is again to be squeesd and wrackt by Propositions to give up the heart of
Regal power: ground tween the Milsiones of both Nations: not admitted to come
to his Parliament; but Holdenby; thrust into a corner while others frolic in
his Dominion.

Now hurried into another hell; snatched out of this as too honorable, and
taken away by agitators and common soldiers: They must have their turn to vex
this piece of misery; They that had often chased him, pursued him with death,
he must be their prey, and be carried about as Army baggage: They now will have
the moulding of him, and will cut out a new garnent of Royalty to cover his
nakedness, But it is shrunk in the making, and they have disposed of the cloth to
their own turns.

Poor wretch, frighted from hence by a new and strange fiend to Regallity,
Levellers: and after another Pilgrimage, he arrives at the Isle of Wight; where
he is again Imprisoned. Laboring to please his masters, studying how to
content all parties, and seeking favor and relief of all, not forbearing
(being in great torment) to ask the Levellers, a drop of water to cool his
tongue.

At last the pit shuts her mouth upon him in the Parliaments Votes to make no
more addresses to him; which is confirmed by the power of the Army; and so
forever rejected as an abominable thing, never to be meddled with.

Chap. V.
Showing the Parliaments errors.

WHen the King had involved himself in difficulties and weary of toyling, to
extaicate himself, he seeks at length to lay down his head in the lap of the
Parliament, and to seek help of his own Spouse to compose the disorders of his
Family.

And the Parliament appears at first, assisted by a lovely and sweet Angel,
as the tender Mother of all our liberties, as the womb in whom our Civil rights
lay; as Jerusalem that is from above, the Mother of us all: having the face of
Jesus, a savior from all our troubles; speaking nothing but a general and
universal love, and a care of all; as a rich treasury full of all blessings
that might make us happy: But that Angel leaving her, she quickly discovers
her weakness and inability, and sinks into confusion under her sins, and
Divine displeasure.

Your evils are against Christ, against the King, and against the People.

Chiefly against your Fundamental Law, Christ the Son of God, who is in you,
and with you, and you know him not; yea, deny him, and in express words,
scorn his Spirit. You some times profess for the Kingdom of Christ, but do
indeed put him to open shame; burying the Wisdom, Beauty, Righteousness of
Christ; and holding forth visibly nothing but an abominable heap of folly,
disorder and unrighteousness: you are indeed the seat of all the fulness of
Christ, the house of God where God would dwell; and so a body of Heavenly
wisdom, religion, justice, goodness, and everything that is Excellent: But
you have departed from this principle, yea, wholly killed it; and walk after the
imaginations of your own hearts, after the customs of men; yea worse, after
the will and mind of others; not following the stable rule, The Lord; you are
become subject to People, City, Scots, Army, any.

And having lost the true life and spirit of a Parliament, the presence and
Majesty of God; you are become a dead Idol, standing in the power of darkness,
in direct opposition to God: This poor empty name, this vanity do you with all
your might maintain, zealous for your Privileges, as if all happiness lay in
them; and while you labor to uphold them, you do most destroy them; selling
your selves for relief in any danger to any that can but seem to help you;
making your selves cheap and common, mercenary; and so the great betrayers of
your own rights.

In your rebellions against the holy God you have trodden in the steps of your
Father the King, and in his may see your own iniquities.

But particularly, You are guilty of hipocrisy and deceit in that great
pretense of Reformation, seeing such a spirit acting in the People, to keep
them sure to you; and by that to gain advantage against your adversaries: you
assume this title, The Cause of God, and Reformation; without either love to
it, or judgment to know how to go about it.

It Is known you are men your selves unreformed, men of corupt and loose lives;
and that whereupon yon insist most, you are most guilty of, Arbitrary power;
every one being in dispose of his estate a Tirant, and wracking Tennants
according to his own will; which is the general sin of the Nation, every one
laboring to oppress others to advance himself: And since you came together
walking in a continual course of illegal and arbitrary power. You are grossly
ignorant of the Heavenly Kingdom, The true Pattern out of which the Kingdom
was taken and formed, and into which it must be Reformd.

As you want judgment, so want you power, having trampled under your feet the
power and Spirit of Christ, your Ordinances are all spiritlesse, weak and
despicable.

But having laid this Egg of Reformation, you make this use of it, When you
want an Army to help you, you carry it to Scotland to be hatched there; and
thence it brings forth an imperfect, earthy, crawling Cockatrice, Presbytery,
which never yet did any good, but vex the Nation and help your friends to get
into fat livings: And because you want the help of active men here of different
judgments, they sit upon the Egg, and bring forth liberty of conscience, and
with it, a monstrous heap of misshapen errors and opinions; which you cannot
suppress by conviction, nor dare restrain by power.

The Church, it is true, was extremely corrupted, full of tyranny, darkness,
worldly pride, and great disorder; But you have brought nothing to it but utter
ruin and defacement: Not having that Spirit of judgment and burning, to
separate twixt the precious and the vile in Episcopacy etc. you have in a
blind conformity with Scotland, and to supply your own needs of their lands,
untterly demolisht all.

Your errors against the King are, not following your foundamentall
constitution; He a Husband, you his body; he a Father, you a Son.

He being plunged in his government, and in necessity, he calls you together
and seeks your help; which was a fair opportunity for you by fair carriage and
dutifulness to regain his restranged heart: but you grow upon his necessities,
and in stead of insinuating into him by love, you at first rigidly and harshly
capitulate for priority and privilege; and fell into a violent and illegal
forcing, the sword, the Militia, out of his hands; a strange and un-naturall
contest (having no other bottom but jealousy and fear of suffering) for the
Wife or Son to disarme the Husband or Father. You have unkindly, unjustly
requited his error: who would have Reigned without you, made you ciphers, and
kept the substance of Government from you. You deal so with him, would take all
power from him, and leave him to be a state ceremony, a great nothing; a gaudy
thing set out with Titles, for pomp and fashion sake to be looked upon; a
servant having power to do neither good nor hurt. And that which every man as
a man contends for, to be Arbitrary, or to have the exercise of his will,
without which we are the greatest slaves in the World; that is wholly denied
him in Government. Your endeavors is to imprison the Throne; to infeeble your
Lord, and disable him from doing the Kingdom any good: such an empty weak
thing, would be a heavy curse to the Nation; a dishonor and shame to you, and
that which you would quickly be weary of.

It Is most true you have Royalty in you in the second place, being bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh; the express image of his person: but to set up
this above the head, or by this to thrust out the other, is falsehood, and
disloyalty to your head: That any thing in you should live in distinction from,
or opposition to your head and Father; it is to commit Adultry with your selves,
or shadow of your Lord: to fashion up a notionall King amongst your selves.

When he was departed from you, you should even to death have followed him: and
not rejoiced in his absence, and shut the door upon him: all jollity, mirth and
confidence in his going was un-naturall: Then your civil life and glory went;
and it had been your way to have lost your selves with him; or to have sat as
widow till you had recovered him.

When there was in him a mind of returning, as at Notingham, you should then
have opened your hosomes to him: but having possession of all in your hands,
you were high, peremptory, churlish and froward toward him, and so refused him,

He has done you wrong, and since offered you satisfaction, which you have not
accepted: but require unjust and unreasonable terms: he offended in personal
acts; but you insist upon hereditary satisfaction from him and his Children: He
has offended himself, and suffers for it: but you would have restitution from
the Office, which is Gods, and that never offended. You have quite lost that
reverence and honor that is due to him, and look not upon him as he is in the
Book of God: you Lord and Head, and his Anointed: never minding God in him
(though buried under a heap of dross) and so never durst put any confidence in
him or in the Divine Ordinance: but looking upon him through the Glass of your
own weak jealousies and fears, in which he is still presented to you, as a
black* f^ul mischievous person: you count it the greatest safety to keep at
distance from him.

To satisfy the People and your own consciences, you promised to make him the
greatest Prince in the World; and always swore and Covenanted to defend his
Person, honor, etc. and since you have conquered his Armies, and gotten all
into your possession there appears nothing but high neglect or him: instead of
putting any honor on him; because he does not tamely sit down under your weak
and absurd frame of government, of Church and common wealth; you imprison his
person and honor.

You have greatly transgressed against the People who have entrusted you.

You have by your folly and weakness, and unworthy managing that trust
committed to you; betrayed the honor and greatness of Parliaments into scorn
and contempt, and for ever (except the hand of God wonderfully appear) ruind
and destroyed, the Kingdoms great interest and the Peoples right, a Parliament.

You have grossly disowned the People of England, and have been led after others
to save your selves; becoming not ours, but now the Armies; then the Cities;
then the Scots Parliament.

You are cut off and dis-joynted from us; making use of us for no other
purpose, but to bear your intolerable burdens of Excise, Taxes etc. by which
yon have almost wasted us; and mind only your selves: we receive not acts of
favor, justice, Peace or honor from you: you doing nothing effectually but
reward your own Members: suck and draw into your selves, the honor, wealth and
places of the Kingdom: the whole Kingdom languishing in misery; you only and
some few of your creatures getting wealth: Not a Parliament; but a trade now, a
great Menopoly of honor, wealth, Law, dignity, and every thing that is good in
the Nation.

You never would or durst suffer any thing for us; if you would (as by right
you should) have suffered for the People, we might have been saved from ruin;
but you constantly avoid it in your selves and expose us to it: so cowardly
that you dare not stand by your own Votes, Ordinances, Principles; but upon all
occasions for fear disert them, justice and us.

We charge you with weakness and inability to manage the affairs in your
hands; for want of judgment and sore-sight, you have brought your selves into
a maze of confusion, and know not which way to go either backwards or forwards,
and so will lose your selves and us at last in a wilderness of woe and
perplexity.

As you waste our estates, so are you prodigal of our bloods; you never were
tender enough of peace; but too forward in war. As the King was guilty of
beginning; so you of upholding the plague of war: as not in seeking peace, so
not in accepting of it when it was offered: especially in continuing of an Army
in the Kingdom when there was no enemy to hurt; wherein you showed your
distrust of Gods protection; and the Peoples affection: your feeling the guilt
of your unreasonable and unjust Government; which made you keep up force to
defend your Turkish Tyranny. This being certain, public justice and
righteousness requires no protection but it self in a Kingdom Had you
universally distributed right to all, and established peace and righteousness
you needed no force. So that as the King begun the former, you are the
beginners of the second war in England, and so guilty of the blood that is shed.

Your gross and constant breach of faith and Covenant with all; whereby the
Faith of the Kingdom is become a scorn and reproach; and our expectations of
good from you are continually frustrated: and for all our losses of estate and
blood we are repayd with nothing hut shameful confusion in Church and common
wealth.

Chap. VI
Showing the Judgment upon the Parliament.

NO Error can be small in a Parliament; yours have been exceeding great: and
great evils must bring great Plagues: and your evils hold proportion with your
sins and standing; the greatest evils that can befall such a body as you are.

Along while you have labored under the disease and distempers of blindnesses,
malice, frightings, faction, etc. wasting by them into faintness and
feebleness; and carried into many indirect and false ways: but at last comes
your dissolution, when you were rent and torn a pieces by women and boys,
Apprentices: forced by them to their pleasure, and so broken into two pieces,
one part flying, and another part staying, and both in arms one against
another; showing by open war your former inward contests: so broken as none
could tell which was the Parliament: neither part (being in deed but parts)
able to challenge the being of the whole Parliament: the standing piece
pretends most right; but the other the best sword: this breach not heald, but
smothered up: as they were broken, so composed by force: and so to this day
they stand not a natural, free; but a violent forced Parliament: not bottomb'd
upon Christ, or standing upon the Pillars of the Kings writ, the Peoples free
choice, and their own joint consent; but as an accursed broken Idol; upheld by
necessity and Armies force, and in profess enmity one against another: A body
of death in the Kingdom of darkness, subsisting and acting in Satan; standing
not to save the Nation; but to be a parpetuall plague to themselves and others.
They have the nature of hell, a civil hell, full of gross darkness; in
chains of darkness; in such a thick mist they cannot tell how to take one
right step, but it is into misery; void of true wisdom; all their actions poor
petty shifts, weak devices, improper, independent, irrational things. Already
miserable, undone, laboring under their own and the Nations ruin: but so
encompassed with misery, that attempting to get out, they meet with greater.
The destroyer has the upper hand of them and is their master; they are in a
pit of destruction, and so shut up that that which should save them is
destruction to them. If they look to the King; their evil consciences (the
great difference tween him and them) assures them if he come to have power will
be revenged of them.

If they look to the People, they are filled with indignation against them. If to
the Army, that's misery enough to have the sword to be their Lord; they know
they then must be their slaves; twere well they could not be; but that's
dreadful too; and therefore they must continue, in the great wrath of an angry
God, who has left them, and given them up to this wretched state; blasted and
accursed in every thing they take in hand: setting a stamp and mark of
dispeasure upon all their undertakings; every thing that come forth from them,
signed with vengeance, that we may read vanity and death upon all that passes
from them; and so cold and ineffectuall that its buried in neglect, as soon as
it is brought forth. In great shame and confusion, fallen from great honor and
Majesty, to be the scorn and contempt of the meanest People; utterly spoyld of
all renown, and laid open to the revilings of the basest. And in hideous
confusion, not knowing where they are; how they come in, or which way to get
out; not knowing the state of the Kingdom, or their own affairs; fallen into a
vast wilderness of numberless evils, not knowing how to settle King, People,
Army or any on piece in his right place.

In perpetual distraction and division, continually griped and paind with the
rending of their own bowels being tormentors to themselves, they need not
others to mischief them; if they were alone they would continually mischief
themselves: they are in perfect hatred, and deadly fear one of another: and
broke and shattered into such variety of factions that they cannot handsomely
side; but every side has his subdivisions; and so his own side (when he has
joined to ruin others) will ruin him.

There is this of hell too, They are restless; perpetually agitated and tossed
about from side to side, from party to party; from one thing to another: full
of contradiction to themselves; drunk with the wine of the wrath of God, they
reele and stagger to and fro from one thing to another: condemn a thing for
Treason one while justify it another: a King and no King; Vote and un-vote; and
that not in trivial, but in the weightiest things of the Kingdom, childishly
and miserably uncertain.

Thus are you, of a remedy, become a woeful disease; of Saviors, destroyers of
Church and Commonwealth. Our great fence against tyranny and oppression,
become the strength of tyranny and opression. Mighty and strong in nothing but
to keep misery and destruction together that it leave us not. Evil imbodied;
ruin formed into a state; wickedness in a Law; all folly and confusion
inthroning it self; securing it felse; and sitting in the great Council of
Parliament to contrive for the People new vexations.

This is your doom, For leaving the light and wisdom of the Lord Jesus, and
for exalting your selves above him, left in wrath, cast off, and become the
Kings, your own, and the peoples hell.

Chap. VII.
Showing the sin and punishment of the people of both parties.

HAving seen the sin and judgment of these two great earthly powers, let us
descend lower and view the People of England as they are divided by these two
heads King and Parliament, into two streams, Roundheads and Cavailiers.

You are both deeply guilty of the evil of both your heads, and therefore
justly fall into the same condemnation: look upon your King, and in him see
your transgressions, and proportionably your sufferings from a righteous God.
Look you upon your Parliament, and in them behold your wickedness, and your
just afflictions: you have joynd your selves to them, or leand upon them, and
are fallen with them; or you upheld them and supported them in their wicked
ways, and they are fallen with all the burden of Gods wrath upon you, and so
break you to pieces.

But particularly, and besides theirs, you are guilty,

First of the same things in a lesser way: You are tyrants and oppressors in
your estates, in your families; as husband and wife, father and children; and
do all live, not in the light of God and Christ, but in the darkness of Satan
and this world: and if you had not a general, you would be devoured with
private vexations; the same evils being broken forth upon the world in
families, trades, bargains; deceits, cosonage, suites, strife, wars, jarres,
differences; and if the light of God appear not for your deliverance you will
be utterly ruined, and the joy and comfort of these things utterly wasted; for
the whole frame of things is out of course, and there is secret curses stolen
into all relations and things; which much shakes and distracts, though not
quite over-throwes their peace.

There is in your taking of parts, blind zeal, ignorance of God and of the
Kingdoms constitution, and gross Idolizing man. Every one hurrying on in his
way without judgment or consideration; forgetting God and making flesh your
arm; mad of your particular Idols, KING and Parliament, which now you see are
empty, vain and helpless things.

In taking sides, you are carried much by sinister and by respects, each
seeking to make himself something by the war, and to advance themselves
whilst they seek to advance their party; all aiming at a worldly and carnal
ease, prosperity, and preferment; and while you strived to exalt your selves,
you have lost the ground and foundation of all your hopes; and every one
seeking to make himself something, has made the whole nothing; in seeking to
add to what you had, you have lost the whole.

There was also much revenge, bloody malice against your neighbors, and
malignancy against each other; thirsty after the ruin of each other, and glad
of oppertunities of doing mischief one against another.

And for these wicked things are become partners in the misery of the King and
Parliament; as you have their and your own sins, so you suffer their and
your own plagues: Their destruction is yours, you cannot but be miserable in
their misery; in their divisions your very hearts are divided; The very
foundations are out of course; and you are left in a state of calamity without
means or hopes of recovery.

Besides, The wrath of God is daily wasting of you, and you are wasting one
another; the Nation becoming such a hell of confusion, that men are Devils one
to another; maligning and hating each other to death: These ways would utterly
waste you if you had ten thousand times more then you have. The fruit of all
your long labors sweept away from you in a moment by mischievous villains; to
have your bread taken from you, and your selves, and wives and children
tirannized over by free quarterers.

Honest industry quite discouraged, being almost use-less: most men that have
estates betrayed by one side or other, plundered, sequestered. Trading (the
life and subsistence of thousands) decaying, eaten up with taxes: your poor
ready to famish, or to rise to pull relief from the rich men's hands by
violence: the heavens and earth jarring in unseasonable weather; and summer and
winter fighting together, and invading each others quarters; which threatens
famine upon you. Squeesd by taxes, wracked with war, the anvill indeed of
misery, upon which all the strokes of vengeance fall. A woeful Nation! once
the freest people in the world, now the veriest slaves: slaves not to one, but
to many Masters; and those many, of various and different tempers: by whom you
are forced to be sometimes one way, sometimes another. And the Church, which is
the joy of Saints, strangely confounded; that none almost knows his own, or
his Neighbors Religion; in such a mist of darkness are you.

Chap. VIII.
Showing the wickedness of the Ministry, or Clergy and their judgment.

THe Clergy (so called) have a great hand in the evils of these times, and
require an especial discovery; But I purpose more fully herafter to open the
state of the Church, and to show the particular evils and good of every sect,
with their defects, the reason of their difference: and so reduce them all to
their proper place and order; which is the true uniformity; And therefore,
shall only at this time take notice of them briefly, and as respecting these
evil distractions.

The Clergy are deeply concernd, and especially eyed by Divine justice: a
corrupt generation, and horribly departed from their Lord and Rule, Christ.

The Son of God, the Prophet, the Pressed, the Bishop, is the life, original and
true pattern of al Ministry: And there is no true office that Christ does not
constitute by his own presence, nor no right dispensation of that office, if
Christ himself do not administer, and be the thing administered; and therefore
all others are Antichristian and Babylonian, In whom the Spirit and power of
the Holy Anointing lives not.

Its true that the Clergy of England, all sorts of them that have appeared upon
this preset stage; Episcopacy, Presbytery and Independency have their
particular excellencies from particular Angels assisting them. The Bishops
grave, Magisteriall Authoratative Honorable; and having imprinted upon them a
dark and earthly form of Christ, The great Bishop; and of him in his Lordly, or
Royal priesthood as he is exalted.

The Presbyters being laborious, painful, zealous, earnest, affectionate;
carrying an image of the Elders and Apostles of the Church.

The Independent delighting in a more particular and entire union with his
people, of greater strictness and exactness; and personal care of his flock;
is more truly in the Pastors or Teachers place: But they are all earthly and
carnal, darkning the true light of Christ in their ministry; and holding forth
the name of Christ, but not the power; but their own parts, opinions,
readings, humane and weak affections: yea have wickedly departed from their
Master, and do not worship in the Temple, in Heaven, in the new Jerusalem; but
in Egypt and Babylon of this world, where the Lord is crucified: and stand at
a distance from, and enmity to the Spirit of Christ. They profess Christ in
their way; that is in enmity to him, they profess they are not with him nor he
with them; glory in their shame, which is a Worldly, and a Devilish life. They
are ignorant of heaven; came not from heaven; are not in heaven; neither
return they to heaven: they judge not things in the light of heaven, nor know
things as they are in the book of life, the Scriptures of truth; as they are
in the Spirit of God; but as they are written, and spoken of in the world: and
so are blind guides, and have led the blind people of this Nation into a
ditch of destruction on all sides.

Their great unlikenes to Christ appears in these things,

First, Christ is Anointed with the Spirit of God: he is sent of God; he comes
from the Father: Has all power given him in Heaven and Earth: But these men
all of them, derive not their ministry but from men: at best according to the
outward fashion of the letter of the Word, and so from Paul etc. and that they
follow most lamely, and so far only as serves their turn; taking indeed their
ministry themselves from their earthly Fathers, according to the customs and
traditions of men: and therefore have no power at all but the power of their
own reason, which being weakness it self, they presently run to the power of the
Magistrate, and strengthen themselves with that, whithout which they are most
contemptible and despisable things. The Bishops, take away the King and what
becomes of them? The Presbyters if the Parliament fail, they fall into the
ditch.

Secondly, Christ emptied himself and became of no reputation; took upon him
the form of a servant: but these men are one all sides stickling for worldly
greatness; contending by all ways of cunning and policy to raise themselves
to the highest point of preferment, in their several spheres, pleading for
their honor from the People, urging and forcing from the People respect to the
Ministers: each party in their seasons laboring might and main, with blood, to
uphold that interest in the Nation, that they have gotten; and pressing upon
men's consciences to fight for Religion, which is, their means, places, honors
and safeguards.

Thirdly, Christ foretold and desired his sufferings: The Baptism that he was
to be baptized with. But these men never knew their own or the Kingdoms
sufferings, to give or take warning: but filled with the visions of their own
hearts, prophecy pleasing things in their seasons: The glory of the Church;
blessed times; great and wonderful things. And if their sufferings has been
declared to them by God, they would not hear it; but as Peter, in his
satanicall pride: Master be it far from thee: and when they had gotten into the
mount of Court and Parliament favor, then they cry, Its good to be here;
abhorring the thoughts of suffering: And would be reigning upon the Throne,
before they touch upon the Cross. These carnal Gospellers are in all their
thoughts enemies to the Cross of Christ.

4. Christ's Ministry was glory to God on high: on Earth Peace, etc. But these
men's is glory to themselves, and to their King and their Parliament, and for
want of this a sword, fighting; like Satan's Priests, Preaching and speaking the
fire of their rage; Pulpit incendiaries; pronouncing curses and judgments upon
their brethren, and so giving them up to the sword of one another. Priests
indeed; not to offer up their honors, places, preferments and lives to
purchase peace a Christ did: and they should. But have offered up the Kingdom
a Sacrifice to their own blind zeal and carnal lusts together. In stead of
standing in the gap, have made a gap; and increased the divisions of the times;
casting not water to quench; but Oil to inflame the differences of the Nation:
not laying down their lives, but seeking the lives of others to serve their
ends.

Fifthly, Your bitter and violent persecuting each other when you have gotten
power into your hands. You have been in your several seasons the ruin of each
other; denying each other subsistence, or the exercise of each others gifts:
Far from the love of Christ or his People. Paul in case of greater difference
then these outward forms of Government, wished himself accursed for his
brethren: but you in the spirit of Satan, blaspheme and curse one another: Both
upon false and alike hipocriticall grounds. The Bishops pretending tending the
peace of the Church, conformity, Oath, subscreption, obedience to the Kings
Laws. And the Presbyters, Reformation, Covenant, uniformity, and obedience to
the Parliaments Ordinances: but mainly it is your intolerable pride, that cannot
bear any to dissent from you: a conscience guilty of your own weak foundation;
that makes you fear that every one will supplant you: and earnest contending
for self-honour, self-security; and wicked malice against your Brethren.

They are but fellow servants, not judgess as they presume though they beat
their fellows. Both servants, living at a distance from God; in the World; not
upon the Throne in Heaven: and but fellows; set each to do their several
works in their several ways, and that much upon equal terms: though they
admire themselves, and think highly of themselves, and despise others as of no
use.

But of the two, its most strange to see the Presbyterian, who the other day
was oppressed by the Bishop for his conscience in point of Sabbath, etc. who
could not long since live without the favor of the Bishop; should now thrust
out those (under whom he lived) for not taking the Covenant; which is contrary
to their conscience; and show less favor to them then he received from them;
and do that which he condemned in others; and this upon weak and fleshly
grounds; admiring his own way, which is to pray and preach longer and more then
another: to be strict in repetitions on Sabbath days, and some such poor,
formal things: To set up this as the power of godliness and reformation, to
the ruin of another who it may be is a man of more justice, ability, and
wisdom; more sobriety; more stability; more patience, and constancy in
suffering. The persecution of the Bishop was wicked and abominable: but this
being now acting (and the other part and almost blotted out and forgotten by
their sufferings) is especially to be noted.

Did these men live in the largnesse of heavenly love that comprehends all
these parties; and in the light and wisdom of God, who brings forth all these
out of himself, and for his own holy purpose manages all in order. The Bishops
and the Presbyters might agree, as well as Christ and the Apostles: and be so
far from destroying, as they would support each other; did they know that
heavenly order, that is in divine things, they might live in as sweet a
fellowship, as the one throne of Christ and twenty four Thrones of the Elders
or Presbyters, Rev. 4. All three might live in one Family, as elder and younger
brethren; as Fathers, children and grandchildren; who while they live in Satan
the accuser, and in the darkness of the World, they oppose and destroy each
other.

You are worldly; live in the World, and suffer the calamities of the World:
and are partners, great sharers in the misery of the Nation: being public
persons are of public concernment; these evils do lie in a large and more
general way upon you: in these desolations, the Prophet that teaches lies he
is the tail: The lower and baser kind of judgments fall upon you; the deep
scorn of the People: you are cast out by God from your honor and glory as an
abominable branch, as salt wanting savor, to the Dunghill.

What Is become of the Episcopal glorious Church, his lordly Palaces, stately
worship, adorned Temples, great Revenues? Made desolate torn in peecs, left to
the Satire, Schrich-owle, to Zim and Gim; under what a hideous curse do they
lie? What Is become of the great Reformation of the other party that promised
such glorious days: pure Ordinances; power of godliness? become a breach in a
wall; a rotten and putrifid sore; abotch; a filthy issue: nothing appears in it
but wretched disorder: their eyes sink in their heads while they look for
salvation: they inwardly cut themselves as Baals Priests, crying to God to
deliver them, and find no relief but scorn; tormented with fears to be
torn in pieces by the people.

Palenesse and blackness fills your faces, and horror and confusion you
spirits on both sides; To see your worldly glory burning in the fire of Divine
jelousy; your Idols broken to powder and cast into a Sea of confusion, your
fleshly beauty eaten up with worms of rottenness and putrefaction: To see your
confidences in your Idols rejected; your prophesying lies of a glorious time,
by Gods hand confuted; your fastings and multitude af solemn prayers cast as
dung in your faces, not regarded: your zealous covenants whereby you thought to
save your selves, broken in pieces and trampled under foot; your much admired
worships of Directory and Service-booke, Creeds, Confessions, Articles, of no
profit; use-lesse and helpless things, laid by the walls, scornd and despised:
your Churches and People taken from you, scattered several ways: your gifts
dying in you, or dying in their use, and ineffectuall.

The Church which is heaven, shining in the light and presence of God, in unity
peace and order, in holiness majesty and righteousness; through your dark and
wicked government, through your weakness, worldlines, and want of Divine power
and wisdom, become a cursed field overrun with thistles, briers and thorns;
a wilderness full of wild beasts; a hell full of blasphemies, malice, revilings,
scornings, derision, railing, errors, mistakes, herisies of all sorts: the
greatest pillars of truth, Trinity, Father Son and Spirit, Christ his death,
etc. defaced with foul errors; so many, so various, so abundant, as it is a
confused heap of folly and madness; and coming in upon you in such a torrent
that they drown you; and are so high and prevalent that not a man of you dares,
or can appear in any power or strength against them; but are forced to
lye-down and expose the truth, your crown, if ever you had any, to be stamped
in the dirt by them.

Chap. IX.
Showing the iniquity of the Army and its judgment.

THE Army, though but a branch of the Kingdom, and a particular part, yet in
these civil wars the power of the sword has been great, and got the upper
hand of the Civil. The Army descended from the Parliament as its Child, but
the Parliament growing old and weak, and leand so long upon the tressels of
the Army that its power at last, sunk into the Army: (manifest in the Members
flying to the Army in its approach to London.) The power or the King, the head,
fell into the breast and shoulders, the Parliament; and thence descended into
the legs, the Army; but there they make a swelling disease quickly, and show
themselves to be in an un-naturall course.

The Army a company of honest and active men, fitted excellently by a strong
Angel* for the work they were called to: under whose conduct they dispatcsht
their business speedily, and honorably; walking in ways of justice, courage,
industry, love, mercy, they were favored with admirable mirable success;
relieving the Kingdom from war. And while they were contented with their
state, the condition of servants to the Parliament, they shined in honor and
reputation (though malignd and envied) while their masters daily impaired: I
hey shine in the eyes of the Nation, and were the peoples hopes; yea an Idol,
upon whom many had placed their confidence of a worldly deliverance.

When the Parliament, or a party of them, in ingratitude and malice against the
favors God bestowed on them, would have them disbanded, as standing in the way
of some malicious design; They united, imboldned, and strengthened by their
just and honest intentions, refuse; and so grew to be a body of their own,
independent; and to stand upon their own bottom.

For a while they appear in this form very fair and clear, Proposing honest
and general good, fixing upon just and good things; and obtain (by the
assistance of their good Angel) success against their adversaries: But alas,
How short lived is thy goodness? A very morning dew that presently passes.
Thou have only the power to propose and offer good, but none to perform; or a
scourge to others, a sickle to cut down the withered King and Parliament but no
power to build up: when thou did begin a new frame, thy folly, self-love,
in-justice worldlines quickly appears; and thou art left and forsaken in the
same pit of darkness with others.

Thy Iniquities and Judgments are,

First, Thou wast ignorant of the presence of the Lord of Hosts with thee, and
of that extraordinary power that guided thee: thou did talk of it, but
falsely; and did not simply and absolutely follow the LORD, and walk in his
power; but did mingled God and Baall, do things haltingly and imperfectly; in
base fear, respect and stooping to men: and declining the noble, high actings
of the Spirit of God, did consult with flesh and blood, with sense and
reason, worldly customs and ways; which disabled thee to bring forth any
excellent or honorable thing: Thou durst not trust in GOD alone, but
deceitfully turned away from him to thy own sense and reason.

Thou weart weak and unable to manage the affairs of state in this storm in
which it is; but being called to it, have in thy insufficiency brought it to
another, and worse wrack.

Thou undertookest a work beyond thy power, and losest thy self and the
Kingdom by it: When the Nation lay at thy door begging for relief, and thou
had an opportunity to restore it, a prize in thy hand and knew it not: But
did stifle, and by unbelief and carnal policy smother the wisdom and
power of the Lord in thee, and not suffer him to come forth for the Nations
salvation; but bring forth thy own foolish ways to the Nations farther ruin.

When thou begun thy work through fear of the Kings party (whom thou had
conquered and brought to thy feet) thou did weakly and without judgment,
take up the King in his filthy curse, and as a piece of a ruind wall, to
strengthen your selves: and when you had foully promised, you as foully brake
with him; and so become guilty of all his iniquity in taking him un-washt; and
of his unjust sufferings in leaving of him.

When you had broken the Parliament, trampled upon it, defiled its authority,
besmeared it with your disobedience, dishonored it, inslaved it by force; you
then in hope to secure your selves by it, in confidence in it, set up this
broken Idol again in all its mass of folly and weakness injustice and
oppression; without giving any satisfaction to God or man.

You in opposition to the Spirit of the Lord, that is pulling down worldly
power, set them up, patch and bodge them together in a confused and broken way;
and set your selves to heal the breaches that God makes; and so stand in the
way of Divine displeasure to be consumed by it. And now employ your Army, which
God set to pull down unjust and corrupt powers (in which you did prevail) to
uphold and maintain those powers no whit better (in which you cannot prevail)
your Army is now the girdle of strength that holds together the ungodly, and
oppressing power of Parliament: or the fence, and wall to keep out the
vengeance of God from coming farther in upon men; and it is so far from keeping
it out, that it keeps vengeance in, or upholds them in a state of wrath.

You, when you were lifted up, begun to please your selves, to admire and
bless the Army; to magnify your selves as the Kingdoms Lords and conqerors;
to make your Army intyre; to conceive a necessity of continuing an Army, to get
preferments in it; to bethink your selves of living richly in it; of
recovering your Pay and arreares: And upon these grounds to continue the Army
upon the Kingdom, with taxes and free quarter; the greatest oppression that
England, or any other Nation ever bore: so that now you are the last, and
heaviest of the Nations burdens; that promised to save and deliver, and turn
the greatest Tyrants; lose all the good you have done; set up a forcible
Government; turn war into a trade, England into a Camp; perpetuate
desteruction, and provoak new commotions.

You have at last, deceived all parties; promised much, but done nothing;
broken your word; frustrated all expectations of good from you: become a broken
reed, which while men leand upon, run into their hands; and so become of a
remedy a great disease.

You judgment is the same with your Mother, the Parliament; and with all Power
upholding it self, and maintaining it self in enmity to God; Accursed of God:
your standing is in the darkness of Satan and the World. The King in the pit;
the Parliament the pit it self of confusion; and you shut the mouth of it; the
Porters of this National hell; to keep them in torment that are there; to
conjure down those keep them in torment that are there; to conjure down those
spirits that would come forth by these risings; and to set bounds to this Sea
of confusion that it do not overflow: The rock against which these proud waves
dash themselves in pieces; the walls to contain, and instruments to inflict
evil on the People; against which they continually foam and fret: or the
fetters and shakels of the Nation in prison under you: the chain in which the
mad Kingdom is bound and tied: for their folly and rage you are to inflict
more evil on them; and because they will not bear what is laid on them
patiently, you are to lay on more; and as you lay plagues on them; so you
receive some blows from them.

And so are sunk from that great favor to be the Kingdoms hope, a savior,
to be a jailer; vexing and being vexed: able to keep men in misery, but in no
way at all to deliver them.

And to this are you tied and bound. A way of peace and quietness has been
set before you* and that way of peace you have not known; but being ensnared
and caught in this net of trouble, you are engaged by honor, self-preservation
etc. to go on in this hellish trade.

You are in darkness and know not which way to go; having got a course of
fighting, you go on to fight, for you know not who, nor what: Not for the
Parliament; you know if ever they have opportunity, they will remember your war
against them, and make it Treason: and if you had the same opportunity you
would do as much for them again as you have done; master them. So your cause
is lost: and you only fight because you are an Army; because fighting is your
business.

All that you did in your greatest undertaking against the Parliament and City
is blasted and undone: Members restored to the House; the Tower in the same
hands it was; which writes vanity upon your proceedings: and shows what
foolish builders you were, that when you had power in your hand instead of
doing good too and for all, you minded nothing but your own, and your friends
advancement; having indeed not the general nature of the whole, but the
affection of a party and faction. Your ways are not now paved with love and
sweetness, as here to fore: but full of briers and thorns: your work hard and
knotty, meeting with a fierce, bloody, enraged Enemy, sharpened and provoaked
against you, by a sense of their own and the Kingdoms ruin: harsh and angry
weather.

True, you have subsistence still: but not in honor, peace, greatness; but in
war, in vexation: and that increasing so fast upon you, as threatens your
overthrow, or at least show you so much work to do, that you must go on
butchering men as long as you live: for as fast as one party is crushed another
rises: that tells you the spirit of the Nation is against you and that
oppressing power upheld by you: so that you must fall under their fury, or the
Nation be consumed by you: either you must give way to their rage, which you
cannot; or continue to be the scourge of the Kingdom still; a wretched life:
This Woolfe you have by the ears in this dark and black path you walk in.

If you think you are well because you live, because you are not come to
nothing; you know, not to be an Army, or to be in the cnodition of private
persons would be your mercy; but you are engaged to be in dishonor, in war,
shame, tormentors and being tormented.

Chap. X.
Showing the state of the Levellers.

THe Levellers are men that are justly sensible of the miscariage of all that
are gone before them, see etc their corruption, how they have swarved and
declined, etc that's not heard; but in applying a remedy, they are as much
mistaken as any. His excellencies is not great; assisted he is by a discerning
Angel, that discovers the falsehood, injustice and wicked ways of others; and
opens this truth more then any, how all power and authority ascends out of the
People; or descends from the People; making in a kind them the chief: But
alas, this Angel is low and weak that speaks and writes in a corner; but come
forth into action he cannot; but sinkes under the fall of the Kingdom, and his
own mistake.

Thy errors are these,

Thou can not bear the Kingdoms suffering under the hand of God, nor thy
own; but in a carnal love of this worldly state, seek to uphold it against
the justice of God; and so fallest into the same evil of thy Fathers, self-love
and preservation, in enmity to the LORD. To save thy self, that the
overflowing scourge may not come nigh thee; thou make a Covenant with hell,
and an Agreement with death: the Agreement of the People, who are turned by the
Divine justice into a hell and death.

Thou art ignorant of that wisdom of God, that only can save the Nation; and
having gathered some scraps of earthly knowledge from others, thy proud heart
is lifted up, and thou conceivest highly of thy self, as if thou art able to
save the Kingdom; and so presumest upon that which thou art not called unto.

It Is true, The King is by the People; and the People are the original of
power: but this is an imperfect piece; and take it alone it is very
destructive. The King is of the People; so is Man by the Woman; yet the Woman
must not shake off her yoke of subjection; For as the Man is by the Woman, so
the Woman is of the Man, and for the Man: so the People are taken out of the
King, and are for the King; as well as the KING by the People.

KING and Parliament are, in relation to the people, as Christ to David; He is
the root and offspring of David. David's Son, yet David's Root; and David in
spirit calls him Lord. So is power in King or Parliament; the root and offspring
of the People. The King is Son to the People, and Father too; and so in spirit
is called Lord.

While you take one part in darkness and leave the other, you confound and
disorder the whole.

In your actings (to set up a worldly power now) you are of the earth earthly:
The Nation ground to powder, or dust: dust thou art, and to dust etc. the
Serpents meat. You confess no Father, acknowledge none above you; and therefore
art, Terroe-filius; or filius populi; Son of the Earth; or Son of the People.
The base Son of the Parliament; begotten in her Adultery; growing out of her
principles: The people must not be left without a remedy to save themselves
etc. Self-saviors; your cry is the People; all power is disolved, and the
people must judge. It Is according to your wish: the people in diverse parts do
take the power; and above all, would mine you; their greatest indignation is
against you: so you run from God to hell for help.

It Is your portion to suffer in the common calamity, and to be as mad men,
striving with your fetters as a Bull in a net, toyling your selves: or
agitators not resting quietly in the grave of public misery, waiting for a
resurrection: but disturbed, agitated dust in a whirlewinde of divine wrath.

Chap. XI.
Showing the Judgment of the City of London.

LONDON the chief and Mother City of this Nation; has been the place of
residence of the great glory of England; the house that gives entertainment to
the head the King, and body the Parliament; and these flourishing together in
peace and righteousness: The Heaven wherein these dwell, and chiefly shine
forth themselves: The habitation of these Majesty's, in which they are
comprehended: That is enriched by them with honor, state, greatness; and does
again supply and enrich them with plenty of clothes, food, etc. And thou have
held up thy head high in these times, and been mightily preserved by a great
Angel in thy many dangers.

Thy evils of sin and punishment are; besides the common guilt and plagues of
the Nation.

Thou art wholly ignorant of thy heavenly original; thy true foundation upon
which thou stand: The new Jerusalem that is from above. Neither have thou
shined with that blessedness and holiness; but upheld a worldly and divelish
darkness, and so art become a filthy Sodom; a vile and poluted thing; living
not as the Lambs wife; but in filthiness of adultery, with the pomp and
greatness of the World: glorying in thy own Riches, Power, Multitude, and not
in the Lord.

Thou have been proud and lifted up, and every way have vaunted and boasted of
thy government, Militia, wisdom etc. and have boldly pressed into the Throne
of the Government of the Kingdom; and at pleasure have interposed
authoritatively beyond thy place: Common Citizens in great confidence of their
ability to rule the state, busily intermedling in things much above their
understandings, and quite out of the sphere of their callings.

You have often given check both to King and Parliament; and lifted up your
head above the power of the Kingdom, and that rashly, effeminately, and
without judgment; in rude, bold, violent and tumltuous ways.

You have not in a Mother wisdom and moderation endeavored the composing
these differences, it was thy place to spread thy Arms of love to embrace both
King and Parliament, to have enclosed and begirt them both in unity: But thou
have headily, passionately, according to thysex engaged with the Parliament,
and were far too eagar and inconsiderate in promoting war; and partial in thy
affection and laying out thy strength.

It Is thy property to be rich: and wanting it in a natural and just way of
trade; you are many of you turned Officers, publicans, Excise men, others
buying Bishops and Irish Lands: an unnatural way of Merchant adventurers; to
strive to catch the ruins of the Kingdom as they fall; or to grow rich upon
public miseries; this is un-blest wealth: there is a curse follows it.

Thou suffer deeply in the common calamity: and the spoiling and plundering
in the Nation, must be put upon thy account; thou art pillaged in most parts of
the Nation.

The great and intolerable loss of King and Court to shine in thee in peace
and righteousness; proena damni: the pesence of the King in thee, living in
agreement with his People is thy true life and glory, and makes thee a heaven;
and the want of it is to thee intolerable and makes thee a Hell. After the
recovery of this happiness do thou insatiably thirst, and can not live
without re-enjoyment of it.

Thy glory and reward has been stained; thy greatness brought down by the
Army.

Thy trade is lost and broken; thy wealth wasting and consuming: there is
stretched out upon thee, The line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

Thou art continually shaken with fears and indignations, tossed about as a
Ball, unstable and uncertain.

Fires of divisions kindled and burning fiercely in thee, in all thy meetings
common Council, common Hall, Nothing but fire and brimstone; bitter and sharp
contests, horrible rage one against another, spitting fire in the face of each
other; preparing for the destruction of one another.

The wants of the poor threatening to tear out thy bowels; a heap of disorder
and confusion, acting in all things in darkness and wrath, and so art of the
nature of the Kingdom in the destroyer: and a particular hell of thy self and
to thy self: mighty in malice; rich in madness; it is thy trade and business
having little else to do, but to design mischief to torment thy self.

Chap. XII.
Showing the irrecoverablenesse of Englands ruin by humane ways.

ENgland thou art lost, for ever lost: Thou have departed from God who is thy
life; and now thou art dead: Rejected into destruction. The Peace, Wisdom,
Justice, and Goodness of God has left thee; and the madness, wrath,
injustice, and malice of Satan fills thee: Thou art broken like a Potters
vessel into shivers, into many pieces: Thou art nothing but division: head
from body, limb from limb: and each party has a piece of thee; thou art by
divine justice distributed and given forth into several interests: The King
has his part. The Parliament their part. The Army another, etc. and each an
essential or integrall part, without which the whole cannot subsist.

These several principles, or spirits of the Nation; are by the breath of God
blown into the several parts of the earth; scattered into the four winds; as
much divided as East and West, North and South.

And all parts have distinct natures given to them, several principles of
self-subsistence, which sets them a contending for their own being: yea, such
beings as can never be nulled, standing upon the unmovable pillars of the
decree of God, and of the constitution of the Kingdom: especially in the great
division of King and Parliament: both must subsist. It Is as impossible to
destroy Kinglinesse wholly, or to settle England without a King; as it is to
overthrow the first person God the Father: if Heaven would dispense, yet the
earth would not; King being as natural unto us, as a head to the body. King is
engraven in the spirit of the Nation. If it were consumed to ten men they would
have a King: if the Nation were shrunk into one Family, they would he governed
by a King.

Upon the same ground stands the Parliament; you may pull Christ out of Heaven,
as well as overthrow the interest of Parliament: it may be suspended a while,
but quite suppressed it cannot; Christ will eternally uphold it; so the Nation
will perpetually and restlesly require it; it being the heart and life of the
Nation.

The distinct natures or principles are strongly confirmed by Covenant, Oath,
conscience, honor, on all parts, whereby the Persons in whose hands these
interests are* are engaged to maintain and uphold their particulars to death.

And so bound to maintain their own (both at a distance from God, and from each
other) as while they save it they lose it: being in the dark separated from
God, to continue it, is its certain death: so that it must be and they will
have it; and in the way it is, it cannot but be miserable.

But these parties are not only thus divided one from another; but inplacably
set to destroy one another, in deadly opposition one to another; and so instead
of being each others life (as they should) they are each others death, standing
directly in the way to each others happiness; each persuaded that they might be
well if their adversaries were gone; There is a good and an evil in both; the
good of each is hid from the other, and turned away the bright side, the face;
and the back-parts, the weakness, the foul part in view and sight of each
other. The Kings party say, if it were not for this Parliament and Army, the
Kingdom would be happy: the Parliament and Army say, if it were not for King,
and Cavaliers the Kingdom would be happy.

Being desperately with mortal hatred enraged one against another, they
heartily seek the destruction of each other; and in destroying each other,
they do destroy them selves; for indeed, they are the mutual health and
welfare of each other.

The KING it he could ruin the Parliament, should but destroy his own body;
himself in another; his own flesh: and the Parliament in destroying the KING,
destroy themselves in their head. The Parliament have conquered the King; but
have gotten only this by it, to be a confused head-lesse heap; and put off
their natural head, to put on another; to be headed by an Army, a faction: and
if the King should do as much, and conquer the Parliament, he would be unhappy
in it; and he would be the head, not of a body, but a confused rabble; not a
King indeed, but a friend: his party would Level with him, and expect to be
Kings with him: he would be in as great a confusion without a Parliament, as
the Parliament without the King.

As they are broken, divided, set in enmity, and malignancy one against
another; so are the parts disordered. The head, the King laid in the bottom;
the Parliament upon him; the Army has been, and when occasion serves, can be
uppermost.

The Kingdom stands upon his head; The Parliament came forth of the King; and
Army forth of Parliament: now the King cannot come forth but it must be from
the Parliament, as the Parliament comes forth of the Army.

Divided and subdivided; broken into King and Parliament; Parliament and Army;
Army and City; City and Parliament; England and Scotland. Scotland their
divisions; Ireland divided from both, and subdivided amongst themselves. But
the destroyer has most showed his cunning in our divisions; so perfectly and
artificially are we entangled, and perplexed in distractions, as there is no
escaping.

The KINGS party divided, and some fallen in with the Scotch and Presbyterian,
which they perfectly hate and yet are joined to them. Others rather choose to
sit still; or have better love to the Independent interest: and there is another
conjunction in dislike and dis-junction. The Parliament is divided some look
back to the KING; others had rather stand against him; both jealous of him, yet
forced to look toward him: The Presbyterian joining part to the Cavaliers,
and part to the Independent; and both hating those they join too: The City
falling to pieces too. Thus does God shake the Nations; jumbles their
principles together; scatters them as dried bones that none knows whether to go
to join.

The King is shut up in his pit, in his prison, under the Army and Parliament;
he must make his way through their blood to come to the Crown: and when he has
done that, he must again ruin those by whom he rises, the Scots; and when he
has done that he is yet but miserable; and is worse then where he is.

The Parliament must go through the Kings party to their end by the Army; and
when they have done that, they must ruin the Army and Independent, intolerable
to them; and then they arrive but at confusion.

The Army must destroy the Kings party first, and then the Parliament; and at
last it gains nothing but to be a wretched nothing.

The City must ruin the Kings party; or else woe be to them, and the
Independent too, or else they can have no settlement; and then the Parliament
and they may have leisure to fight alone.

Hambletons Scots have the English Nation wholly to destroy before they can
come to his end; both Army, Parliament and KING; and their own Nation at home.
And what then? Then there will be room to fight with the Irish: so that we
are involved in destruction, shut up under several locks and bolts: and to get
out of one, is but to be out of a less into a greater or larger hell.

Therefore its impossible to recover your selves by force; you may wrestle and
tug with your fates, and weary your selves with toyling, but by all you will
but sink your selves deeper; and by your false hipocritical and unnatural
conjunctions of heterogeneous bodies make new matter of difference, and
increase your own misery.

Neither can a Treaty compose you in the condition in which you are; you are in
death, and under the curse, and all your actions are, and shall be accursed.

The Nation is not only broken, but as dried bones, have lost their marrow of
Union, their spirit of Love; it has neither flesh of softness and
gentleness, nor sinews of agreement. Neither does there appear that wisdom
and skill to bind up these breaches. King lost, disabled; Nobles scattered,
weak inconsiderable things; Commons distracted, hurried after their vain
imaginations. Of all the sons that the kingdom has brought forth, there is
none to guide her, to take her by the hand to lead her out of this pit.

The end of Treating at best, is but to settle the Kingdom in its former
worldly estate: It Is looking back to Egypt: we are in the wilderness, and must
on to Canaan. It were woeful if we should lose the fruit of all our blood and
misery that we have suffered; and only be where we were, which will quickly
fall back into the condition we are now in: No, the Divine purpose is of some
higher favor to us; and short of it we must not sit down.

Besides, This Treaty is not voluntary but forced: not open and plain, but
false; each seeking to catch advantages, and in darkness and jealousy,
fearful and unblieving, which will blast them: sin and iniquity unpardoned,
the wrath of God still flaming against the Nation, unquenchable by all the art
of man; that will render all humane attempts vain and fruitless.

Here lies England as Sodom, burning in the displeasure of God; in Civil bloody
wars, in madness and folly: The Majesty and honor of the Mation confounded
and lost in the KING; the liberty and justice of it in the Parliament; the
power and might of it in the Armies; the religion and truth of it in the
Church; the wealth and trade in the City; the fruits of the earth by war and
unseasonable weather: and ALL in the loss of Gods favor.

Here is the Kings curses of his people, and imprecations of judgments upon
themselves and families brought forth to the life. That mad party that cry Dam
me and Ram me; that drink healths to the confusion of the Parliament; it is done,
you live to see it.

The other side that have Covenanted the exterpation of Episcopacy root and
branch; it is finished fully: The Parliament and the KING their root; or the Laws
of the Land out of which they grew: the Nation her self, the Church, all rooted
out: And all sects and schisms (Presbytery it self for one) pulled up by the
roots. Your fears have brought forth, the thing you feared is upon you; The
removing of the Candlestick; the loss of the Gospel: The whole Kingdom is
left in Hideous darkness; And the glory of it is gone from you.

That persecution feared by Independents is come; Satan, the destroyer is upon
you, wasting, killing, imprisoning all true glory, light, righteousness,
peace; And the answer of your many prayers for destruction upon the enemies of
Christ; your selves and the whole Nation, in all parts of it, are found
fighters against Christ; and for it are destroyed: You have all been big with
this misery; it has been within you, declared it self in your several forms
of cursings; and because you loved it, its come upon you; as a girdle about
your loins: it cleaves fast to you.

Thy Sores are opened from head to foot, and lanc'd to let out the filth and
corruption; and if you suffer it to come forth, you will immediately find
ease: He that confesses his sins and forsakes, finds mercy: If you would
you cannot hide them: all your reasons pleading your good intentions; the
clearnes of your consciences cannot justify you; Here Is one greater then your
consciences; a sentence so Authoratative as will not be resisted.

Neither can you by cunning or force escape out of this prison; not the
stoutest of you: not your friends, Armies, multitudes; none can help you.

Kings are bound in chains of Iron, and Nobles in fetters: Such honor have
all the Saints.

Chap. XI.
Showing the method of God in curing the Nation, (viz) First, to take our sin
upon himself.

IT IS written in your hearts, and spoken in your mouths, That none can save us
but God. It Is the happiness of the extremity of our misery, that we are past
the wisdom and strength of man; and so fall only and immediately upon the
mercy and goodness of God. Cease from man: Behold your LORD: The LORD is our
Judge; The LORD is our Law giver; The LORD is our KING; He will save us. He
that has opened hell and death to let you in, can and will open it to let you
out. He has the Keys, and opens, and none shuts, and shuts, and none opens.
All this sin and wrath was in us in our best estate though it appeared not; it is
good it is broken forth; it is in order to perfect health: our recovery was
designed in it; and the foundation of a mighty salvation is laid in these deep
miseries.

The method of our cure must be this,

First, to take away sin and curse; so long as they lie at the door, there is
no passage for mercy to come in, or man to go out: Now the only way to do this
is, to lay them upon one that can bear them; The LORD Himself: they have lain
upon the Nation and sunk it, utterly destroyed it: But now we see there is one
will bear Englands sins, and the sin and curse of the whole world; and there
we must charge them: yea, The LORD charges himself, and says, Is there any
evil in the City that I have not done? Why have thou caused us to Err from
thy ways? Thou have blinded us that we might not see; and hardened our hearts
that we might not understand. It Is thou that have mingled a perverse spirit
amongst our Princes; that have given the Nation the wine of astonishment to
drink; The cup of thy wrath, that they may Err in judgment; that they may
stagger and reel, vomit up their own filth; and fall, and not rise again: And
in all this thou have been just.

There has been two great evils amongst us, our being divided from God, and
amongst our selves; and this the LORD has done; especially in the great
divisions of King and Parliament.

The day dawning after this dark night of sorrow, we can say of England, GOD is
in thee and none else: In these clouds is the Lord and nothing but the Lord;
Here is God in the lower parts of the earth; and the earth shall disclose her
blood, and no longer cover her slain. Verily, God is in this place, and we knew
it not.

Thou have always dwelt in the Majesty and greatness of the King: It is thou
that have Reigned in him; But verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, under
vanity and a lie; under a poor, sinful, unstable, weak creature; in a
crawling worm: thou art there covered with corruption, falsehood, wilfulness;
made sin; clothed with filthy garments: so veiled under a thick covering, that
he himself knew thee not: had he known thee, he would not have denied thee, and
crucified the Lord of glory: he did it ignorantly; thou did not come forth,
nor act out thy self in thy own brightness and power; but did retire,
withdraw thy self; and lie down in weakness: and so lived in sinful flesh.

Thou were in him, dwelling in such thick darkness; in such storms and
tempests of wrath; in such a thick mist and fog of wicked men; lying down there
in such a hell of a Dam me crew, that his own body did not know thee there. His
People Rebelled against him and thee, when dressed in this deformed shape.

Thou were in him, raising up his heart into an absoluteness and greatness:
It Is thou that say dest in him, I am alone, and there is none besides me: I Will
do what I will, and none shall resist it. Thou were there most Righteously,
and accoding to thy nature, gathering up all thy glory into thy self, keeping
thy self incommunicable; minding only thy self and thy own Majesty, and
rejecting all things else; refusing to stoop to any thing that is mean, or
below thy self; disdaining that any should excel but thy self: magnifying thy
self; and being confident of thy own sufficiency. This now we see darkly
shadowing out it self in the Kings Prerogatives.

Now we see it is Thee, The LORD, that in his leaving his Parliament, leavest
thy own Son; thy own spouse; because she is unclean; because she was filthy and
poluted: This is righteous in God to leave a diseased body, laboring under the
guilt of the Nations sin; to give her up to be tormented, to be left desolate
for her iniquities.

In the Kings flying from his Council, to strength; We now see Divine
jealousy, that is impatient of having his Majesty sullied and stained by common
hands. The indignation of the Lord of hosts hurried the King away in violence:
and taught him to begirt himself with power to uphold Royalty: yea, rather to
bury it in the earth then that another should wear the Crown. It is the Lord
that stiffens and hardens the spirit of the King against all Propositions that
may lessen his Greatness; here God says, My glory will I not give unto
another. To retain golden Royalty in the flames; to be a King still while
hated, opposed, denied, Is the Divine Spirit: When it is most opposed to
contend for it: This the Lord does.

In the Kings dark and unknown ways, in his secret practices, We now see Our
LORDS obscuring himself: when fleshly man would find him out to prey upon
him; when wicked and rebellious man would rob him of his glory; he mists
himself in the privacy of darkness; he has a long while concealed himself in
the midst of us, and so kept himself from the world (who have always been in
pursuit of him) because he sees they are not fit to enjoy him: This is the
Lords doing in the darkness of man; the Highest Majesty of God under the
shamfull vilenesses of man.

In the Parliament Now, is manifest the Son of GOD made flesh, and dwelling
amongst us: Thou art here our Lord encompassed about with infirmities; in
abundance of weakness, in temptations, fears, distresses, in so poor a body
as thou art not known to them; they deny thee, kill thee, and know not what
they do: In this form, Thou come to thy own, and thy own receive the not.

Thou art in them, speaking in such dark parables, in such confused and
un-understood ways, with such a rabble of oppressing Publicans, Harlots and
sinners about thee, that thou art judged a Devil; and to mention thee here is
blasphemy to all men: It Is the cry of King and People, Away with him, away with
him; he is not worthy to live: thou art here loaded with iniquity; made sin
indeed.

In the Parliaments assuming the power of the King, his Prerogative, his
revenue, we hear the Lord say, All that the Father has, has he given unto me;
All power in Heaven and in Earth. The King is with us; we have his power etc.
Christ says in this dark poor form, The Father and I am one; the Father is
me; the words that I speak are his; and the works that I do, He gives me to do
them. I come from the Father; Thus the Son goes forth; for a while appears
amongst men, and the Father conceals himself, and is not seen but in the Son;
and the Son challenging the honor, name and power of the Father.

In the Parliaments undertaking the work of reformation and failing in it, We
now see the Lord in flesh; coming amongst us, and entering into The Temple, and
over turning the money changers; turning out those buiers and sellers; those
worldly Episcopal party, that turned religion into a trade, and worship into
mere gain and preferment; prophesying anew form, a Kingdom; but at last,
lost in it; saying, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for
naught; and suffering under this accusation, that he would destroy the Templets
etc. yea, the Kingdom too; And so the Romans come in and take away both our
Place and Nation. That he was a rebel to Caesar, so crucified in shame;
betrayed; sold; and his Disciples leaving of him, doubting his word, saying, We
thought he would at this time have Redeemed Israel. Our Lord is here in
weakness, failing in his attempts; marred in his vizage more then any man; so
that all turn away their faces from him.

In the oppressing and confused Government of the Parliament, We now see our
LORD come not to send peace, but a sword; to set Father against Son, and Son
against Father, etc. Setting two against three, and three against two;
requiring us to leave Father and Mother, Houses and Lands for his Name:
threatening to undo us, and to strip us of all; bringing of us to nothing;
wasting and spoiling the riches of the Nation: so disolving of us, that we must
be borne again, new-moulded in a baptism of blood.

In the Parliaments endeavor to preserve the Kingdom, to uphold and maintain
the freedom of it: we see the love of Christ to the World and his desire of
saving it; we hear him say, Oh England, England, how often would I have
gathered thee etc.

In the zeal and rage of both parties against each other, we see darkly, come
forth the wrath of God against his enemies: God fighting with those that fight
against him: the fierceness of the vengeance of Heaven against his
adversaries: cursing them raining snares, and fire and brimstone upon them.

Thus does the holy God dwell with and under the roof of sinful man. Thou
that know no sin, art made sin: Thou live in those fleshly forms: Thou
sendest forth spirit and they are created, And then does blow upon them and
they dye and wither, lose their goodness and beauty, and are tossed about as
vanity, as chafe in the wind. That thou might destroy them, thou come
into the likeness of sinful flesh, that thou migtest consume sin in the
flesh; appearest in flesh, and so against it and under it, that thou may at
last save it: And unfoldest the brightness of thy face and glory, to be in
perfect and undefiled purity, in and under the vileness and baseness of the
creatures.

Chap. XIIII.
Of the second thing in saving of the Nation: The Death of Christ, and our
fellowship in it.

AS God bears our sins, so he suffers under them, and we suffer in and with
him, and thereby is iniquity taken away: It Is by blood that we have remission of
sin.

God dwelt in the Kingdom: The power of the King it was Gods; God was in that
majesty and dominion; God was in the right and freedom of the Parliament: in
the peace and happiness of the Nation: in the wealth and honor of the City:
in the power and strength of the Army: in the glory and order of the Church:
And God suffers in the death of all these: he suffers with us: loses in our
losses; not our blood alone but his is shed: not our goods only wasted, but
the Lords: his they are and were, and God is in union with them, and suffers in
them: The Lord is made a curse for us; our sin has brought this curse upon
God: This is a sacrifice well pleasing unto God: sufficient for ever to take
away iniquity, and to appease divine justice: Though destruction should for
ever wast England, it would never be satisfied; but feeding upon the glory of
God, eating so deep into Englands sides as to reach the heart of God; it is time
for it to say, I have enough: let anger cease, it does feed upon God himself.

Cease to trample upon the head of King Charles, God is there; thou tramples
upon God in him.

Cease to confound our Parliament; Christ is there.

Cease to destroy the Nation; it is a holy and heavenly Nation.

Now we are reconciled to God: we were divided by death; now one in death; or
God so loves us and is so near to us, as to suffer with us and for us: our
friend indeed that has laid down his life for us: The glorious love of our God
is triumphing with us in and over death: God is in our misery insulting over
it, O death I Will be thy plague, etc. and so makes death sweet to us; thou art
now a lovely bed wherein our Lord and we, being uncloathed of life, lie down
together; death rends the vail and takes us into a naked enjoyment of GOD:
because we could not live together, our earthly in Gods heavenly Kingdom;
therefore must we die together; we die because we have left God, and he comes
and dies with us; will not live without us; but comes into the grave to us, so
that he might deliver us thence: Thou destroying Angel proceed no farther: The
blood of God cries peace, and you English (mad to destroy) cease crucifying the
Lord of glory; every wound you make Pierces the heart of God; every sad and
grieved spirit afflicts God; every stone of scorn or contempt cast upon KING
or Parliament, upon one side or other, is flung at Christ: and he that
opprosseth poor England in her miseries, or adds one dram of sorrows more,
reproacheth his maker. Yea, If thou do mock poor King Charles, poor
Parliament, poor Cavaliers, or poor Roundheads; thou reproachest God in all
these: if thou do go one foot farther, It is to make long furrows upon the
back of Christ. If men or devils should be obdurate, our God is now tender,
will not still go on to smite his own flesh and blood.

As God died, so are we dead with him; England is dead; and all her glory,
greatness and justice is slain. We departing from God, who is our life, cannot
live; and it is well we cannot live in Gods absence: If we could have saved this
life, we had lost it; and losing it we save it: For if we had kept it, we had
kept it against God; and now it is dead, it dies into God; It returns to him
from whence it came; dying with Christ; being offered up by this Priesthood;
it goes with Christ; dead with him: and he says, I go to my Father: so that we
are fallen indeed into God; and there is nothing now but God.

This is our peace; by this the wall of partition 'twixt God and us is broken
down, and of twain made one new man: destroying the enmity, that honor, power,
dominion, that stood at enmity against God, is abolisht, slain in the slaying
the earthly creature. That which could not endure GOD, is brought down; and
we are hereby brought into God.

By death, is destroyed him that had the power of death, the Devil; his power
and interest in the Nation is utterly destroyed; his kingdom of darkness and
wrath is broken down: he is cast out, and shall no longer destroy the Earth,
nor deceive the Nation into these mad fightings one against another; it is now
taken from him that ruled with cruelty, envy, wrath, folly, and given to
Christ, who will Reign in Peace and Righteousness, in Mercy and Goodness.

And as there is a Union wrought by this death betwixt God and the Kingdom, so
betwixt KING and Parliament; between all parties: and of two, or many, we by
death are made one man; as truly united as head and body, as a man to himself:
And all Ordinances, Covenants, etc. are abolisht: Prerogative, Kinglinesse is
slain, lies in the dust: no KING; a Prisoner, a Captive: no Parliament; a Rout,
a Scuffle, a confused heap. What can you demand of the King? He has nothing to
give: you mock your selves and him. Why are you jealous of him? He cannot do
good or hurt. Why do you labor to save your selves from his power, or revenge;
fear a dead power? Do you think he shall return from the grave to vex you?
Alas, it is not he, but Devils that trouble you: you need not fortify your
Parliament with a Militia, with Acts against a dead power: Or, Why should the
King contend for a dead Crown? or the People raise Authority from the dust?
How foolish and vain are the attempts of his party? Being dead on both sides
in the grave; Here the wicked cease from troubling; The weary Be at rest: The
prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor: The small
and great are here; the servant is free from his Master. How is it, that you
vex one another? It Is a hell sure; and you are Devils one to another: Is not the
grave enough to swallow up enmity? Why should the Parliament insist upon
Covenants, Promises, Engagements? Or the King upon his Honor, Prerogative
Friends? The Law has power over a man so long as he lived; no longer: There is
no bands now upon you; neither party can require any thing of you: You have
stood it out for your principles, for your parties; Cavaliers for KING;
Rounds-heads for Parliament; till you and they are all lost together.

All your engagements for and against each other, are taken away; Law is slain;
right, property, righteousness and truth has forsaken the Earth; it is in
neither side: you may lie still and be at peace; for all is dead for which you
contend: There does nothing live but shame, sorrow, folly and madness; and
that is dead too, in your death.

The King is dead, his Majesty is slain, crucified; and lies in the bowels of
the earth; that is, in his Parliament and People: he is descended into us, dyed
into the Kingdom: And hence it is that Parliament men, Committee men, Army,
City, and Citizens are all become petty Kings: Kinglinesse being sowed in the
earth: And so though we have lost our King yet we have him in us.

The King is dead, and our life of Majesty, our Kingdom died with him; we
cease to be a Kingdom, when our head ceased to rule; and are become a herd of
wild Beasts. He took us all into himself, and so made a rich Sacrifice of all the glory of the Kingdom in one.

He dies for us, they are our iniquities that denies us the blessing of
government; we have the benefit of his suffering; it is for us: By this he
comes down into the meanest subject, into the worst condition of a subject;
bonds: he empties himself into us, and fills us with Royalty; and gives the
lowest to have fellowship with the highest: by his descending from the Throne
into the Prison, and his ascending from the Prison to the Throne; there is an
open way and passage from misery to greatness: by this the poorest creature in
England shall have access to the Throne for mercy and justice: And the KING
shall acknowledge, this is my fellow subject, my fellow prisoner. I am, and was
as low, as mean as he: This shall fill punishments with grace, and make pains
and judgments acceptable from a Prince that is a Brother, a fellow-sufferer:
This is that which only can fit a KING for Reigning, to go by the Cross, to
suffer first; by which trialls and temptations he is for ever able to pity
such as are tempted and do suffer.

The Parliament is dead also; cannot, will not, outlive the KING; puts off her
glory with the Kings; and sits down in the dust: dies into the King, as the
King into the Parliament; goes down into his grave, follows him; and there lies
wrapped up in him the life, union and Majesty of the Parliament: and as the King
arises out of the Parliament, so the Parliament out of, and with the King.

The Parliament dies for the People; so constantly adheres to the Peoples
rights, that She perishes in the obtaining of them; and because She cannot by
life, She does and will by death free us. The Cause that She undertook though
sensibly be lost yet by her shamfull suffering is confirmed* and a Testimony of
blood given to a work of Reformation, which is more effectual then twenty
Bills: And so our Parliament does us most right, not being able to help us, to
lie down and bear our curse her self.

She dies into the Army, gives up her Ghost into the Armies bosom; and leaves
the Army Executor of her will: dies into the People, and al dying together and
tumbled into one grave of confusion.

By this death there is a perfect Remission of sin; here is a true Act of
oblivion on all sides; a blotting out of transgressions: Has the King
transgrest, he lies in the dust for it; he is in your own bowels, devoured by
you: if you accuse him, you accuse your selves: look upon him now as pierced by
you, and you cannot think of his sins, but of your own shame with self-piercing,
self-wounding hearts. Neither can the King remember the Parliaments injuries,
but he must in those thoughts be oppressed; they are in him, and if he should
think of revenge, he must be revenged upon himself; death wholly overcomes and
spoils revenge; and leaves it nothing at all to feed upon: Or if any party do
look back, they see all these mutual violences in the Divine wisdom and
goodness, the sting of them being taken away, with pleasure and content; and
glory in these marks, not of hatred, but love; glory in the Cross, and rejoice
in your mutual sufferings together, and one for another; all bitterness and
envy being slain thereby: Every one (as now in the accuser) you see your own
good, and your adversaries weakness and sin, so shall you by this change of
death, see all the evil as your own, and be able to bear it; every one
accusing himself, and acquitting others: so that the greatest enmity will be
against your selves, or any thing that makes a division; and nothing remaining
to be hated but enmity or hatred it self. There cannot a thought of strife or
enmity arise now, but it must appear in blood; in the blood of Kings, Queens,
Princes, Parliaments: enmity being slain, at first look you do see death in
it, and so abhor to change a word with it; look upon it as a murderer, and
immediately fly from it into each others bosoms.

Here is away too to pay all debts, to cancel all obligations on both sides;
in this pit of death must all be swallowed up. Debts are forgiven a dead man:
Here is a death of the Old man, The old Quarrel, the old terms of enmity; the
old man and his lusts: The lustings of the KINGS party after honor,
greatness, preferment: the Parliament after places, Bishops Lands, etc. the
Armies lustings after arreares: the lusts of envy, malice, tyranny, oppression,
coveteousnes, desiring each others goods (the fuel of this flame in all) is
buried.

Thus, as before our remedies were our diseases, so now our diseases, our
miseries become our remedy: in saving we lost, now in losing we save: Our gain
was loss, and our loss is become gain through the riches of the wisdom and
mercy of the Lord our GOD: Now we must say, we had perished, if we had not
perished.

Chap. XV.
Of the complete cure of the Nation, showing it in its Raised state; and
parrticularly the King.

NOw, through the tender mercy of our God, does the day sparing from on high,
visit us; To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death; to guide our feet in the way of peace: The bright day of Englands
Redemption is come; the sweet morning of our Resurrection. A rise, let us go
from this pit of misery: Let us wrap up all our grave clothes of shame, sin and
sorrow; and leave them with their Father, the destroyer, in this dark night of
hell and death.

The Lord says it, and in the power of the Lord, we do break open Iron gates
of death, and let go these poor prisoners of hope: and before we go we will
spoil the spoyler, trample Satan under foot: laugh and mock at thy power:
ruin thy Kingdom of darkness; take away from thee thy power to vex, wholly
destroy thy destruction; Oh thou enemy, destruction is come to a perpetual
end: We smite thee upon the cheekbone, thou can bite no more: Now we lead
captivity captive; we were under thee; now thou thy self art a prisoner and a
servant: thou have not hurt us, but done us good in destroying us; thy curses
are turned to blessings; to our infinite advantage: Thou thy self shall be
under the burden of divine wrath; We are escaped as a bird out of the snare of
the fowler: your snare is broken, and we are delivered: and thou fallest into
the pit thou diggest for others: by thy wounding us we are healed: thou have
bruised our heel; but we have broak thy head: thy whole design of Englands
ruin; and thy plots are discovered, and turned against thy self: upon thee
and thy wrath as a footstool do we ascend into the blessed throne of God. We
lock thee up in chains of darkness, and throw thee under the earth: get thee
hence and all thy darkness with thee, that keeps Englishmen from seeing God in
one another: take with thee all thy bitterness, rage, madness, oppression,
tyranny, all thy lies and falsehood, thy false Oaths, and breach of Covenant;
all thy disorder and confusion; thy mischievous plots, and all thy scorn and
reproach; and all thy false accusing Father to Son, and Son to Father, etc. Thy
railing and revilings, blasphemies, with every thing that is cursed; and go
headlong into the deep Sea of thy perdition: we will live in heavenly peace,
love and righteousness, in the light and glory of our own God. Shake thy self
from thy dust captive daughter, this cloud of dust that darkens thee, from
divisions, emptiness, barrenness, vanity, instability, and ascend into the
light, majesty, union and strength of God.

England is become the Kingdom of the Lord and of his Christ; God reigns in
her; she is become a holy Nation, a heavenly Kingdom: God is in her and none
else: The tabernacle of God is with men: he now takes his great reign upon
earth: he is come, he is come to judge the People righteously, and to govern
the Nation upon Earth.

The majesty of the Trinity dwelling before in weakness, that is sowed, dyed,
its raised in power; before in flesh, now in Spirit; before covered and veiled,
hiding himself, now in open and naked face: We are now a new creature, a new
Kingdom of righteousness; living in the immediate brightness of the face of
God.

God is with us, with all his host of power and goodness, mercy and wisdom,
to establish us in peace and justice: there is nothing amongst us but God, who
is exalted alone: and says, I am and there is none besides me; and has taken
the Kingdom into himself; and every thing is what it is in the glory of God:
now indeed the soil is the Lambs, he is English Earth: The people, the Lords,
and shall be filled with the excellency of God in himself.

The Lord is King; God himself reigns: God is upon his throne, and says openly
to the whole Kingdom, I am your King; you are my People; I Will rule you with a
pure golden Scepter of righteousness and peace: you shall submit to me, and
receive law, honor, justice and protection from my self; you shall now see
the beauty, sweetness and goodness of my government, I Will be a King to and in
every one of you.

And I Will reign over you in and by King Charles; I will take him out of the
prison of Satan's darkness out of the pit of the world; from all his vileness
of lusts, of oppression, coveteousnesse, folly, fiercnesse, wrath; and from all
his shame and dishonor: from his evil counselors, wicked spirits that have
seduced him to evil; into my bosom: and turn his heart as a river of water:
It shall no longer be mudded with evil counselors; nor with pride,
coveteousnesse, cruelty; but run in a pure stream of Divine justice and
goodness; and so largely and plentifully, that it shall flow forth freely upon
you: Righteousness shall run down your streets. A fountain of honor as well as
justice, that shall give real, true (not titular) honor to his People; that
shall stream forth Majesty and greatness as freely into the whole Nation, as
the Sun does beams: he shall freely communicate Royalty that it shall be every
ones; and every one shall live in the view and enjoyment of it, and fully
satisfied with it; it being truly his own: A King enlarged with the largeness
of God that comprehends all his People as the sands on the Sea shore; and is an
Ocean of goodness and righteousness to cover those sands: whose Arms of love
can at Once embrace the whole Kingdom; every party and person: that carries
every English man in his bosom: That impartially will communicate favor to
every one according to his true worth and ability to receive it: of large
wisdom, filled with the wisdom of God: of quick and piercing understanding, to
execute judgment in all causes: one living in the light of GOD; shined upon
with the Majesty of God, that he shall not be deceived by flatterers; but shall
scatter all such mists from before the Throne; that of all places, wicked men,
and wicked things shall fly from the Court and presence of the King: Of such
tenderness, that he shall really bear the burdens of all his subjects; and
every man's trouble shall make him restless, that cannot be fully content til he
has fully satisfied all the wants of his People: That is all mildness and
gentleness to his own People as a Father; and terrible only to your
adversaries: whose indignation is bent continually against the enemies of his
People and his childrens peace: a Lion to them, but a Lamb, a Shepherd to you:
A Prince Mighty with the Mightiness of God, able to do you good; mighty in
word and deed; able to save you, and to destroy them that hate you: A King that
has no joy or delight but the good and prosperity of his People: It Is your
happiness only that is his Crown: that knows no glory but a loyal and loving
People; that is King only to make you happy; and your happiness is his
Kingdom: or, health and prosperity in the People, grows up into a lively
flower of glory; a King; or breaths out it self in his Majesty: So the KING is
the breath of our nostrils.

That is indeed a King Anointed by God; by and in the grace of God; that is
covered over with Divine grace; that is nothing but what God is; and has all
the Kinglines of God shining in him: With whom, and in whom you shall nakedly
see the face of Divine justice; and in whom the glory of God does take pleasure
to show it self; and not as another from him, but in perfect Union; in truth
and righteousness: where there is nothing to separate nor part the earthly,
from the heavenly King; but the earthly is in agreement, in covenant with the
heavenly; living together in the same Spirit: The heavenly God being entire
himself, and the King entire himself, yet both but one in true marriage and
conjunction for ever; a bond and covenant that never shall be broken: the King
in God, God in the King: The King is what God is; and God is what the King is;
neither alone: God all in him, he all in God. He that opposes one, opposth
both; he that loves one, loves both; exclude one, you exclude both; deny
one, you deny both; disobey one, you disobey both: This is heaven and earth
married together in harmony and agreement; and the King that once appeared an
Image of God, a shadow in which he was weak, and which he has dyed to* and the
evil and corrupt part left in the grave; he is raised up in the very
substance; in Union, in Spirit, in Truth; in Eternal fellowship with GOD.

Chap. XVI.
Of the Parliament in its Raised estate.

ALL things are made new; a new King, and a new Parliament; a new Head, and a
new Body: a Heavenly body; a Host of Divine excellencies; in which all the
perfections of the Son of GOD shines. An assembly, or body of Christ; The
fullnes of him who fills all in all: not only a company of weak men, But this
is thy new name, The LORD is there; GOD is with us: Christ in glory, in
Majesty; Highly exalted. Thou in whom are hid The treasures of wisdom; thou
sit in Council to draw forth excellent Laws for us, and to rule in the
midst of us; One chosen out of the People, in which meet in one, the life,
spirit, and wisdom of heaven. The LORD is here, challenging the Kingdom to be
his; here is gathered the heads of the Tribes; a congregation of the first
borne; the chief and choicest Saints and Angels collected and imbodied into one
Son of God.

The LORDS Christ, he says, I am here, your flesh and blood; one of you: I Will
provide and constitute wholesome Laws for you in this Parliament.

And this Parliament taken out of all its filth and guilt; out of all its
madness and disfraction, folly and confusion; out of the hands of the envious
man that divides and destroies; from under cursed darkness, violence and
oppression; from the Peoples woe and curse. I Will wash it, and cleanse it, and
fill it with Majesty and goodness; make it a mountain of holiness, a City of
Righteousness. Arise shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. Thou shall no longer sit in darkness: Thy Sun shall go
down no more: thou shall not stumble nor fall for want of light; thou shall not
dash thy foot against a stone: The Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory. The Sun of righteousness is Risen in thee, with
healing under his wings.

Thou now art Divine justice; A habitation of justice: where justice it self
shall delight to dwell. No unclean thing shall be found in thee: living always
in the righteousness of Christ, thou shall be separated from sinners;
blameless: live in a hight of righteousness above accusation: The Lord Our
Righteousness.

The Savior of the People; thy walls shall be called salvation, and thy gates
praise; sending forth saving health to the whole Nation, into every part that
is pained or diseased: a universal remedy for all malladies; a skillful
Physician, richly furnished with the fulness of the Spirit of Christ to apply
a plaster to every sore.

Thou now art all bowels, a heap of compassions rowlling together; of most
exquisit sense of any burden that lies upon us: The Mother of England, as the
KING is the Father, in whose womb our freedoms, rights, peace lies: from whose
breasts we shall suck milk of comfort, riches, ease, quietness, justice
happiness; as tender of every one of your children as of your selves. Thou art
beautified with garments of salvation, honorable, glorious: the joy of the
whole earth: Adorned now with such excellency, that thou art a Queen indeed; a
complete Second for such a First.

This thou art, in perfect conjunction with the Divine nature, in one Spirit
with the LORD; taken into the Nature and Being of the eternal Lawgiver; being
one with the great Court or Council of heaven: Really, truly, being in the
LORD; and the LORD really, and truly in you; not in shadow, that is destroyed,
but in substance: not a natural, but a spiritual body; not a earthly, but a
heavenly, The Lord from heaven: Now a holy and incorruptible body, that cannot
fail. Christ is completely himself in you; you are completely in him; and
completely one Lord, one man, one body; one Assembly or Congregation: having
the same Nature and Person.

Chap. XVII.
Of the perfect Union betwixt King and Parliament, and by them with his People;
in this new and raised estate.

THESE Two, KING and Parliament, by flesh and Satan were divided from God, made
un-like God; set at distance from, and enmity to GOD, and at enmity one from
another: So now, that flesh and Devil being destroyed, the Spirit unites them
truly to God, in truth and substance; and as to God so one to another: This law
often he Spirit knits them and marries them both ways.

In this raised estate King and Parliament are in most excellent union, joined
together in nearest bonds of fellowship as Husband and Wife, as Father and Son;
God and Christ: In the greatest distance of these unnatural breaches, there
has been still a secret tendency toward each other; your union was never so
much slain but it acted out toward an agreement: And now there is a thirst in
both after your selves in each other, and a restlesnes of spirit attends you
till you meet; in that dark way in which you are, in hell, you are groping one
after another; in a feeble way of Treating; and framing a net of spiders web to
catch one another in; in several forms: These are too weak to hold or bind
you together; you are both pitied, that long for each other, and cannot enjoy
each other; especially the poor Parliament whose desires are after her Husband,
lusting for him, and knows not which way to compass him through fear and
ignorance.

I shall but draw a vail, a curtain aside, and show you both embracing each
other.

The Union betwixt King and Parliament, and by the mediation of Parliament with
the People, whom they Represent, is strong and Inviolable; It is admirable and
delightful: They are one in Nature and Being; and can never be divided: As
Christ says of the Father, so the Parliament may say; The Father in me, and in
the Father. Where ever the King is, the Parliament is; and the King cannot be
without his parliament and People; and where ever the Parliament is, or People
are, the King is: They are one, and together, in the greatest distance: the
Union is such, that distance is swallowed up by it, and comprehended in it. The
Son comes forth of Heaven, and is in Heaven; is in Heaven while out of Heaven;
and when alone, yet not alone; The Father is with me: So the King and
Parliament are asunder, yet together; and by their parting their union is
enlarged, not broken: Their fleshly outward union broken, but by that the
inward and true union appears and is brought forth. In truth, the Parliament
is in the King; and acts not, moves not, but in the King; has, not, cannot
do: and the King is in the Parliament, and naturally does what the Parliament
does. The King retires and carries the life and spirit, of the Parliament with
him; and it is in perfection in him: the Parliament withdraws and keeps close
the King with her: The King takes the spirit of the Parliament; the Parliament
keeps the body of the King; and to narrow, poor sense they are divided: but
such is the largeness of the Spirit, that delights to extend union into
distinction; and there they are, and always were, more one in truth then they
have yet appeared to be.

The former union was too weak and strait, and therefore its snapt asunder; and
the LORD now shows such a union as disjunction does confirm and multiply;
while they are parted they are doubly one; each upholding union in their being
distinct; and so manifests, that they are so one, as they are two likewise; and
in being two, they are twice one; each carrying the other along with him. The
King carries with him the power and spirit of the Parliament, it being his; and
the Parliament the matter and body of kinglynesse, that being hers: the King
has the Parliament in night and eminency of form; the Parliament has the
King in lowness and grosnesse of matter: yea the Parliament has the KING in
his hight and spirit; but covered over, and hid under unity and lowness of the
matter: so the King has the matter in the excellency and unity of the form.

And they so are in one another as manifests their union; both languishing in
desire after each other, in such an absolute necessity of being together, that
the King cannot act the business of a King, will not assume the work of a King,
but with his Parliament; and the Parliament cannot act in the power of a
Parliament til they have the King: Which shows that the union is still good; so
strong that they cannot be but together in affection, though parted in place;
and will not be happy til they are fully together: Their love lives at
distance, and distance is slain by unions being in distance; their distance
opening the foundation of their union, and awakning the strength of love to
show it self in reunion; so by a temporary division comes an eternal and
inseparable conjunction: as that parting of Christ from his Disciples, It is
expedient that I go from you, that the Comforter may come, and he shall abide
with you for ever. Thus does the Sea of the spirits love drown al your
divisions; and it abundantly triumphs over your breaches; flowing in upon, and
in your breaches, to the utter destruction of that plague of enmity.

You are one in original; in one Cause: yea, you are the cause of each other:
you are descended and derived from the same Father, from the same Heaven, and
are again taken into the same Heaven; joint heirs of the same glory; filled
both with the same life; begotten by the same Spirit: The same Spirit that
gives majesty and power to one, gives the same to the other; one fountain fills
both your Cisternes; two streams coming from the same head; two twins lying in
the same womb of the Spirit: and it is the same Spirit that lives in you both:
There can be no difference between you, you have indeed but one mind, but one
heart: Englands peace, honor, justice and greatness, is the substance of both
your lives: you have but one subsistence; but one happiness; but one breath
and air, Englands joy, Englands good: you are not one now by outward Oaths and
Covenants, but by inward Oaths and Covenants; by an everlasting Covenant that
cannot be broken. The same God and Spirit speaking both, or swearing both by
himself; bringing forth both perpetually in the same Oath, by himself: While
he swears to save and deliver his People in England, he swears a good KING and
Parliament: bringing forth himself, he brings forth you; or brings forth
himself KING and Parliament. Being brought forth by Gods Spirit, there will
not come from such a fountain, bitter and sweet waters, no dissenting
affections: and bringing forth in both nothing but himself; but one and the
same justice, one and the same goodness, wisdom, love, to the People; there is
no fear of disagreeing: and bringing this forth, not in a dark and misty
world, where you have been subject to mistakes; but in the clear light of the
Spirit; in the calmnes, quietness, opennes, freenes of the Spirit; there can be
nothing but pleasure and mutual delight in all.

As you are brought forth by one, and in one Spirit, so by one another, as Man
and Woman; The same Spirit producing the KING out of the Parliament, and so out
of the People; and the Parliament and People out of the KING; As Man is by
Woman, and Woman of Man.

The Parliament and People is of the King, taken out of his side, and from
thence formd and built: The King is Father, and we his children; he is the
first man in the Kingdom, is before all: Adam, in whose loins we all were,
and from him, and of him we are: our true Civil Father; from whom we all
receive our Civil beings; in whom liberty, property, peace, order, honor,
authority is first originally, and chiefly; and so from him derived to us:
Especially, the Parliament is taken out of him by his Writ, from his heart; is
the Product of the deep thoughts of his mind; which being gathered together
are a Parliament.

As he is ours, so we his original: Man is by the Woman: The Parliament and
People in their fulness of time, when grown up into maturity, bring forth a
Government, a KING; The firstborn; their vigor and strength: and so property,
liberty, order, etc. are first in us; and then they arise out of us into him:
And by this continual motion of the blood, life, and spirits of the body, in a
circular course, the whole shall be preserved in a lively and lovely state. All
the strength and power of the Nation continually ascending and descending;
passing from us upward to the King, and thence removes down again to us; and so
takes the nature of all: perfectly refreshes the lowest, and taking his
meannesse and carries it to the highest, to the head: being there in-nobled and
raised, carries its Majesty down into inferior parts again: and is the same
River called by several names, in several places: as the Sea is one, only
distinct by the shore it washes upon.

This union, by the wisdom and fullness of the spirit, is brought forth, not in
a rude heap, but in judgment and proportion; in a sweet variety; and in such
harmony as they are the joy and delight of each other: as Husband and Wife; one
flesh, yet two persons; so ordered and composed with a pleasant variety, that
the same (which were it only the same, and not another, would be dull and
fruitless) being thus varied, gives delightful fellowship and profit. Such is
the fulness of this heavenly glory, that it is One, and not less but more,
in making another: The King has all power and authority, and the Parliament
has the same without robbing the King: the Parliament having in another way:
(viz) a second, shall never clash against the first: but being one, the King
has it in the Parliament in another way then he has it in himself: and so
his power is enriched and strengthened by it. and it is no loss to the
Parliament to give it to the KING, her Husband: whilst she gives it him, he
being hers, she has it in him, in a more excellent way then she can have it
in her self. And for either of these to have it alone, would be unpleasant,
solitary, and burdensome: Its delightful to see it and enjoy it in another;
we not so perfectly beholding our selves, or loving our selves, in our selves,
as in another; sight, love, and enjoyment requiring another.

It is the content of greatness, not to be, but to propagate greatness; For the
King to rule alone cannot be so acceptable to him as to confer Dignity upon
his own body, his Seed. It would be irksome to have his greatness included in
himself; and this is the most proper way of his propagating himself, his
Parliament; and so a Parliament is his own choice; his meet help, by which he
is free, and without which he were bound to himself, and in himself: and so to
be a King, were but to be a pack-horse: and for the Woman, the Parliament to
rule by assistance (being called) in the bosom and heart of her head, pleases
her: should she be always in it, and necessitated to it, it would be her
bondage; she would desire to resign it up to her Lord, and her self choose an
easy and pleasant subjection. Thus divided it is increased, and nothing
lessened but the burden; which while thus equally balanced, is no burden,
but the safety of the whole: For the King to be the root out of which the body
of the tree grows, the Parliament; and out of her the People, the branches; and
to send forth sap freely whereby the dody is supplied, and so every arm,
branch and twigge, that it brings forth good fruit, wealth, peace, content,
honor, power, al kinds of prosperity for the King; and then the people to be
the root, the Parliament, the body: the King the head or top; and the people to
send up by the body riches, honor, greatness, as sap into the head, whereby
he may bring forth fruits of Majesty, Justice, Greatness unto them: and so the
burden and the fruit is divided; and both be the pleasure and profit of each
other: And so, is England a Treee of life, under which we shall sit and eat the
fruit of it in peace; and out of which we shall all grow, and bring forth fruit
of righteousness etc.

The order and manner of this distribution is excellent; into a superior and
inferior; a first and second: two without this subordination, would not be so
safe, so profitable, nor so delightful: But being two, subordinate one to
another, without offending each other, yea, to the advantage of each other is
exceeding delightful: the King, the Father, has all retained; People, the
Son, al dispensed: in the first, its absolute and entire; in the second, its
propagated, enlarged, spread-forth: The Husband gives, the Wife receives; he
has all, and bestows it; she has all, and receives it. The King says, ask
what you will and it shall be given unto you; (so GOD says to Christ) choose
what Laws and Privileges you will, I Will grant it; That Is my word and Oath: I
have no negative voice; I cannot deny you. But this is no wrong to the King; for
the Parliament being one spirit with him, can ask nothing but what he is minded
to give: as prayers in the Church; though GOD be bound to give yet its no
loss to him, because his own Spirit asks, for we know not what to ask: So the
KING is the original of asking, and gives the desire of the thing: that which
moves the inferior to desire is most excellent in the superior; and in this
is the fullness of the King, he shall still call, ask of ME; and shall still
out-goe the desires of the Petitioners, and give more then they can ask; his
heart being more large toward his Spouse or Child, then his Spouse or Child
can be to it self; and that mind that is in the Spouse or Child, of good to
it self, is in the Father before it was in the Son, and more excellently:
Neither can the Son ask any thing in this spirit, that can derogate from the
Father; for thereby he should prejudice himself; and weaken, or lessen that
power that conveighs good to him, and so wrong himself most, to wrong his head
or fountain from whence he is supplied: Neither is it any wrong to the Son to
have it this way, but it is the most perfect way of having it by asking it of
another; for thus, there is a stock and treasure in which is store laid up that
is the Sons riches; the surest and sweetest way of having, is by the easy way
of asking: It Is the excellency of it, that it is a gift, and that it is free; or
that it has the Royal stamp of love and Authority upon it; by which it is not
a stolen and forced, but lawful and pleasant favor: It Is a free and ingenious
subordination; where the inferior has power to choose what it will; and chooses
to have it in that way, and not in another; and has that freedom in asking
that is powerful; The woman has power over the head, to command by love; and
to say as Christ, I will have it so: and then it is most acceptable to the
Father, when it is most boldly and freely asked: it being the great joy of the
head to have the wife confident in his love: And in this way there is, and shall
be a river of pleasure running between King and people; or from King, and
Parliament, and People; wherein they shall do nothing but please one another:
The fulness of the one, completely answering the largeness of the other.

And the KING having to give what ever the Parliament or People can desire; and
desiring them to receive as much, as they desire him to give; and taking more
pleasure in creating greatness and freedom in them, then in possessing of it
himself; it being his nature and place to give forth, and without their
receiving honor from him he were not a King: and it being as pleasant to the
People to receive it from a King: it would not content them to have it in
themselves; but their Kings gift sets the price upon all favors they do
enjoy; its therefore sweet because their Lord bestows it upon them.

This is the flourishing estate of King and Parliament in their restored life;
living now in the glory of the Spirit and in union: As God and Christ are of
themselves; are in each other, and neither without each other; but the Kingdom
of both is completed, in their dwelling together in the third the Spirit:
where they do continually delight in each other, in bestowing themselves upon
each other, and are most happy in fellowship: so it is a heavenly blessedness
for Head and Body to be thus united, and to give and take largely and openly,
to communicate themselves to each other.

The King in prosperity, in health, strength and pleasure, is in breaking forth
his Majesty upon his Nobles, that have affinity to his greatness: thence to
derive it to the People; this is a full King in hight and breadth: and a People
ascending through the Lords into the bosom of the King; is a People in hight
and depth: the body in prosperity and pleasure: three states in one, and one in
three; in perfect agreement, and in complete unity: all make up but one
fullness, one Kingdom. Thus each is a Heaven to himself, and a Heaven to the
other: and this conjunction by this righteous law of Spirit; the highest
Heavens, being all in the light and face of the eternal majestty: This is the
great and main pillar of Englands happiness; the foundation of our comfort:
which as its most excellent in its self, so it will effectually change the
whole Kingdom into its form: all parts must follow the condition of King and
Parliament; yea, all are included in it; in this our whole happiness lies: The
body being thus in health it cannot but send forth nourishment into every part:
not a man in England but shall presently find a reviving upon this agreement;
a new spirit of love, joy, comfort, trade, and prosperity is immediately
dispersed into the whole Nation: every one leaping for joy in the goodness of
God, and the happiness of the Nation.

Chap. XVIII.
Of the Cure of the People of the Land by this Death and Resurrection.

THE God of the whole Earth delights to do great things, and to fill the whole
earth with his glory: The great favor of divine presence, of love and peace,
is not reserved for Princes alone; but to be communicated generally to all
People, That all the ends of the earth may see the salvation of our God.

You the People of England have sinned, We have all like sheep gone astray; but
God lays on him the iniquities of us all: We see the zeal of Christ under
your blind rage one against another: Christ in you in weakness and infirmity:
The Lord says of you, You are my People, all my children: your families,
relations, comforts, and persons are the Lords: not one English man or woman,
but carries the Lord with him and in him. The Landlord is the Lord of the
Earth; the Tennant is the Son holding of the Father all he has. The buyer, the
seller; the rich the poor; Master and Servant; Father and Son; Husband and
Wife, are all but various breakings forth of God and Christ, and the several
enjoyments they have of each either; and passing from one to the other by and in
the Spirit. Ministers and People, Towns, Corporations, Manufactures, Markets,
Grasing, Feeding, all but the abundant flowings forth of the fullness of
Christ; pleased to express it self in such forms.

You are all one Commonwealth of God and Christ; and in you all does Christ
suffer; in that deadnes, disorder, spoil, confusion that is amongst you, does
the body of Christ suffer. It Is the blood of Christ that gives life to all these
things; and in the spilling of them his blood is spilt: With him you suffer, as
he with you: The glory, riches, peace and comfort of England is become a
troubled Sea, yea, mare mortuum, a dead Sea. There is no life in any thing you
do: no joy in your labors; no comfort in your lives; no hope of enjoying what
you have: a Chaos, a great grave is England become, wherein is cast all her
riches.

But by this death, is Satan the Prince of death overcome; the author of your
miseries; the destroyer of the earth; that fills you with wanes, suits quarrels;
that sowed the tears of strife amongst Gods husbandry: that hot fiery Serpent
that provoaked thirst to drunkenness; that empty, hungry fiend that led you to
gluttony; that filthy one that wrought breaches in your families; discontents
in your relations; wasting in your estates; that cursed all your blessings;
denies you joy, mirth, sports, recreations: Thou enemy of man art slain; and
with thee darkness, blindness, mistakes, accusations, treacheries, lies,
falsehoods, that vexed English men: These hateful quarrels between Roundhead
and Cavalier, are dead and buried; with all your transgressions one against
another; and all will and power to mischief one another: That partition wall is
broken down that kept you at distance from God, and from each other; that made
you dark, ignorant and sinful in your way: And you are now raisd in a new
life; The old heaven and earth is fled away, because it was corrupt; and we
have a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness: In all your
ways, business, trade, sports, neighborhood, dwells the God of
righteousness: they are all in God, and God in them; the goodness of God
flows forth in them; and all of them shall be filled with the peace, joy, and
life of God: Truth stall spring out of the earth, and Righteousness look down
from heaven: The Lord shall give that which is good, and our Land shall yield
her increase. You are sowed in sin, in darkness; and shall rise now light and
holiness: and with you truth it self: The true and living God shall spring up
in every thing: The truth of God filling all your fields with corn; pastures,
with grass; that which is good, God Himself: your corn shall be better then
Manna, Angels food; you shall feed continually upon the bread of life: you
shall lie down quietly in the arms of God, and none shall make you afraid: God
Reigns, let the earth rejoice; let all that is in it be glad: you shall have
mirth, plenty, wealth, food, raiment, and GOD all in all: You shall be Governed
by God in peace and righteousness; the wicked one shall be destroyed for ever.

Our Sons shall be as plants grown up in their youth; our Daughters as corner
stones, pollished after the manner of a Palace; our Garners full of all manner
of store; our Sheep shall bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our
streets; our Oxen strong to labor: there shall be no breaking in of trouble;
nor going out of comfort: no complaining in our streets: Happy are the People
that is in such a case; yea happy is the People whose God is the Lord. This is
the Great happiness, God is our God, and we his People.

Now ye may sit under your own Vine, and under your own Fig Tree; which is,
the love of God shadowing you, and feeding of you: Let the earth be full of the
knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the Sea: there shall be none barren
of the grace of God amongst you; not a dark corner of the Earth for cruelty to
dwell in; but all shall be enlightened with the joy and peace of God: such a
power of light and heat shall shine from the Sun of righteousness, as shall
melt the churles heart into liberality; the Landlord shall not rack you; nor
the Usurer grind you; Taxes and Excise shall not oppress you: The rich shall
not be a prisoner to his wealth, nor the poor for want; he that hoorded corn
shall bring it forth; the buried money shall rise; trade shall revive; the hungry
shall be fed; the naked clothed: all happy, but he that refuses and resists
this grace, the Devil. You shall all praise the Lord, from the rising of the
Sun to the going down of it: rejoice in the King, in the Parliament; all their
honor, greatness, and dominion is yours; you shall have the comfort and
benifit of it; and from them shall you receive floods and streams of
righteousness that none shall want: the rich shall be freed from the curse in
his wealth; and desire no more: the poor shall be satisfied and have enough:
every one, and every thing shall be filled* And your railings shall be turned
into songs; your fightings into daunces; your fears into rejoyceings: live in
love, in the face of God, as brethren; as owe family; lying in the womb of one
happy Mother, England; a Paradise; the Land of Emanuel; rejoicing in the
prosperity of each other: and the heavens shall bless you; the God of heaven
shall shine on you: Christ, The true Heaven is open to you: Princes, Magistrates
look gently upon you in love, smile on you: and these lowering, frowning clouds
that have vexed you with excess of rain, shall be scattered; and these
heavens shall favor you with seasonable weather; you shall have all blessings
of heaven and earth.

Thus, the People are recovered from slavery under Satan, and wicked men; into
a freedom to live in the face of God: into freedom with, and union to their
King, their Parliament; and amongst themselves; and so are freeborn; a Nation
borne in one day; a Royal and Princly race; a blessed and happy generation;
Borne of GOD, and of their KING.

Chap. XIX.
The restoration of the Ministry, by Christ's bearing their sin, and by his
death and resurrection.

THE Ministry has been deeply defiled, and woefully accursed; they lie under
great sins, and heavy judgments: But here is balm for them, a Physician
will cure them; a fire will purify the Sons of Levi: you are the LORDS
portion; GOD who said you were not my People, will say, you are the People of
the living God: Idol Shepherds are you; but the GREAT Shepherd is seeking after
you; and will restore you.

The Lord is under your sins; bears your iniquities under the Luciferian
pride of Episcopacy seeking to advance themselves into worldly greatness; into
Princes favor; into Lordlinesse: it being broken in pieces, we see under it,
the Kingly and Priestly Office of Christ in union: the Son exalting himself
from a poor minister a Carpenters Son, to sit upon a Throne, far above all
principalities and powers: In their pomp and state of living and worshipping
God in an easy, rich, and brave way, is darkly represented the glory of the
Church, Zion sucking the milk of the Gentiles: having Kings and Queens nursing
Fathers and nursing Mothers: and bowing to the soles of her feet: Christ in
glory, under this abominable filth.

In the Presbyterian rigid and harsh yoke of Government forcing the minds of
men into a observance of their Reformation: We now see the severity of Christ
and his strength and power; his heat and zeal; not contented with a cold
formality; but requiring every Sacrifice to be salted with fire: a smoaky and
dark shadow of the baptism of the holy Ghost and fire: Christ in power, under
miserable weakness.

In the Independents uniting their Churches close into one entire body, and
keeping of them under their own immediate care; and not suffering them to
acknowledge any other power: we see there lies in it the pastoral care of
Christ carrying his Lambs his bosom: heavenly union: Christ keeping his Spouse
chaste to himself; his personal and immediate governing of them, and his
absolutenes and Lordlinesse over them: Christ absolute, and his people
independent, living only in and with himself.

In their sharp opposing one another, being intolerable one to another; is the
zeal of the Lord of host seen; his jealousy that is impatient, of having his
Spouse taken from him: their persecuting one another; a shadow of those storms
and tempests wherewith he persecutes them that take his Spouse his People from
him.

In all these there are some particular excellencies of Christ scattered; they
have gotten each a piece of the seamles coat of Christ: or else they could not
be a rent or schism, but in all his visage is so marred, his form so uncomly,
that he is there unknown to any, even to themselves.

Christ bears their shame upon his own body on the tree: in their shame and
repoach he is reproached: suffers deeply for being in such a filthy shape, both
from themselves and others: all the honor, beauty, order, uniformity of the
Church is the Lord, his face vaild and covered: and now it is a ruinous heap, he
lies buried in it, under divisions, factions, heresies, reproach: by all this
his true body is broken, pierced, slain: This is your sacrifice, O ye Priests,
this blood must wash you, and make an atonement; and it is sufficient to take
away your sins though as red as scarlet; and put you again into white
garments; this will satisfy Gods wrath, and then the rage of the Nation against
you, and the wrath one against another will dye; Christ's body is dead; and you
are dead; you are spirit-lesse, life-lesse, a mere carcass, rotten sepulchers;
That which you fear is upon you; the Witnesses are slain by the Beast coming
out of the bottomless Pit: The carcases lies in the streets of the great City,
scorned, trampled upon: your shame un-buried; where our Lord was crucified.
Dissolved and broken amongst your selves, from the People, and most from the
Lord: your live in a miserable world, and not in Heaven, which only is true
life: and with you dies the false Prophet, the deceiver; the Father of lies and
all the delusions of the devil, and all insulting pride, coveteousnesse,
worldliness, malice, persecution, and vain glory: and by this fire of God
upon you shall you be purified and cleansed: By death the partition wall is
broken down, betwixt God and you, betwixt your selves, and betwixt you and your
People. Of two, God and man, heavenly and earthly priesthood, made one
Priesthood, one new man: The vail is rent, and you are now admitted into the
holiest; and of many kinds of Priests, you are one Priesthood, one tribe, one
body in many members; one Christ: and you and People are one Clergy, one lot
and inheritance; the people Priests with you, and you people with them; all the
Lords People holy: their jealousy and enmity, your pride and loftiness being
taken away.

God will not suffer his holy one to see corruption: But will raise you up
together with Christ: Levi shall never want a man to minister before him: If
you can break the covenant of the day and of the night, that there should be no
more day nor night in their season, then may also my Covenant be broken with
David my servant, etc. and with the Levits the Priests my ministers: The night
of their calamity shall be followed with a day of rejoicing: And though the Sun
have set upon the Prophets, yet it stall rise again; David and Levi shall have
heirs: Christ shall have Kings and Ministers; Kings prophetical or priestly,
anointed with fulness of spirit for both; and Priests Regal, or royal, to
govern the house of the Lord.

Now Joshua thou great high priest, and thy fellows men wondered at: I Will take
away thy filthy garments from thee, and will cloth thee with change of
raiment; I Will remove thy iniquity off that land in one day; and bring forth the
branch. The Lord and all his twigs growing out of him: full of the Spirit of
God; in the compleatnesse and fulness of the spirit; seven eyes upon one stone;
much light and understanding: The Lord himself shall be the Temple, ministers,
people, gifts, and all, and we shall all worship in the house of God for ever:
now are you Divines indeed; holy men, men of God, one with the holy divinity,
shining in the brightness and majesty, in the wisdom and judgment of God;
Anointed with holy Oil; clothed with beautiful garments of righteousness,
truth and peace.

Now raisd out of the dust as the stones of Zion; as dried bones restored to
life by the Spirit of the LORD: God sends a plentiful rain, showers of
righteousness, whereby thou will confirm Levi, thine inheritance when it was
weary: The Lord gives the word, Arise, and great is the company of them that
published it. Though ye have lain among the pots; Kitchen Priests, that have
served for the belly; Now, as the wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her
set hers with yellow gold: Winged now with the Dove, the Spirits strength, in
the purity and excellency of silver and gold; by heavenly and holy gifts, we
shall fly aloft; and live always in the clearnes and light of God; not in the
baseness and foulness of the world. Christ ascended on high, and will give
liberal gifts, all kinds; Bishops, Presbyters, Independents, Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, etc. yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God may
dwell amongst them: God streaming himself forth in all varieties of Offices and
Officers, none in vain; all filld with grace and power.

Now in this restored condition all one with God, indeed spiritual and
heavenly, of pure gold: And one with, and amongst themselves, as Stars of
several magnitude, moving in there distinct Orbs: all glorious lights, yet
differing in an excellent variety one from another in glory; and all pleasant
and useful one to another: And in union with the State, or Kingdom: You were
divided, you kept them from meddling with Spiritual things; and they in
requital and revenge, excluded you from Civil things; you both in your dark
and worldly state, made laws against each other: The heavenly, or spiritual
men, must not meddle with earthly affairs; they defile them; nor earthly men
act in heavenly or spiritual. Thus were you cruel, and unkind to your selves
and to each other; one setting up an Heaven without an earth, the other an
earth without a heaven. These in the Lord are married together in perfect
union; the same Lord being by the same spirit King and Priest, and administering
his Church and Kingdom together: they are joynd in the King, and must run down
in fellowship together into the lower parts: Now truth springs out of the
earth: You shall have God and Christ in the truth of the Spirit, springing up
in all your civil affairs; in all your Laws, Statutes, customs, nothing
else but heavenly truth: and all your business, civil and natural shall be
holy to the Lord; blessed Ordinances of Heaven: you shall be in all of them in
the light of God, and minister in Gods presence: Upon the horse bridles, upon
the pots, upon all things written holiness to the Lord: And righteousness
shall look down from Heaven: Heaven shall shine forth to you righteous laws:
You shall see the same things done in Heaven, that are done in the earth:
looking in each others face and answering one another: here in THIS world earth
will be no burden to Heaven, being new; and Heaven no trouble to earth, no
stranger, when she shows her face and looks out she is the same thing: and
both joining together, salvation springs forth of them: the Earth by her
fellowship with Heaven brings forth good fruit: peace, righteousness and
justice for the Land: and the Earth without Heaven, brings forth nothing, but
cold, dead Laws: and Heaven without Earth but airy phansies: both in
conjunction make a complete happiness.

Now shall we meet together all Sorts in a general assembly, in the light of
Heaven, as golden candlesticks; The holy one walks in the midest of us,
emptying the golden Oil, by golden pipes from his golden self, into his golden
vessels, his ministers: And in this holy assembly, sitting in the light of God,
all things shall be manifest to us; we shall see the whole form of the house
of God; all the doors, windows and pillars of it; nothing of its statutes and
ordinances shall be hid from us: no error shall go undiscovered, unrefuted; all
that have gone astray shall be brought back; the ignorant shall be instructed;
the opposing and dissenting convinced; and the obstinate rejected, and cast
out: such a harmony and consent of hearts and minds in this love and light,
must needs bring forth blessed fruit: What ever is true in any religion, we
shall own; what is false, we shall judge: The darkness of Popery shall fall
before our light; we shall undermine the Kingdom of darkness, and set up
truth in that beauty and majesty as shall gain all hearts; upon such firm
pillars as none can move her.

We fear not Papists, nor all their strength; we shall need no Laws against
them, but The Law of the Spirit of life; which we know will overcome them:
The Gates of our Heavenly Jerusalem shall be open night and day; let who will
come in or go out: No Unclean thing shall enter into us; But all the KINGS of
the Earth; all the wisdom, state, pomp and glory of Rome; and all the World,
must bring their glory to this City, this New Jerusalem: And all the Nations
upon Earth that shall be saved, shall walk in the light of it.

Chap. XX.
Of the restoration of the Army, Levellers, and City of London.

THE Army is but a particular part, and that temporary, and occasional; and is
by this bright shining of the Sun of Righteousness, meltted into a general
peace and unity, but lying under a particular condemnation, it shall receive a
particular discharge. And we know thy employment is so irksome and unpleasant
to thee, To be the kingdoms Jailer, to keep war in, and peace out; or to stand
in the way to the Tree of life, with a flaming sword; to keep men from the
enjoyment of their liberty, KING, peace; though thou art commanded to it by God
(these things being yet forbidden the people) yet thou will be glad to be
released from it; that thou and all other may come into the Paradise of God,
and feed together upon the fruit of Divine peace and love.

There is, under thy assuming power over the Kingdom, King, and Parliament,
and all; and in thy maintaining thy Military power above, and against the
Civil; in thy seeking thy own subsisting, and attempting to be the Kingdoms
Lord and restorer: The Lord clothing himself with zeal, as with a garment,
incompassing himself about with flames of fire: A Man of War, a Lord of Hosts*
Casting away his Fatherly Government, because of the Nations rebellion in all
parts against himself, and ruling us with a Rod of Iron. God marching before
us, out of Egypts slavery, into a Wilderness; turning us from a Civil
Government into a Wilderness; and incamping in the midest of us; and
administering Laws to us; as at sinai: in thundering and lightning, clouds and
darknensse; so terrible, that makes all tremble: A yoke that neither we, nor
our Fathers are able to bear: And so we see Gods severity, under man's
iniquities: And because it is the Lords Rod, we kiss the Rod, and love you for
it.

Death is proper for this administration: The Lord, our Husband, the Law dies;
we were bound to honor you so long as you lived in the power and goodness of
God; The whole Kingdom bowed before you; while you led us safely through the
Wilderness: But Moses cannot bring us into Canaan; but must only have a view of
it, and dye at mount Nebo: This power is weak through the flesh, and cannot do
it; if you contend now to effect any thing, it is but the Devil striving for
the body of Moses; you are laboring to set up an honorable carcass; or to
call back life into a dead body: Christ did come into it, and has offered it
up in his own body, and naild this power fast to the Tree; you are dead, fixed
to the tree of shame, by the curse with your Lord; and by death you shall over
come more then ever you overcame by life; submitting to death, your wills,
reasons, lusts; your seeking a worldly Kingdom; your desire of lording it over
others by force of arms, with all your projects, are slain; and all enmity in
you against others, and others against you.

Death has disbanded you; easd you of your hellish and wrathful employment:
Reconciled you to all, and all to you; brought you from being Turkish
Janisaries, to be English men: You are disolved into a body of love; into GOD:
you lie down in the Eternal.

By this your arreares are paid; you are nothing, you are dead, and you can
require nothing; you, and your demands are fallen to the ground; your service
is dead, and nothing is due to it, but to be buried, and all your miscarriages,
in forgetfulness. Who do you require arreares of? The Kingdom is dead; the
sword reigns, and therefore the Kingdom is free: if you will be paid, take
blood, want, spoil, confusion, ruin; that is all that is left of the Kingdom;
pay your selves of that. Do you expect it of the Parliament? That is dead too.
Poor Parliament, you have eat it up your selves in greedines of pay, you tore
her bowels out; and you can have no more.

But all anger is past, there remains nothing but love: you are dead, and live
with Christ: come forth of your graves; stand up in the resurrection of Christ,
in union and fellowship with Christ. The Lords host; now the Lord is in you;
and you pitch your tents about the Lord; and are the arm of God, stretched out
for his own defense, and for the punishing of transgressors; living in the
strength and Spirit of the Lord: and now, mighty and powerful to execute
Divine pleasure: Now you are under the Captain of our salvation; and at once
interested in the salvation of the Nation; and of Christ, our Savior.

Now we can pay you arreares: you never stuck upon arreares till you sunk into
the earth, into poor earthly minds; rise you again into spirit, you will count
it your honor to help England freely: Money and a Savior, cannot subsist
together. That Spirit of Christ that once acted in you to let go the
prisoners, Englands freedom and justice, without price or reward; that spirit
shall revive in you: and then you will scorn to be mercenary.

I know you disdain to keep Englands wounds open to suck her blood: you have
hazarded your lives for justice and freedom, and cannot now insist upon pay:
you are worthy your selves, and have the worth of all with you: if you desire
pay enter with us into Ca^naan and you shall have Vinyards that you planted
not; wels that you diged not: A land flowing with milk and honey; such mercies
and blessings as you could not expect: The Lord is Judge, he will audite your
accounts, and pay all that he owes you: Religion flourishing in the purity of
it; peace and righteousness as Rivers and Seas; the sweet, holy unmolested
enjoyment, of your own families and estates, in the presence and under the
government of the most high: You shall now subsist in our bowels, be disolved
into the Church and Kingdom, which is the beloved of Christ; Terrible as an
Army with banners: terrible to the world and the God of the world; to the
prince of darkness: and so we shall disband you into spirit and power; the
whole Nation shall be Soldiers able to draw the sword of the Spirit against
all foreign power; amongst our selves wars shall cease from the earth: you must
beat your swords into plowshares, and spiers into pruming hooks: to your honest
trades again; there will need no Iron or steely wrath, but to plow up your own
hearts, and to cut down enemies within your own breasts. all our Towns and
Cities are garisoned with a heavenly host, and we have salvation for our walls
and bulwarks; we shall lie down in peace and none make in afraid: while we need
force we shall use you, but not in civil wars; you must be removed, and only
employed in service against strangers: if you delight to sit down by the still
streams of Englands peace, and feed in our green pastures of eternal love,
you shall: if your valor makes you desirous of military actions, we shall
find enemies abroad to employ your swords against: and when you under take
such expeditions the Lord shall go with you: you shall have Angels spirits
that shall make you invincible where ever you go.

The Levellers grew out of the Army, and are again shrunk into the Army, and
therefore we will now join you to the Army, being mingled together. In your
endeavor to impose your Democracy, your popular Government upon the Kingdom;
over-throwing and overturning all powers into the People: we hear the voice of
one crying in the Wilderness ( England is become a Wilderness) all flesh grass
(all power is corrupt) the Spirit of the Lord has blown upon it and its
withered: This is John Baptist that exalts the valies and brings down the hills:
he brings all into the waters the People; God is in these Levellers casting the
Mountains into the depths of the Seas, plunging all into a confused People; not
suffering one stone to lie upon another.

Thy place is to be in the Wilderness, and not to come into the City: to
expire and dye speedily, to decrease, that he that comes after may increase:
Thou art beheaded, thy devices are fallen to the ground: a mushrome, thou were
little, and art nothing. What went you out to see? A reed shaken with the
wined: growing out of the mire of the Nation: or a man clothed with soft
raiment? People got into Kings houses. In this state thou art vanished, lost,
and raised in the Spirit of Christ, the divine and eternal love of God: and in
this Kingdom there is a perfect Level: The People the original of the
Parliament and King, by a free giving up themselves and and their estates to
the Parliament and King, are in the King and Parliament, and fully partake of
the royalty and power of both, and are leveld with it: The People give honor
and glory to the King, and so higher then he, or he their Subject: He that
gives is greater then he that receives: here all the people are one with that
spirit that is kingly that Anointing that makes Christ King: and so called mine
Anointed living all in the liberty of that spirit that makes Kings: and are
most perfectly content in the Kings greatness, being that which themselves
constitute: making it themselves, they live in it and enjoy it: And the King is
levelled to the people by his sufferings or humiliations, and by his love
taking in every Subject to himself: humbling of himself, to be but the Kingdoms
Servant, and wearing his Crown only for the happiness and good of the people,
living together, and brought into one body, head, and member. The eternal love
is the Leveller, Divine Charity that lifts not up it self, but is lifted up;
and being lifted up, draws all after it.

I rejoice in the healing thy breaches, oh London, thou honorable City: Thy
iniquities have been great, there is a righteous one under them that will carry
them without the City as a escape Goat into the wilderness: we see the Lord in
thee in thy greatest filth; in thy violent enforcing powers above thee to thy
own mind, in constraining the Parliament to thy will, by bold petitions urged
with tumults: we see darkened and shadowed the intercession of the Son of God,
who with violence wrests from his Father favor for himself and his people: he
comes with boldness to take what he asks, and says, I will; and the power
that Saints have in Christ to command God in prayer. In thy siding with the
Parliament against the King, and thy free pouring forth thy self for her: We
see the excessive love of Christ to his Church, who is ravished with love, and
for her forgets all things else: In thy engrossing the riches of the Kingdom
into thee; thou art a shadow of Christ, who treasures up wealth and riches of
glory in the City of God for us.

But thy glory is gone, thy true life; the beautiful presence of God has left
thee; and thou art burning in flames of wrath, jealousies, envies, divisions:
thou art wasted into a sceleton; thy trade obstructed by Sea and Land; thy
People filled with rage; thy bowels pained with fierce contests of parties,
pulling various ways; quite restless; an unquiet Sea, in continual
agitation. The Lord dies in thee; the LORDS delight; thou were his Spouse: thy
glory and greatness, it was the LORDS; he suffers in thy suffering, and is
covered in thy ashes; lies under the burden of all thy wants; is pierced with
the necessities of the poor: And thou art in the dust of confusion; a ruinous
heap; the seat and place of vexation; lying in a thick cloud of darkness. But
his fire purifies thee; in these flames thou losest thy filthy pride,
coveteousnesse, malice, revenge, etc.

Thou shall not perish utterly; The voice of God is heard in thee to revive
thee: thou shall be built again: Thy foundations shall be all of precious
stones etc. The glory of God shall shine in thee: thou art now the City of God;
a Righteous City: this is thy name, The Lord is there: The Lord displaies his
glory in the midest of thee: The new Jerusalem indeed, in truth, in Spirit, in
perfect union with GOD; a heaven, and so in union amongst your selves; Peace
within thy walls, and plentiousnes in thy palaces: a City at unity in it self;
there shall not be the least found of discord in thee: Thy nature is love,
light and holiness; The City of the great King: made happy by the presence of
the King, and all the state and honor of the Kingdom: Now open thy arms of
Divine love, and take into thy embraces the glory of England: Kings, Princes,
Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Judges, Lawyers, with all the wisdom, justice,
power and excellency of heaven and earth; let all flock together; in one God,
one Christ, one Spirit; one City, and thousands of thousands of Saints and
Angels dwelling in thee. Nothing shall be heard in thee but mirth and joy in the
Lord our God; praises of the Great King: Open thy gates, thy everlasting doors,
that the King of glory, the Lord of Hosts, with all his host of Princly powers,
may enter in: And all the riches of the World shall flow into thee in thy trade,
naturally, and abundantly: the wealth of both Indies, and all parts, shall seek
unto thee, and offer up it self to satisfy thee: thou shall be crowned with
blessings; all contents and pleasures shall continually run dawn thy streets;
and all in the sight and face of the holy God; in the pure River of life.

Chap. XXI.
Of the admirable fulness and compleatnesse of this restoration, satisfying
all interests.

ALL the works of God are perfect, found out of all them that take pleasure
therein: The greatest and highest, are reserved for us, in this later, and
great day of God; wherein it pleases the LORD to appear in his fullest, and
most excellent glory: this of Englands salvation is a sweet bud of it; a little
taste of that infinite Majesty that is now breaking forth, in the glorious
appearing of God. In this business, the Lord satisfies his own Interest, who
is Alpha, and Omega; the first, and the last: and this is the rock of our
pleasure that thou art pleased, and satisfied.

Thou reignest, thou art King: this is thy due, all power and dominion is
thine; it is thy right to have all, all are thine, for thee they were created and
made, King, Parliament, Lords, Commons, Ministers, People, all sorts, all
sides, all parties are the Lords, and thou will reign over and in all: from Sea
to Sea, from one end of the Earth to the other, as lightening shining from East
to West: so is thy Kingdom; and thy glory is now due to thee, that thou
should appear not in weakness to serve men, but in thy great Majesty, in
thy highest honor thou must now show forth plainly thy self in thy utmost and
most enlarged goodness, power and wisdom: Nothing now will serve thee but to
be ALL IN ALL: To be All thou art in Heaven, in all the Earth, to bring forth
all thy riches to fill every creature, all glory in all things: Thou art all in
Earth as well as all in Heaven, all in King, in Parliament, in People, there is
nothing but thy self in these; thou art Bishops, Presbyters, Independents, all
these, and all in these; all Majesty, power, glory, justice, in the King; and
all the same in the Parliament, and all that too in the People: thou art all
the labor, strength* riches, freedom in the People, all this in the
Parliament, all the same in the King, all night and all lowness: Thou art all
wisdom, Authority, Government in Bishops; all care, zeal, labor in Presbyters;
all love, union, absoluteness in Independents: and all these in every one;
thou art the same in all, ALL IN ALL: All in darkness all in light, all in
weakness, all in strength: all that every part is, all the wholl is, all the
wholl in every part: and all Heaven, all Glory, all peace* all quietness, all
love, all goodness in all these parts and wholl: Less then this general and
near union and marriage will not satisfy thee; being thy self satisfied, thou
do satisfy all; and being pleased, thou please all: thy content, contents
every one, because thou art all: art content it self in all.

Thou have shaken all Nations, and the desire of all Nations is come: We have
been shaken into pieces, and every piece shaken out of all order and peace.
Thou art good that thou do but shake only; rends, that thou may make way
for thy self to enter, and for all to enter with thee into every part. What we
desire we have: we can desire nothing but the Lord: nothing is desirable but
the Lord; the Lord we have, and in the Lord we meet with every desirable
thing: the desire satisfied, which if a tree of life. God was our desire, which
is now interpreted; being brought forth into performance and enjoyment: God the
bottom, and top; the desire, and desired, meeting in one Spirit and Kingdom:
GOD the root in our desires grown up into the fruit, attainment.

The interest of this whole Kingdom, in this restoration, is satisfied; and
that consists in; First, PEACE; a sure Peace; a well grounded Peace: here you
have the richest jewel of peace that heaven has; the Peace of God: The union
and agreement of Father, Son and Spirit in one; this is our peace, and a well
grounded peace, settled and sure; that is lasting and durable; a threefold cord
that cannot be broken.

We are one with God, reconciled to God; we dwell together in the same house;
he has married us: one in God; one as God; one amongst our selves, as he is
one: All in the Father, the Head, the KING; all in the Son, the Body, the
Parliament: All in Spirit in combination; acting and living together in their
just and lafull rights; and in perfect fruit of righteousness, love and peace.

Secondly, The Nation desires SETTLEMENT, after her shakings, here is everlasting
Settlement, upon sure foundations; The sure mercies of David; upon the rock of
ages: he who was, is, and ever will be: those pillars upon which England stood,
made clear, and bright; and the Kingdom settled upon them: Now the world is
established in eternity, so that it cannot be moved.

Thirdly, The HONOR OF THE NATION: honored indeed; For glory does dwell in
our Land: our Nation now is the very throne and seat of Divine glory; a Royal
Nation; filled with Princely spirits: the Kingdom it self raisd from the grave
of lusts, luxury, coveteousnesse, oppression, baseness and beastliness, into
the nobleness and wisdom of the Spirit of God: England first brought forth
into that excellent and perfect righteousness, liberty and justice that shall
be a copy to other Nations; a Mother, that shall bring forth salvation to all
the earth.

Fourthly, The SETTLING OF RELIGION; of the true Orthodox, ancient Protestant
Religion; and the rooting out sects, herisies, popery: This does it completely
and fully. We now shall have sound doctrine, measured by the scriptures of
truth; the golden line of truth it self: truth derived from the bowels of
eternity: and constantly preserved and kept in the worst ages, free from
defilement; giving testimony of it self successively, in the darkest times; and
now breaking forth in undeniable, and indisputable authority and evidence: Not
pieces, but a whole body of Divinity; divinity it self; not in shadow, but the
body of it; not maimed, but entire and whole, from the highest head and glory
of God, to the lowest part of hell: and all the variety of estates, in Christ,
in Angels, in men; with their fallings and risings, descendings and ascendings,
fully and plainly brought forth. The Sun shall shine so clearly, as shall
discipate these mists of error that are amongst us; with such power as shall
compose the madness and disorder of peoples judgments, into a beautiful
Uniformity; by power of the Spirit of God, and in satisfaction to every mind.

Fifthly, Another Public interest is, LIBERTY from all oppressing powers: this
we have here restored; a glorious liberty; in which all English men shall live
under Authority as children, not servants nor slaves; some shall rule as
Fathers, others shall obey as Sons: Nothing but love, goodness, and
gentleness in both; both to command and obey, shall be sweet and delightful:
no Laws but the perfect Law of liberty, which the subject shall choose and
desire. A KING free and enlarged into the hearts and estates of his people;
living in all they are and have, and they pleased to have it all the Kings;
every one hating that which will not be the KINGS, and Common wealths; counting
that base and unworthy, that is not every ones as well as his own; and that
only to be rich, which is free for all: and so men free to part with, as well
as to enjoy; estates free as well as persons; and men not slaves to men, nor to
their wealth: no, not to propriety; which is the greatest bondage to serve them
selves and their own wealth: That Is true wealth, Common wealth.

And the People free, living in the bosom of the KING; in his authority and
greatness: they have a true right to it, as they have anything; Tbe Court is
their Fathers house; the Throne their own home; where every subject dwells, and
lives in the Kings honor and presence.

Sixthly, In this we have A RIGHT UNDERSTANDING between King and Parliament: The
wisdom of God to show us a way of peace; the true light shining from heaven
upon us: the night of our mistakes is past; The prince of darkness is thrown
down; and we are translated out of a kingdom of darkness, into the Kingdom
of God; in which we shall always have the true wisdom to guide us.

Seventhly, Here likewise have we AN ACT OF OBLIVION; whereby all
transgressions are blotted out; all carried in to the depth of the Sea: where
sin, if it be sought for, it shall not be found: such a fulness of pleasure
and satisfaction as will not admits a thought of revenge; if we shall remember
past things, it will be with joy and thanks to each other; for in ^^rting, we
have saved one another: wherein we have done evil to any, it is turned to
their good; The KING will thank the Parliament for rising against him; and the
Parliament thank the KING for leaving of them: There is GOD, and perfect good
in all that every party has suffered.

HAPPINESS it self; England now has a confluence of the riches of Heaven and
Earth in one blessedness: England; a glorious Land; the Land of God; abounding
in store, trade, justice, peace, amity. We are fallen, but (as has been
expected) We RISE AS ONE MAN: England acted by one head, one spirit, is become
one man: every one loving another as himself; and rising against the COMMON
ENEMY, the Devil, the destroyer; who is, and has been our only enemy; we hate
none but him: and by this RISING, we free our selves from him.

As this satisfies the public, so every particular interest, or all interests
are here satisfied, and brought into one interest, which is the true nature of
an interest; to be in others a joint, or common subsistence: every part made
clean and right, and so inter-weaved into one entire garment; which is the
excellency of Divine works, they are large and save all; that's a humane and
devilish design, that saves one by the ruin of another; but that is Gods way
to save all so, as the salvation of one is the salvation of another: Now here
you see all contented.

The KING (as all have sworn and prayed) advanced into honor and greatness;
freed from prison from chains of darkness wherein he has been held; brought
out of a low dungeon of wrath and heavy affliction, to the highest Throne of
Majesty: Person, and Office restored from blackness and foulness, to splendour
and brightness, into the Majesty of God: and that performed which the
Parliament often promised, A GLORIOUS KING; a KING in the glory of God; or the
glorious God; the Immortal KING Reigning in man, and over men: Sir, this is
your true interest; it is your life and soul; I know it is your heart, though yet
lying hid: It Is the Key will unlock your spirit, and bring it out into the light
and liberty of God; unlock your understanding, after seven times have passed
over you, you shall return to your Throne, and true Majesty shall be given to
you; and your Nobles and Kingdoms shall honor you; all shall freely bow to
you; and you shall command and Reign again, to the terror of your
adversaries, and joy of your friends: now the prison doors stand open to you,
and you shall return to your Royal Parliament and City after seven years
banishment.

We have now a King in whom we can confide* as in God; now the LORD lives in
him it is impiety and wickedness to have a thought of distrust concerning him;
the sure justice and righteousness of God inhabits in the Throne, as its
proper place.

We have a King according to our own hearts; he lives in our hearts; arises
out of our hearts; and our hearts give him his dominion: he has all we have,
and has not too much, because he has us too; and nothing but what we freely
give: one higher by the head then all the People: having the wisdom of the
whole in him; of the largest understanding, and therefore King because he does
in true worth excel any in the Nation, and is of all men fittest to reign:
fitted by his great suffering, and Gods fullness dwelling in him.

This is the QVEENS interest she may return to the King, there is no fear now,
she cannot hurt either Parliament or Religion both being in such a condition as
cannot be hurt: besides living in this light, of all she shall most love the
Parliament; it being the same with her self the Kings Consort, and she being
the same with it, concurring together in several ways to help, and honor the
King: if she should attempt any thing against it, it would be against the King
and her self.

The Parliament administering about the affairs of the kingdom, that the King
may enjoy his Queen and Family with greatest plenty, honor, ease and pleasure:
and the Queen administering in the domestical affairs of the King about his
Person, that the king may enjoy his Parliament and people in greatest content
and freedom: The Parliament in business of State, a Queen lying in the bosom
of the king; and the Queen in private and personal affairs a Parliament: and
so Parliament and Queen interested, joynd in one interest; And for her religion
we are now so far from being afraid of it, that we rejoice in it, and in her
great interest in the Papacy: For as the Papists had by her designs upon us:
so now (the stream being turned) we shall by her design upon them, and
over-runne the whole Papacy with light and truth, she shall be the door by
which we shall enter into all the riches and honors of the Papacy, and
without injury to them, we shall spoil them of all their glory, or rather bring
a glorious fire amongst them, that shall outshine theirs; and burn up theirs
into it self.

The PRINCE his Interest is here satisfied, he is indeed one with the
Parliament; they and he are brethren descended both from the loins of the king,
and are one in various forms: each being the glory of the king, and the staff
of his age, Christened at the same Font the Spirit of Christ: both the hope and
joy of England, both being the glory of the King, propagated unto eternity, a
never failing offspring, and flourishing in the vigor and youthfulness of
the Son of God: both interested into Christ, or the interest of Christ, and so
of each other. The LORDS who have lost their Nobility, sunck in disgrace,
scattered, and almost buried in dishonor: by this shall be restored, not to
airy empty Titles, but to true Nobility: The Lord does appear Lord of Lords:
your Lord, owning Lordlinesse and filling of it with himself, as well as king
of kings, and as he sets a Crown of pure gold upon the head of the King: so
Coronets of pure Gold upon yours, you shall shine as stars in this Firmament,
in wisdom, holiness, justice and goodness, and be in affinity to the King;
that head ennobled with heavenly Majesty, fit to be about the Throne, and
advanced to be the shoulders and breast of the Nation, next the head.

The Kings party are here fully satisfied: to see their King restored to the
honor and greatness of his Ancestors, his Progenitors: which is into the
glory of God the great king, the Kings true Father: They that contend for
KNOWN LAWS, by this the Laws are known by God, brought out of the dust of the
earth in which they were trampled upon and restored into the brightness and
life of God: And now we shall see the whole body of the English Laws
interpreted and opened to us by the wisdom of God, and all drawn forth into
life and power by the Spirit of God, as we see the fundament all Law of King
and Parliament written in the face of God and Christ by the Spirit.

You shall have Religion in the OLD WAY; in the good old way: DIVINE SERVICE;
wherein every part of it shall be irradiated with the Beams of Divinity, and in
every thing you shall see the Face of God, and have fellowship with the Divine
Nature: Religion shall be adorned with Solemnity, State, Pomp, Glory, Ease,
Music, all Heavenly and Earthly together, such as may allure and please the
minds of men, and there shall be nothing harsh or rude in it: yea, rudeness
it self shall have its comeliness. You shall have your sports, pleasures, we
will sing together in the hight of Zion: young men and maids dance together
without offense or iniquity, all in the innocence, holiness and joy of God:
your whole life a course of pleasure; all things* yea labor and pains shall be
recreations: God recreating all things, or making all things new, they shall be
sweet and delightful: you shall have your Holy Days: yea, your whole life
shall be spent in holy days, a continual rest, the great Jubilee.

You the more civil and solid of that party, that sincke into a retired
condition in these tempestuous times, that lie quietly and patiently in your
graves of your own and the Kindomes sufferings; your resurrection is come, and
you shall revive, and in a new spirit act for, and in the prosperity of the
Nation.

And you mad Lads shall SWEAR: Now the Lord lives in truth, righteousness,
and judgment, and know him present with you; swear by the eternal God, the
Spirit filling every oath with truth: you shall curse your enemy the Devil with
all plagues to the pit of hell, and so dam him and ram him in, that he shall no
more come forth to trouble you: you shall eat and drink freely, and forget
your selves and your sorrow, and in it be filled with the Spirit of the Lord:
be raisd into high mirth and jollity, drink so freely of this new wine of the
kingdom, till you are drunk out of your own wits into the Princely Spirit of
God, and then ever speak and act things of love, worth, bravery and excellency:
This is the KINGS HEALTH his saving health, his union with God, God with him,
drink of this health freely: and the whole Kingdom shall PLEDGE; be bound to
fill it again, and drink down this heavenly liquor of the Majesty of God in the
King into them: and the whole people shall say, and see it performed, GOD SAVE
THE KING: The King is saved in God: and God the salvation of the king.

This restoration fully satisfies the Parliaments Interest, gives her high
PRIVILEGES: She is called to an honorable state to live in the Lord Christ,
to sit with Christ in heavenly places, to be one with the Son, the body of God:
to be Jerusalem above the mother of us all; and therefore FREE, free with God,
and in God with the King: freedom to enter into his heart and bosom, to lie
there continually: The king shall greatly desire thy beauty: Thou now have
POWER as well as liberty, to make Righteous Laws in perfect Righteousness
that shall stand for ever: such a King and such a Parliament as we have long
begged, to agree together in just things: and in both we shall reap the fruit of
our prayers; which though they were sowed in weakness, and now seem dead and
rotting in the earth, yet shall rise in power.

The great Interest of the Parliament, the COVENANT is here fully satisfied:
The end that we looked upon, HAVING THE GLORY OF GOD IN OUR EYES: that glory is
now manifest: God in glory. All Popery, etc. rooted out and the root of it,
Satan; a through and perfect REFORMATION. God once formed the Kingdom after
himself in his own likeness, in which it corrupted, he has taken down the
old form, and sets up a new; reformes us in State and Church: now we shall
have doctrine and discipline, according to the WORD OF GOD; the true and eternal
Word; the Word it self brought forth: and according to the example of the BEST
REFORMED CHURCH, The general assembly in heaven etc. We have the KING in
honor; the KINGDOMS, heavenly and earthly UNITED; and a strong bond that will
bind these three, and all the Kingdoms of the earth in one life, law and
peace. By this THE POWER OF GODLINESS is set up; Godliness, likeness of God; in
Spirit, in Power; or God himself: all things else being but a form. We have
here PROPRIETY, God, our own God; we restored to him, and he to us; his own
Vineyard: Every one shall enjoy what he has in peace; and coveteousnesse, the
root of oppression destroyed: every one shall have enough; every one shall be
satisfied; have so much as he has ability to bear: and others shall freely
part with that which has been burdensome to them selves; none have more then
they want, and all that they want; all in such a condition, place, office, as
they are fit for, as they are capable of: Every one having a mind to his
condition, and a condition to his mind; every one by Divine wisdom so
disposed as he shall rest in it, and not move after others; there being no
discontent but in hell, which is in perpetual motion after every thing and
attains to nothing.

THE LORD SHALL BE ONE, AND HIS NAME ONE in both Kingdoms: There is now but
one LORD; all gathered into Christ; he is LORD indeed; and his name written
upon every thing in Church and State; nothing but the Lord spoken and done
amongst us: in heaven and earth, in England and Scotland: The Spirit of the
Lord running through these Kingdoms, and through all persons in it, ruling
over all in, and by himself; the whole shall be called by this Name, The Lord;
and so not only one man, but one Lord; there being nothing but the glory and
righteousness of the Lord amongst us.

This is that which we have desired, and attempted, to set up THE KINGDOM OF
CHRIST, THE REIGN OE THE SAINTS; The holy God, holy Christ, holy Spirit, with
holy men and Angels, Reigning together.

This rich LO RD, filling all Magistracy with justice, all People with love,
our Ministry with truth, our hearts with heavenly joy, all our Laws with life
and light, our Cities with unity and wealth, our Villages with plenty, our
Families with content, our Persons with happiness, our King especially with
honor, glory, safety, ease of heart, clearness of understanding, a sweet
enjoyment of his Queen and Children: the Parliament, LORDS and COMMONS, with
perfect agreement, majesty, goodness, love of the King and peoples prosperity.

This is a true PERSONAL TREATY, wherein King and Parliament and all the people
are together one person, one body, living in one Spirit.

Thus the Lord is Englands desire, and Englands joy; him we sought for, him we
find. God gives us all that we desired, and more then we could ask or think
of, and that too in a more excellent way then we could imagine. It Is the Lords
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: It Is the day of the Lord, we will rejoice
and be glad in it. It Is thy self O God, Englands life and soul; and England is
thy delight, thy firstborn of all the Nations of the earth: It Is thy self, out
savior and salvation: It Is thy justice has took vengeance upon our inventions,
and saved in that vengeance: It Is thy power triumphing in our weakness; thy
mercy rejoices in our deliverance; thy wisdom shines forth: that brings light
out of darkness; turns mourning into rejoicing; makes our Tragedy end in a
Comedy: a seasonable deliverance, now when all miseries and destructions are
met together in our bowels, a clear Sun to break forth of a sudden, out of
such blackensse of darkness as covered us.

Thou have carried us through death to life; yea, through thy own death to thy
own life: It Is by blood we are saved, by the blood of Christ. Thou have done
all things well, thy works are all excellent and perfect.

Let the People praise thee, O God; yea let all the People praise THEE.

FINIS.
Poscript.
THese are the Leaves of the tree of Life; that will give a new life to this
Nation; and will heal all her deadly maladies: but the leaves, not the fruit;
yet effectual: It Is written here weakly, it shall be mighty in operation:
imperfectly expressed now, but fully, and accurately, will it write forth it
self in action. It Is death to resist them; The rebellious do dwell in a dry
land, in hell: Particular persons may be confounded, the Nation is the Lords and
shall be recovered; he that opposes, all the evils of the Kingdom shall
gather into his heart; and he shall be the common shore into which the Nation
shall empty forth all ber plagues; wrath and destruction leave the Kingdom,
and dwell there; thou shall cease tormenting the Nation, and torment them that
resist: You see the Leaves, I know you desire the Fruit: that is indeeed the
life of all; you shall speedily enjoy it: all the glory and happiness of this
Nation beer expressed, and of all the Nations of the earth and heaven too,
shall, in its highest perfection, dwell in every particular soul: This, and
every piece of it, and more ten thousand times then this, shall in the purest
and fullest glory of Father, Son and Spirit, Grown every Saint; and fill his
soul, body, relations, calling, business, recreation, and all; with the
Righteousness and Light of Heaven; and the Face of God.

Errata.
Page 2. line 21. for were read wear. p. 16. l. 25. for Mame r. Name. p. 45.
l. 2. for see and their r. see their. p. 55. l. 16. for Mation r. Nation. l.
22. for them selves and families r. himself and family. p. 57. for Chap. 11. r.
Chap. 13. p. 81. l. last, for a second r. as a second. p. 82. l. 29. for dody
r. body. p. 88. 13. for stall r. shall.

The Contents.
CHAPTER, I. Showing the happy and flourishing condition in which the kingdom
of England once stood, and the ground of it. page 1. CHAP. II. Showing the
kingdom of England in its corrupt and declining estate. page 6. CHAP. III.
Showing the kings errors. page 10 CHAP. V. Showing the Parliaments errors.
page 18 CHAP. VI. Showing the judgment upon the Parliament. page 26 CHAP. VII.
Showing the sin and punishment of the People of both parties. page 29 CHAP.
VIII. Showing the wickdnesse of the Ministry, or Clergy, and their judgment.
page 32 CHAP. IX. Showing the iniquity of the Army, and its judgment. page 39
CHAP. X. Showing the state of the Levellers. page 45 CHAP. XI. Showing the
judgment of the City of London. page 47 CHAP. XII. Showing the
irrecoverablenesse of Englands ruin by humane ways. page 50 CHAP. XIII.
Showing the method of God in curing the Nation. (viz.) first, to take our sin
upon himself. page 57 CHAP. XIV. Of the second thing in saving of the Nation:
The death of Christ, and our fellowship in it. page 62 CHAP. XV. Of the
complete cure of the Nation, showing it in its raised state; and particularly
the king. page 69 CHAP. XVI. Of the Parliament in its raised estate. page 74
CHAP. XVII. Of the perfect union betwixt king and Parliament, and by them with
his People; in this new and raised estate. page 76 CHAP XVIII. Of the cure of
the people of the Land by this death and resurrection. page 87 CHAP. XIX. The
restoration of the Ministry, by Christ's bearing their sin, and by his death
and resurrection. page 90 CHAP. XX. Of the restoration of the Army, Levellers,
and City of London. page 97 CHAP. XXI. Of the admirable fullness of this
restoration, satisfying all Interests.
FINIS.

