THE ANATOMY Of Secret Sins, Presumptuous Sins, Sins in Dominion, and
Vprightness.

WHEREIN Diverse weighty Cases are resolved in Relation to all those
Particulars: Delivered in diverse SERMONS preached at Mildreds in Bread-street
London, on PSALM 19. 12, 13.

TOGETHER With the Remissibleness of All Sin, and the Irremissibleness of the
SIN against the HOLY GHOST Preached before an Honorable AUDITORY.

By that Reverend and Faithful MINISTER of the Gospel, Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick,
B. D.

Perfected by Himself, and published by those whom he entrusted with his NOTES.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Adoniram Byfeild at the sign of the three Bibles
in Cornhill near Pope's Head Alley; Anno 1660.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE Name of the Reverend Author of this Work, will commend it to the
Acceptance of them all, who were either acquainted with his Ministry, or have
attentively perused his Treatises formerly published. He was a Work man who
needed not to be ashamed: As the matter of his Discourses was solid and
profitable, so his language was pregnant and delightful, both which took much
upon his gracious and ingenuous Auditors. This is to be acknowledged a great
abatement of the Churches loss by his death, that though he be dead, he yet
speaks from the Press by the useful Treatises left written by his own hand,
which through Gods Mercy, may prove rich blessings unto posterity, by edifying
Christians in Grace and Comfort. As the reasonable immortal soul is the more
noble part of man, so supernatural Grace does truly ennoble it by introducing
the likeness and life of God. This Grace which is The good work Phil. 1. 6.
The good and perfect gift of God Jam. 1. 17.
may be promoted both in its habit and exercise, by such helps as this, which
Divine Providence puts into thy hand. And therefore since sanctifying Grace
(which is the strength, beauty, riches of the soul, and the best thing on this
side Christ himself, From whose fullness we all do receive Grace for Grace John
1. 16.
) is wrought, preserved, enlarged, and quickened by these means, they should be
gladly welcomed, and diligently improved by all serious sincere Christians. And
whereas Humility and Sincerity are Graces eminently excellent, and useful
throughout the whole course of Christianity rendering every other grace, and
every duty the more lovely and acceptable. Helps in both these thou may
expect from this ensuing Treatise. The Text here handled does hold forth at the
first view, both Sinfulness and Uprightness of Gods servants: Their sinfulness
bitterly bewailed, and their uprightness seriously designed; whence we have The
Anatomy of secret sins, Presumptuous sins, Sins in Dominion, and of Uprightness.

Every self considering Christian does see so much sin in his heart and life,
that he is abased under the Burden Psalm. 38. 4.
of it; how heavy then is this thought upon his heart, that there are many
thousands of secret unseen Errors chargeable upon him by the All-knowing
heart-searching God. And yet this adds further load unto the burdned Spirit,
that besides his former guiltiness of, and inclination to presumptuous sins,
(things heinous and horrid) the seeds also of that unpardonable sin (the
thoughts whereof are amazing and dreadful to every Gracious heart) do lie and
live in his depraved nature. These particulars are here largely and
convincingly discoursed of, by means whereof the secure sinner may be well
awakened, and the proud heart deeply humbled. What examples of Bitter Mourning
1 Samuel 7. 6.
, self-loathing Ezekiel. 36. 31.
, and lamentable outcries Romans 7. 24.
, upon this account are recorded in the holy Scriptures. How needful and
seasonable this too much neglected Endeavor would be in these loose lukewarm
times, might easily be manifested. The manifold precious Benefits of this
practice may persuade it; Besides, Divine Acceptance Psalm. 51. 17
and familiar Communion, Isa 57. 16. and 66. 2.
together with many rich Promises hereby possessed. By means hereof the soul
will patiently submit to Gods Afflicting hand 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6; 7. Job 22. 29.
Lev 26. 41. Mic. 7. 9.
, and seriously set upon real Reformation 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11.
: Thus Christ will become much more precious and sweet unto the soul 1 Timothy 1
12, 13, 15. Romans 7 24, 25.
; And as we shall be made more Meek in our deportment toward all, so more
peculiarly compassionate toward Bleeding, Repenting sinners Tit. 3. 2, 3.
, viewing the number and heinousness of our own Irregularities, considering how
much we our selves do still lie under Sins Dominion Rom 7. 18 19 21, 23
, with the guilt of some presumptuous Iniquities Mat. 26. 75
.

Good Reader, thou shall not only be thus edified in Humility (his Product of
sins discovery) but in Sincerity also by that which follows in the Anatomy of
Uprightness. Inexpressible are the Comforts which come into the soul by
clearing up its Sincerity from Scripture evidence. If there be a Messenger an
Interpreter, one of a thousand to show unto man his Uprightness, John. 33 23,
and.
then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the
pit; I have found a Ransom, his flesh shall be fresher then a Child; And for
the Enjoyment of satisfaction out of Gods All Sufficiency is assured in the
Covenant of Grace unto upright walking with his Majesty Genesis 17. 1.
. Herein consists Gods image in man Eccl. 7. 26
which is his fairest beauty, and his greatest Glory. The imperfect
performances of the Sincere, do not only find Acceptance 2 Chro. 30. 28, 19. 20.
, but Delight in the Lord Pro. 15. 8.
; unto them he will not deny either Grace or Glory, or any thing may be truly
Good Psalm. 84. 11
; and notwithstanding the saddest dispensations imaginable, God will be
constantly and superlatively good unto them Psalm. 73. 1.
: How bad soever they be in their own eyes, yet they are perfect in Gods
Account Ps. 37. 37.
; and they may always rejoice with Thanksgiving before the Lord, and with
gladsome Boldness Psalm. 33. 1.
: look Pale death it self in the face when it does approach 2 Cor. 1. 22
. But we will not enlarge our selves in these matters, contenting our selves
with these short hints suggested to give thee a taste of that sweet fruit which
thou may expect to reap by the careful perusal of this very savory useful
Book, which we commend to thy Improvement, and thy self therein to the Blessing
of the Almighty, through Jesus Christ, in whom, and for whom, we are

September. 1. 1659. Thy faithful friends and servants, Humphrey Chambers,
Edmund Calamy, Simeon Ash, Adoniram Byfeild.


THE Anatomy OF SECRET SINS:
PSALM 19. 12. Who can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secrets: or
from secret sins, or faults.
SAint Chrysostom conjectures that the maine intention of the greatest part of
this Psalm consists in the discovery of divine providence, which manifests it
self in the motions and courses of the heavenly bodies, concerning which the
Psalmist speaks much, from v. 1. to the 7. Saint Austine (upon the place) is
of a quite different opinion, who conjectures that Christ is the whole subject
of this Psalm: whose person is compared to the Sun for excellency and
beauty, and the course of whose doctrine was dispersed round about the world by
his Apostles, to which Saint Paul alludes, (Romans 10. 18. Have they not heard,
yes, verily their sound went into all the earth, etc.) and the efficacy of
whose Gospel is like the heat of the Sun, which pierces into the very heart
of the earth, so that into the secrets of the soul.

I confess this allegorical exposition, is not altogether impertinent, neither
is that literal Exposition of Saint Chrysostom to be blamed, for it has its
weight.

But to omit all variety of conjectures, this Psalm contains in it. The
contents of the Psalm. A double knowledge of God by the book of the creature.


A double kind of the knowledge of God, of which one is by the book of the
Creature; and this Divines call a natural knowledge: there is not any one
creature, but it is a leaf written all over with the description of God, his
Eternal power and Godhead may be understood by the things that are seen, says
the Apostle, Romans 1. 20. And as every creature, so especially the Heavens do
lead us to the knowledge of a God: so v. 1. of this Psalm: The Heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work: they are the
Theaters as it were, of his wisdom, and power, and glory.

Another is by the book of Scripture: And this knowledge The book of the
Scripture.
is far more distinct and explicit: with the other, even the Heathens do grope
after a Deity, but with this, Christians do behold God as it were with open
face: The Characters here are now fresh, spiritual, complete, and lively: The
Word of God is the singular means to know God aright: Look as the light which
comes from the Sun, so that Word of God, which is light, is the clearest way
to know God who is light it self. Hence it is that the Psalmist stands much
upon this, from v. 7. to v. 12. where he sets open the words in its several
encomiums and operations, viz. in its perfection, its certainties, and
firmness; its righteousness, and purity, and truth, and then in its efficacy:
That it is a converting word, an illightning word, an instructing word, a
rejoicing word, a desirable word, a warning word, and a rewarding word.

2. A singular and experimental knowledge of himself, so it The experimental
knowledge of himself.
seems that that word, which David did so much commend, he did commend it
from an experimental efficacy; he had found it to be a righteous, and holy, and
pure, and discovering word, laying open, not only visible and gross
transgressions, but also like the light of the Sun; Those otherwise
inobserved and secret atoms of senses flying within the house, I mean in the
secret Chambers of the soul.

Now in this there are two things which the Psalmist sets The parts of the Text.
down.

1. A sad complaint of his ignorance, [who can understand his A sad complaint
of his ignorance.
errors?] As Paul in his case spoke, the Law is holy, and just, and good, and
spiritual, but I am sold under sin, Romans 7. 12, 14. so David here, the Law of
the Lord is pure, and righteous, and perfect, but I am very sinful; many sins I
see in my self, and more there are which I cannot espy, I cannot find them out,
nay, I think says he, every man's sins do arise beyond his accounts, he cannot
give a full and entire list of them, who can und^rstand his errors.

2. An earnest request, and that for three things. An earnest request. To be
cleansed from secret sins.


One is to be cleansed from secret sins, which words some expound that he
desires to be pardoned, not only his known, but also his unknown sin; Yet
others conjecture that his desire reaches to sanctification, which might
prevail not only against open, but the private and closer methods of sinning.

2. Another is to be kept from presumptuous sins, v. 13. Saint To be kept from
presumptuous sins.
Austin and others read it, a superbiis contine servum tuum, keep back thy
servant from prides. I think their reason is because, 1. Pride is a bold and
presuming sin. 2. And it is that which is the maine ingredient of a
presumptuous kind of sinning: even good men have the root of high
transgressions within them, into which they may fall, If corruption might have
its swinge; and if they do not fall into them, it is not because they are able
alone to keep themselves, but because God does by his spirit of grace keep them
back.

3. A third is, the ordering of his words and thoughts, which he The ordering
of his words and thoughts.
desires might be so composed, that they might be always acceptable in the
sight of God, v. 14. as if he had said, O Lord, I do not only desire to be kept
from the viler ways of sin, but from all whatsoever, I would not only not be
wicked, but I pray thee that I may be good: As I would not do evil, so I would
not speak evil, nay as I would not speak, so I would not think evil, I desire
to be so, as that I may be acceptable before thee; I desire to do, as that I
may be acceptable with thee; I desire to speak so, as that I may be accepted:
yea and I desire to think so, that I may be acceptable in thy sight.

In my poor Conjecture you have in David here a lively copy of an upright
heart, which is truly plain all over, and pitcheth upon this, that it may be
acceptable with God, and that it may be so, it would be wrinsed of all sins,
not only notorious and visible, but invisible and secret, and it would have not
only an outward decency of religion in pious actions, but also an inward
conformity even of the very thoughts and Meditations of the heart.

I shall not speak of David's complaint, v. 13. who can understand his errors?
only a word and a way.

By errors, he means his unwitting, and inconsiderate mistakes: What is meant
by errors.
There are sins, some which are committed when the Sun shines (i.) with light
and knowledge, and then as it is with colors when the Sun shines, you may
see them, so these a man can see and know, and confess them particularly to be
transgressions: there are other sins, which are committed either in the times
of ignorance, or else (if there be knowledge) yet with inobservance: either of
these may be so heaped up in the particular number of them, that as a man did
(when he did Commit them) take no notice of them, so now after the commission,
if he should take the brightest candle to search all the records of his soul,
yet many of them would escape his notice. And indeed this is a great part of
our misery that we cannot understand all our debts: we can easily see too many,
yet many more lie as it were dead, and out of sight; To sin is one great
misery, and then to forget our sins is a misery too: If in repentance we could
set the battle in array, point to every individual sin, in the true and
particular times of acting and re-acting, O how would our hearts be more broken
with shame and sorrow, and how would we adore the richness of the treasure of
mercy which must have a multitude in it, to pardon the multitude of our
infinite errors and sins.

But this is the comfort, though we cannot understand every particular sin, or
time of sinning, yet if we be not idle to search and cast over the books; and
if we be heartily grieved for those sins which we have found out, and can by
true repentance, turn from them unto God, and by faith, unto the blood of Jesus
Christ, I say, that God, who knows our sins better then we know them; and who
understands the true intentions and dispositions of the heart, that if it did
see the unknown sins, it would be answerably carried against them; He will for
his own mercy sake forgive them; and he too will not remember them.
Nevertheless, though David says, who can understand his errors? as the Prophet
Jeremiah spoke also, The heart of man is desperately wicked, who can know it?
yet must we bestir our selves at heaven to get more and more heavenly light to
find out more and more of our sinnings: So the Lord can search the heart: And
though we shall never be able to find out all our sins which we have
committed, yet it is possible, and beneficial for us to find out yet more sins
then yet we do know: And you shall find these in your own experience, that as
soon as ever grace entered your hearts, you saw sin in another way then ever you
saw it before, yea, and the more grace has traversed and increased in the
soul, the more full discoveries has it made of sins: It has shown new sins
as it were, new sins, not for their being, not as if they were not in the heart
and life before, but for their evidence, and our apprehension and feeling: we
do now see such wages, and such inclinations to be sinful which we did not
think to be so before: As physic brings those humors which had their Simile.
residence before, now more to the sense of the Patient: or as the Sun makes
open the motes of dust which were in the room before, so does the light of the
word discover more corruption.

But I pass by that point of the impossibility of a full apprehension of all
sins committed ignorantly, and inconsiderately.

I now proceed from David's complaint to David's request, David's request
and here I shall speak of his first Request, viz. Cleanse thou me from
secrets, or secret sins. Saint Austin upon the words, Ab occultis meis munda me
domine, expresses it thus, A cupiditatibus in me latentibus munda noe: (i.)
from those concupiscences which lie so hid, and so close, and so private within
me: O Lord cleanse thou me, And in his second exposition of this Psalm (for he
expounded the Psalm twice) Tolle-ex cord maelam cogitationem, (i.) O Lord take
out of my very heart even the sinful thoughts.

I will name the Proposition, and then we may perhaps open things more fully.

CHAP. I.
IT is the desire of an holy person to be cleansed, not only from public, but
also from private and secret It is the desire of a holy person to be cleansed
from secret faults.
sins, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man (says Paul) who shall deliver me? Why, O
blessed Apostle! what is it that holds thee? what is it that molests thee? thy
life, thou say, was unblamable before thy conversion, and since thy
conversion, Phil 3. Thou have exercised thy self to have a conscience void of
offense, toward God and toward men, Acts 24. 16. And yet thou criest out, O
wretched man, and yet thou complainest, who shall deliver me? Verily brethren,
it was not sin abroad, but at home, it was not sin without, but (at this time)
sin within, it was not Paul's sinning with man, but Paul's sinning within Paul, O
that Law of his members, warring (secretly within him) against the Law of his
mind, This, this made that holy man so to cry out, so to complain: As Rebekah
was weary of her life, not as we read for any foreign disquietments, but
because of domestique troubles, the daughters of Heth within the house, made
her weary of her life: so the private and secret birth of corruption within
Paul, the workings of that, that was the cause of his trouble, that was the
ground of his exclamation and desires, who shall deliver me? I remember that
the same Paul advises the Ephesians as to put of the former Conversation, so
to put on the renewed spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23. intimating that
there are sins which are lurking within, as well as sins walking without; and
that true Christians must not only sweep the door, but wash the Chamber, my
meaning is not only come off from sins which lie open in the Conversation, but
also labor to be cleansed from sins and sinning, which remain secret, and
hidden in the Spirit and inward disposition.

Now for the beneficial discovery of this assertion, let us enquire four things.

1. In what respects sins are called secret? 2. What it is to be cleansed? 3.
Why we are to desire a cleansing from them? 4. What of all this to us?
SECT. I.
1. IN what respect sins are called secret? for the resolution In what
respect sins are called secret.
of this know, that sin has a double reference.

Either to God, and so really no sin, nor manner of sinning Not to God.
is secret, Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him?
says the Lord, do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. it
is true, that wicked men with an Atheistical folly imagine to hide themselves,
and their sinful ways from God, they seek deep to hide their Council from the
Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who
knows us, Isa. 29. 15. But really it is not so, though the cloud may somewhat
eclipse the light of the Sun, and though the dark night may shut it forth
altogether, yet there stands no cloud, nor curtain, nor moment of darkness or
secrecy 'twixt the eyes of God and the ways of man: The ways of a man are
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5. 21. He
speaks principally there of the ways of the adulterer which usually are
plotted with the most cunning secrecy, yet God sees all those ways, so Heb.
4. 13. There is not any Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked, and opened (Anatomized) even to the eyes of him with whom we
have to do. Not a creature, not a thing, not any thing of any creature, but it
is naked, it is without all fig leaves, it is uncased of his colors and
pretenses, ye it is opened as it were unbowelled, cut into distinct pieces, the
very inside of it turned out to the eyes of God.

O^ to man, and thus indeed comes in the division of sin into, But to man.
1. open: and 2. secret: Now in this respect sin may be Termed secret dive^sly.

1. In respect of the person sinning: when his very sinning is (formally
considered) hidden from himself (^.) he does a In respect of the person sining.
thing which is really sinful, but to him it is not Apprehensively so what
outrages did Paul breath out against the Church in times of his Ignorace which
he did not know to be acts of sin, but thought to be motions of a warrantable
zeal; In this sense all the obliquities which may be fastened, at least, upon
Invincible Ignor^nce, may be sti^ed secret sinners.

2. In r^spect of the manner of sining, and thus sins may be Termed In respect
of the manner of sining.
secret.

Either, 1. When they are colored and disguised, though they do fly abroad,
get not under that name, but apparelied with When colored and disguised.
some semblances of virtues: Cyprian complains of such tricks in his second
Epistle which is to Donatus.

2. When they are kept off from the stage of the world, they When kept off from
the eye of the world.
are like fire in the Chimney, though you do not see it, yet it barnes: so many
a person, like those in Ezekiel, Commit abominations in secret: (i) so as the
Public eye is not upon them: He is sinful, and acts it with the greatest
vileness, All the difference twixt another sinner and him, is this; that he is,
and the other says, he is a sinner; just as twixt a book shut, and a book
opened; that which is shut, has the same lines and words, but the other being
opened, every man may see and read them.

3. When they are kept, not only from a public Eye, But from any mortal Eye:
(i.) The carnal Eye of him who Commits When kept from the eye of him that
commits it.
the sins sees them not, He does indeed see them with the eye of Conscience
but not with an eye of natural sense: even those persons with whom he does
converse, and who highly commend the frame of his ways, cannot yet see the
secret discoursings and actings of sin in his mind and heart: for Brethren,
all the actings of sin are not without, they are not visible, but there are
some, yea the most dangerous actings within the soul: where corruption lies as
a fountain and root. The Heart of man is A scheme of wickedness, nay, a man
says that in his heart, which he dares not speak with his tongue, and his
thought will do that which his hands dare not to execute, well then sin may be
called secret, when it is sin, and acted as sin, even there, where none but God
and Conscience can see; me thinks sin is like a Candle in a Lauterne where the
shining is first within, and then bursting out at the windows: or like Boyls
and ulcerous Humors which are scabbes and scurvy stuff, first within the skin,
and afterward they break out to the veiw on the outside, so it is with sin,
it is a malignant Humor, and a fretting leprosy, diffusing it self into
several secret acts and workings within the mind, and then it breaks abroad
and dares adventure the practice of it self to the eye of the world, and be
it, that it may never see the light, that it may be like a Child born and
buried in the womb, yet as that Child is a man, a true man there clossetted in
that hidden frame of nature, so sin is truly sin; though it never it gets out
beyond the womb which did conceive and enliven it.

Now whether David does speak of secret sins in opposition to the eyes of men,
or to his own sensible eye, (i.) such as currupt Nature did commit within his
own heart; or whether he intends it of both? it may be much disputed: for my
part I conjecture that it may be understood both of such which he might commit
in private, and so the words respect the actings of sin in secret, and also
which his own heart and thoughts might commit within themselves, and so the
words respect the secret actings of sin, though Principally they may be most
fitly Expounded in this latter sense.

But what were those secret sins from which David desired to be cleansed.

Nay that is a secret; he does not Instance in any one because his desire is to
be freed from Every one: he speaks Indefinitly, He found many secret
inclinations (without all doubt in several kinds of sin, now in one, now in
another, from all of which (not some only) he desires to be Cleansed.

SECT. II.
2. BUt what is that to be Cleansed.

There be two Expositions of it.

1. One is that he desires to be justified, to be pardoned those What it is to
be cleansed.
sins and so the Hebrew word (...) does import in the second conjugation
immunem aliquem facere a Culpa vel a poena.

And indeed the blood of Christ which justifies is a Cleansing To be justified.
thing, it wipes off the guilt.

Now if this be it, Then thus much is evident, that secret thoughts and
inclinations may be sinful and are damnable, or else they were not pardonable.

2. Another is that he desires more to be sanctified, and that his To be more
sanctified.
Nature might be more changed, not only that outward sinnings might be
abandoned, but even inward actings or motions might be subdued.

And observe, he does desire to be Cleansed, he does not desire to be dipped
only into the water, or sprinkled, he does not desire only to be a little
rinsed, but he desires to be washed so 3. Things Employed in this desire.
long until he be cleansed, until his soul be made clean and pure, and free
from those secret sinfulnesses.

Where observe by the way three things.

First, he who has received True Grace needs more grace: our lives need to be
still reformed, and our hearts still to be cleansed, He who has received true
grace needs more grace.
the soul is such a vessel as continually is gathering in and sending out what
is corrupt and evil. It is like a fountain which you need still be laving of
it out.

2. Again the progress and perfection of cleansing the soul appertains The
Progress of cleansing the soul belong to God as well as the beginning.
to God as well as the beginning, The physician must go through with his cure,
or else the patient will relapse, the disease will prevail, no not the created
Grace in the soul is hard enough to keep down sin, much less to put it out,
unless a divine and new assistance comes to the soul, Therefore David, though
an Holy man, prays to God to cleanse him.

3. Lastly, persons Truly Holy, and sensible desire yet further Persons truly
holy, desire more holiness,
measures, of Holiness: David was cleansed before, and yet he desires to be
cleansed: why, because though he had a radical purity, yet he had not the
graduall purity, The whole man was cleansed, but it was not cleansed wholly:
some grace he had, but more he did want, some sins he was pretty well rid off,
but others he felt yet stirring and working: Though no man saw them, yet he
felt them: Noe combat, serves the Christian but that which Looks to victory,
and he thinks the day is not yet won, if he has not yet the conquest of every
sin, as well as any one.

SECT. III.
3. BUt why should we desire to be cleansed from secret sins: Why we should
desire to be cleansed from secret sins. Secret sins will become Public sins if
not cleansed.
Either from secret acting or secret motions.

I will give you diverse reasons of it.

1. Because secret sins will become public sins, if they be not cleansed. It
is with the soul, as it is with the body wherein diseases are first bred, and
then manifested; and if you suppress them not in their root, you shall shortly
see them to break out in the fruit: or as it is with fire catching the inside
of the house first, and there if you do not surprise it, it will make way for
its self to get to the outside. Lust when it has conceived it brings forth
sin, Jam. 1. 15. Beloved, remember this, that though the first ground of sin be
within the heart, yet the propension of sin is to come forth into public: the
Child in the womb has not stronger throws to get out of its private lodging,
then sin secretly wrought to fly into open and manifest action: Ammon is sick
with the sinful Conceptions of incestuous lust, and what ado was there till he
had committed that villainy: let a man set up any sin in delightful
Contemplation and meditations that same inward acting of his sin, Either does
actually Cast him upon the outward adventures, or invites them. This is the
least that it does, it does strangly ripen his natural inclination; and
besides that it does prepare him for a temptation that suits that way: Satan
shall not need to tempt him much, who has already tempted himself: and he who
will work sin in his heart, a weak occasion will draw it out into his life,
thirty pieces of silver will prevail with a covetous Judas, who had already
sold his Master in his heart.

Object. But what of that, will you say, suppose that secret sins uncleansed do
become public.

I say therefore, should we the rather labor to cleanse them: for as much as
the more public sin becomes, the worse it is you know, that if the word or
letter of the mind be written in paper, now it becomes a copy for others to
write after, whilst secret sins are confined the house (i.) to the soul only,
and break not out into visible act, though they be very damnable, yet they are
but of personal and proper danger, they endanger him only who maintains them,
as poison does him who takes the poison; But when they come to public and
visible actings, then they are a copy, they are exemplary sins, and like the
Plague infecting other persons, others are capable to imitate them, and so
more souls are tainted, and God now receives a common dishonor.

2. Secret sins are apt to deceive us most, and therefore cleanse there; Secret
sins are apt to deceive us most.
there is a deceitfulness in all sinnings whatsoever, the soul is cousened by
sin whenever it does sin; but now secret sins deceive us most, they are most
apt to prevail with us: partly,

1. Because we have not that strict and spiritual judgment of the inwards of
sin, as of the outward: many times we conceive of them as no sins at all, or
else as slight and venial, to draw a sword, and run a man through the heart; O
this is a fearful murder, to draw a false word, and slanderously to pierce
through his good name, we likewise imagine that this may be bad, but to kill a
man with malicious thoughts, with revengeful plots and desires, nay, this is
scarce thought as a matter culpable, or at least very excusable. Beloved, it is
the ingenium of sin to come off easily in the soul without stir and debate,
and no sins come off so easily, as those with we scarce imagine to be sins. Now
we are apt to think that secret sins are scarce sins.

2. And because Most men decline sin upon outward respects, which do not
reach the actings of secret sins, shame and fear, and observance are great, and
the only restraints to many. They do not live in, and visibly commit such
sins, because they like not shame, and are afraid of punishment, but what are
those to secret sinnings, where no Law of man can reach, and no ey of man can
search. It is true, that God has set some one or other to watch the sinner al
over, as his law for inward, and outward actings; his conscience principally
for the inward, and the eyes and mouths, and hands of men for the outward: but
now for secret sinning, it being invisible, it does therefore escape all the
outward restraints by the seeing, and speaking, and judging of men; and it has
mainly to attend what conscience will say, which perhaps is ignorant or drousy,
and if it does speak yet it is not regarded: Now mark of all sins eye them
most, which do most easily deceive you, these a man commits most, affects most,
and continues in longest, since therefore secret sins come under that form, is
it not necessary to labor to be cleansed from them.

3. The strength of sin is inward, therefore labor to be cleansed The streng^h
of sin is inward
from secret sins; if a man has a fever, so that his tongue does even fry in
his mouth, and his flesh is even roasted with burning heat, yet the strength of
that fever is in his spirits and inward parts, which are set on fire by some
humorous distemper; so is it with sin though the outward actings be bad
enough, yet the strong holds are within the soul: The strength of a sin,

1. Lies in its nearness to the fountain, from whence it can take a quick,
immediate, and continual supply, and so do our secret sins, they are as near
to Original sin, as the first droppings are to the spring head: they are
indeed Original sin immediately acting it self, which sin is a full sin, a
feeding sin, a sinning sin, and never weary.

2. It Lies in the acceptance of the affections: love and liking set sin upon
its throne: They are the Arms royal of a sin; now of the two, men are more
apt to like and love secret then open sinnings.

3. It lies in the confidence of Commission: Now a man does take more heart and
boldness and courage to commit secret sins then open.

4. It lies in the iteration and frequency of acting, for sin often repeated
and acted, is like a cable doubled in strength by the manifold twistings, but
secret sins are more frequently iterated; an unclean heart can keep a whore in
his thoughts every day and moment, who perhaps is afraid to be seen at the door
of her house once a year: a proud person can disdain another in his heart all
the week, who yet will not show it once a month, so for the malicious, etc.

4. The principle object of Gods eye, is the inward and secret The principle
object of Gods eye is the secret frame of the soul.
frame of the soul, therefore labor to be cleansed from secret sins, Psa. 66.
18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psa. 51. 6.
Behold, thou desire Truth in the inward parts: Therefore is he often said in
scripture to search the heart and the reins, which intimates this special
observation of the secret frame: it is true, that God does give in charge
against open sins, why, because he would not have any to be profane; and so he
does give singular charge against secret sins, why? because he cannot endure
any to be hypocritical: the man is most, in all to God what his inside is: if ye
work wickedness in your heart, God will destroy you, plaster your visible part
with all sorts of pious expressions, if yet you can set up a form of sinning
within, you are notable Hypocrites? the Lord sees you to be false, and rotten,
and he will discharge himself of you: Treason is as bad as Rebellion,
Rebellion is but open Treason, and Treason is but secret Rebellion; the King
will exact life justly for either; so will God for the secret sinnings, as well
as for The spirit of God is grieved by secret sins.
the open.

The spirit of God is greived by secret sins, as well as dishonored by open
sinnings.

SECT. IIII.
but also from private sins, not only from gross and visible, but also from
secret and invisible sins: then these things will follow For Information.
from hence, as informations.

1. That true holiness has a repugnancy and contrariety to all sins: It is
not contrary to sin, because it is open and manifest; True holiness has a
contrariety to all sin.
nor to sin, because it is private and secret, but to sin as sin, whether
public or whether private, because both the one, and the other is contrary to
Gods will and glory, as it is with true light, though it be but a beam, yet it
is universally opposite to all darkness: or as it is with heat, though there
be but one degree of it, yet it is opposite to all cold; so if the holiness be
true and real, it cannot comply with any known sin: you can never reconcile
them in the affection: they may have an unwilling consistence in the person,
but you can never make them to agree in the affection.

Beloved, there is a mavelous difference twixt things which are at difference
by a respective and accidental repugnancy, and by a natural and pure
contrariety, in the former there may be an accord, but in the latter none: an
Hypocritical heart may fall out with its sin for the consequence of it, for
the shame it brings, for the stinging guilt which it causes in the conscience,
yet his heart has (in absolute terms) an inward Cohesion and league with that
sin: but now true holiness and sin are opposite with a natural contrariety,
therefore you can never reconcile them in the heart: but the opposition is
inward as well as outward, to sin wheresoever it is. That sanctifycation is
Imperfect in this life.


2. That sanctification is not perfect in this life, he who has most grace,
has yet some sin: Else why does David (an holy person) desire to be cleansed,
he who needs to pray, that he may be cleansed, cannot yet totally say, my heart
is Clean.

There is a perfection of Integrity which an holy heart has standing in
opposition to Hypocrisy and essential defectivenesse, but there is not a
Perfection of eminency which consists in an opposition to all want: Grace
whiles in your hearts living on the earth, is as health rising in a sick body,
or like heat getting into the water, or like light spreading it self more and
more to chase away darkness, there is yet more of sin to be conquered, and we
have less grace then we should have, and where any part or degree of sin is
yet as an enemy, being and rising, there grace though it may be sound and
saving, yet is it not absolute and perfect.

3. Here you may understand the grounds and reasons of the That secret
corruptions are the Christians trouble.
many troubles and heavy complaints of Christians: It is true, that they may
fail many times in their words and speeches (and he is a very perfect man who
does not trespass therein) and they may be overtaken with explicit sinnings,
no holy person will profess himself to be an Angel, but he has many outward
sins to bewail, as he has many inward graces to bless God for; yet the load
of his soul is within his soul; commissions do justly humble him; but the
secret inclinations of sin they do even burst his heart asunder.

Why look ye so sad, say we oftentimes to good people, and why are yea so cast
down? what is it which troubles you? you have a good God, and a good Christ,
and a good Gospel, yea, I have, but withal, I have yet a bad heart in despite
of all my conflictings, and and strivings, and prayings; I am yet so molested
with sinful imaginations, with sinful inclinations: If I do, not perform duty
with any life, I am troubled for my dullness: if I do it with any life, I am
troubled with pride: If I do not pray, I cannot bear the guilt of a willing
omission; if I do pray, I am even torn from my self; and the crowd of other
thoughts do justle out the apprehension and affection of my praying. Another
Ch^istian he complains bitterly of secret blasphemies; Atheistical risings,
Another with private murmurings, discontents, unbeleivings; though you hear no
such words, and see no such carriages; O wrethed man that I am, said Paul: and
verily so great are the Insolences of secret corruptions, that the Christian is
oftimes weary of his life. Beloved the maine battle of a Christian is not in
the open field, his quarrels are most within, and his enemies are in his own
breast, when he has reformed an ill life, yet it shall cost him infinitely
much more to reform an ill heart; he may receive so much power from grace at
the beginning, as in a short time, to draw off from most of the former gross
acts of sinnings, but it will be a work of all his days to get a through
conquest of secret Corruptions.

4. Then all the works of a Christian is not abroad, if there be All the works
of a Christian is not abroad.
secret sins to be cleansed.

There are two sorts of duties,

Some are direct, which are working duties, they are the colors of grace in
the countenance and view of the Conversation, setting it forth with all holy
evennesse, and fruitfulness, and unblamablenesse.

Some are reflexive, which are searching duties, they appertain to the inward
rooms, to the beautifying of them, and reforming of them; for not only the
life, but the heart also is the subject of our care and study: I am not only to
labor that I do no evil, but a so that I be not evil, not only that sin do
not distain my paths, but also that it does not defile my intentions: not only
that my clothes be handsome, but also that my skin be white (i.) my inward
parts be as acceptable to God, as my outward frame is plausible with man; yea,
let me tell you one thing, that he is an hypocrite, who takes care to wash the
outside only, forasmuch as the greatest solicitude for the life, may be without
any reformation of the heart; not that the life must not be squared, but if
that be varnished, and the heart neglected, the person has not only the same
natural and lively frame of sinfulness, but he deceives himself, or at least
another with a mere pretense and shadow, therefore brethren let us have eyes
to look inward, as well as outward, God has given us a reflexive faculty; and
besides that, know

1. That Prima pars, the first part of our work is to set upon the inward part;
how vain is it to wash the brackish streams which are yet fed by a sour
fountain: and verily the conversation will be ever and and anon unequal and
unlike it self; if the heart remains unpurged and unchanged, corruption which
has often entertained your secret thoughts, will at length present these
births to your very eye.

2. That Maxima pars, the greater part of your work is within: It is true, an
ill tongue, a lustful eye, a stealing hand, they may challenge much prayer,
care and observance, watchfulness to reform them, but a beam of light is
small to the vast body of light in the Sun, and the dribling rivers are with
more ease, turned and dried up, then the deep ocean, sin within, is sin in the
fountain, and sin in the visible parts, is sin in the streams, yea, and as
every thing is strongest in its cause (and therefore sin is highest in the
heart) for the strength and vigor of temptations is at the inward part of man:
Satan does not stir a naked eye, but a filthy heart to look through that sinful
window, he does not come to the hand, and say steal, but first to the heart,
which will quickly command the hand: he does not say immediately to the tongue,
swear and blaspheme, but the heart, which can easily command that Hellish
language into the tongue. If thou should pluck out thine eyes, and never see
any object to excite thy unclean heart, yet may thou be as filthy a person,
thine own corrupt heart, and Satan would alone incline thee; and though thou
hadest never a foot to go, nor hand to stir, yet might thou be as very a
thief as Judas: thy heart might rob every passenger, and steal from every
house thou come in: objects are but accidental things to man, they have no
necessary impressive influences; they do but deliver themselves in that nature
wherewith God has clothed them: but that which invenoms them, and makes them
to work so wickedly, is man's wicked heart; you have many persons who complain
much against objects, O they can see none, or deal with none, but wickedness
is stirring. Why, beloved, the objects are innocent, but our hearts are unclean
and sinful: if thou could get another heart, thou would look with another
eye: the only way to make temptations lose their force, is to decline
occasions, and to cleanse the inward parts.

SECT. V. Use 2. Trial.

ANother Use which I would make of this is, to try our selves, We should try
our selves, because So many wallow in secret sins.
what care we have of secret sins: I will give unto you some Reasons why I
would have you to try your selves in this,

1. Because there be many persons, who wallow in secret sins. The Apostle
complained of such in his time, Ephesians. 5. 12. It is a shame to speak of those
things which are done to them in secret, he speaks of such as lived in secret
fornications and uncleanness; Brethren, how many are there, who do apparel
themselves even with a form of godliness, who yet not only allow themselves in
the secret thoughts of abhorred wickednesses, but even in the secret actings of
the same, as if there were no God to look on them, nor conscience to espy them,
nor judgment day to arraigne them: O how infinitely odious must thou be in the
eyes of that holy God, who dares to Court him in the public, and yet dares to
provoke him to his face thus in private; like a whorish strumpet, who
dissembles marveilous affections to her husband abroad, and yet at home she
will violate the Covenant of her God, before her husbands eyes; So thou to
pretend so much for God before company, and yet in private thou will presume to
sin before his face: for he sees thee, and that thy conscience knows right
well.

There be at the least three horrible sins which now thou do commit at once.

First, that very sin which thou would so conceal: And perhaps it may be a
sin of the deepest dye. Yea, mark this, that usually the most damnable sins are
such which are committed in secret, as Sodomes adulteries, and such fearful
kinds of pollutions, and murders, and treasons, etc.

Secondly, Hypocrisy, which is a screen to thy sin, an holy cover for an
unholy heart and practice, which makes the sinner by how much the more vile in
Gods eyes, by how much the more that he does not only sin against God, but
wrests (as it were) something from God to cover and palliate his rebellion
against him.

A third is Atheism: if there be not formal Atheism, yet there is a virtual
Atheism, as if God were no God in secret, but only in public, that he could
see in the light and not in the darkness; that his eye is as the eye of a man
only: whereas he The principle of sinning is secret and common to every man.
is an universal eye, and is a light without all darkness.

2. The principle of sinning is secret and common to every man.

The motions of sinning are not like the motions of a bowl which runs only by
the virtue of an imprinted strength, they are not violent motions whose cause
is only extrinsecal, but they are natural motions, whose principle is within
the subject: out of the heart (says Christ) proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, malice, deceit, lasciviousness,
an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness, all these evil things come from
within and defile the man, Mark 7. 21, 22, 23. the nature which tempts thee,
that nature is in thee, it is the womb of many and infinite sinful corruptions,
and imaginations: it casts out wickedness as the fountain casts forth water; so
the Prophet, Jer. 5. 7. it is very true, that outward occasions, and Satan by
his suggestions may assist and quicken original corruption, as the bellows may
inflame the fire, yet the fire has heat, and an aptness naturally to burn. So
original corruption, though it may grow monstrously active by temptations from
abroad, yet it can and does incline us, and can beget private actings of
horrible sins, from its own native strength, it can send out several forms of
sinning, and incline us to contemplate upon them, yea to contrive the singular
methods of transgression, yea, it can feed the soul with wonderful delights in
them, so that in the eye of God, the sinnings are formed, and fashioned, and
ripened with most of odious perfections.

There is an high depth of hypocrisy in the the souls of men, There is a depth
of hypocrisy in every man.
whose proper work is to have a secret way contrary to an open profession; as a
player who takes on him to act the part of a King, yet in his private and
absolute way, he may be a person of most ignoble birth, and unworthy qualities:
so it is with Divines distinguish of three sorts of hypocrisy.
the hypocrite.

1. One is natural and has footing in every man: even the most upright heart
has in it some hypocrisy, and he does sometimes seem to be that, which he is
not: he may be sometimes more full in his profession, then he is indeed in his
actions.

2. Another is foul and gross, which is when a man's heart, is not at all what
it seems to be unto the world. Christ compares persons guilty of it to whited
Sepulchers, which within are full of dead and rotten bones, as when a man shall
profess he loves God, and Christ, and his ways, and yet secretly contemns and
hates holiness, and resists the motions of Gods spirit: and is at defiance with
all the heavenly rules of life and powerful obedience.

3. A third is formal, when a man not only deceives others with a show of what
is not in him, but also cozens and cheates his own heart with a false
persuasion of his own happiness, partly from some specials, which he finds in
himself above others, and partly from the pride of his own spirit, joined with
an affectation of happiness; yet all this while, his heart keeps an haunt of
some private lust and ungodliness, there is some sweet morsel under his tongue
from which he will not part.

4. Outward occasions can incline to secret sinnings: Beloved Outward occasions
can incline to secret sinnings.
(there lies a snare almost against us) in all society: we have such vile
natures, that as a spark of fire will easily kindle a box of tinder, so but a
word spoken does many times kindle a world of passion, of malice, of revenge
within us: yea, the misplacing of a look begets in us secret disdain and
discontent, yea, the casting of an eye may inflame the heart with excess of
lust: need we not then (putting all these things together) to search our inward
frame, to see what care we have about and against secret sinnings: but you will
say, how may a man know whether he does, or no, desire truly to be cleansed How
a man may know he does desire to be cleansed from secret sins Negative trials.
from secret sins.

I will give unto you some observations for this, 1. Negatively, then 2.
Positively.

1. The Negative discoveries (i.) those by which a man may know that he does
not desire to be cleansed from secret sins are these.

1. When the principal restraint of his sinnings is terminated When the
principal re-restraint of sin is terminated only in man.
only in man. Beloved, really our conversing is either with God, or with our
selves, o^ with men; and answerable to these, there are three several reasons
of forbearing sin; either because of God, whose will and holiness is injured;
or else because of our conscience, because our secret, quiet, and ease shall be
interupted, or else because if we should adventu^e to sin, we should hazard our
estimations and estates, and safeties, and incur ignominy, blame, shame,
punishment, and loss with men.

Now mark it: when respect to man is the only reason, why I forbear sin, I am
all this while loose and unconscionable in the inward frame, all my care is
taken up about those actions and carriages which fall under the eye and
judgment of man; and none but the visible and open actings of sin break out
that way: If I forbear sin for man's sake, that men may esteem well of me, and
not censure or punish me, I therefore so far restrain sin as it may not be
visible, but I do not strive against it, because it is sinful; I say, not
because the thing is sinful before God, but only because it is culpable before
man: now try your selves in this: what is the restraint of your sinning:
suppose all men in the world were in a dead sleep, suppose that no eye did see
thee, suppose that no tongue of humane justice would call thee to account:
would not thy heart then with full sail spread out it self: would thou not
now, like the lions in the night, wander about for thy preys; would not thy
heart turn out it self, let go it self, drive out its secret inclinations:
would thou not do that in any place which now thou committest in secret
corners.

2. When the hindrances of secret sinnings are a burden, they are crosses. A
man does not desire to go out of the way of When the hindrances of secret sins
are burdens.
his delight: he is not weary of his affection, for delight is endless, and
unsatisfied: though the body may be wearied, yet the affection of delight is
never wearied: now brethren, a man may know his delights by his crosses, if I
attain not that which I respect not, I am not moved, but if my spirit rise, and
swell, and rage, or if I grieve, and complain, and am sad, because of an
impediment of something which has clapped in it self 'twixt me and my desires,
this shows that I had a delight in it, that I would feign have had it. Now let
me apply this to our business in hand, God does many times hinder the sinner,
he does step in by his providence, and prevents him from increasing his guilt:
he puts forth some accident, some impediment or other which stands twixt the
intention of sin, and the execution of it: the sinner has contrived and
plotted the time, and place, and the manner of the sinning, but God (who
overrules all) has disappointed him, by the unexpectedness of other company,
or some other occurrence of sudden sickness, or misadventure, if now the heart
do grow into Ahabs turbulent fits, it is a sign it would have had Naboths
vineyard; if the hindrance of the sinful fact, whether (open or secret) be a
grief to thee, this shows the bent of thy heart to the sin, but I pass on.

3. When the nature of sin is no burden, but some particular actings When the
nature of sin is no burden, but only some particular actings.
are. As Joab said to David, when he observed his sorrow for Absalom, I
perceive (said he, 2 Samuel 19. 6.) that if Absalom had lived, and all we had
died this day, then it had pleased thee well: So here, when the main trouble is
for some actions irregularly starring out to the world, and not for the nature,
which is a cause of that and all other sinful actings, this shows that our eye
is outward and not inward.

Brethren, mistake me not, I do not mean that sinful actions should escape our
tears, nay verily all our sinful births and broods naturally, calls for sorrow
and humblings, and the more sinful any explicit act is, the more dishonor God
has by it, the more scandal religion suffers for it; therefore, I say, the
more sorrows and tears should we cast after it; but then know, that according
to the guilty quality, according to the proportion of it, should be the
answerablenesse of our grief and perplexity: am I grieved for a rash and hasty
word, and not for a passionate and violent nature; am I troubled for an
unclean gesture or act, and not for an unclean heart; am I perplexed for a lie
by my tongue, and not for an evil and false heart: verily then my eye is not on
God, but man, it is not upon secret sins, but only upon open and manifest
sins.

4. When we cannot abide the spiritual efficacy and inward When we cannot abide
the spiritual efficacy of the word.
searching of the word: Beloved, the Word of God is quick and powerful, a
two-edged sword, it divides between the joints and the marrow, it is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. you find it to
be so, that it comes into your closet, it finds you out in your most secret
ways of sinning, it follows you into the most dark corners, it pierces into
the imaginations and plots which you never yet brought out to the Sun, it
tells you of your very desires and affections, what you like most, crave most,
do most. Now what do your hearts say, how do they bestir themselves, when they
find the word to haunt and pursue them, when they observe the word to come and
close with the secret windings and turnings: do you not strive to keep out the
light? do you not hold it off, as they do the enemy in a siege in the
outworks, that he might not break into the heart of the City, would you not be
spared, unsearched: nay, you cannot endure the word which comes to your private
sinful gains; and to your private sinful pleasures, you will not endure to be
ordered how to think, and how to desire: if it be so, where is then in When the
apprehension of Gods eye troubles the man, he wishes there were no God to see
or hinder his sinning. Positive Trials Consider Of what acceptance are secret
temptations.
you the property of an holy David, who does not desire to guard and defend,
but to be cleansed from secret sins.

Positive Trials.

The Positive observations by which you may know that you desire in truth to be
cleansed from secret sins, may be these.

1. Consider of what acceptance are secret temptations; there are open and
broad temptations which carry some express prejudice unto our names, and there
are implicit, and close temptations, which carry a real prejudice to Gods
glory, of this latter sort, there are again two kinds: some temptations there
are which the ingenuity of a refined nature may perhaps start at as too
infinitely gross, to yield unto them; as some kinds of blasphemy, and mockings,
and revilings of God, or Christ, or the Gospel, and those hidious excitations
to self-murder, or any unnatural villainy: other temptations there are which may
find a principle within the soul more intimate and apt to take and receive the
impressions, if not opposed by the advertency and purity of a spiritual heart:
now assuredly the heart does desire to be cleansed from secret sins which
stirs up it self with all its might against those secret temptations, which
deal for sin within the soul, which lighten and quicken natural corruption by
representation, or by excitation, or by both: O it is the heavy day of the
soul, when it is so inwardly assaulted and buffeted: the heart is so far from
yielding, that it is resisting with tears, with prayers; yea, and observe one
thing which is this, that the temptation to the sinning is not only resisted,
but it is made an occasion to the holy soul, the more to labor against the
corruption, unto which the temptation would secretly incline: as if Satan
should tempt to secret pride; not only not to admit the temptation, but now to
go to God and pray more earnestly against a proud imagination, and a proud
spirit, yea, to be vehement for an heart more lowly and humble; or if Satan
does tempt to contemplative uncleanness, or secret actings, not only to resist
and abhor them, but to pray more earnestly for a Chaste and pure heart, and for
chaste and spiritual imaginations and thoughts.

2. Consider how far forth thou desire to approve thy self How far forth
thou desire to approve thy self to God.
to God. God is the God of our spirits as well as of our bodies, and he does
not only ponder our paths, but does also search our hearts: That thou sendest
forth some words in prayer, O this satisfies not because of so many
distractions in the mind, and of so many deadnesses in the affection: that man
cannot accuse thee for any habitual unevenness, this is not enough, if God
cannot approve of thee for a person after his own heart: if thy heart were such
as God would like regard, approve, accept, then thou would be better
satisfied.

There is a twofold approving of our selves, one in the conscionable exactness
of duty appertaining to our callings; hence the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 3. giving no
offense in any thing that the Ministry be not blamed: verse. 4. But in all
things approving our selves as the Ministers of God in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses.

Another in the internal disposition of the soul; which is when the private
frame of the spirit is so endeavored to be rectified, squared, beautified, and
ordered, that the great and holy God may take delight, and proclaim his
gracious testimony of the same: hear that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 18. Not he
that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends; in the
former respect is that phrase of Paul, Romans 16. 18. approved of men, in the
latter respect is that phrase of Paul, Romans 16. 10. approved in Christ; and of
Peter, Acts 2. 22. A man approved of God. Now verily, no man can sincerely
desire to approve himself unto God (i.) to put himself over unto Gods sentence
of trial and decision so, that he might find an acceptance from his eyes, but
he does indeed desire to be cleansed from secret sins; why? because Gods
sentence is righteous and according to truth, he does not weigh so much, the
actions as the spirits of men, not so much the outward expressions as the
inward dispositions; not so much what they do, as what they would do; not so
much that they do not, as this that they would do no iniquity I remember that
David is upon this very strain, in Psalm. 139. 23. Search me O Lord, and know
my heart, and know my thoughts, v. 24. And so if there be any wicked way in me:
Here he puts himself entirely upon God, to try him, to search him, to see
whether his heart be such as he should like and approve. Paul is in the same
strain, 1 Cor. 4. 3. with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged
of you; (i.) whether you approve of me or not accept of me, or condemn me, I
tell you, this is not the main thing that I look on, v. 4. But he that judges
me is the Lord, (i.) there is another Judge, a greater Judge, a better Judge,
one who can canvase the secret and inward parts, as well, as eye the mere
visible acts and motions, to him do I look, to him do I desire to approve my
self.

3. Observe, where do thou lay the sharpest edge of the axe: Where do thou
lay the sharpest edge of the Axe.
the axe, said Matthew in another case, is now laid to the root of the tree:
sin is like a tree, it has root and branches, that which we see of the tree,
is the bulk and branches, that which is the life of the tree we see not, it is
the root which is moored in the bowels of the earth. Now as a man may deal with
a tree, so he may deal with his sins; the axe may be employed only to lop off
the branches, which yet all live in the root, and he may apply his axe to the
very root, to the cutting of it up, and so he brings an universal death to the
tree: So it is possible for a man to bestow all his pains to lop off sin
only in the visible branches in the outward limbs of it, and it is also
possible for a man to be crucifying the secret lust, the very corrupt nature
and root of sinfulness. Now this I say, he who bestows his study, his prayers,
his tears, his cares, his watchings, his strength to mortify corruption in the
root, in the nature, in the cause, how unquestionable is it that he does desire
to be cleansed from secret sins. Suppose a man has an ulcerous part
(undiscovered) in his breast: if he applies such physic which will carry away
the spring of that ulcer, it is a palpable sign he does desire to be cleared
from the secret ulcer it self: so it is in this case.

Beloved, we distinguish 'twixt these two things, viz.

1. The restraining of sin. 2. The weakening of sin.
A man whose sins may crawle in him, like the worms in a dead body, which may
feed upon his most exquisite contemplations, and dearest affections, with
fullest and sweetest contentment, may yet curb and restrain the habits, or
sinful propensions from breaking out into act; The vigor of a natural and
enlightened conscience, and the ingenuity of a more nobly bred disposition; and
the force of particular aims and ends, may be able to rein up and bridle in
thee. Actus imperatos (as the Schoolmen speak) the notable or visible
deliveries or actings of sin; But that which weakens sin is grace; that which
purges out the sin is always contrary to it.

Again, we observe a difference 'twixt these two, viz. to have sin and the
heart asunder: and to have sin and the shame or the bitterness asunder: this
latter a Pharaoh, an Ahab may desire; but the former, only that man who is
truly holy, and would be cleansed from secret sins.

4. And this now leads me to a fourth discovery of a person Do thou strongly
desire io have another nature.
who desires to be cleansed from secret sins, viz. he who strongly desires to
have another nature, another heart. Another nature or heart is a heart
replenished with most holy qualities, which stand in a present opposition to
that of sin, and which in time will get the victory over it: Suppose a man be
apt to much unbelief, secret mistrusts and distrusts, how know I that he would
be cleansed from them? not only by this that he complains, but also that he is
day and night with God for the grace of faith, and the strength of his Spirit
to believe: And indeed it is the contrary grace which does cleanse from sin;
secret grace which cleanses from secret sins: forasmuch as the inward
clensing, is not by outward medicines, but by a completed principle, both in
nature and operation, striving against the nature and operations of sin, as the
Apostle eligantly shadows it, in Gal. 5. Psalm. 51. Create in me a new heart,
said David; the new heart is a new frame and temper to fill the soul with other
inclinations and thoughts, and the life with other ways and actions.

SECT. VI.
Comfort For comfort to such as have such desires.
to such persons whose desires are really carried to be cleansed from secret
sins, as well as public and visible, they may comfort themselves in many
things. For,

1. That their praise is of God, and he does commend them, Their praise is of
God.
see the Apostle, Romans 2. 28. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither
is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, verse 29. But he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God: Now what a comfort
is this that thou art a person whom the Lord will take notice of, yea, whom the
Lord himself will praise and commend: to say of thee as of David. I have found
a man after mine own heart; and and that thy heart is perfect with the Lord.

2. That conscience in a day of distress will acquit and clear Conscience will
acquit them in a day of distress.
them. Beloved, there are two sorts of people.

Some dawbing, and dissembling, and shuffling, whose care it is not, not to
sin, but to be cunning in sin; these shall find that in the day of their
distress, conscience shall rip up before their eyes their most private
vilenesses, and that God will set their secret sins before the light of his
countenance; yea, and the more industrious and witty that they have been that
way, the more shall conscience aggravate the hypocrisy of their souls.

Others conflicting and agonizing with secret motions, outward occasions,
strong temptations: these persons in a day of distress shall find singular
testimony from conscience; for though now, whiles their judgment is oppressed
with variety of arguments, and the mind is overladen with the heap of
temptations, they are not able clearly to judge and decide their condition, yet
when conscience (which is the great umpire in man) shall arise to examine
fore-past actions and endeavors, it will there give sentence for thee,
excusing thee, approving thee, That in all simplicity, and sincerity thou had
thy conversation, both toward m^n and toward God, and that it was the desire
of thy soul, to fear the Lord, to do no iniquity, but to walk before him in all
well-pleasing: conscience does clear, as the word clears, and whom the word
does clear.

3. They may with confidence make their prayers to God, and They may with
confidence pray and shall be heard.
shall be heard. The hypocrite has Moabs curse, that he shall pray but not
prevail, Esaias 16. 12. for says David, If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear my prayer, Psalm 66. 18. But says Eliphaz, Job 22. 23. If
thou return to the Almighty, etc. and shall put away iniquity from thy
Tabernacles, ver. 27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear
thee: O how acceptable unto God are the sacrifices of a spirit truly and
uprightly tempered.

4. The Lord will more and more cleanse them: he will by degrees God will more
and more cleanse them.
put more beautiful ornaments, on the inward man, and change their burdens; if
Paul be troubled with himself, Christ will deliver him from himself; he has
this comfort, that for the present God observes his inward conflicts, and
accepts his secret uprightness, and for the future, that he shall have the
victory over his rebellions by Jesus Christ. There be two things, of which the
soul, which deals with inward convictions (out of a pure respect) may be
confident, viz. One is grace to combat, Another is strength to overcome.

Ob. 1. O but can a man be truly holy who has such vile inclinations, abhorred
thoughts and motions, such wonderful eruptions of sinful abominations working
yet within him.

Sol. 1. A word for this; you must know this that an holy man is a man, and a
man; he is compounded of a nature, and a nature; flesh and spirit, grace and
sin.

Secondly, you must distinguish 'twixt the secret motions of sin, and the
secret approbations thereof; as grace does not utterly root out all the
existence of natural corruption, so neither is it able absolutely to suppress
(though to hinder) the operations or workings of sinful corruption.

Thirdly, we distinguish of secret workings of sin, there is a double secrecy.

1. One is natural, and it befalls any man: for sin naturally carries shame
with it, and therefore has a desire of secrecy.

2. Another is artificial, which is a cunning devising of sin: this kind of
secrecy is not so incident to holy persons: they do not frame methods of
transgressing, no ways of dishonouring God, yet I will put forth a distinction,
I think it good, there is a twofold artificial secrecy,

1. One antecedent and delightful, contrived on purpose to enlarge the way of
the vile heart out of a deep love of the sin, and to compass the contiuall
fruition thereof.

Another is a consequent and troublesome, and a kind of enforced
artificialnesse, as was that of David, which did arise from a sin secretly
committed by him, in the have of a temptation; Now I think that even an holy
soul may possibly touch upon an artificial secrecy, by consequence having been
violently and preposterously carried unto some precedent sin, which that it may
be hid from the eye of man, it does therefore spin out some other methods of
sinning: however this is a very fearful course, there is no comfort at all in
it, but a deeper aggravation of the former sinning, for as much as adding sin
to sin is no remedy, but to repent of former sinnings is the only and best
way of help.

SECT. VII.
for Exhortation to take heed of, and labor against secret sins: its true,
that all Exhortation to take heed of secret sins.
sin is to be declined: But I therefore stir you up to beware of secret sins,
because we are more apt to those then to the open; we sink our selves sooner
with these then with any other sinnings.

There are three things which I will handle here, and so conclude this point,
viz.

1. Motives to enforce our care. 2. Aggravations of secret sins. 3. Means which
may present help against secret sin.
1. The Motives.

There be many arguments which may justly stir us up to take Motives.
heed of, and to cleanse from secret sins.

1. The Lord knows our secret sinnings as exactly as our visible The Lord
knows our secret sinning^ exactly.
sinnings, Psalm. 44. 21. He knows the secrets of our hearts, Psalm. 139. 2. He
knows our down sitting and our uprising, and understands our thoughts afar
off, ver. 11. If I say surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night
shall be light about me, verse. 12. yea the darkness hides not from thee; but
the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike unto
thee, Ezekiel. 8. 6. Son of man, see thou what they do; even the great
abominations that the house of Israel commits here. Like one on an high
mountain pointing at the thief robbing a man in a thicket, see you yonder
thief plucking of him down, etc. so here the great and lofty God, whose seat is
on high, beholds all the ways and motions of the children of men, even through
the thickest clouds, and nothing can bar out his observance, whose eye fills
heaven and earth: what is the curtain to him, or the night, or the lock, or the
chamber; or the whispering, or the thinking, or the imagination of that
thinking: he needs not to have his understanding to be informed by the
sensiblenesse of speech, or the visibleness of acting, who made the frame of
spirit, and searches into the depths of the soul, and clearly observes all
things in a perfect nakedness.

2. The Lord will make manifest every secret thing, Mark 4. God will make
manifest every secret thing.
22. There is nothing hid which shall not be manifested: Neither is any thing
kept secret but that it should come abroad.

There is a twofold breaking out of a secret sin or manifestation of it.

One is natural: look as the child formed in the womb naturally desires
liberty to come forth, and as the fire within, to fly out and abroad, so the
the inward conceptions of sin, naturally propend and strive to thrust out
themselves into visible acting and view: the soul cannot long be in secret
actings, but some one part of the body or other will be a messenger thereof.

Another is judicial; as when the Judge arraigns, and tries, and scrues out the
close murder, and the dark thefts: so God will bring to light the most hidden
works of darkness; for though the actings of sin be in the darkness, yet
the judgings of sin shall be in the light: though they be secret, yet these are
open: as though the times of theft be private, yet the places of Judicature are
open, Eccles. 12. 14. God shall bring every work into judgment with every
secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil: he does not say, some
work, but every work, and not only works, but secrets, and not only secrets,
but every secret; and not only secret good things, but evil too, whether good
works or ill works, whether secret or open, all must be brought to judgment, 1
Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the heart: Though thou may now cover thy sinfulness with much
hypocrisy, yet then all vizards shall be pulled off, thou sha^t be stripped of
all counterfeit shapes, as thou art, and as thou have done, so shall thou be
made known to men and Angels, and to all the world: thy whole heart, and thy
whole course of life shall be pulled a pieces before thee. God will judge them.


3. Thy secrets shall not only be manifested, but shall also be Judged by God,
Romans 2. 16. In the day when God shall Judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ:
we read sometimes that God will Judge our words, and God will Judge our works,
and here that God will Judge our secrets, he will judge words and works as
sins ripened to expressions; he will judge secrets, as sins ripening and
breeding, Job 31. 26. If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking
in brightness, 27. And my heart has been secretly entised, 28. This also were
an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, Job 13. 10. he will surely reprove you
if you do secretly accept persons, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Cursed be the man that makes
any Graven Image, an abomination to the Lord, etc. And puts it in a secret
place.

There is a twofold judging, to which secret actings of sin are obnoxious.

One is Temporal, and in this life; see this in David, 2 Samuel 12. 9. wherefore
have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight, thou
have killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword (this was done in a secret letter)
and have taken his wife to be thy wife, and v. 10. Now therefore the sword shall
never depart from thine house, because thou have, etc. v. 11. Thus says the
Lord, behold I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I
will take thy wives before thy eyes, and give them to thy neighbors, v. 12.
Thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before
the Sun, Ephesians. 5. 6. Because of these things comes the wrath of God, upon the
Children of disobedience.

Another is eternal: that the Lord will Judge them with eternal wrath, for
that is the portion of hypocrisy: though thou may escape the judgment of
man, yet thou shall not escape the judgment of God, Heb. 13. 4. whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge, he will sentence them himself for their secret
abominations.

4. Secret sins are more dangerous to the person in some respects then open
sins. For,

1. A man does by his art of sinning deprive himself of the help Secret sins
are more dangerous in some respects then open sins.
of his sinfulness: like him who will carry his wound covered, or who bleedes
inwardly; help comes not in because the danger is not descried nor known, if a
man's sin breaks out, there is a Minister at hand, a friend near, and others to
reprove, to warn, to direct: But when he is the artificer of his lusts, he
bars himself of all public remedy: and takes great order and care to damn
his soul, by covering his secret sins with some plausible varnish, which may
beget a good opinion in others of his ways.

A man does by his secrecy give the raines unto corruption; the mind is fed
all the day long, either with sinful contemplations or projectings, so that the
very strength of the soul is wasted and corrupted.

3. Nay, secret actings do but heat and inflame natural corruption, as in
shouldering in a crowd, when one has got out of the door two or three are
ready to fall out after: so when a man has given his heart leave to act a
secret sin, this begets a present, and quick, and strong flame in corruption to
repeat and multiply, and throng out the acts: sinful acts are not only
fruits of sin, but helps and strengths; all sinning being more sinful by more
sinning: not only in the effects but in the cause: the spring, and cause of sin
will grow mad and insolent hereby: and more corrupt, this being atruth, that if
the heart gives way for one sin it will be ready for the next; if it will yield to
bring forth once at the devils pleasure, it will bring it for^^ twice by its one
motion.

4 A man by secret sins, does but polish and square the hypocrisy of his
heart, he does strive to be an exact Hypocrite, and the more cunning he is in
the palliating of his sinnings, the more perfect he is in his hypocrisy.

2. The aggravations, will you give me your leave to make a short Aggravations
of secret sins.
digression, touching the degrees of agravation of secret sinnings, verily,
perhaps they may sink deep and quicken us to repentance and caution.

1. The more foul the sin naturally is, the worse is the secret acting of it:
you know that some sins have a souler dye in them then The more soul the sin
is the worse if it be secret.
others, all are not a like, but some are more intrinse cally vile: A
blasphemous thought, is worse then an Idle thought, and the secret stealing of
a shilling though it be a sin, yet not so great as the secret killing of a man.
The more relations are broken by secret sins the worse.


2. The more relations are broken by secret sinning the worse they are, and
more to be wared, for all relations are bonds, and cords, they are a file of
reasons, why we should not sin; for a single person to commit folly, its a
damnable sin, but for one to break the covenant of her youth and God, for a
person who is married, this very relation trebles the guilt: for any one to
murder is a sin of death, but for the Child to murder the parent secretly,
this very relation increases the guilt.

3. The more profession a man makes the worse are his secret The more
profession a man makes the worse are his secret sins.
sinnings; forasmuch as he carries not only a badge, but also a judge on his
shoulde^s, he not only wears a profession which is contrary to his practice,
but which shall condemn and judge him; that he is not what he would seem to
be, yea, his contrary practice, does ground and occasion the great reproaches
and blemishes like dirt, to be cast upon the face of Religion: and woe to him by
whom offenses come.

4. The more light a man has meeting him in the dark, and secret actings of
sin, the more abominable is the sin; when not only The more light a man has
^he more abominable the sin.
a discovering light, but a checking light, not only a checking but a
threatening, not only a threatening but also a troubling light, opposes, and
charge from the conscience against the sinning, this makes it the more out of
measure sinful. The more against the light of nature the worse they are.


5. The more repugnant secret sins are to the light of nature, the worse are
they in their actings. A sin is very broad when the light of nature without any
aid of knowledge from the scripture shall make the heart to tremble at the
commission and to be terribly amazed, the Apostle touches at these kinds of
secret sinnings, Romans 1. unnatural lustings and burnings.

6. The more art a man does use to effect his secret sinnings the The more art
a man uses in secret sins the worse they are.
worse they are: forasmuch (as a about the same sin,) it is ever wo^se when it
is breathed out by deliberation, then when it is forced out by a mere
temptation: and sin is not to be reputed an infirmity, or weakness, when art or
cunning is the cause of it, for as much as art is sober and takes time to
contrive, and reason to place and displace; to help and forward its acts or
intentions The more frequent a man is in them the worse they are.
all which are contrary to surprisals and infirmities.

7. The more frequent a man is in secret sinnings the deeper is his guilt? when
he can drive a trade of s^n within doors: when it is not a slip, but a course;
and he has h^^dly scraped out the bitterness of the former, but he is
exercising the sin new and afresh again.

8. The more gripes of conscience and resolutions a man has felt To wallow in
them against conscience and resolutions makes them worse.
and taken against secret sinnings, and yet wallowes in them, the more stain
and guilt lies upon his soul. A wound to a sick man is worse then to an
healthy man, forasmuch as the spirits are already wounded by sickness: no
sinnings wound deeper then such as follow the woundings of conscience; a sinner
does thrust the sword in again to the same hurt.

Thirdly, the means.

But you will say, this is fearful to sin thus, what Means The means to be
cleansed of secret sins.
may be used to get off, and to keep off the soul from secret sins?

The rules of direction (which as so many means) I would commend unto you are
these.

1. If thou have been guilty of secret sins, be humbled and repent: A man
shall hardly stave off a new sin, who has not been humbled for an old sin of
the same kind: for as much as future care Be humbled for them.
seldom manifests it self without former sorrow: have thou been a secret
Adulterer, fornicator, thief, backbiter, oppressor, liar, drunkard, etc.

O hasten, hasten in by speedy sorrow, by speedy repentance: bewail (if it be
possible) with tears of blood thy secret wickedness: if thou do not judge
thy self, God will surely judge thee, and think not that because thy sinnings
were secret, therefore thy compunctions must be small, nay, thou ought to
abound the rather, and the more in floods of tears, and of bitter contrition,
who did dare to provoke God so, etc.

2. Take heed of secret occasions and provocations: why is it that Take heed of
secret occasions, and provocations.
thou say, O this nature, O this heart, O that Satan. Thou have, I confess,
shed many tears; thou have felt many sorrows and troubles, thou have made many
vows and resolutions; thou have put up many prayers and petitions, and yet
thou art in thy secret sinnings, why, what should be the reason, do prayers do
nothing against sin? yea, do tears nothing? do troubles nothing? do vows
nothing? yes, all of those may do something, if something else be added, if the
leake be stopped, if the windows be shut, if the doors be locked, I mean, If
occasions and provocations be conscionably and carefully avoided: otherwise
they are nothing: if thou prayest and then adventures thy strength upon the
occasion of thy secret sinning, what do thou but seek God first, and next
rise up and tempt him. Keep close to heaven, and keep off from the occasions,
and then tell me whether God will not keep thee from thy sinnings.

3. Crush the temptations which come from the roots, Though thou do decline
occasions, yet thou can not decline thy Crush the temptations from the roots.
self: And there is that in a man's self, which can fetch in the occasion by
representation, by inclination, by contemplation: sometimes another provokes
thee to sin, and this is in society; sometimes thine own heart provokes thee to
sin, and this is when thou art solitary. Now the thoughts steal out, now
imaginations present and confer with the mind, with the will, with affections:
would thou now free thy self from secret actings, then free thy self from
secret thinkings.

The picture in the glass may inflame as much as that in the natural face: so
sin in the representation of the mind may fire our corrupt hearts, as well as
the entisings of it by conversing occasions, Psalm 19. 14. Let the Meditations
of my heart be always acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my
Redeemer.

There are two things which will never fail you in your surprisal of secret
sinnings, viz.

1. One is to be digging up the intimate root of all sinnings.

2. Another is to stifle the first conception of sins, to make sin an
abortive in the womb, that it shall never stretch out it self to actions.
Beloved, to tie Sampsons arms, it was a vain thing, his strength lay not
there; but if the hair of his head be cut off, then his strength is gone, and
he shall become weak. To tamper (only) with the acts of sin is not the way to
be rid of sinful acts. But the singular way to be rid of bad acts, is to be rid
of a bad nature: the virtue of the effect always lurks in the cause, and
therefore it is the cause which gives life and death to it. If thou could
once get an holy nature, which might be at defiance with sin in its throne;
know this, that a new nature and daily combat would much help against secret
sinnings. That sin is least of all acted with life, which is most of all
combated within the heart: for sin has least practice where it has most
opposition: And of all oppositions those that are inward are most weakening of
sin.

4. Get an hatred of sin, which will oppose sin in all kinds, and all times,
and in all places.

5. Get the fear of God planted in thy heart. There are three sorts of sins
which this fear will preserve a man Get the fear of God.
against.

First, Pleasant sins, which take the sense with delight.

Secondly, Profitable sins, which take the heart with gain, but what shall
it profit me to win the whole world, and to lose my soul.

Thirdly, secret sins of either sort. Joseph did not dare to sin that great
sin of uncleanness; though the acting of it might have been secret, and
thou^h perhaps the consequence of it mi^ht have been his preferment; why, the
fear of God kept him off, he had an awful regard to God, he knew the greatness
of his holiness, of his power, How can I do this great wickedness and ^^nne
against God? Genesis 39. 9. Why (brethren) if we fear the Lord, it is not the
night which the thief does take, nor the twilight which the adulterer does
take, nor the seasons of secrecy or places of obscurity that will prevail with
us, etc. Yea, but God sees me, the great judge of heaven and earth, the holy
one, the God who hates all sin, whose eyes are brighter then the Sun, and
purer then to behold sin: and who is mighty in power, and just in his
threatenings, he sees and beholds, therefore I dare not.

6. Believe Gods omniscience, and omnipresence; that the Believed Gods
omniscience:
Lord is every where, and all things are naked and open to his eye with whom
thou have to deal: thou can not intend to think, thou can not whisper out
thy thou^hts, thou can not finger the closest bribes, thou can not incline
thy self to the most abstracted kind of secrecy in the world; but God sees
thee clearly, perfectly; now if a man could believe that God is still with us,
and there are two which evermore go with us, the Judge and the Register, God
and conscience, that he is acquainted with all his thoughts, paths, ways, this
would put an awe upon him: would the wife be so impudent to commit folly and
prostitute her whorish body in the sight and presence of her husband; would the
servant be filching out of the box; if he saw his Masters eye upon his hand.

7. Get thy heart to be upright, uprightness is an inward temper: and
hypocrisy is an outward complexion, Psalm Get thy heart to be upright.
119. 3. They do no iniquity, etc. The inward man is the business of
sincerity, to the forming and fashioning of that, does it improve and employ it
self? it knows that God delights in truth, and this too in the inward parts:
It endeavors to please God in all things, and there to be most to God, where
man can be least in observation, and that is in the secret and hidden frame.

PSALM. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them
not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and shall be innocent from
that great transgression.
CHAP. II.
THese words contain in them David's second Petition and request: sins do not
only differ in respect of opennesse and secretness, but also in respect of the
degree of hainousness and greatness: now because secret sins sticks closest,
and are of a more easy and adventrous commission, therefore David prays much
against them, Lord, cleanse thou me from secret sins: And because
presumptuous sins are of a more fearful efficacy, and consequently (they
being usually the bravings of God even to his face) therefore David prays as
vehemently against them in this verse.

This verse may be considered two ways. The words considered.


1. Respectively, as in connection with the former by that In conjunction with
the former.
word (also) keep back thy servant also, as if David had said, O Lord I have
prayed unto thee to be cleansed from secret sins, and I beseech thee let me
be answered, but yet this is not all that I have to request, I have yet another
request besides that, keep me also from presumptuous sins.

2. Absolutely, in regard of their proper matter, so they In their proper
matter.
comprehend.

1. The Petitioner [thy servant.] 2. The Petition, which respects sins.
1. Presumption [from presumptuous sins.]

2. Dominion [let them not have Dominion over me.

3. The Petitioner who is employed, and that is God, yet expressed by what he
should do [keep back, etc.]

4. The Conclusion or inference which he makes from the grant of all this,
which is his uprightness and innocence, innocence, not absolute, but limited,
innocent from that great transgression. There is more matter in these words
then you yet well conceive of, I will touch some Propositions, which might
challenge a further prosecution, and then I will set down at large upon the
main intentions and conclusions from the words considered as a connection of a
new request with the former request, these things might be observable, viz.

SECT. I.
There may and should be a conjunction, even of great There may and should be a
conjunction of great requests at once to God.
Petitions and requests (at once) unto God: As they say of graces and duties,
that they are connexed (and like so many pearls upon one and the same string)
for we may say of requests to God, though they be many for kinds, and number,
and matter, yet they may be put up in the same prayer to God. David ends not at
that request (keep me from secret sins) but goes on also, O Lord, keep me
from presumptuous sins, he multiplies his suits according to the multiplicity
of his necessity and exigence.

viz. Our prayers must be with


1. One is an urgent fervency; when the soul does not nakedly commence the
suit, propound it to God, and say, Lord 1. urgent fervency.
hear me, but it does enforce (as it were an audience and acceptance, it does
strive with God and wrestle with him, I will not let thee go, unless thou
bless me, Genesis 32. 26. as Jacob, And, O Lord hear, O Lord hearken and
consi^er; do and defer not for thy name sake, as Dan. 9. this is a following
of the suit with God, as the woman did Christ.

2. Importunity: when a person renews the same suit, comes 2. Importunity.
often to the door of grace and knocks.

3. Patient perseverance: I will hearken, says David, Ps. 85. 3. Patient
perseverance.
I will wait, says the Church, Mica. 7.

4. A variety or multiplicity of matter, like as a patient who comes to the
Physician; Sir, says he, such an ach in my 4. Variety of matter.
head, and such crudity in my stomach, and such a stitch in my side: so when we
come to the Lord in prayer, we may and should open not only one want, but all
our wants; and crave help not in one thing, but in every thing: we should
multiply requests, O Lord, says David, in Psalm. 51. I was conceived in sin,
but do thou cleanse that; and I shed the blood of Uriah, do thou pardon that;
and I defiled his wife, do thou wash that; and I lost thy spirit for these, but
do thou restore that; and I weakened and wounded my graces, but do thou renew
them: As Paul spoke, Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God: so I say, for every thing
let your manifold requests go up to God by prayer: And I think that phrase (in
Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying with all prayer) will reach the point in hand: All prayer
extending it self not only to all the kinds and forms of praying, but also to
all the matters or things for which we do pray.


1. God can hear every request as well as any one. A multiplied 1. God hears
every Request, as well as any one.
request as well as a single request: for he takes not, nor observes things by
discourse, where one notion may be an impediment to the apprehension of
another, but all things (by reason of his omniscence) are equally at once
present unto him. 2. Nay, he can grant many and great requests, as easily as 2.
God can grant many and great Petitions, as well as single and little ones.
the single and smallest Petition. The greatest gift comes as freely and
readily out of his hand, as the most common mercy, even Jesus Christ, and
pardon of many sins, are of the same price with our daily bread. Though the
former gifts be (in comparison with the other) of a much more elevated nature
and dignity, yet in respect of the fountain of them, all of them come from the
freeness of his goodness and love. 3. Christ (by whom we are to put up all our
requests (for he 3. Christ is as able to implead many and great Requests, as
few and small.
is our advocate and intercessor) is as ready and able to implead many and
great requests, as well as some and inferior: As he is our mighty Redeemer, so
he is our mighty Intercessor. And his blood is as efficacious and meritorious
for many sins as for some. 4. God has for this end made manifold promises;
therefore 4, God has made manifold Promises.
we may put up many and great requests at once; the promises are called the
wells of salvation, and the breasts of consolation. Now the living wells will
afford a plenty, as well as a scanting measure of water: the child may move
from breast to breast, and draw enough of either, if one alone will not serve:
If one promise comprehends not all thy wants, yet all of them do; And as God
graciously comprehends all our supplies in all of his promises, so he has
propounded them all unto us, that we might then there urge him for the supply
of all our necessities. 5. Lastly, God is rich in mercy, and plenteous in
compassion; 5. God is rich in Mercy.
his mercies are often styled manifold mercies, and his goodness is called an
abundant goodness, and his redemption a plenteous redemption, and his kindness
a great kindness. Now mercy is a ready inclination to pity and help, and
multitudes of mercies are as a compounded, and doubled, and redoubled opening
(as it were) of Gods tenderness to do a sinner good.
Uses of this might be many, I will briefly touch a few.

Then conceal no one of thy distresses from God: the heart and Conceal no one
of thy distresses from God.
life of man are full of sin, and as full of want; there is not any branch of
the soul, nor limb of the body, nor turning of the life, but is replenished
with some necessity or other. Thou have a mind which yet needs to be
in^ightned, a judgment which yet needs to be captivated, an heart which yet
needs to be converted, and humbled; how many sinful commissions are there which
need to be bewailed; how many particular and vile inclinations which need yet
to be subdued: besides all this every grace which thou have (and there are
manifold graces in an holy soul) every one of them is in exigence, and needs a
more spiritual filling* both for the habit, and acts, and degrees: Yea, and all
our duties are but lame handed motions, which needs more strengthening, or as
mixed rivers which should run more clearly.

In this case what should we do? to whom should we go? should we divide the
principles of our helps, and go for some to God, and for the most to the
creatures: O in no wise, for all our help is only in him, who alone can help
all, or should we branch out our helps, and present them as a beggar does his
supplies, one day open one want, and some distance of time hereafter, open
another; O no, come with all, and with all at once, to God, who is as able, and
as willing for many sinners, as well as for one sinner; and for many sins in
one man, as well as for one in any. As they did with the impotent and sick man,
they b^ought all of him (bed and all) and laid him before Christ, so should we
bring body and soul, and every distress of either, and present the whole bulk,
root and branches all before the Lord at once, for a manifold supply; we should
press upon him for manifold mercies, for abundant strength: for God is able to
do exceeding abundantly, above all that we are able to ask or think, Ephesians. 3.

Beloved, as a man's own unworthiness should not prejudice him from being a
Petitioner to the Throne of grace, so the variety of a man's necessities should
not discourage him to commense his suits at the Throne of rich mercies:
forasmuch as there is reason in God which will dis-hearten us, and there is
reason in our selves to crave as earnestly, and as simmultaniously for all our
helps, as for some: thou do equally need the pardon of this sin, as that,
and Mercy is as ready, and able for both, as for either. And if that corruption
were more subdued, and yet this remained altogether untouched, thou would
have as many, and more forcible suspicions of the truth of thy estate from this
division, and inequallity of thy victory. Wherefore as Abraham in his suit for
those of Sodom and Gommorrah, took up request upon request, descending from
high to low, from many to few; so should we in our requests, ascend from one
sin to more, from more to many, from many to all; you know that confession of
sins, should not be particular only, but universal; and our sorrow for sin
should respect the kinds as well as the particular acts: all which import an
Amplitude of grants; so much Mercy and supply answerable to the required
latitude of confessions and sorrow.

Object. It Is true, some one sin may (upon special reason, either of some
guilt, or present insolency) be more insisted on then another, (as one clause
in the plea, may be more urged then any other) yet not with the exception of
the rest.

Another Proposition, which I will briefly touch on, shall be this, viz.

SECT. II.
THat even a good Christian should have a fear of great sins A good Christian
should fear great ^^ns as well as less. Reasons from, The latitude of original
sin.
as well as a care of secret sins: Keep me also from presumptuous sins.

Reasons whereof may be these.

The latitude of original sin, which as it is yet remaining in the best, so it
i^ in them an universal fountain naturally apt to any vile inclination: though
actual sins may be divided in the life, yet they are all united in their
spring, (i) they are all of them virtually as so many potential effects
involved and lurking in original sin, as their cause, which how far it may
work, both from its own strength, and the assistance of temptions and
occasions, if God does not actually prevent and interpose, if we put not forth
our fear, and watch, we may with miserable experience both, know and bewail.

2. The instances of great transgressions: even those Saints, 2. The best
Saints have been guilty of great Transgressions.
who have been as the highest stars, have left behind them their twinklings,
and sad Eclipses. Noah, his actual distempers by wine: Lot his unnatural
defilements by incest; David his wounds and bleeding by whoredom and blood;
Peter his unkind and troubled denial of Christ against his knowledge.

Now when Cedars fall, should not the tender plants tremble? if the sins of
others be not our fear, they may be our practice; what the best have done, the
weakest may imitate, if they do not hear and fear: there being scarce any
notorious sin into which self-confidence will not plunge us; and from which an
holy and watchful fear may not happily preserve us.

Instruction from this, and so on: Blessed is the man that Blessed is he that
fears always.
fears always, Prove. 28. 14. When we read of great sinners in the Scripture,
and see great falls, and sins in others, as we should thereupon seek to recover
them who are thus fallen by our Counsel and prayers: so we that stand, should
take heed lest we also fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. If that Satan, who would deal with
us, could be procured to shape out only mean and vulgar assaults and
suggestions, to common and unavoidable infirmities and sinnings, this might
somewhat abate the vigor and intension of our holy fear and circumspection?
yet not altogether, forasmuch, as he being a subtle enemy, trains and
facilitates the heart by the frequency of small commissions, at length to the
boldness of great Impieties; or if Satan's suggestions were artificially and
extremely laid, and pressing to great sins as well as small, yet if we had
natures no way capable to receive the greatest impressions of sin, but were
naturally averse, and stiffly indisposed to such temptations, then our careful
fear were not so requisite: But we are not shot-proof: Temptations (even to the
greatest sins) have within our breast some principles which would presently
shake hands with them: The actual light and acting grace do sometimes happily
turn them aside from closing, though they keep them at the door, as the Prophet
caused the Messengers who came from the King to take away his life; Yet there
is another Principle of corruption which would let them in, and which would
cooperate with those temptations, even to Contemplation and inclination, and
acting both inward and outward: nay, this corrupt nature of ours alone, (though
it does learn somewhat by temptations and occasions) yet it alone from it self
can cast forth most sore temptations to most abhorred sinnings.

Therefore this we must do, fore-past sins must be eyed with grief, present
inclinations with combat, and future with fear: we must not in our War imitate
the Syrians, who were to fight neither with small nor great, but with the King
of Israel: No, but we must oppose all sins, small sins as well as great, and
great as well as small: those sins which do encounter us, we should force some
out, and keep the rest off. He is a wise and sincere Christian who resists the
smallest, and fears the greatest sins: Keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins.

SECT. III.
That a good man A good man is Gods servant.
is Gods s^rvant, [Thy servant from, etc.] We read of diverse servants in the
Scriptures; some are the servants of men, who apply all their gifts and parts,
and sacrifice the whole method of their beings and expressings, to claw and
humor the itch and pleasure of others: All flatterers are such, who are a
people of slavish-bondage, having sold themselves from themselves to some
persons. Some are the servants of the world, whose hearts and labors are
bestowed upon earthly things; and they make even those noble souls of theirs to
weary themselves for very vanity; and to increase only in that with the least
toe, is too excellent to tread upon. Some are the Servants of Satan, mentioned
in an instrumental Activity and readiness to entertain and execute his base and
hellish inspirations and motions. Some are the servants of sin, who (quales and
quanti) all that they are, and can do, is to fulfill the lusts of their flesh:
there is no servant so obedientially attending the Command of his Lord, as they
to receive, and act the pleasure of their sinful hearts. Some are servants to
themselves, who, as if they were born, neither for God, nor man, apply all
their will, and strength, and abilities, only to their own ends without any
real effectual consideration to public good of Church or Country. And some
are servants to God; Moses was so, Simeon was so: Moses my servant is deal,
said God: Now letest thou thy servant depart in peace, said Simeon: and David
here, (Keep back thy servant.) Gods servants disters from all servants in the
world: every other servant loses himself by service; sui juris, -- in the
Law: but the only way to find a man's self, is to be Gods servant. Every other
servant loses his liberty by his service; but libertty is then got, when we
become servants to God: As soon as we enter the service, we obtain our freedom:
Every other servant in strictness of Rule, is below a son, a child; but every
servant of God is a son of God, and shall have not gifts as a mere servant may
have, but the inheritance which the son who serves his Father shall have.

There are two sorts of servants under God.

1. Some stubborn, who are Servi victi; (as St. Aust in speaks) The Law of
Creation is upon them, and so will they, nill they, they are in some
obediential and serviceable Relation.

2. Others are servants, not of force, but of affection, not of compulsion, but
of election they have chosen God to be their Lord, and have willinglly resigned
up themselves (in the purpose of their hearts) to an universal observance, and
love of him, and obedience unto him, impartially, and constantly to do his
work. Such a servant to God was David: but this observation is very general,
therefore I pass unto another, viz.

SECT. IV.
That we are Gods servants, should be used to move the Lord to help us against
sins; you know that in all relations That we are Gods servants should be a plea
for help against sins.
there are mutual bonds and duties: the wife owes much of subjection to the
husband, and the husband owes also much of love, respect and care to the wife:
The Child owes much attendance, reverence, and affectionate duty to the
Parents, and the Parents owe much of instruction, reproof, correction, nurture,
provision of Estate for the child again: so is it betwixt the Lord and his
servant, though to a mear slave, there be no mutual obligation, or else it is
in that which is weak; yet to a servant, who stands in that relation, which
they call Ingenuous; as much is due from him to his Lord, so, something his
Lord ought to do for him, to feed him, to cloth him, to house and lodge him, to
defend him against wrong and injuries.

This is it in the case of David, Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins;
as if he had said, O God, thou art my Lord, I have chosen thee, to whom I will
give obedience, thou art he whom I will follow, I bestow all that I am on thee.
Now a Lord will help his servant: his servant against an enemy, against an
enemy who for the Lords service is the servants enemy. O, my Lord, help me. I
am not able by my own strength to uphold my self, but thou art All Sufficiency.
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.

viz. for his own glory, and for his names sake: sometimes he has been urged,
from some word or other which he has let fall, at which the believing soul
does catch, (as did Benhadab servants from Ahab; thy brother Benhadab) Remember
thy word (says David) upon which thou have caused me to hope, Psalm 119. Thou
said thou would do me good, said Jacob, Genesis 32. Sometimes he has been
urged from the special relations twixt him and his people; as from that of a
Father: Isa. 64. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father: and this of a Lord.
Isa. 63. 18. The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while,;
verse 19. We are thine; and in many other places, Remember thy servant, and
remember thy servants.

Beloved, It is a great thing to stand in near relations to God: and then it is
a good thing to plead by them with God: forasmuch as nearer relations have
strongest force with all, the servant can do more then a stranger, and the
Child then a servant, and the wife then a Child: but though this urging of God
by virtue of our relation be an excellent point, yet because it is not the main
intention of the place, I likewise pass it over.

Another observable Proposition may be this.

SECT. V.
should be special Reasons to work a care not to sin against God. [Keep thy
servant Our special relation to God should make us careful not to sin against
God.
from, etc.] Thy servant: there be many reasons against sinning: the very
nature of sin carries along with it a condemnation of sinning, because sin
formerly is a transgression, an Anomy, and a Rebellion, which alone is an
inglorious thing: Again, The Laws and threatenings of God should be as forcible
cords to draw off the heart from sin: And again, All the Mercies and goodness
of God should exasperate the heart against sin. Again, All the Attributes of
God might hold us: Now with these this also may come in, viz. The specialty of
our Relation to God, that we are his Children, and he is our Father, we are his
servants, and he is our Lord: though the common obligations are many, and
sufficienr, yet the special Relations are also a further tie: the more near a
person comes to God, the more careful he should be not to sin against God.

Let us who are of the day be sober, let us not sleep as do others. 1 These. 5.
6, 8. God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, 2 These. 3. 7.
If you call him father, pass the time of your so journing here in fear, 1 Pet.
1. 17. If I then be a father, where is my honor? If I be a Master, where is my
fear? Mal. 1. 6. I will be sanctified, (says God) of all them that draw near
unto me.

There is a double drawing near unto God.

1. One in respect of Office, as the Priests of whom he there spoke, who
because their Calling and Office is more high and heavenly, they therefore
should be more religious and holy.

2. Another in respect of Nature and change by virtue, of which our Relation
comes closer to God, even this nearness should occasion more care against
sinfulness.



First, Admissions of sinnings here do diffuse a greater ingloriousness Their
sinnings are most dishonorable to God.
to God: sin is most darkning in a white cloud, then in a black, as a spot is
more eminently disgraceful in a fair then in a foul cloth. Though the sins of
evil men do prejudice Gods Glory, yet the great sinnings of good men do
occasion much more: for not only the particular sinnings send up a cloud, but
other men by reason of them, form out of them a smoke of blaspheming and
reproaching of the ways of God, and the profession of Grace.

Secondly, Their great sinnings do make them the sorer wounds Their sinnings
make the greater wounds.
and work: no sinning wounds so deep as such, which have more Mercy and
goodness to control them; and these only good persons do most taste of: much
grace received, and much kindness conferred, will in case of great
transgressions, make the conscience eagerly to arise, and sting the Offender.
Such as profess more interest in God, should walk more exactly with him.


Interest in God, more Title to Christ, more purity of Religion then others?
Why? if we be light, then to walk as Children of the light: if we do profess
the Gospel, then to walk as becomes the Gospel: if we be the Children of God,
then to walk as dear Children, cleansing our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit. None needs to be more circumspect, then he who is called to
holiness: his very relation is of a tender (though high) nature, he cannot sin
but he grieves a father; yet this is as true, that none of our relations exempt
us from temptations and assaults, which call upon us to be watchful and
prayerfull: If temptations drive thee not to thy knees, they will drive thee
easily to the ground^ no more but this; no man should sin, and no man should be
more careful, then he who is most good; for if he offends, then God suffers,
Christ suffers, the Gospel suffers, Religion, Profession, Christians, and all.

O then let us improve our interest in our God: Should such a man as I flee,
said Nehemiah; so then, should such a man as I sin thus, walk thus, live, do
thus? Why? God is my God, he is my Father, I am his child, his servant. If I
should sin, sin would not only be my own wound, but his dishonor: I may not so
abuse his love, his mercies, his Calling, his honoring of me. Others look on
me, but I must look on my God, and on his honor.

Thus have you the general observations of the Text, now I come to a more
punctual and intimate view of them both in the petition, and in the conclusion
of them, consider the words as a Petition, they yield unto us two main
considerations.

1. One of sin in presumption, [Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.

2. Another of sin in Dominion, [Let them not have dominion over me.]

First, For presumptuous sins; there are diverse expositions of these words.

1. Keep me Ab alienis, scilicet peccatis, from those sins which by the
suggestion or temptation of others I am enticed to; or as others, Ab alienis,
(i) falsis diis, from another, or false gods that I do not serve them, and be
not captivated by them; these think the Word to be Zurim from Zur, which
signifies Alienari.

2. Keep me a superbiis (Mizedim a verbo zud) which signifies superbire, aut
superbie and temere agere; the word in Hiphel signifies to do a thing, de
industria and per presumptionem. Before David prays to be kept from sins of
ignorance, and here from prides; from such sins as are done insolently and
knowingly; Some translate it, keep me from proud sins, others from insolent
sins, by which are meant manifest sins, open transgressions, committed with
contumacy, and with a high hand; but to hold to the expression in the Text,
Presumptuous sins. And the Observation is this.

CHAP. III.
The servants of God should pray to be kept from presumptuous sins.
from presumptuous sins.

Touching this I shall enquire into these particulars.

1. What presumptuous sins are.

2. Of that strength which keeps regenerate persons from presumptuous sinnings,
and what difference 'twixt the withholdings and restrainings of evil men, and
this keeping back of good men.

3. What reasons or causes of this desire to be kept back from presumptuous
sins.

4. Then some useful applications of all this to our selves.

SECT. I.
Quest. 1. WHat presumptuous sins are; What presumptuous sins are.
Sol. Sin (in the general) is any transgression of the Law: the Law of God is
his revealed will, for doing, or forbearing, and it is the rule of nature, and
actions; whatsoever things stands in conformity to its good, and whatsoever
varies or swarves from it, that same is sin. Sins diversely distinguished.


Now sins are diversely distinguished, for all sins are not equal either for
matter or manner: For matter some sins of themselves For Matter.
are more deep transgressions then others, as some diseases (in their own
nature,) are worse then other some; to blaspheme and curse God is a sin
naturally more vile then an idle thought, or an empty word: and to commit
Idolatry, is naturally more vile then to steal a Shilling: to shed innocent
blood is worse then to steal.

Again, sins may be distinguished in restect of the manner of For Manner.
committing, and thus it may fall out, that even a sin in its own nature less
then another, may yet for the manner of commission be more heinous: and a sin
in its own nature greater then another, may yet for the manner of commission,
be less guilting then a lesser sin which is more intensively raised by
circumstances; as to gather a few sticks on the Sabbath, was in it self not so
great a sin, as deflouring of a virgin, yet because the person did commit the
sin with a contempt of Gods express prohibition, it became more heinous and
guilty.

Now here falls in that distinction of sin into sins of infirmity, Sins of
infirmity, and sins of presumption.
and into sins of presumption: which distinction is made, not from the
different quallities of sin, but from the diverse qualification of sinning; the
same sin may be committed through presumption, which is committed through
Infirmity, yet the commiting of it through infirmity, is still much less and
extenuating, then the commiting of it through presumption: for as much as all
passive failings, (which arise from unevenness of strength) are not so high as
the active trespassings, which arise more from the ready contributions, and
concurrent assistances and furtherances of our own hearts: now to the thing in
particular.

Presumptuous sins are the bold darings, and proud adventurings of the heart
upon things or ways known to be unlawful against express Presumptuous sins
described.
threatenings, either upon a false confidence, or upon contemptuous slighting,
or desperate wilfulness: I have in this description not only expressed the
nature of presumptuous sinnings, but also concluded in it the several degrees
and risings thereof: all which, give me now liberty to open and explain:
consider therefore.

1. That presumptuous sinnings are proud adventurings of the heart upon sin;
there is a large difference 'twixt foilings Presumptuous sinnings are proud
adventurings upon sin.
by temptation, and adventurings by presumption: Temptation beats down that
actual strength of grace resisting: but presumption tramples down the light of
the word opposing: therefore presumptuous sinners are said to sin with an
exalted, or high hand; the sinner does put aside Gods will, and prefers his
own: Our tongues are our own, said they, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. yea,
they are said to set their q. d. what tell you us of the Lord; of his
displeasure or pleasure: As for the word which thou have spoken in the name of
the Lord we will not do it, said they in Jeremiah 44. A man does even try it
out with God, and provokes him to his face: and maintains the devises of his
heart against the purity and equity of Gods will.

2. In presumptuous sinnings a man knows the thing and way to In them a man
knows the thing to be unlawful.
be unlawful: and therefore the presumptuous sinner is opposed to the ignorant
sinner, Numb. 15. not that every sinning against knowledge (absolutely
whatsoever, is a presumptuous sinning, is against knowledge, and without gross
ignorance; the presumptuous sinner holds a candle in one hand, and draws out
the sword with the other; my meaning is this, that he breaks through the light
of knowledge, discerning the way to be sinful: yea, and flaming upon his
breast, working in and checking his conscience, notwithstanding all which, yet
he will presume to offend and proceed in transgressings; It Is true, even a good
man in many particulars through it to the way of his sin: yea, he makes his
heart to uphold the sin against the force of his knowledge, and drives back the
arguments with a resolution, that however he will have his sin.

3. The presumptuous sinner (in that kind of sinning) adventures He adventures
against express threatenings.
against express threa^nings: thus it stands with a man, his heart and Satan
incline and egg him to sin, but God and Conscience stand in the way against
him; as he said of Joab, Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the
end, so God says to him, thou shall not have peace in this way, it is the
thing which I hate and abhor, and I have revealed wrath from heaven against
it: but in presumption the sinning soul steps over the threatening to the
committing of the sin: that sword of God which may keep back another man, yet
though God sets the point of it to the breast of a presumptuous sinner, it will
not stave him off from adventuring: therefore the presumptuous sinner is said
to bless himself in his heart, though God threatens a curse, Deuteronomy. 29. this is
a truth that a presumptuous sinner is not changed by mercies, nor affrighted by
threats, but as the Leviathan in Job, laughs at the shaking of the spear; so
the heart of a presumptuous sinners puffs at all divine warnings and menaces:
come, said they, let it come that we may see him: As there is not a love to the
goodness of God; so there is not a fear of the greatness of God in presumption.

4. Presumptuous sins do arise from a false confidence; there are two They
arise from a false confidence. Of the facility of mercy.
things upon which the presuming sinner does imbolden himself.

1. One is the facility of mercy: when a man sets mercy against sin, he does
well, (because Gods mercies should draw our hearts off from sin) but when a
man sets mercy against Justice, now he offends; yet thus does the presumtuous
sinner, perhaps there is not in every presumptuous sinner such a spirit of
Atheistical madness; that he is absolutely careless of all that God
threatens, nor is he so miserably prodigal of his soul, that he rejoices to
have it damned, no, he may and sometimes does apprehend threatenings, yea, so
that his heart is caused to demurre, it may be a stopping apprehension (i.)
such as may make him study how to pursue his sin, and yet to wave and decline
the edge of the sharp threatening, and this he does by opposing mercy to
justice; it is true, this is a sin, and divine justice will not take it well,
but I will adventure on it, hoping that divine mercy will pacify the rigor of
the threatening, I will sin and offend Justice, but then I will decline that
Court, by flying to the Mercy-seat: God is of a gentle heart, easy to be
entreated, and will be presently satisfied and appeased: Just like a man who
will break his bones, because he trusts to have them quickly set by a skilful
Surgeon, or like a lewd child, who adventures to outrages, upon the scope
and allowance of his fathers good nature: This ground of presumption God fully
intimates in Deuteronomy. 29. 19. when he hears the words of the curse, that he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, etc.

Beloved, this is certain that presumption disposes of mercy beyond all
allowance, and writes a pardon which God will never allow nor seal: it will
dare to run in debt upon a conceit of a discharge, and clearing however: as
if Divine mercy were nothing else but a present untwining of all the knots
which we make, and a crossing of debts as soon as entered, and served for no
other end, but that men should be bold to sin, and cheerful after the
commission of it; But verily mercy is more precious then so.

2. Another is the self possibility and strength of future repentance: Of the
self possibility of future repentance
he is one of the worst patients in a way of sinning, who is confident that he
can be his own Physician: no soul wounds it self more then that which vainly
thinks that it can presently cure them; presumption is not always carried upon
an absolute hope of mercy, but the sinner being more piercingly understanding
knows that mercy is a special Charter, and such a balm as is spread only upon
a returning and humbling soul; here it is that this presumptuous person will
adventure to sin upon a confidence that he will (notwithstanding all this)
fashion and polish his soul to a meet capacity of mercy, by hereafter
repentings and humblings: he does foolishly delude his soul with a fancy of
such things which exceed his power. There are two things which the sinner
cannot assure himself of.

One is the lengthning of his life: for this candle is lighted and put out, not
according to our desires, but according to divine pleasure: all life has its
limits from the Lord of life and death: he who sins to day, cannot be assured
that he shall live till to morrow. Now repentance is a work of this life: death
binds us over to sentence, and then it is too late to return: And therefore
every presumptuous sinner adventures boldly upon that which cannot be his,
beyond the time present.

Another is the returning of the heart from sin, though our natural
principles can give the wound, yet they must be supernatural principles, which
give the cure: our own hearts can cause us to fall, but Gods grace only is that
which raises us; Now Gods grace is Gods gift, and not man's stock: though we
alone can fall off from God by sin, yet none but God can bring us back from
sin by true repentance unto himself: yet presumption makes the heart bold, not
only with time (which is in Gods hand) but also with grace, which is only in
Gods gift: Though I sin, yet I will hereafter repent, thus the presumptuous
soul, whose life may be instantly cut off, and to whom God may therefore deny
his grace to repent, because it did beforehand presume to sin.

5. In many presumptuous sinnings there is a slighting contempt: It is with a
slighting contempt.
therefore, Numb. 15. 30, 31. presumptuous sinning is called a despising of the
Word of the Lord: the soul that does ought presumptuously, etc. shall be cut
off, because he has despised the Word of the Lord, etc. to despise the Word of
the Lord, is to esteem of it as a vain thing, to disregard it in his
authority and Majesty over our consciences, and hearts, and ways: As if a soul
should say, what care I though God does speak thus and thus; I will not be
curbed, and limited, nor restrained: this is to contemn God: And it is called a
rebelling against him, Deuteronomy. 1. 24. I spoke unto you, and you would not hear,
but rebelled against the Commandment of the Lord, and went up presumptuously to
the hill.) It is called a casting of Gods Law behind our back; God has hemmed
and circumscribed the soul with precepts, within which if a man walks, he has
God to be his security, but in presumptuous sinnings a man will exceed his
limits, and yet believe a safety: this very thing is expressed in Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
According to the sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee, and
according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do, thou
shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the right
hand or to the left, ver. 12. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will
not hearken to the Priest, etc. even that man shall die, ver. 13. And all the
people shall h^ar, and fear, and do no more presumptuously; There you see that
presumptuous sinning consisted in the slighting of the sentence of the Law by
the Priest: the Priest said, this is it which God would have you do: This is it
which he would not have done. Now the person who sinned presumptuously, would
not stand to this, but would break over this sentence, and would go in his own
way, he disregarded what God spoke, that should not be his rule, no not his.

6. Lastly, presumptuous sinnings may rise higher then all It may arise to
malice and despite against God and Christ.
this, as when a man sins not only knowingly and wilfully, but most
maliciously, and despitefully against God and Christ; the Apostle speaks of
such presumptuous sinners, who tread under foot the Son of God, and do
despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. And who crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6. 6.

This kind of presumptuous sinning, is not only to sin, though a man knows
it, nor only to sin, because a man will sin, but it is also to sin on purpose
to dishonor God, and to vex his holy spirit; the soul is grown unto that
abominable insolency, that a man even plots deliberately how to cross God, and
will therefore apply himself to such words and acts, because he knows they will
displease God; this is the very top and height of presumptuous sinning: when a
man in a sober and calm spirit exempted from violent diseases and strong
passions, and insolently turbulent temptations, shall in sober circumstances,
desperately, and of malicious and set purpose encounter God, adventure
iniquity, to provoke God: he knows that the worst which shall befall him is
damnation, but he cares not for that, he will however have his pleasure in
sin, and will strive to despite that God, who stands in a just enmity to his
soul and sins.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. WHat that strength is which keeps back regenerate What that strength
is which keeps back the regenerate from presumptuous sins.
persons from presumptuous sins; and what difference 'twixt the restrainings
of evil men, and this keeping back of good David.

Sol. For a more distinct knowledge of this point, observe a few particulars.

1. Restraint is any kind of stop 'twixt the inclination and the Restraint is
any kind of stop betwixt the inclination and the object.
object: when the nature is inclined to such or such a thing, and a bar falls
in, to keep them asunder, this is restraint. As when God bridled up the fire
from burning the three children; and the Lion, from devouring Daniel; and
Abimelech from touching Sarah; and Laban from hurting Jacob, The natural
inclinations of the former, and the morally evil dispositions of the latter,
were chained in, they were stopped, they were hindered in respect of their
actings and exercise. All creatures are capable of restraint, because under a
Supreme power; only God cannot be restrained: but for all creatures, their
natures, and inclinations, and operations, are under his command by the Law of
Creation.

2. Restraint of any Agent, arises from a greater strength Restraint of any
agent is from a greater strength of a superior agent.
of a Superior Agent: whatsoever keeps a man back from a sinful acting, it is
(at that time) whiles a restraint of more actually strong force, then the
present inclination is; as in the stopping of a stone or water, that which is
unequal in strength, a lesser force is not able to keep in the stronger: the
cords wherewith Sampson was bound, were no restraints to his motion and escape,
for his strength exceeded them, and he easily brake them asunder: But Gods
decree and providence is a restraint to the raging sea: and his power is a
restraint to gird in the malice and rage of man, because, though sinful
inclinations be strong, yet God can overruled, and bound, and bind it in.

3. All Restraints presupposes an aptness, a disposition ready to Restraints
suppose a readiness ^o get out.
run, and get out. The Child whose desire is to lie in the Cradle, is not there
said to be restrained: and the Tradesman, whose shop is his paradise, is not
therefore restrained from going abroad; but when a servant would be gadding,
and yet is kept in, this is Restraint. In every man there is too much sin;
Corruption is in us all, and it is with it, as with a Child in the womb which
would be breaking out into the world; or as with fire kindled within, which
would be flaming abroad; such an aptness is there in our sinful inclinations
to secret, and then to open actings. Now the Cohibition, the enclosing, the
locking of them in, is properly Restraint.

4. All Restraint of sin is from God. That God whom David here desires to hold,
or keep him back, did also All restraint of sin is from God.
withold Abimelech, keep in Laban, keep up Esau, keep off Saul; and it is
granted that there are several means and ways of restraint, natural, moral,
spiritual, (as you shall hear anon) but it is God in them which causes
restraint; he imprints Abel, but every Cain would kill him; not a Jacob, but
Esau would pursue him; not a David, but Saul would hunt him; not an Apostle,
but Herod would be-head him: All Christian Religion would lie in blood, yea,
and the very order of nature would sink into confusion by the efficacy of that
sinful corruption which is equally divided amongst all, if God did not look
down from heaven, and restrain the rage of sin in all.

5. All evil men are not equally restrained by God; which All evil men are not
equally restrained.
appears both in the matter, and in the measures of sinning: some evil men do
not break out into all horrible kinds of sin: some, though they be at the same
school of particular sinning, are not yet in the same form, and height, or
degree of sin, though they be at the same trade; yet their skill and thriving
in the same sin is different: Every Drunkard is not the mighty man to drink,
and every swearer lets not his tongue loose to the highest blast of Blasphemy.
There is no man so high in sin, but if God should cease to restrain him, he
would yet plunge himself into a deeper guilt.

6. The restraining of any sinner is an Act of a merciful Providence unto him.
Gods Justice begins already to smoke against Restraining of the sinner is an
act of merciful Providence.
a man, when he totally leaves the rains unto him, when he gives him up to
himself to his own vile affections, reprobate mind, to his own Counsels and
ways, and will no more strive with him, but cast him off to himself. But it is
a great Mercy when he restrains: though renewing grace be the saving Mercy, yet
restraining grace is a great Mercy, when God will not let a man's sinful
corruption take its full walk: for restraint diminishes guilt, whereas, if
this bridle were off, a man would increase his sinful accounts by infinite
iterations and multiplications of sinning. Now he is kept from enlarging his
debts, yea, and it diminishes sin; whereas a man let loose, would diffuse sin,
cast his firebrarnds about, draw others to a consociation of evil, and so set
up the trade: now by restraint, sinning is more contracted and narrowed: yea,
and it diminishes wrath and judgment: for according to the number and
measures of sinning, there shall be an equal proportion of vengeance and
punishment, the greater sinner shall have and feel the sharper flames of hell:
but now restraint keeps in the sin and at least makes it less sinful, (for as
sin sticking in the inclination is not so deep as that which flies out of that
into actings and consummations) and so consequently is a means to lessen the
heat of future torment.

7. God does restrain the good and the bad from sin. The evil man God does
restrain both the good and the bad from sin.
is so wholly carried by a sinful nature, that if God did not keep him back;
he would bring all to confusion. The good man is so weakly good, that if God
did not prevent, and interpose, and withold, he could not with-stand so much
evil as now he does.

How great a Mercy did David acknowledge a Restraint from sin to be, you may
see in his own words; 1 Samuel 25. 32. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which
has sent thee this day to meet me. Verse 33. And blessed be thy advice, and
blessed be thou which have kept me this day from shedding innocent blood.

The Father has two Children, one young, and the other old: if he does not
keep in the elder, he will be like the Prodigal, sell all, and be riotous: if
he does not hold in the other, he will fall, and be like Mephibosheth, lame on
both feet.

Evil men have strong corruptions, which God is pleased many times, many ways
to keep within door, he will not suffer all their intentions, desires, projects
to see the light.

Good men have weak graces, their own legs are not able to bear them up, and
strong temptations and occasions may soon lay flat a weak defendant, and
therefore God is pleased yet to bridle in that remaining corruption, to keep
off the soul, or something off from the soul, lest it should sin: we see it in
experience, that grace alone is not able to keep off sin: Grace can keep us,
whiles God keeps the grace: but if God leaves us to the assayes of our own best
strength, we are unequal Combatants in the field.

8. God does diversely keep back or restrain men from particular God does
diversely restrain men from sin. By enlivening of Conscience.
sins and sinnings: sometimes,

1. By inliv^ning the con^cience, which being st^ictly awakened, rises to such
an height of impatience, and choler, and rage, that the sinner is willing to
let go the sinning, rather then to answer the scourging inditements and threats
of conscience for it. As the luxurious patient, though he likes the sparkling
wine, yet he dares not drink it, lest his spirit should be thereby inflamed,
and burn him up; even an evil man, though he be not af^aid of sin, yet he may
be afraid of conscience, and may therefore be kept back from his sinning, as
the Colliar from handling his coals, not because they are coals, By
self-reflecting apprehensions.
but because they are burning hot.

2. By self-reflecting apprehensions: the love that a man has to himself, may
be a means to keep him off from some sinful actings: for some sinning have
such infamy, and charge, and envy, and loss, and danger indorsed on them, that
the very present arrearages of sin do prevail, and keep off the man from
adventuring; he will not strike the bargain for payment so sharp, and sure, and
present.

3. By l^gal imprintings: God is pleased many times to set By legal imprintings.
up the flaming sword, and the shadows of hell before the eyes of a daring
sinner: tells him plainly that he will call him to an account, and wrath shall
be his portion, if he will not forbear thus to provoke him: whereupon he
forbears.

4. By denying and crossing opportunities: when a man has By denying
opportunities.
prepared himself for a sin, then God does so secretly direct the ways, and
the eyes, and the presence of other creatures, that the sinner must keep in the
cup which he has tempered, and dares not draw the sword with which he is
girded, nor act the evil which he did before earnestly intend to prosecute and
finish The sinner does not always sin, not that he wants an heart, but because
he has not a convenience; as the ship ridged may be wind-bound: though the
greediness of sin thrusts on the sinner, yet the wisdom of the flesh will keep
it in, till the season of sinning may sutably match with the former
contrivances of sin. Esau deferred to slay, his brother Jacob till Isaac died.

5. By denying, or withholding of temptations. Beloved, By withholding
temptations
Though evil men are under the power of the Prince of the Air, yet I
conjecture, not in this sense, that they may tempt them when, and how he
pleases; or that they must necessarily act every sin to which he tempts them.
But as God is pleased, when Satan does many times tempt them, yet sometimes to
restrain them; so he is pleased, when Satan would tempt them, many times to
restrain them, well knowing that his temptations would easily draw out matter
already prepared: An heart which has won it self to a sin, may without any
more ado, by the very presence of a temptation and occasion be instantly
wrought unto it.

6. By causing Diversions, which may call aside the employment By causing
diversions.
of the sinner another way: As when Saul in malice raised a persecution against
David, and had hemmed him in; God yet restrained Saul, by letting in the
Philistines upon his County, withdrew back the execution of his ragefull
intention against David at that time.

7. Lastly, By beginning, and supporting, and enlarging the By a principle of
sanctification.
principle of sanctification, which is the sweetest restraint of the heart from
sin, drawing it off, inabling it against inclinations and temptations: and such
a kind of holding back does David pray for in this place, viz. a sanctifying
restraint, a renewing restraint, a subduing Restraint.

9. The restraining of good men are exceeding different from The restraints of
good men are different from those of evil men. They differ,
those of evil men: though the sins from which either are restrained may be
common, yet the keeping back of one by renewing Grace, and of the other by mere
restraining grace, are very different. v. g.

1. They differ in the fountain for keeping off by mere restrainings, proceed
from the care of universal providence, but In the fountain
keeping back by renewings, comes from a special affection of God in Christ:
God has an eye over all his works, and a mercy over them too, he does not
totally leave, no not the sinful Creature, but expresses a Providence in
permissions of somethings, contradiction of many things, restriction of many
things, and ordination of all things: though men be desperately evil, and as it
were the lords of sin, yet God will be known for ever to be the Lord of nature
by circumscribing, and abridging, and commanding it in its propensions: But the
keeping back by renewing grace, this does arise from a tender love, a most
gracious affection which God bears to his servanrs, like the Father
withholding of his dear Child from a sword which might hurt him, or meat which
might make him sick.

The restrainings of evil men are from the Wisdom of divine In the form of
impression.
power, and the cohibitions of good men are from the goodness of special
favor. They differ again in the form of Impression: for restraint of evil men
arise only from argument, but those of good men, depend upon nature as well as
argument. In the former, it is argument alone which makes the stop. In the
latter it is argument and nature both, as Abner said to Asahel; 2 Samuel 2. 22.
If I should smite thee, how should I look thy brother Joab in the face? there
was naked argument. How can I do this great evil, and sin against God? as
Jos^ph said to his Mistress, Genesis 39. 9. there was a divine Argument, and an
holy nature; bid a man to grasp a toad, his very nature shrinks back from this;
bid him climb by a little rope to the top of an high mast in the midst of the
sea, and here Argument or reason may withhold him: it is one thing for a new
Argument to keep off an old heart; it is another thing for a new nature to keep
back from an opposite corruption.

3. They differ in their entrance and seizure; The Restrainings of evil men are
but as locks upon the out-door: and In their entrance and seizure.
the keeping back of good men is as the lock upon the Closet; one is an
impedite to the actions, the other is an impedite to the inclinations; one is a
bridle upon the lips and hands, the other is a bond upon the heart and
disposition; the one may seal up the lips that a man does not swear: the other
tempers the heart that a man fears an oath.

4. They differ in their Efficacy: Restrainings of evil men do In their
Efficacy.
not impair the state of sin, no more then chains and prisons do the nature of
the thief or Lions: Look as it was with the fire, into which the three Children
was cast, the restraining of its burning Act did no way prejudice, either the
nature of the fire, or the faculty of it to burn, only it did suspend the act:
so it is with mere Restraints about moral things, though it does give a
Supersedeas to the evil act, (for the present) yet it grants not a Capias
corpus, the body of sin is all one, as before. But in the keeping back of a
good man, there is not only an inter-let of the Act, but some measure of
diminution to the sinful inclination.

5. They differ in the fairness of equality: Mere Restraints In the fairness of
equality.
do not deal justly with sins, they make a stop in one, and leave open a gap
for other sins: like a vessel of many holes, though the water break not out in
one place, because it is stopped, yet it freely flies out in the rest: so where a
man is restrained only, though that sin cannot find a way in that vein, yet it
will find a course (like the water which is hindered under ground) another way:
But the holdings back by renewing grace do indispose generally and evenly.

6. They differ in the fullness of duration: for mere Restraints In the fullness
of duration.
hold in the nature, no longer then the things remain, by virtue of which the
mind was restrained. Let the fear of death expire, put aside the edge of the
Law, be sure that shame shall not follow, and the only restrained sinner breaks
open school, so that he goes to the sin: But holdings back by renewed grace are
cohibitions of the heart upon permanent grounds, viz. the perpetual contrariety
twixt God and sin, twixt sin and his Will, and Holiness, and Goodness, and
Honor.

7. They differ in this, That the heart of a man only restrained, In Restraints
men grow worse when at liberty.
does, being at liberty, (like waters held up) pour forth it self more
violently and greedily, as if it would pay use for fo^bearnace; it abounds in
the sin, and makes a more fully wicked recompense for the former restrictions.
But where the soul is kept back by renewing grace, i^ does not multiply sin,
Not so in renewing^.
because of less practice now, but is laboring a fuller diminution of sin,
because of too much practice heretofore.

8. They differ thus: An evil man is kept back as a prisoner Restraints are an
evil man's force and cross, a good man's desire and joy.
by force against his Will; But a good man is kept back as a Petitioner, it is
his hearts desire, O that my ways were so directed that I might keep thy
statutes: order my steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion
over me: Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins.

It is an evils man cross to be restrained, and a good man's joy to be kept back
from sin: when sin puts forth it self, the evil man is putting forth his hand
to the sin; but when sin puts forth it self, the good man is putting forth his
hand to heaven; if he finds his heart yielding, out he cries, O keep back thy
servant: An evil man is kept back from sin, as a friend from a friend, as a
lover from his lover, with knit affections, and projects of meeting: but a good
man is kept back from sin, as a man from his deadly enemy, whose presence he
hates, and with desires of his ruin and destruction: It is the good man's
misery, that he has yet an heart to be more tamed and mastered: It is an evil
man's vexation and discontent, that still, or at any time he is held in by
cordor bridle.

And thus you see what David aims at, in desiring to be kept back from
presumptuous sins, viz. not a mere suspension, but a mortification, not a
not-acting only, but a subduing of the inclination, not for a time, but for
ever. Nevertheless, methinks, there may he something more added for the opening
of this point, Keep back thy servant from presumptuons sins.

Take what I conceive, briefly thus, God keeps back his God keeps back his
servants from sin. By preventing grace.
servants from sin.

1. By preventing Grace, which is by infusing such a nature, which is like a
Bias into the Boul, drawing it aside another way: so that holy nature which God
confers on his servants, does secretly draw off the soul from the consent,
appetition and practice of sin propounded to the soul.

2. By assisting Grace, which is a further strength superadded By assisting
grace.
to that first implanred nature of holiness, like an hand upon a Child holding
him in. This Divines call, a Cooperating Grace, which is an excess of divine
strength, to that strength which God has formerly imprinted in preventing
grace: which whether it be an enlargement of habitual grace in the natural
measure of it, (as when health is made to rise to a greater degree of strength)
or whether it be an efficacious motion of Gods Spirit, powerfully strengthening
the inherent Grace to the acts of aversation and resistance of sin and
temptation; It is, I confess, an acute and disputable inquiry, yet whether the
one, or whether the other, the soul is by either more confirmed, and
established, and upheld, and kept from sin?

3. By quickening Grace, which is, when God does inliven By quickening grace.
our graces to manifest themselves in actual oppositions, so that the soul
shall not yield, but keep off from entertaining the sin: As when in the motions
of sin, he inflames the heart with an apprehension of his own love in Christ,
and then excites our love exceedingly unto himself again, whereby the heart is
made marvelously averse, and to detest any closure with this sin, by which so
ample and gracious a love should be wronged and abused; or as when in the
temptations to sin, he excites that affection of holy fear, which works that
filial and awful regard to a great God and a good Father, that the soul is
brought into Joseph's temper, how can I do this great evil and sin against God.

4. By directing grace, which is when God confers that effectual By directing
grace.
wisdom to the mind, tenderness to the conscience, watchfulness to the
heart, that his servants become greatly solicitous of his honor, scrupulously
jealous of their own strength, and justly regardful of the honor of their holy
profession. And therefore they decline all occasions of the sin which may
over-lay their own strength, and dailies not with the temptations, or with the
first motions: But as they are in fear of themselves, so they are in defiance,
not only with apparent sins, but also with the appearances of them: and shun
not only the sins, but the inlets and preparations to the sins: and verily he
shall be much kept from the secrecy of sin, as a King who is wise to keep off
Parle with the Ambassadors of sin, I mean occasions, which do negotiate with
the soul, and prepare it to lose its own strength.

5. By doing grace, which is, when God effectually enclines By doing grace
the heart of his servants to the places and ways of their refuge, safeties
and preservations from sin: By enlarging the spirit of supplication which
carries the soul to its strength; prayer engages God, and this we find, that
the praying Christian is more kept from sin, then the disputing Christian: for
though sin be stronger then reason; yet God is stronger then sin: by framing
the heart to the reverent and affectionate use of his Ordinances: A man many
times comes to the word a combitant, but is sent away a Conqueror, comes hither
as a pursued man, by sin and Satan, but here God gives him a safeguard, a
protection; and sends him away armed with more holy resolutions, courage and
defiance, by strengthening his graces, by assuring his love and strength, by
making the sin more vile and odious.

SECT. III.
Quest. 3. NOW I proceed to the third question, What causes or Why David prays
to be kept from presumptuous sins.
reasons there should be which might move David to put up this prayer, Keep
back thy servant from presumptuous sins.

Sol. Reasons thereof are many, I will touch them, though under a few heads,
viz.

1. In respect of himself. 2. In respect of the sins themselves. 3. In respect
of others. 4. In respect of God.
1. In respect of himself.
1. If he considered himself, there were sufficient grounds In respect of
himself.
for such a petition, because

1. His aptness by virtue of original corruptions, even to His aptness to
presumptuous sins.
presumptuous. sins. Beloved, I dare not traverse the extent and compass of
sin (in respect of aptitude and possibility) even for a good man: of this I
am sure, the least sin is farther then he should go, and the higher he mounts
in sin, the deeper are his own wounds; no man can be safely bad, or comfortably
sinful: Nevertheless, this may be said, that though there be some top-sins,
which perhaps, a good man does not commit, yet there is scarce any sin for
kind or degree, which might not lay him flat, if God did not hold him up, and
keep him back.

The reason whereof is this, because original sin, which (cleaves to the
best) is not only a corrupt, but also an universal corrupt inclination; what
the Philosophers conceit of the capacity and disposition in their first matter,
that it is illimited, unbounded, infinite, not restrained to this or that form
only, but in a general way lies open to all impressions: That is most true of
original corruption, even in all that it is (for its part) a capacity, an
aptness to any actual villainy and wickedness, a womb of all uncleanness, a
seed of all iniquity, not distinguishing 'twixt the vilest and the fairest
transgressions; Paul complained in Romans 7. 18. I know that in me (that is in my
flesh) dwells no good thing; the flesh (i.) the corruption of sinful nature
is an utter vacancy of any good, that is the privative nature of it, and then
the flesh, i. e. sinful corruption, is a diseased inclination, a filthy
fountain, a lewd womb, a sinning sin, impelling, intising, egging on the soul
to consents and acts unlawful, and that upon all occasions without any
distinctions of great or little, and that is the positive nature of it: Though
inherent grace does much abate and keep under that sinful nature (as a naughty
servant may be held down by a good and stronger Master) yet it is of a false,
deceitful, and capable nature for the vilest impressions of actual sins.

2. His impotency and self inability to keep off himself from His impotency to
keep himself from such sins.
such sins: Beloved, it is true, that grace is a sweet and enabling quality;
he who receives grace, does with it receive a measure of strength proportioned
to the degree of grace received, and no man is so vain to conceive that a
person receiving grace, can do no more against sin, then he who gratia operans)
to change the nature within, so there must be a second grace which they call
gratia co-operans, to assist the soul and the first grace, against the
insolency of corruption, and of actual temptations; grace can do much, but (of
it self) not always enough to keep off a sin: it is true that the distance of
the soul and sin depends (i.) that such a sin does not engage and lay flat the
soul, this does not owe it self to the mere and natural strength of the the
first created grace, but to that grace, as assisted and supported by an higher
hand from heaven: so far as I yet conjecture that principally effectual
strength of created grace is more in its dependence, then in its self. As an
arm is strong, and able to do much service, and to put off several assaults,
but principally by reason of its communion with the head, from which if it were
separated, it can do nothing but fall down: o^ as the beam of light from the
Sun, moves, irradiates, pierces, and perhaps heates and melts, none of which
could it do, if there were an eclipse, an intercision, a cutting of it off from
its dependence on the Sun; so grace does most and more, as it is most and
more assisted from above, from its head which is Christ, and from God who is
the father of lights. Suppose grace left entirely and solely to it self, a
person would be exposed to many and foul miscarriages: though the water be well
heated, yet remove the fire, and the natural cold will return and prevail over
that accidental heat: The natural habits of sin would easily have the better of
the extrinsecal habits of grace, were not these held up, and backed by an
higher arm, then that of it self, or then that in corruption working against
it; you know that all Adams strength was not Canon proof against Satan's
temptations; he assaulted and entered his Castle, and laid him flat and all the
world with him. Peter, though a very good man, and a very forward Disciple (one
qualified with much grace, and high affections) yet was beaten down in plain
field, he could not preserve and keep back himself, though armed beforehand
with a warning from his Master, but denied him thrice, and that with some high
qualifications too: Nay, the great falls of the best men we ever heard of in
Scripture, show thus much, that it was not their sword, and their own spear,
that it was not their own strength which could keep them entirely back, and
point unto us, not only the impotency of our own guard, but also the name by
which we stand, and therefore is it, that David prays, Keep back thy servant
from presumptuous sins.

2. In respect of the sins themselves.
In respect of the sins themselves.
The mere consideration of sins (as) presumptions, afford strong causes why
David should pray to be kept back from them: for though every sin contains a
natural reason of dislike and forsakement (every sin carrying a foul quality
in it, and a condemning inconformity) yet some sins are of a deeper dye, and
of a more crying guilt, and of a darker blackness, and of a more wounding
sharpness, and of a louder vileness then other some are.

Amongst which higher ranks of iniquity are presumptuous sins Presumptuous sins
are amongst the higher rank of iniquity. The more shining light we sin against,
the viler the sin.
and sinnings; which may appear thus.

1. The more shining light of grace is trampled over for to act the sin, the
viler is the sinning; for if naked light makes the spot the broader (the sinner
ever sins the more, by how much the more clearly he sees his way to sin) then
shining light makes it much more heinous, (i.) when knowledge does as it were
wrestle in the conscience, when it does contend strongly with the soul by force
of evidence and plain reasonnings, to stay it: But now presumptuous sins and
sinnings, they are the laying flat (as it were) of shining light: the soul does
(as it were) shut its eyes, and stop its ears, it does break away to the sin,
against all the discoveries and clear impleadings of knowledge, gainsaying and
withstanding it, the presumptuous person goes not to sin ignorantly, but he
does it by imprinted light, so the sin as Gods enemy which yet he will embrace
as his friend: yea the more Inexcusable that a sin is, the worse it is; when
little or nothing can be said in behalf of the siner: thus is it in
presumptuous sinings, the man cannot say I did not know it, I was not warned.

2. The more pride of heart accompanies any kind of sinning, The more pride of
heart in any sinning, the viler it is.
this makes it the more vile: for pride lifts up the point of the sword, it
shakes the spear against God: when the will of God, and the will of a sinner
come into a competition about sining, then pride grows high; Who is the Lord
says Pharaoh that I should let Israel go, Exodus 3. Who is Lord over us, said
they in Psalm 12. when the heart goes proudly to sin, it will acknowledge noe
Lord, but its own pleasure, and no rule, but its own resolution, it can slight
a precept, and scorn a threatening. Now presumptuous sinnings are filled with
pride; I think St. Austine had an aim at this, in his exposition of this v.
when he rendered the reading of it thus; contine servum tuum a superbiis, keep
back thy servant from prides: as if pride were knotted, and folded, and doubled
in presumptuous sinnings, there was pride and pride again in that heart which
durst thus to sin: and verily so there is in presumptuous sinnings a manifold
pride: a pride of judgment to approve that which God has branded and
condemned; a pride of will to rise up to that which God would have the sinner
forbear. A pride of security to make a Sanctuary for the soul, when God has
threatened wrath, etc.

3. The more impudency and boldness attends a sinning the worse it is. There
is a double impudency about sinning.

One of defense, when the sin has been committed, of which I am not now to
speak, which is no more but to paint The more impudency in sinning, the worse
it is.
a whore, or to cover a plain sore, to make that seem good which really is
stark nau^ht.

Another of entrance, when the sinful soul lays aside all shame, and fear, and
modesty, and restraints, and arguments, said he, whatsoever may be said come of
it, whatsoever may come, yet I will on; let God take it well, or take it ill,
let him beseech by mercy, or warn by threatenings, nothing moves, neither my
peace nor comfort, nor soul prevail, nor my shame, nor trouble, nor misery keep
back. But thus it is in presumptuous sinnings, the heart is bold and impudent,
which can look so much mercy in the face, and yet will dare to sin, which can
look so many threatenings in the face, and yet will dare to sin, which can look
its own great misery (in respect of the issue

4. The more abuse of mercy concurs to the sinning, the more heinous it raises
the sin: for mercy is the sweetest stop of a The more Mercy is abused, the
more heinous the sin.
sinner; and the kindness of it should smooth off the soul from offending:
what is mercy but that unspeakable readiness in God to forgive a sinner; a
gracious willingness to sit down with wrong offered, if yet the sinner will
come in, and the abusings of it, are affronts to the highest love. But now in
presumptuous sinnings mercy is extremely abused.

First, in that it has not its dir^ct end: the direct end of mercy is to awe,
and to keep off the heart from sin; There is mercy with thee, therefore shall
thou be fear!: Psalm. 130. But the presumptuous sinner is less fearful,
because God is so merciful, and the mercies of God should lead to repentance,
Romans 2. But the presumptuous sinner yet dares to hold on the sinful trade.

Secondly, when it is made to serve and to encourage sin; O this is the
imbasing of that high and tender attribute of God, when we draw out from his
goodness to embolden the heart to wickedness; as if that God whose soul
abhorres sin, would let fall any expression to hearten a sinner, yet thus it
is with the presuming sinner, the very mercy of God makes him bold to sin
against God; the confidence of that easiness in God to forgive, occasions him
therefore to adventure and multiply transgressions. In respect of others.


3. In respect of others.
David had good reasons to pray to be kept from presumptuous sins in respect
of others; as well as in respect of himself: whither you consider his general
calling (a man of goodness, or his particular calling, a man of dignity and
place) but I will fold them both together: thus then, 2. Reasons. His sins
would be exemplary.


1. Such sins would be exemplary and noted: There are three things which set
a man upon the stage, which lift up his actions on high to the eye of the word.

One is his powerful and active sanctity; a very holy man is a kind of a
wondrous sight, after which many eyes are gazing: Godliness is a very rare
thing, and therefore men look much upon him who professes it.

Another is his singular dignity: lift a man out of the crowd, advance him to a
place and seat of honor above others, how busy is the multitude to eye, and
judge, and imitate him. The ways and actions of great persons (are usually)
the present copies of the most.

A third is his notorious miscarriages, which are like the tail of a blazing
comet; the great sinning of good orgreat men, fall instantly into common
discourse and (perhaps) also easily into common practice. Therefore great cause
had David to pray against presumptuous sins, which by his practice might
prove a common snare, for who will not confidently write after that sinful
copy, which both goodness and greatness have begun: that which the great man
dot^, the inferior person will do; and that which the good man does, that the
evil man thinks he may now lawfully do: if knowledge will venture, ignorance
supposes that it may safely follow, and if holiness will adventure, why
should profaneness be so nice as to stop: The way or fact is credited, either
as not bad, or else not so dangerous, where either authority or profession are
leaders.

Now this might be some cause to move good David to pray to be kept back from
presumptuous sins, knowing how his actions were capital copies, wrote in Text
Letters: And that the sinnings of great men are like the fallings of Cedars,
which bring down with them to the ground many lower shrubs: And that the
sinnings of good men are easily snares, whereby other men would encourage and
deceive themselves.

2. Such sinnings from him would be trophies to evil men: His sins would be
trophies to evil men.
There are three things which flash evil hearts.

One is the accomplishing of their own projects and lusts.

Another is the distresses of the Church; Aha, so would we have it.

A third is the great falls of good men, now like the dog they will bark and
insult over the wounded Lion: A good man's sins, which are his wound, and Gods
dishonor, is their day of mirth and sport.

I observe that there are three mouths which the higher sinnings of good men do
open.

The mouth of God, O how his word thunders his displeasure against the soul of
such an one who is come so near unto him, and yet has adventured thus to sin
against him, do thou thus requite the Lord.

The mouth of conscience, if we do well and keep uprightly with God, then the
mouth of conscience yields words of oil and peace (it exceedingly excuses,
comfort, acquitteth, upholdeth, etc.) but if we wickedly transgress and
exceed infirmities, O then the mouth of conscience proves like the mouth of the
sword, it speaks with sharpness, and woundings, and terrible amazement, etc.
breaks the bones of David, Psalm. 51. makes him roar, Psalm. 32.

The mouth of evil men; Now their voice is set on high, the trumpet is set to
their mouth; O what Ragings, Raylings, Girdings, Scoffings, Obloquies, and
Blasphemies are instantly heaped upon Religion and Profession, yea, these are
they, this is their holiness, this their profession, this their niceness, this
the hypocrisy of them all. Now (perhaps) this also might move David to pray to
be kept back from presumptuous sins, though not the immediate, yet the
colateral reason, viz. because he might not give occasion to the Adversary,
that God might not suffer by him, nor Religion by him, that he might not sad
the hearts of the righteous, nor weaken the Glory of holiness, nor stretch the
mouths of them who can bless themselves in a course of vileness, and yet curse
and accuse the godly for particular facts only. In respect of God.


4. In respect of God.
Here also might David frame strong and singular reasons to be kept back from
presumptuous sins. I know there is nothing in God which a good heart might not
urge as a sufficient 2. Reasons.
argument against any sin; but I will contract my thoughts and matter.

1. What God had been to him, might cause him to pray What God has been to him.
against presumptuous sins.

For his temporal kindness, that was exceeding great, he raised him from the
crook to the Scepter, from the Shepherds tent to the Kings Throne, and now
after all this, to answer so great goodness with great sinfulness, this would
be a high degree of odious unthankfulness.

His spiritual kindness, that was more then the former, he did set his love
upon him, and made him a person after his own heart, gave unto him his good
Spirit of grace and joy, comforted his soul in many adversities, compassed him
about with favor, as with a shield, heard his prayers, granted him the desires
of his soul; O then, how should David do such great wickedness, and sin against
his God! God forbid that David should put forth an hand to such an high kind of
sinning, who had received from the hand of his God such high kinds of mercy and
goodness; Mercy should make the greatest distance twixt us and sin, and cause
the purer walking twixt us and God. What he was to God.


2. What he was to God, Why? David was his servant (see the Text) and
presumptuous sinnings are high oppositions to our service of God: David was his
child, his son; and presumptuous sinnings are great, at least incongruities to
the way of filial obedience. Should such a man as I flee? said Nehemiah: so
here, should such a man as David, one to whom God was so near, one who was so
near to God, should he break out into the ways of Rebellions, into the acts of
an enemy, into the paths of hostility? not only sin, (which may befall the
best) but sin presumptuously, which befalls the worst, nor only to be surprised
by temptation, but also to dare one in a sin by a proud presumption: What for a
child to take arms against his Father, for a holy David to sin with so high a
hand against so good a God, and so professed a Father? no marvel that he fears,
and prays, and that earnestly, Lord, Keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins.

No other might be expected from men professing themselves haters of God, and
Lover of sin: but for a friend, for a servant, for a child, how can my God take
such vile dishonors from me? and who will honor him, if his own should
adventure, and presume thus to dis-glory his name, and wrong his, and their
relation?

SECT. IV.
NOW I shall descend to the useful Applications of this David. 1. Of
Instruction. 2. Of Examination. 3. Of Exhortation. 4. Direction.
1. For Instruction.
It may instruct and inform us in diverse particulars, viz. Instruction.


1. To see our own danger: as the prayers of holy men for good things, should
learn us faith and hope: so their prayers See our own danger.
against great sins should teach us fear and watchfulness. There is a story of
an heathen man, who prayed to Jupiter to be saved from his enemies, one who
heard him so petitioning, willed him to mend his suit, and to desire Jupiter to
save him from his friend, for he trusted them more, and therefore they might do
him most hurt. I would add one thing more to have mended that petition also: He
should have prayed to have been saved from himself; for there is more danger in
our selves, then in all enemies or friends.

O Brethren, we carry about with us vile natures, and treacherous hearts: Even
those abominations which sometimes we could have trembled at, unto them will
our wicked selves deliver our selves, if God keep us not back. Natural
corruptions will bid fair for the foulest commissions; and that the match is
not finished and acted, it is not because we want hearts, but because God
restrains and hinders. My soul is even among Lions, said David: In another
case, assuredly our soul dwells with such a nature, as will not distinguish
twixt small and great, but is then most like it self, when it is boiling in the
vilest degrees of sinning.

The temptations cannot be so black and foul, but our corrupt hearts would
easily kindle by them, and we should embrace them, unless there were a God to
stay and stop us: you know that Hazael, when the Prophet wept, and told him of
that Savage and barbarous Cruelty which should break from him in ripping up the
woman, and but chering of the Children: Is thy servant a dog? said he, q. d. I
abhor the thoughts of such unnatural villainy; and yet being left to himself, he
soon acted that which now he seemed to abominate: even those sins which made a
cry to heaven, as Cains murder, and Sodoms uncleanness: and the mighty sins
which the Prophet touched at, yea, and the highest and stoutest rebellions,
they have all of them in all men a natural foundation, and seed and principle.

Secondly, Not to boast our selves of our standing. Learn Boast not our selves
of our standing.
Paul's counsel th^oughly, Let him that stands take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor.
10. 12. Even thou which have heretofore bitterly judged another for his
sinnings, art now in the same transgression, and thy conscience is all over
running with blood; either thus thou art, or thus thou may be

There be four things which the great falls of others should viz.

1. Great compassion: It is an ill heart which can rejoice at other men sins,
and it is never right with us until we can hate our own sins, and shed tears
for others.

2. Humbling fear, Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1.
Thy Glass is made of the same brittle metal, and that it falls not, and
breaks, it is because of the hand yet holds it, not because it keeps it self.
If God should permit Satan to winnow thee, thou would (perhaps) more readily
deny Christ, and his truths, then ever Peter did: many a man has sound limbs,
because he was never in the field at battle.

3. Earnest prayer for continued assistance: forasmuch as though our Combats
and dangers are here below, yet our guards and safe-comes are there above, and
only there.

4. Tender jealousy. When others fall into sin, it is good for us to fall upon
our knees, and watch, since our forbearance depends not on the betterness of
our nature, or greatness of our strength, but on the efficacy of Gods
preventing and assisting grace.

Thirdly, You may here learn, what weakness there is in the What weakness is
there in the strongest Christian.
strongest Christian: all his own strength is not sufficient for him against
temptation or sin: if any thing could keep off sin, it is grace, but grace
needs help, as well as sin needs a bridle: Hold thou me up, said David, so
shall I be safe, psalm 119. Look as it must be a divine Power which implants
Grace, so it must be an Almighty hand which must mantain it: we can neither
form our own hearts, nor conquer our own lusts: What would become of the Child,
if the Nurse did not hold him? And whether would the ship be driven by a
Tempest, had it not a Pilot to steer and order it? None can say what shipwracks
would befall even a good soul, were it not continually preserved and looked unto
by a good God. Our strength and safety is more in the name of God and Christ,
then in our own defense: hence it is that our Savior commended that petition,
even to the best, (Lead us not into temptation) not that God tempts any man to
evil, but that Satan would easily lead us into sin: Did not God lead us out?
his suggestions are crafty, his temptations strong, our hearts deceitful, our
graces weak, our hands feeble, our resolutions insufficient, so that we may all
cry out in this case, as Peter in another, Help Master, or else we perish.

It Is true, we must resist, and we must handle all our weapons, Lord, Keep back
thy servant, or else none of these (without him) will keep off the sin. That
soul is most kept from sin which keeps most to God: None can keep up a soul,
keep off a sin, keep back a temptation, so as God can do.

SECT. V.
2. Of Examination. Examination.

NOW let us come yet more close to our own hearts, David's care is here against
presumptuous sins; But how stands it with our souls? Are we in the shallows
only, or have we adventured into the deeps? it is true, that there are some
presumptuous sinnings which are past all shore, they are out of the reach of
all recovery, therefore I meddle not with Degrees of presumptuous sinning very
fearful, yet recoverable. Presumptuous sins arising more from the manner then
the matter. In times of light there is either formal or virtual presumption.
Habitual presumption and particular presumption.
them; but then there are other Degrees which are, though very fearful, yet
recoverable. Consider,

1. Presumptuous sinnings arise more from the manner then the matter, it is not
always so much what is done, as how the soul behaves it self in the sinning,
which make it presumptuous: A little sin committed with an high spirit may
therefore prove an high sin.

2. Again, In times of much light either there is much formal and explicit
presumption, or else vertual and interpretative presumption: for where so much
is afforded to lighten and keep back, it must be reputed as presumptuous, yet
to adventure on.

3. There is Habitual presumption, when a man will hold on in a course and way
of sinning: and there is particular presumption in respect of this or that
fact: now one of these most men do touch upon.

I know you like not to be handled roughly in this thing: such is our hearts,
we had rather have our sins concealed then uncased, and still conceive that we
are not so bad as the worst, Discoveries of presumptuous sinnings.
therefore let me propound things unto you more generally.

1. What call you that kind of sinning, When we our selves When men venture
upon the same sins they condemn in others.
will venture upon the same sins which we condemn in others? Romans 2. 1. Thou
art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same
things.

2. What kind of sinning call you that, When the heart will When the heart will
mantain its way against revelation of wrath.
maintain its way against the Revelations of wrath, (i) though God proclaims
vengeance and death against such a sinning way; yet the man will adventure on
in the commission: I say, will adventure: for through weakness a man may be
trodden down; but it is a stoutness when he will break through the Army: when a
person will through the pikes, he will not give up his worldly and fleshly
lusts, though the heavens be darkened round about his soul with threatenings; is
not this presumptuous sinning?

3. What kind of sinning call you that, When the soul suppresseth When the soul
suppresseth truth.
truth, and holds back the light for unrighteousness sake? when it knows the
fact or way to be sinful, and yet will not be held back.

4. What is it for a person to bless himself in his way, and to When a man
blesses himself in a sinful way.
protect himself when God has cursed his facts; to say, none of this evil
shall befall me, but to morrow shall be as to day: The Prophet is a fool, and
the spiritual man is mad: God will not do as he reports, therefore soul take
thine ease, thy course, let us eat and drink, and to our sins still.

5. What is that, When men will not repent till they be old, When men will not
repent till they be old.
or ready to die, and till then will continue upon that score of sinning, upon
a presumption that sin will be easily discharged, and Mercy presently had? When
men return to those sins they have found bitter.


6. What is that Returning of the soul to a fact or way which it has found to
be bitter already? and though it has found Hell in the conscience for the same
sinning, yet it will break out again upon a hope of great mercy.

Object. Yea, But alas! The best have their infirmities and escapes: we think
no hurt, and God knows our hearts, sin we do, and who does not? but it is not
through presumption, but through infirmity. The spirit is ready, but the flesh
is weak; we still carry flesh and blood about us, it is our weakness, and God
we trust is merciful.

Sol. It is most true, that the best are sick, and the strongest are weak, but
then it is as true that the heart is deceitful, and sin is subtle, and men
are apt to raise themselves in a false opinion of their safeties, and to
extenuate the height and parts of their sinning.

But to the objection, I will briefly discover unto you, whether Four things.
Whether our sinnings be from infirmity or presumption.
your sinnings fall from Infirmity, or else proceed from Presumption.

This must be granted in the general.

1. There are sins of Infirmity as well as of Presumption. 2. Infirmities are
of two sorts.
1. Mere Infirmities, sins arising from mere weakness without any deliberation
of the mind or choice of the Will, as sudden evil thoughts, words, deeds,
dulnesses, defects, shortness in good, etc.

2. Mixed, which have a tange of presumption, but not enough to make the sin to
be presumptuous; A knowledge, but not a practical Judgment, pro hic and nunc:
some apprehension, but not a perfect deliberation: sudden passions perplexing
the Judgment, and dazzling of it; Inadvertencies, Inconsiderations. But more
particularly,

1. Acts owning themselves to infirmity, depend most Infirmities depend most
upon outward strength,
upon outward strength: they have not such an entire causality from the
subject, but are produced from unequal power; It is granted, that even a good
heart may yet be found in the dirt, it may be overtaken with some particular
facts which are stark naught; but this irregular action arises principally
from a strength of temptation, which exceeds the actual strength of the renewed
heart: like a man in a crowd, though he strives another way, yet is overborn,
he is over-set, he is carried down, for all his strength cannot shoulder off
the crowd, he is too weak: So when a man sins through infirmity, there is a
nature which resists, as Paul had a Law in his mind, warring against the Law of
his members, Romans 7. yet the strength of that sinful Law did over-bear the
resisting strength of his renewed mind, in respect of particular facts, and
therefore the acts were acts of infirmity. But what is this to him whose heart
is set on wickedness, who imagines sinful devices, who shapes and contrives
his way of sinning, who tempts even sin it self to sin, whose sinnings arise
from affection, not from temptation, who provokes his corruption to get out,
who is a devil to his own heart, inclining and stirring it to sinful
commissions, were our sinnings springing from a full principle, from a nature
giving out it self: and that alone, I cannot judge them to be infirmities.

2. Acts of infirmity, are not habitual, but particular; they Infirmities are
not habitual but particular.
are rather transient then permanent acts: they are acts, but not continued
acts, like a land-flood, not like a river; and the reasons of it are these.

1. Partly because they spring from Temptation, which though

2. Partly because They flow from passion and sudden distemper, which is not a
constant inclination, but only a fit, a present violence.

David in a sudden Passion, will kill Nabal, and every mothers child, but when
Ab^gail met, and assuaged him, and made him understand reason, he was quit from
his projects: But now where things fall into a habit, into a course, into a
common practice, when a man is every day at his sin, when it proves an haunt,
this cannot be called a business of infirmity: when our actions run, and fall
into a kind of naturalness and custom, that a man is always sliping, and
always swearing, and always filching, and always lying, when the way of his
sin is a Trade, why this is no more to be reputed an infirmity, then for a
Mariner to be in his ship, or a Tradesman to be in his shop.

Thirdly, acts of infirmity are involuntary acts: the man does Infirmities are
involuntary acts.
them, but the will is against them: the evil which I would not do, that do I,
said Paul, in Romans 7. As the fact opposes the Law, so that will opposes the
fact, it is that which a man's judgment disapproves, and which his will is
averse from. The traveller, his will is to go the right way, and in that to
stand, yet he may stumble and fall down, and this may be called an infirmity:
But if he be himself, and should put off his clothes, and lay himself down in
the dirt, this were an act of a voluntary madness; so when a man sets himself
to sin, when he will go and wallow in the mire; when with Ahab, he sells
himself to work wickedness, that he does bargain away his soul for a sin;
when he gives up himself to uncleanness with greediness, this is no infirmity,
it is a height of proud presumption; But through infirmity of prevalent
resistance, a good man may be sold under sin, as Paul, he may be led captive,
being over-surprized, he may be led with Peter, that way, or to that fact,
which yet he would not willingly do.

Fourthly, acts of infirmity is not a state of quietness, or consistence, (i.)
if a man sins from a weakness of withstanding Infirmities are not a state of
quietness.
grace; Though the temptation has been his conquest, yet his sinning shall be
his trouble: weak strength in grace, though it be not always actually
sufficient to prevent sin; yet it will be able to melt the soul for it; if
temptation has surprised the soul to sin, grace will then surprise the soul to
mourn; neither will it lie with sin upon it: Even a weak child thrown down
will be scrambling up or crying for some to raise it; But if the places of our
fall be the places of our peace and of our rest, it is a bad sign that our
sinnings exceed infirmities: when the sinning is to us, as the sea to the fish,
or as the center to the stone, or as the bed to the laboring man; this is no
infirmity.

Fifthly, in sinful acts of infirmities, the heart as it intends not sin, it
condemns sin; the heart is more sensible, watchful, prayerful In infirmities
the heart is against sin.
against it, and exceedingly strives to mortify it, and subdue it.

SECT. VI.
3. Of Exhortation.
A Third Use shall be to exho^t us to imitate holy David Exhortation to be
careful to be kept back from presumptuous sins. Consider. It is a great
judgment to be left to our selves.
in a care against presumptuous sins, and to be kept back from them.

Consider seriously a few things.

1. It is a great judgment to be left to our selves: to be given up to a man's
own heart, to be given up to Satan, to be given up to vile affections, to a
reprobate sense, to our own councels and ways. As if God should say to a
person, I have dealt with thee by my mercies, but thou will be unrighteous
still, I have dealt with thee by my ^udgements, but thou word and counsels, but
thou will proceed on in thy sinning still; I have dealt with thee by my spirit
in many convictions and motions, but thou will sin still; I have dealt with
thee by reproofs, and checks, and troubles of conscience, but thy heart is set
in thee to sin still: Since thou will be unrighteous, thou shall be unri^hteous
still, since thou will be filthy, thou shall be so stil^; I will leave thee
unto the hands of Satan who works mightily in the chil^ren of disobedience, and
he shall take thee captive at his pleasure; I will leave thee to the vileness
of thy own sinful nature, that since thou will not hearken unto me, thou shall
(as thou desire) with all greediness fulfill the lust thereof, but I will
withdraw from thee in my mercy, and in my loving care: go on, and fill up the
measure of thy iniquity and of wrath: why brethren, this is a sad and forlorn
condition; what is the estate of the patient, when the Physician gives him off,
and relinquisheth him to his own sick palate, and his own vain appetite and
diet, why says he, physic will do him no good, it is in vain to presc^ibe him
rules, let him do on, take what he will, I see well he is a dead man; thus it
is with him whom God leaves unto himself.

Surely there is not a more direful judgment then for God to give over his
keeping of us: whither will not our wicked hearts carry us? what will not sin
(left to it self) dare to do? how outragiously will it swell? how irrecoverably
will it sink the soul? all helps are little enough to bound and keep in sin,
but if it be left to its own force and violence, then like the sea without a
shore, what a deluge it makes.

2. To sin upon presumptuous grounds, upon a presumption To sin upon a
presumption of Mercy, is the next way to cut off from mercy.
of mercy, is the next way to cut us off from mercy: Know thou not O man
that the kindness, and long-suffering, and mercy of God should lead thee to
repentance; but thou through thy hardness and impenitency of thy heart,
treasurest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 4, 5. God will
not be merciful to the wicked transgressor, but he will wound the hairy scalp
of such a one who goes on still in his sins: Mercy is a sweet City of refuge to
the penitent sinner, but justice will tear off the presumptuous sinner, even
from the horns of the Altar: God never yet said that he would forgive him, who
will not leave his sins; do not flatter thy self, thou do forsake thy
mercies; unless thou will forsake thy sins, God will not spare thee, nor pity
thee.

3. Presumptuous sinning makes high work for the soul; The Presumptuous sinning
makes high work for the soul.
pricks of a pin, the cut of a knife may do much hurt, but the gash of a
sharp sword, forcibly followed, this will open death in thy sides. Every sin
fetches blood in the soul, but presumptuous sinnings do even cleave the
conscience asunder, be thou good or bad, who mounts up in an high kind of
sinning, good Lord, how it will, (in a day of judicial sense) make the very
sinews to crack, and thy joints to tremble.

Of all sensible wrackings in the soul, there is not any one comparable to that
of despair: O! despair, it is the death beaten off by any method and warning
of heaven, but went on in a secure confidence of the easiness and largeness
of mercy: when God will not take these proud braveries any longer, but arrest
the stout transgressor, and set his sins in order, both for the greatness of
fact, and height of pride and darings, and that against all light and
goodness, and warning and threatening, and the sinner sees himself fallen into
the hands of a terrible and glorious God, from whose fierce displeasure it
cannot now rid it self. O cries out the miserable man, what shall I do? woe to
me that ever I was borne, I have shut up heaven against my self, I am rejected
for ever; as I have dealt with God, so now he deals with me, I would not
hearken to him, and now he will not hearken to me, O I shall never have mercy,
I have adventured on so presumptuously, that I have distinguished my self from
any hope and possibility of recovery: I was entreated, but still I would sin, I
was warned, but still I would sin, I saw it to be sinful but I would do it; I
felt some trouble for it, but, etc. I despised counsel, and scorned reproof, I
slighted mercy, I quenched motions, and these so often, O Lord, now thou have
met with me, now shall I never rise any more, I would have my sins, and I
have them still, and I shall have thy just wrath and hell with them too. Thus
the presumptuous sinner Cain, my iniquity is greater then can be forgiven, Genesis
4. No, no, there is not balm for such wounds, there is not mercy for such great
transgressions as I stand guilty of.

SECT. VII.
4. Of Direction.
THe last Use of the point shall be for direction, guiding us Direction. Nine
Rules How to be kept from presumptuous sins. Beware of a course of little sins.
to the observation of some particular Rules, that so we may be kept from
presumptuous sinnings.

1. Beware of a course of little sins: The stirrup, though it be low and small,
yet it does serve a man to mount; the great flames of fire took their beginning
from a cole or a spark: And men, usually, have been first wading in lesser
sins, who are now swimming in great transgressions: sinnings (supposed as
little or inconsiderable) have not only this happiness, that they are not so
much regarded, but this unhappiness that they are more often committed: And
then this is certain: That the frequent commission of small sins is great in it
self, and does also dispose and prepare to greater commissions; many drops make
a current: he who makes no conscience of acting many little sins, will shortly
take the boldness to assay and act some great sin.

For, 1. The more any sin is committed, the more is the

For little sinnings are not like a little inch of candle which goes off in an
absolute period, but they are like a train of powder, which takes fire from
corn to corn, till at length the barrel is burst asunder, or like a little
sickness which is an humor disposing to a stronger distemper: or like a
little circle in a pond, which begets greater and greater.

I observe three things.

1. That Satan has a strange hand over that soul which can Satan has a strong
hand over the soul which can bear with any sin.
bear with any sin: he may by lesser things maintain his command: as it was
said that the little child did command the land, for the child prevailed with
the Queen, and the Queen with the King, and he over the land: Satan can prevail
for a little sin, and a little sin can prevail with the heart, and the heart
with the whole man.

2. That little sins are breeding sins: Now sin will keep its bounds, but
naturally would greaten it self; though Little sins are breeding sins.
it seem modest at first, yet will it by degrees become familiar and impudent.

3. They are entisings sins, they are the advocates in the They are enticing
sins.
bosom for greater, they do not only labor for their own lodging, but will
deal strongly with the heart to embrace greater, as occasion and temptations
present themselves.

Therefore this do give the water leave, no not a little: little streams makes
way to the ocean. And thou studiest the present way, to become a great
transgressor, to rise to presumptuous sinnings, who wilt allow thy self to be
an habitually immoderate sinner.

Secondly, take heed of the iterations of any sin, (viz.) do not go a sin
over and over: of all transgressions, Take heed of the Iterations of any sin.
which dispose the soul toward presumption, the repeated have a special
influence, and I will give you a reason for it,

Because presumptuous sinnings depend much upon the boldness of the heart: when
the heart becomes bold and fearlesse, sinned with both hands, and as high as
Sodom, who came to this pass, that they knew no shame.

Now sins of iteration, or repeated sins, they frame a boldness in the
heart (as repeated blows do the anvile) and the more hardened the heart is, the
more bold it grows; partly because they delude the heart, they work false
principles in the mind; forasmuch as we have gone on in these courses again,
and again, and no evil befalls us, therefore to morrow shall be as to day, let
us eat, and drink, and sin.

It was a sweet advise that of Elihu, Job 34. 32. That which I see not, teach
thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no more: for all sin grows strong
by practice, and the often going over it is like the motion of the feet from
one round of the ladder to the other, still rising, or like the manifold
turnings of the wheel, which mounts the weight still to an higher pitch; what
Job therefore spoke in another case, Once have I spoken, but I will not answer,
yea, twice, but I will proceed no further, Job 40. 5. that I say unto thee,
once thou have sinned, thus, and thus, yea, twice, and yet conscience is
tender, there is yet fear and sorrow, but proceed no further, least that become
mighty to sin. This is certain, that the stronger sin grows, the more easily
will a sinner presume. Now repeated sinnings do wedge in the sin with strength,
as the more often the Scholar writes after the copy, the fairer he writes, and
the more he is enabled to write: so often sinnings makes the soul more strong
in that kind, and then more fit for a worser.

Thirdly, do not stifle or reject the frequent checks of conscience: Do not
stifle the frequent checks of conscience.
God has appointed several things to give the sinner a touch, like cords to
twine him in, to keep him from sinnings, viz. the voice of the word, and the
voice of judgment, and the voice of men, and the voice of his own conscience.

Now mark it, there are two of these voices (more especially) which if a man
will neglect and slight, a thousand to one, but he will fall to be a
presumptuous sinner, viz.

1. The voice of the Word, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, hardened
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

2. The voice of conscience: when the conscience shall concur with the word,
in its informing acts, and in its directing acts, and in its warning acts, and
in its restrictive acts, and in its corrective and judicial acts, (i.) it shall
point the way, or fact, in the evil, and unlawful quality of it, and strive,
and reason, and fret, and reprove, and threaten, yea, and speak bitterly, yet a
man will go on, I say, this man hastens to some great sin, to presumptuous
sinnings.

I will give you a reason for it, because the Lord will forsake this man, he
will leave him to himself, he will give him up to his own heart: since he will
not hearken to the counsel of the word, nor to the advises of his conscience,
God will strive with him no more, but he shall be left to himself, this is the
usual course of Gods righteous and judicial proceeding. Now what can the heart
do, being left to it self, as it has no strength against a great temptation,
so it has sufficient strength and desire to; for the greatest methods of
transgressings; if restriction be a merciful bond to corruption, then wrathful
desertion, a desertion of the creature, (i.) a denial of preventing assistance
against temptation or inclination, or acting, why it is as the unmuzling of the
Mastive, or untying of the Lion, Not that God sets on the heart to sin, but
that the heart will in a moment be mighty in sinning, which is judicially
deserted, or left by God for former sinnings.

Therefore, I beseech you take heed of scorning divine admonitions and
reproofs: Consider that place well in Psalm. 81. 11. But my people would not
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me, ver. 12. so I gave them up to
their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels: if thy heart can
rise above the word, it will rise above thy conscience, and if thy heart rise
above thy conscience, thy next sinnings will rise above thy former: he will not
be modest to sin, who grows impudent against the word, and violent against
his conscience.

Fourthly, secure not the heart because of Gods present silence. Be not secure
because of Gods present silence.


Beloved, I observe that God is silent (oft-times) when men are in either way,
in the good and in the bad: a man O my God, says David, Psalm. 22. 2. I cry in
the day time, but thou heardest not, and in the night season, and a man may
repeat his sinnings against God, and yet God may be silent, Psalm. 50. 21. These
things have thou done and I kept silence: But then this silence is not an
infallible testimony either way; though he be silent to the many prayers of his
servants, yet the vision will speak at length, for as thou have a time to seek,
so God will find a time to answer. And though he be silent many times at the
sinnings of men, yet this is but forbearance, it is not an acquittance, if thou
takes the times to sin, God will take his turn to punish, Psalm, 50. 21. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.

Obj. But you will say, what is this to the preventing of presumptuous sinnings.

Sol. Very much; for presumptuous sinnings depend much upon security: a man
secures his facts and ways from this, that God is silent and does not
presently draw the sword; send for the arrest: and therefore presumes to a
second or greater sinning, from God connivence and patience toward former.
Solomon insinuates it clearly, Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil, q. d. There is now no ho, they make no bones of
it, they will venture yet again: But brethren: take heed; if you sin, and yet
you prosper in the world; if you sin, and yet conscience be quiet; if you
sin, and yet God presents not a present testimony of his displeasure; yet do
not presume: for if you do evil, sin lies at the door: first or last, when
you open it, your sins shall fly in your face: though the punishment of the
sinner be not present, yet it is certain: it shall not be well with the wiced,
though he prolong his days, Eccless. 8. 13. yea, the sinner of an hundred
years old shall be accursed: And this is observable, that Gods silence toward
a forward transgressor, is made up at length, not only with certainty, but with
number and measure: perhaps he will take such a time to account with thee, for
thy sinnings, that he will break thee suddenly all to pieces; he will break thy
estate, and thy conscience, and thy body, and thy soul, and all, and all
irrecoverably for ever.

When a man emboldens his heart to sin because of divine viz. Study and improve
Mercy aright.


1. He rises suddenly to the ven eance. 2. He curses the sinner without all
remedy, and so fully vindicates his silence, and glorifies his Justice.
Fifthly, If you would be kept from presumptuous sinnings, then both study and
improve mercy aright: Mercy it is the sweet savor of a sinful soul: that
gentle voice which speaks hope to a trembling spirit, that tender hand which
supports and relieves a fainting soul. And yet even from this sweet flower does
p^esumption suck the vilest poison: corrupting and inflaming the heart to the
greater boldness of sinf^ll adventures, from the greater goodness of exceeding
Mercifulness in God. But then mark it, that upright apprehension of divine
Mercy would serve to keep off the soul from presumptuous sinnings. If a man did
consider two things.

1. That Mercy, the very intent of it, the pulse of it, it is to draw a man off
from sin: it is true, Mercy is an harbor, but not for the Traitor to thrust in
his ship, it is a City of refuge, but not for the audacions manslayer: O! No,
Mercy it is the tenderest goodness, but withal it is a special goodness, and is
set up not as a light by the sea, that a man may know thereby how to sail more
freely, that a man should therefore sin more violently, but as a proclamation
from a Prince, to draw in the rebel to sheath his sword, and to fall down on
his knees. There is Mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared, said
David; And know thou not, O man, says the Apostle, that the goodness of God
should lead thee to Repentance; Romans 2. 4. Has God mercy to pardon me? with
what heart can I then presume to provoke him; Has he Mercy to pardon me? How
can thou then, O my soul, hold on thy sins, and not return when Mercy sends a
Message after thee, it is the last, and most prevailing motive for a sinner to
repent, even this that God will be merciful to him.

2. Mercy mis-proved to the sin, is both justly denied to the sinner, and also
intends his sin: The only way to forsake our Mercies, is that we will not
forsake our sins: God will never show thee Mercy, if tbou wilt not return from
sinning against him: if we will not return, iniquity shall be our ruin.

Object. O! but God is merciful, though we be sinful.

Sol. Yea, But he is merciful only to the penitent, and if thou will be
impenitent, thou forsakest thy metcies, and treasurest wrath unto thy self
against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 4, 5. Nay, more, Mercy does so infinitely
upbraid thee that the very Devils will hiss at thee: in the day of Judgment
they may cry out against thee, for the abominablest wretch living, yea, in this
respec^ worse then they: Lord, may they say, we have sinned exceedingly against
thee, why, what should we do? we had never any hope or proposition of mercy, it
was never offered to us, nor assured us; but here is a wretch, that though he
were a sinner, yet thou did beseech him by thy mercies to leave his sins,
thou assuredst him of free pardon, if he would return, and he not only refused
the pardon, but because of thy goodness in it, therefore grew more proudly
bold, and presuming to sin against thee.

6. Sixthly, Consider this, That it is a difficult thing to repent, It is a
difficult thing to repent
and that the more a man does sin, the more hard it is to repent of his sins.

Object. Why will you say? what of this, to the prevention of presumptuous
sinnings.

Sol. I answer, this conduces much, because the presuming sinner leads on his
soul to sin upon this ground and confidence, that if the worst come to the
worst, he will yet at last put off his sins, and repent; whereupon his heart
adventures far.

Now if a man were thoroughly convinced of two things, this ground would sink,
and perhaps his heart might be taken off from presuming.

1. One is, That it is a difficult thing to repent; Why? Repentance is the new
setting of the heart and life: it is the very contradiction of a man's former
love and practice, it is the undoing of all his doings, it is the shifting (as
it were) of his nature, and the transplanting of himself, the divorcing of the
affections, the new bent and edge of the soul for all holy and pious obedience:
and is this an easy thing? Is it easy for a man to become an enemy to
himself, to lay down his sweet delight, his precious profits, his closer
nature, to judge and condemn his heart and ways, for ever to forsake his own
counsels, his own inclinations, his own courses: Know you not, that to sneath
up but an idle word and form of language, is not so facile an act? how much
more then to put off root and branch? Do we not stick in the same sins after
many threatenings of wrath, after many executions of Judgment, after many
invitations by mercies, after daily counsels and directions by thy Word, after
instances and examples of punishment; nay, after particular and personal
experiences of the deceitfulness and bitterness of our sinnings: Does not this
show that it is a difficult thing to repent?

Nay, Take an Assay of thy heart, begin the study of thy self, remember thy
doings which have not been good, thy ways that have been evil, summon up all
the matter of Repentance, (for if Repentance be true, it must be an universal
turning) and then set upon the work of Repentance, and tell me whether former
sins cannot plead hard for future and constant possession, whether they cannot
work mightily and deceitfully? tell me how willing and ready thou shall find
thy heart which comes to this duty as a Thief to the Executioner? Tell me
whether Satan will easily give up his Title and interest, and will give Christ
possession quietly without many fervent suits to heaven, yea, without bitter
and strong conflicts, yea, unless the Almighty God himself come in, and turn
him out of thy heart, and turn thy heart to him.

2. Another things is this, That the more a man does sin, the more he disables
himself to repent, Tell me, seriously, Does not the Debt weaken his ability of
payment by greater engagements? Does not the disease consume the powers of
nature by its increase? Why? what is that which spoils us, and disarms us of
strength, is it not sin? then the more sinning, still the less strength to
return from sin. Nay, sin does not only corrupt our strength, by multiplied
sinnings, but withal increases its own strength: the more a man does sin, the
weaker and weaker he becomes, and sin thereby becomes stronger and stronger:
Now tell me, if it be hard for thee in strength to turn from sin, will it not
be harder for thee in weakness to conquer strength? if thou can not step over
the brook, why, do imagine it easy to stride over the Ocean? If thou can
nor stand before the child, thinks thou in a moment to cast down the strong
man? surely by thy continued and multiplied course of sinning, thy mind is more
blinded, and thy Judgment is more corrupted, and thy love is more inflamed,
and thy heart is more hardened; and art not thou then more disabled?

Once again; by thy more sinnings, the Counsels of God are more despised by
thee: and the Spirit of God is more grieved and resisted by thee, and the
Mercies of God are more abused by thee, and the patience of God is more
profaned and injured by thee, so that God in Justice may forsake thee, and deny
his hand for ever unto thee, and then, thou, what will thou do? what can thou
do?

I beseech you lay these things to heart; they may check, and hold off your
hearts from presuming: why thinks the soul, here is a temptation to sin, yea,
but I must repent, and it is not so easy, that to do, if it be, let me try
about my former sins, without a new addition now: and then this I am sure of,
that the more sinnings will make the work of Repentance more hard, forasmuch as
they wedge in the sin more into the affections, and provoke God more, etc.
therefore it shall suffice me to have sinned already: I will adventure no more,
nor no further.

Seventhly, Consider, That thy life is short, and thy account Thy life is
short, and thy account sure.
is sure.

Thou sinnest this moment, and art not sure to live till the next day, and have
not assurance of life till to morrow: for what is our life, but a lease of
time, which God lets to man, the date of which is only known to God, and
commanded by him. Saint James would not have us talk of to morrow, and Christ
would not have us think of any more then for two days: and Paul says, That the
present time is the acceptable time, and the day of salvation. Thou fool, said
Christ, this night shall they take away thy soul, death attends thee every
moment, it is even laying hands on thee in the womb; and thou art never going
to sin, but death says, Lord shall I now strike him, arrest him in his very
rebellion; Now if a man were effectually persuaded of this, perhaps he would
not presume to sin; for presumption is usually confident of

Eighthly, Get knowledge sanctified. Knowledge is like a sword, it Get knowledge
sanctified.
may defend a man, and it may hurt a man, it may both arm him and kill him; or
like the light of a Candle which may both direct, and also burn: and so
accidentally, even knowledge it self may prove a great addition to our
sinnings. That which serves to give us light against them, may yet improve the
guilt of them upon us.

There is a twofold knowledge.

1. One naked, which shows the evil.

2. Another sanctified, which keeps from evil: the former is good at the
Object, but the latter is good with the subject; that looks upon what is to be
done, or not to be done; this looks down to the heart, and inclines it strongly
to embrace the good, and to resist and abhor the evil. This is certain that not
all the spirits of speculation are a sufficient rescue of thy soul from
presumptuous sinnings.

Object. Why? says a man, I will not sin so, I know better then so.

Sol. Alas! The bullet strikes down the soldier for all his headpiece; naked
knowledge is at best but an headpiece, (and that not of proof neither) but
sanctified knowledge is a breast plate, and that keeps off the dart.

Lastly, Renounce thine own strength of nature, of parts, of Renounce thy own
strength.
gifts, yea, of graces, yea, of services: he shall be brought far in sin, who
goes far upon his own strength; thy own strength will deceive thee: it is not
enough to keep thee good, nor preserve thee from being bad: if thou could
get a trembling heart, and a bended knee, and a believing eye, and an humble
spirit, then thy Castle were impregnable, etc.

PSALM. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them
not have dominion over me.
CHAP. IV.
HAving handled David's prayer against sin, as lying in presumption, now I shall
touch on it, as it does respect sin in Dominion, [Let them not have dominion
over me:]

There may be diverse conjectures about the connection and depending sense of
these words. Two Expositions of the words.


First, As if they were a distant petition, q. d. Lord, I pray unto thee
against high kinds of sinning, and perhaps I may sometimes be laid flat by
them, but then I desire of thee that though they strike me down, yet they 1. As
a distinct petition.
may not rule over me: though I stoop, yet I may not serve; though I fall, yet
I may not lie, and rest; though they may be sometimes so strong as to
overcome, yet never so full as to reign, let them not have Dominion over me.

Secondly, As if they are but the same petitions greatly enforced, q. d. O
Lord, I beseech thee to keep back thy servant 2. As the same petition enforced.
from presumptuous sins: all sins are bad, and inglorious, and foul, but none
so as they, they are high transgressions, therefore I beseech thee, let them
not have Dominion, (i.) never suffer them to prevail over me, never let them
enter into my soul, or life, let them never overcome me, let them not
over-take me, let me never commit them. Now which way of these you conjecture
the sense of the words may be aimed at; it requires accurateness to determine,
and cut the thread; For my part, I think that both may be commodious, and are
pious, though the latter to me does seem more genuine; yet in this I easily
submit to better Judgments.

FOR the words themselves, this is evident, that they express the spirit of
holy David, as vehemently carried against presumptuous sins in Dominion; for
the better discussing of them, I shall inquire these particulars.

1. What Dominion of sin here may import, Four things*
wherein it consists.

2. Whether sins in Dominion may befall a David?

3. Why David prays so against it?

4. Then some useful applications.

SECT. I.
Quest. 1. FOR the first of these, What Dominion of sin does What Dominion of
sin imports.
import?

Sol. Dominion is given sometimes to God, sometimes to Christ as Mediator,
sometimes to man over man, sometimes to Satan over man, sometimes to death
which is said to rule, and sometimes to sin, when it is betwixt sin and the
sinner, as betwixt a King and his Subjects. As a reigning King has dominion,
so sin, it acts in all things like a King. 1. It has possession, original sin
of our hearts; actual sin of our lives. 2. Has a title, our forsaking of God,
and voluntary election and compact. 3. Has a throne, our souls. 4. Has
servants, our Members. 5. Has a council, our carnal wisdom and corrupt
reasonings. 6. Has power to give Laws, and see them executed. Paul speaks of
the Law in his members, and the Law of sin, Romans 7. 21, 22.

But more distinctly for the better understanding this, Four things.
observe these particulars.

1. That Dominion (properly) is the Right and Power of a What is dominion
properly.
Lord over a servant; it is a word implying Superiority and Subjection, one who
has Authority to command, and another whose condition is obe^iential, and to
serve; so that in the dominion there is one who does rule, and another who is
ruled; one who does command, and another who yields at least virtute ^uris (he
is to yield and obey) and ratione facti, where dominion is exercised, there is
actual command, and actual obedience; as the Centurion who had authority and
dominion over his servants, he said to one go, and he did go, to one come, and
he did come, to another, do this, and he did it.

Secondly, observe that Dominion is twofold, it is either, Dominion is either,


1. Original and absolute, and this is when the Lord has a Original and
Absolute.
natural, and prime, and irrespective title, it belongs to him as so, to
command, and impose obedience, merely from his absolute right, and acco^ding to
his own pleasure: such a dominion belongs only to ^od, who made all the world,
and is Lord of all: All the creatures are his servants, and are set by the Law
of their Creation, to the obedience of his will; he does rule the Nations, and
has power to order, limit, appoint, to require, to bind both bodies, and
souls, natures, consciences and acts.

2. Derivative and depending, and limited: such is the Dominion which God has
given man over the creatures: the Dirivative and depending.
great Lord has made man a Lord over the works of his hands, a pro-rex, a
deputy as it were: yea, and he has derived dominion to man over man, to one
man over another, to the King over his Subjects, to the Parent over the
Children, to Masters over Servants. I say, he has derived dominion unto them
(i.) a power to command, and order, yet this is a restrictive dominion, and not
absolute: it must not be against God, but for God and according unto God.

Thirdly* observe that there is a twofold dominion.

One is lawful (i.) such a dominion and subjection There is a dominion lawful.
which the word and will of God does or will warrant, as that of persons over
persons, or of God and Christ over all persons and creatures: God may command
us, for he made us; and Christ may command us, for he redeemed us, both our
persons and our services fall unto him, we are not our own, for we are bought
with a price, therefore serve or glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods, 1 Corinthians. 6. 19, 20.

Another is unlawful, and as it were usurped, which is Unlawful.
when command is exercised, and obedience given, without any just title or
right; and this Dominion is either assumed by Satan, who is called the Prince
of the air, and the Prince of darkness, and a Ruler, and one who works
mightily in the children of disobedience: or else it is exercised by sin, sin
is said to have a Dominion, a Law, a rule over a sinner, and the sinner is said
to obey the sin, to serve it, to fulfill the lusts of it, etc.

Fourthly, consider, that the dominion of sin does imply The dominion of sin
does imply. Singular power and strength with authority.
two things.

One is singular power and strength joined with authority. The authority of it
consists in this, that it does command the man (as a King does his Subjects)
and the strength of it consists in this, that it is able to make its commands
to be obeyed and followed.

Another is quiet, willing and total yielding of subjection to Quiet yielding
of subjection to that authority.
that authority, law and command of sin: when a man is as cheerfully and
readily prepared to obey his lusts, as any Subject is to embrace the commands
of his Prince, or any servant is to follow the will and pleasure of his Lord
and Master.

The former of these is styled, in Scripture, sometimes the powers of
darkness, Col. 1. 13. Sometimes the strong man, Luke 11. 21. Sometimes the Law
of sin, Romans 7. 23. Sometimes the power of Satan, Act. 26. 18. Sometimes the
efficacy of the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. by all which phrases, this is
implied, viz. that where sin does reign or has dominion, there it is of
singular power, not only to stir and ^ssault, not only to tempt and provoke,
but also to command and incline, to rule and dispose of the heart and ways,
that the will of a man is but as it were the will of his lusts; and the desires
of the man are but as it were the desires of his lusts: he is taken captive at
the pleasure of Satan: and sin needs not use any violent compulsion, or
strength of argument to draw on the sinner, only if sin speaks the word, it is
enough, that is Law enough.

The latter of these is expressed; sometimes by fulfilling the desires of the
flesh; and by having the conversation in the lusts of the flesh, Ephesians. 2. 3. and
by being servant to unrighteousness, Romans 6. and by taking pleasure in sin,
and by sinning with greediness, and by selling of a man's self to work
wickedness, and by giving up our selves, or our selves over to uncleanness;
when a man does as it were by a proper and voluntary act surrender up his soul
to the obedience of iniquity, as the servant passes away himself, when he
takes such an one to be his Lord, that all his faculties, and strength, and
designs, and maine intentions shall submit themselves to the service of his
lusts and sins.

So that dominion of sin on sins part, comprehends strong and complete power,
a commanding and disposing power, and on the sinners part, it comprehends
resignation, and complete subjection: A molesting power does not constitute its
dominion, the Throne, and gives forth its Laws and commands to the soul and
body, as to its proper servants and instruments: the which commands are as
cheerfully entertained, as they are unjustly prescribed.

But a little more to wade into this point, sin may Sin may be said to have
dominion.
be said to have Dominion, or to reign in a threefold respect.

1. In respect of assent: when the understanding subjects it In respect of
assent.
self to its motions: I say subjects it self, for there are two acts of the
mind about the motions and commands of sin; one is apprehension, another is
subjection: a man may apprehend sin as working, and yet he may not embrace, but
resist that working of sin: And then it is not sin in dominion: If I see an
enemy approaching, and rise up to oppose that enemy, he is now an enemy
encountering, but he is not a King ruling: so that it is not mere
apprehension, but subjection Two sorts of subjection.
which puts up sin into the Throne, into a dominion: (i.) when sin gives the
command, and the sinner yields thereto, Renders up himself to the obedience,
freely gives way unto, and entertains the motions of sin.

And hereto we must again distinguish of that subjection of assent which
denominates Dominion, that it is not a mere passive subjection (as when a man
is taken prisoner) but an active subjection, a subjection of approbation, as
when a servant hears the will of his Master, and he likes it so where sin has
dominion, the sinner does not give a naked assent, but an approving assent, he
allows his sin and approves of his sinful course.

Neither is this all, for every active assent is not sufficient to Assent is
either precipitated or deliberated.
denominate dominion; a man may be on a sudden circumvented, he may be under
the quickness and strength of a temptation, he may be so overborn by sudden
passion, that possibly he may assent, and approve a sin in respect of the fact,
in this or that particular, for this and that time, as a true subject (suppose
one of David's) not understanding all thing aright, not pawsing, was drawn to
the conspiracy on Absolons side, so a Christian, in whom sin has not a proper
dominion, he may on a sudden be so ensnared by sin and temptation, that he
gives way unto it, yet afterward he returns to himself, and condemns his own
act by sound repentance.

Therefore know, that the assent which sets up sin in dominion it is double.
Twofold assent that sets up sin in dominion. 1. Antecedent.


One is Antecedent: and this assent is such a work of the mind, wherein sin is
not only not rejected and condemned, but yielded unto and approved: what
Abraham answered in another case to Isaac, calling out, my father, he presently
answered, here am I my son; so when sinful corruption thrusts out the sinful
inclination or motion, the sinner presently answers, here am I, I am ready to
do thy will, I like it, I allow it.

The other is Consequent: this is an assent not only when a Consequent.
sin is to be committed, but after it is committed, and that too, not whiles
the heat of sinful deceit or temptation remains, and lies upon the soul, but
when that is gone off; when matters grow quiet, and sober and calm; then a man
he likes his fact, he likes his course, he does not only antecedently devise
mischief on his bed, and abhorres not evil: and sets himself in a way that is
not good, (as David speaks, Psalm. 36. 4.) But he rejoices when he has done
evil, and delights in the frowardness of the wicked (as Solomon speaks, Prove.
2. 14.)

Even a godly man by temptation, and by infirmity may yield an antecedent
assent, but then as soon as he comes to himself again, as soon as he recovers
his judgment to be clear, and his affections to be calm, he will then set
upon himself and reverse his own acts; he will judge and condemn both his deed
and his assent (such a fool was I, said David) and he will hate himself and his
sinful yeeldings (such a beast was I, said David again) and he will not rest in
such an estate; Peter goes out and weeps bitterly, so that even his
underhanding will condemn his understanding, his understanding by a subsequent
act of judiciary sentence will condemn and dis-allow, yea, and dis-avow the
antecedent act of the understanding in assenting and yielding: the serious
judgment will condemn the rash judgment; As a man who has foolishly yielded
to the bond, if he can get it into his hands he will now blot out his name, and
tear off his seal, so it will be in this case.

But where sin is in dominion, there is not only antecedently permissio (i.) a
free and favorable leave given to the committing of sin, but consequently
there is adhesio and defensio: the man approves and upholds that which was
committed; there is not a revocation of the fact, a man does not put in, and
sue out a Writ of Error against himself (i.) that he was circumvented by deceit
and mistake, nor does he make protestation against his sinful commissions, but
still owns them as being ready to proceed and advance on forward: he gave his
band before that sin should be done, and now the sin being drawn out, as it
were, into a deed of his own approbation he further confirms the same, by
adding thereto his Seal, he approves it still, and says, To morrow shall be as
to day, and much more abundant.

Secondly, In respect of the consent of the will, when the In respect of the
consent of the will.
will declares it self expressly as a party for sin. Beloved! the disposition
of the will is the fairest throne of sins dominion, and as we judge of the
dominion of grace far better by the will and affections, then by the workings
and reaches of the understanding; so on the contrary we may more safely judge
and determine of the dominion of sin by the frame and bent of the will, then by
any other faculty: whatsoever may be discoursed about natural actions, for
their prime and principal causation, whether by the will or by the
understanding, yet this is most true in morals, that the greatest denomination
is from the will, either for good or evil: and this holds in the case of sins
dominion; the will has (in a sort) the casting voice, it is one of the chief,
of the Royal Arms and supporters of the sinful Throne: sin is strong indeed,
when it has taken seizure and possession of the will, the more corrupt a man's
will is, the more strong is corruption in the man; sin is high, when the
sinner will sin, and Three things appertain to the will.


The Schoolmen observe three things which do appertain to the will, and they
do all of them demonstrate sins dominion.

1. Consensus: you know that the consent of the will is Consent.
that which makes the match 'twixt person and person (in Law, the Canon Law,
consensus, non concubitus facit matrimonium) so here the consenting of the
will, it is the espousing and contracting of the soul and sin together: I
will be a Lord to thee, says sin, and I will be a servant to thee, says the
sinner: I will give thee pleasure and profit, says sin, and I will give thee
my heart and obedience, says the sinner.

2. Electio: this is such an act or work of the will in which Election.
a man prefers one thing before another, or one way before another: And where
sin is in dominion, the sinner would rather be sinful then godly, he would
rather go on in his sins then forsake them; They love darkness rather then
light, Joh. 3. 19. Thou love evil more then good, and lying rather then to
speak righteousness, Psalm. 52. 3. as it was with the Hebrew servant, when the
year of Jubilee was come, liberty was propounded unto him, he might go free if
he would, it did depend upon his own choice, but the servant (sometimes) he
loved his Master, he would not go free: So when the Lord comes to a man in whom
sin does exercise dominion, and propounds unto him several things, and
several ways, here is Heaven, and here is Hell; here is Life, and here is
Death; here is Holiness, and here is Sin; here is the way of Duty, and here is
the way of Disobedience; why as Esau made choice of the poor mess of pottage,
or as the Jews of Barabbas; so the sinner, he makes choice of his sins and
sinful ways, I had rather keep my drunkenness still, my uncleanness still, my
covetousness still, etc.

3. Imperium or propositum: the will is the chief wheel of the Command and Rule.
soul; it is that which in a sort commands all the faculties, and all their
acts: now where the will is chief in sin, if sinning be the fruits of its
lustful commands: a man has set up his resolution, it is the purpose of his
heart, to be as he has been, and to do as he has done, he will not learn to
do good, he will hold fast his wickedness, here sin is in dominion.
Nevertheless for the clear discovery of this part of sins dominion in respect
of the will, be pleased to observe several things.

1. That there is a twosold will. There is a twofold will. Single.


1. One is altogether single in its workings, it does not partly incline to
good, and partly to evil, but either only to good, or only to evil, v. g. where
the created nature (which is reasonable) was never morally deformed, or where
the rational nature is gloriously reformed, there the will inclines only to
good, (as in the Angels and blessed souls) so again, where the nature is
totally deformed, (I mean in respect of spirituals) where it is entirely
corrupted, there the Bias of the will draws the soul only to evil, the whole
ponde, weight, and strength of the will is for sin: and the sinner (without any
intrinsecal opposition of another nature in the will) will yield and surrender
up himself unto sin. Now such a will as this plainly argues dominion of sin:
where the will, what it is and can do, that it is and will do for sin; when we
may say of the will as Saint John of the world; the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. so the whole will (the whole frame and bent of it) is
universally obediential, or serviceable, where the whole nature of the will
vents it self into an habitual and plenary consent; This is of it self
manifest, that sin has dominion.

Another is mixed and compounded: when the will is divided Mixed and compounded.
within it self, and consequently its consents and dissents (embracings and
refusing) are likewise opposed one to another, and opposing each the other in
the same man: you must know that original sin (which yet in part remains) is
diffused through the whole man, and into every faculty; and so renewing grace
(which is oppositite thereto) is an universal temper, dispersed into every
faculty too: Neither is it able utterly to dis-lodge sin in respect of being on
some actings: So that a regenerate man (as Saint Austin^ spoke) has in him an
old man and a new man: his flesh is like a dead man, and his spirit like a
living man; the living man moves up, the dead man hangs down; the living man's
breath is sweet, the dead man's savor is loathsome; so far forth as the will is
renewed by grace, so far does it reject and deny sins consent, but so far as
it is affected and distu^bed by remaining and working corruption, so far forth
it is willing and ready enough to consent to sinful actings.

Now when we say that the dominion of sin depends upon the will, this is not to
be understood of the compounded will, or of the assent and actions which do
arise from a nature, and will imperfectly renewed and cleansed in respect of
degrees: But of the single and corrupt, and so complete will wherein the
consent is total and plenary. Now the plenary consent of the will consists
properly in the full and natural, and longing inclination of the will after
sin; when the will embraces an evil, sets the heart upon it, bends after it,
and that without any resistance or striving: so that it is the embracing of
sin, with an unstriving consent of the will, which sets up the dominion.

Quest. 1. Here now falls in a subtle and deep enquiry whether Whether all
resistance impairs dominion and no resistance argues it. All resistance does
not prejudice dominion.
all resistance impairs dominion, and no resistance does always infallibly
argue it.

Sol. I answer briefly to the first.

1. That all resistance does not prejudice dominion: A man may hold a firm
league with sin in his heart, he may be a servant to it, though sometimes in
some particulars he may skirmish and quarrel.

There is therefore a double resistance, or denying, or disputing A twofold
resistance.
with sin.

One is Collateral and accidental; which does not arise Collateral and
Accidental.
from an immediate contrariety of nature, but from a contrariety of effects: As
now a man in whom sin has dominion, his sinnings may be sent back with such
bitter Writs of attachment, that he may stand at defiance, and be at some
forbearance (a while) from sin: or he may have such affected apprehensions of
death and hell, and shame and terror: whereupon he may resist sin as penal and
painful: as a thing so bitterly vexing, and galling, and this grieves him too.

Another is natural and immediate: which depends on an Natural and immediate.
holy nature implanted in the soul, which opposes sin as a thing formally
evil and displeasing to God: This resistance does (I confess) prejudice sin in
its dominion, but the former does not.

Secondly, No restraint does imply the consent to be plenary, No resistance
does imply a plenary consent
and therefore sin to be in dominion: when the estate of the soul is such,
that no contrary quality stands twixt the command of sin and the obedience of a
sinner, it is easy to point who is Lord of the House: and indeed what does
more palpably demonstrate dominion, then a quiet subjection.

It is not all the commandings of sin (alone) which argue dominion infallibly
(an enemy may command much, and highly, as Sennacherib, and yet not be obeyed)
but it is consent, and the more full and quiet kind of consent, which is that
where no resistance is made) this shows that the strong man possesses the
house.

Quest. 2. But yet another question is raised, and to be removed, Whether a
good man may not yield a plenary consent in whom sin has not dominion.
whether a good man, in whom sin has not dominion, may not yield a plenary
consent of will: which if, then plenary consent argues not dominion.

I will tell you what I conjecture about it, in a few propositions.

1. It is possible that he may sin willingly: two Intensive A good man may
sin willingly.
aggravations of sin (in respect of particulars) may befall a good man, viz. he
may sin knowingly, and he may sin willingly: the cause whereof is this, because
his will is but in part renewed, and therefore may be a willing principle;
neither does this set up sin in dominion, though it greatens sin in the
commission; for as much as not every particular willingness, but an habitual
and a complete willingness assures sin of its dominion.

Secondly, observe, that there is a double concourse of the wills There is a
double concourse of the will to sin. Real.
consent to sin.

One is real, when in truth the whole composition, and all the inclination of
the will is for sin, the bent of it, and Bias, all runs that way: and where it
is thus, there sin is in dominion.

Another is sensible; which is an observed acting of the will Sensible.
as embracing, and leaguing it with sin: when all (which may for the present be
observed) is a corrupt inclination and consent: Now here I conjecture, that
possibly sin may not always have dominion, where yet, for the present, and for
a particular, the whole sensible part of the will seems only for sin.

My reason is this, q. the resistances of grace are secret and

Thirdly, you must distinguish 'twixt dominion of sin, and twixt Distinguish
twixt dominion of sin, and a strong inclination to sin.
a strong inclination to sin: dominion of sin is a thing more natural, but the
strong inclination may be preternatural: as a stone by strength may be
vehemently carried upward, or an arrow out of a bow, and yet the propensions
of their nature are quite contrary and downward.

A man in a violent temptation, and under the strength of a seduced judgment,
like a captive, he may be exceedingly haled, he may put on eargerly for a sin,
yet with some little reluctance, with some strivings on the other side, with
some dissentings, though faint, though feeble, though not able to put by the
actually greater strength of the temptation: so that the will may be strongly
inclined, when yet it is not totally inclined; the violent flying out of the
soul, may be but the hurrying strength of an enemy, which marches in haste:
against which the Regenerate part of the will may put in its exceptions, and
though unable to stay the soul, yet it may be able to appeal to heaven against
this rash and strong working, etc.

4. Lastly, you must distinguish 'twixt facts, and 'twixt Distinguish betwixt
facts and courses.
courses; and 'twixt particular, and 'twixt general intentions: and 'twixt too
much yielding, and a plenary yielding and resignation.

The will may come on to sin (where it has not dominion) in respect of facts;
and by a particular intention, and by a partial yielding: but where the will
comes on as to a course, and with a general intention, and with a plenary
yielding, there is dominion: Thus of the dominion of sin in respect of the will.

Thirdly, the dominion of sin may be considered in respect of Of the dominion
of sin in respect of the service,
the work or service; the working of sin, and obedient acting of it, does also
include and express its dominion; Hence they, in whom sin has dominion, are
said to serve sin, and they are said to obey sin, (his servants ye are to
whom ye obey) and they are said to commit sin, (...) (to do it as a man would
follow his trade) and they are said to do the work of the devil, Joh. 8. 44. as
if the sinner had nothing else to do, but to follow and serve his sins: which
we may evidently see in persons under the dominion of any lust, their whole and
maine designs are to fulfill it: the drunkard, it is his work and life to sit
and drink; the covetous person, it is his work and course of life to be
scraping, and getting; As where grace is in dominion; why? the main work is to
serve and please God, to learn his will and obey it; so is it on the contrary
where sin has Dominion; the service of the sinner is given up to sin, so that,
obedience to sin (which is the doing of the work of sin) does evidently
demonstrate the dominion thereof.

Nevertheless, you must wisely understand this as you have the other parts
respecting sins Dominion; therefore Consider,

First, that there is a twofold obedience unto sin. A twofold obedience unto
sin Material.


One is Material: when that thing is done or acted which is sinful: the work is
repugnant to the will of God, yet this absolutely does not constitute dominion;
for as much as it may be with the soul, as with a Captive, who may do the same
work which the subject does, yet not with the same mind, and not in the same
form of service.

Another is formal: when the work of sin is not only done, Formal.
but it is done after the manner of sinning, as when a servant or subject do
express service and obedience, they do it with the hearts of servants and
subjects, and as to a Master* and King: so where a man obeys his lusts, where
he does the work, as Covenant-work, as the work of a servant, as a proper work,
and as a ready work, as an hearty work, indeed this argues Dominion.

Again, we must distinguish of obedience to the commands of Distinguish of
obedience to the commands of sin. Simple and absolute.
sin.

One is simple and absolute: which is when to sin, though it be not every
particular thing which a man does, yet it is a principal thing unto which he
applies himself: as that is a man's trade, not presently which he looks upon or
deals in, but wherein he does principally, and chiefly deal in, unto which he
applies the current and strength of his stock: so it is here, sin is a man's
absolute work, when it is his maine work, and he is besides his calling (as it
were) when he is besides his sin: such an obedience is a respect unto sin in
Dominion.

Another is cursory or transient: as a Be may light upon Cursory or transient.
a thistle, but her work is to be gathering at flowers, or a sheep may be in
the dirt, but its work is to be grassing on the mountains, or in the meadows:
or an honest traveller may be besides the way in a wood, or in an house, but
his work is to go on in the Kings Rode. So is it possible for a man, in whom
sin has not dominion to touch upon sinful facts; But his maine way, his
principal work to which he does apply the intentions and strength of his heart
and spirit, it is the obedience unto God, and his holy and righteous will.

3. Therefore in the third place observe another distinction: which though it
does hold some correspondency with the former: yet it says a little more, and
gives yet a further light.

There is an obedience. There is an obedience Of course.


1. Of course: which is a continued applying of our selves to the work of
sin* it is our trade which we do drive, the mire in which we wallow, the mill
which we help going on.

2. Of Fact, which may be but some particular and intervenient acts: not a
thread spun out and drawn, but a Of fact.
sword drawn, and sheathed again, and laid down. There is something which
steps in, interrupts the progress, and takes off the soul from service, and
then it is not sin in Dominion.

Quest. 1. I know that that is a notable case, whether Whether all
interruptions of sinful acts impeach sins dominion. All absolutely do not. Two
kinds of interruptions. Political.
all interruptions of sinful facts, impeach sins Dominion.

Sol. For my part I think, that all absolutely do not, there are two kinds of
abruptions, or interruptions, (i.) working causes, which do, if not untwine the
thread, yet respite and hinder the finishing of it.

Some are Political: when the interruptions depend upon politic and private
respects: as upon the wisdom of the flesh, the stingings of conscience, the
defect of occasions, the safety of our names and credit, etc.

Others are Natural, which depend upon a contrary nature, touching the heart
for its particular trespassing, humbling it, recovering it again out of the
snare of the devil, and this interruption, is not only a mere limit, or
politic halt for a while where the sinner takes breath, and makes a pause
before he will go on, but it is an undoing of a particular illdoing; by an holy
nature now recovering the soul.

Once again observe, that the work or obedience to sin is The obedience to sin
is twofold
twofold.

1. Either by surprisal, and compulsory, and this work owes Compulsory.
it self not to the intention of the heart, nor to the approbation of the
judgment, but to the deceitfulness of sin, and to the strength of temptation.

2. Another is cheerful, and as it were of nature, now remember Cheerful.
that acts of surprisal, do not testify sin in dominion: indeed this they may
testify that sin in its inclination, or Satan in his temptation, is (at that
time very strong: but yet, not that they rule; for dominion in this case is not
when a man is vanquished and captived, but when he yields out himself, and
willingly follows.

Though sin be acted, yet it is not therefore sin in dominion, unless it be a
willing doing of the work of sin: though force and compulsion, may be
sufficient to testify, that there is a tyrant, yet ready obedience is that
which testifies homage to a King.

Thus have you heatd a little in the general about the nature of Dominion, and
about the nature and manner of sins dominions.

5. I conjecture: that it is fit to add one thing more in the Sin in dominion
is either,
general about the dominion of sin, as respecting its powerful commands that it
is either,

1. Habitual, where sin in the course behaves it self as a King, Habitual, or,
it rules, and commands, and disposes of the person to its base services and
lusts.

2. Actual: and this is not properly its dominion, though Actual.
it be miscalled so, yet to give a little scope to freeness of language, I
will call it an actual dominion, which is rather a particular prevalency of
acts, then a Sovereignty or dominion in the nature, when though the heart and
nature have surrendered themselves to Christ as the only Lord, and to his will
as the only Law, yet in many particulars, sin gets the better over grace,
though it cannot be said to rule, yet it may be said to conquer: it makes the
man to fall down; it is too strong and prevalent for all the actual
improvements, and particular resistances of grace and prayer at that time, and
for that fact. Against which, if I mistake not, David does here principally
bend himself, when he prays [Let not them have dominion over me] that is, not
only, let them not rule, but which is beyond that, let them not so much as
prevail over me: Though I may meet with temptations to presumptuous and high
sinnings, though I may find a false nature ready enough to break forth upon a
vain confidence, yet Lord do thou then so effectually aid and assist me, that
I may not only resist, but refel them; though they may attempt, yet let not
them once conquer nor overcome me; let me never yield to them, nor act them:
yet if any think that he aims at the habitual dominion of those sins; I will
not enter into the lists, let him enjoy his opinion, but I think this of actual
dominion is more punctual to the place.

SECT. II. Whether sin in dominion may befall a regenerate person.

Quest. VVHither sin in dominion may befall a David, or regenerate person?

For the resolution of this question remember these particulars. There is a
difference betwixt a conquest by sin, and the dominion of it.


1. That there is a difference twixt peccatum vincens, and peccatum regnans,
'twixt a conquest by sin and the dominion of sin: A Conquest is when sin
prevails: Dominion is when sin Rules: The Conquest respects power, Dominion
respects the will; In Conquest the person resists, but his strength is too
weak: In dominion the person yields up himself to the Will, and Law, and Power
of another. Sin may overcome a Regenerate person, but it has not dominion in
him.

2. There is Dominium Tyranni, and Dominium Domini; There is a tyrannical
dominion and aregal dominion.
A tyrannical Dominion is by force and constraint, a Regal dominion is by
consent and choice; the former is incident to the Regenerate: Paul complains
that he is sold under sin, Romans 7. But Ahab sold himself to work wickedness.
Paul is brought into captivity to the Law of sin, but Judas willingly offers
himself to betray Christ: In tyrannical dominion there is unwillingnesse,
hatred, dislike, conflict, weariness, trouble, and desire to be freed: In
Regal Dominion there is chief Contentment, Delight, and Rest, etc.

3. The Dominion of sin may be taken either, The dominion of sin taken Strictly.


1. Strictly and Properly: where sin is absolute, and full, and uncontrolled,
and the sinner freely and totally Resignes up himself to the lusts, and will,
and commands of sin.

2. Largely, and in some respect, when as to some particular Largely.
act of sin, there is not (for a time) any actual or prevalent present
resistance: even the will it self is surprised by carnal affections, but yet
in the event, and at length, it is revived, and grace does resume its imperium,
and recovers the person again: In this sense sin may be said to reign, or to
have dominion in a Regenerate person; But it is as Simile.
a Thief or Robber reigning and ruling in a royal Castle, which (shortly) he is
forced to quit and leave.

But for a complete, uncontrolled, habitual, final dominion of A complete
dominion cannot befall the regenerate. Reasons of it.
sin, this cannot befall the regenerate.

1. The Dominion of grace and Christ is eternal: True grace is an immortal
seed, it cannot be totally quenched: a well of water springing to everlasting
life.

2. The union with Christ is inseparable, and insuperable, which could not be,
if a regenerate person might fall under such a dominion of sin.

3. The promise of grace must not fail, sin shall not have dominion over us,
Romans 6. 14. I will subdue their iniquities, Micha 7. 19.

4. The Covenant of God is, I will put my fear into their hearts that they
shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40.

5. Jesus Christ has conquered, as well as other enemies, so our sins.

Quest. If sin in dominion cannot happen to the Regenerate, Why then does David
pray against it. Reasons of it.
why does David pray, etc.

Sol. Three things may be said of this,

1. If David or any regenerate person should be left unto himself, sin would
have dominion over him: therefore he prays, acknowledging that it must be a
strength greater then his own, etc.

2. Prayers are a means to fetch us out of the Dominion of sin, and keep off
sin from having dominion over us: upon Paul's prayer, the answer was, my grace
is sufficient for thee.

3. Although habitual, and universal, and final dominion of sin be incompetible
or inconsistent with the state of grace, yet actual and particular dominion is
possible, and there are great reasons for a regenerate person to pray, if it
were no more then against particular, and temporary dominion of sin; but of
this more distinctly in the next Section.

SECT. III.
Quest. 3. WHy David prays against sin in dominion? Why David prays against
sin in dominion.
Sol. Remember that precedent distinction of actual dominion, which
comprehended a particular prevalency over the soul for particular acts of
sinning: and of habitual dominion which intimated the full resignation of the
heart to the commands of corruption.

In both respects there may be great reasons, why any man should pray against
the dominion of sin. Reasons of praying against actual dominion. Actual
dominion of sin is very bad.


1. Against actual dominion.
1. Because though actual dominion does not infallibly testify the person to
be bad: yet it is ever a breaking forth of what is very bad: for as much as the
action in this case is but sin acted.

Now consider,

1. That every sin (as acted) is therefore the worse: you know Note.
that sin, though it be a vile thing, yet it tends toward a perfection Every
sin as acted is therefore the worse.
(in its kind) lus^, when it has conceived, bringe^h forth sin, and sin when
it is finished, etc. Jam. 1. 15. He alludes to a child in the womb, which in
the conception is not so perfect and complete, as in the birth and life: sin is
naturally bad, if it be at all, it is evil, if in inclination it is evil, if in
thought evil, if in acting, then much worse; when it is brought forth, then it
is more ripened, and therefore the more sinful; now where sin has but actual
dominion, there it prevails, thou^h not always to a full consent, yet to a
sinful service or act: the person does the thing which is evil.

2. That the acting of the greater sin is always a greater kind The acting of
the greater sin is a greater kind of sinning.
of sinning: I mean, caeteris paribus, if things be equally set together.

A high sin, a presumptuous sin in temptation is not so guilty, as the same
presumptuous sin in dominion; for all sin in service is ever worse then any
sin in conflict: though sin may trouble a man more when it inclines and
tempts, yet it wounds a man more, when it prevails and overcomes.

Secondly, actual dominion though it does not always conclud Actual Dominion
weakens the strength of grace. sin prevailing does not infer. Privation of
grace.
the absence of grace, yet it always impaires and weakens the strength of
grace.

There are two things which sin prevailing to act, does not necessarily infer.

One is Privation of grace: for even a good man may stoop and fall, a good man
may yet do that evil which he would not: an honest traveller may be struck
down, and a faithful soldier may be taken captive, though to sin be the evil
man's work, yet it may possible be the good man's action.

2. Another is Annihilation of grace: There is a great difference Annihilation
of grace.
twixt sickness and death: sickness though it removes health, yet it does not
remove life, it is death which does that; particular dominion, or prevalence,
it may lay flat, wound deeply, leave a man in a swoon (as ye shall hear
presently) yet it is the habitual dominion which denies life.

Nevertheless, particular dominion does even weaken grace (i.) any sin (much
more a presumptuous sin at which David seems Yet it may weaken grace.
here to touch) prevails and winnes ground on the soul to yield to act, there
the Corrupt nature improves it self, it has the better: And this is certain
that sin is never improved but grace is weakened: weakened much in its measure,
and in its strength; as all health by the prevalency of sickness, and all heat
by the victoriousnesse of cold, sinful actings do abate the vitality of grace,
the edge and the spirit of it, and lay it in a swoone, so that a man may now
have little heart to pray, Infinite distrust toward God, and which is as bad as
the rest, if he takes not heed, actual prevalencies (at the least) incline and
tempt him shrewdly to habitual actings, so a man shall hardly do sin any one
service, but sin to recompense him, will impose the reupon many Commands for
more.

3. Because actual dominion, though it does not always cut off Actual
dominion does check the comforts.
the union, yet it may and does disperse and check the comforts. It is an
eclipse though it be not a night, He who made the Leprosy, though he lost not
right to his tent or house, yet he was interdicted the use and benefit of
either. A Child who offends his father, though he does not therefore presently
cease to be a child, yet his offense does turn and change the countenance of
his father. Though it does not break off the relation, yet i^ does the respect;
he shall not easily be admitted into his fathers presen^^, and then, he shall
see bended brows instead of smiles, an^ sharp rebukes, and upbraidings instead
of kind and wonted wel-comes: so shall even David himself find, if that
great sins get dominion over him, if they do prevail, if he does act them,
though God does not cast off his person, yet he will draw off his Countenance:
why hidest thou thy face? He shall quickly find the difference twixt the
service of God, and the service of sin: when he goes to pray, his sin shall
meet him, and when he goes to hear, the Ordinances shall cast his sin into
his face: As Sampson, when he lost his hair, he could not do as formerly, as
at other times, so even actual dominion of sin, though it does not nullify.
the relations, yet it wonderfully varies the condition: The Sun seems to be
darkened at noonday, the Air is filled with tempest, and thunders, which
lately was overspread with beautiful light; God looks in terror and
displeasure, and the conscience wounds with closest bitterness: all former
comforts seem to take leave of us; sometimes we are so distressed that we fear
we are lost for ever: one such sinning may cost us many years of cruel
vexation, and of this we may be sure, that till we are soundly humbled and
renew our repentance, we shall never see a smile in Gods countenance, nor hear
a good word from conscience: Now this is a doleful case that a man shall hear
the same promises from which he sucked much comfort, and yet he may not taste
(now he cannot rejoice) and that God whose communion was so sweet, now through
his sinning, becomes so bitter and heavy, etc.

4. Because actual dominion, (especially of great sins, and over Actual
dominion is accompanied with great prejudice to divine glory.
a David) is accompanied with great prejudice to Divine glory: As they say of
Fevers, that they are usually worst in the strongest constitutions; and of
spots, that they are usually the greatest blemishes in the fairest garments:
that we may say of sinnings: the better the man is, the more dishonorably foul
his offendings are: God loses more honor in the eyes of the world, by the
slips of the good, then by the wallowings of the bad: evil men are hardened,
good men derided, Satan and sin advanced, and by all these God is infinitely
dishonored: Therefore good reason has David to pray, Let them not have
dominion over me.

Secondly, Habitual Dominion.
But then in the Second place, if we interpret the dominion Reasons of praying
against habitual dominion.
here of an Habitual dominion of sin, the reasons of prayer against sin, as
in such a dominion, are very strong and urgent.

1. Habitual dominion decides the estate: the question of a man's soul is,
whose servant he is, whether he belong to God and Habitual dominion decides
the estate.
Christ, or to sin and Satan.

Now particular failings do not determine this, but the dominion of sin does,
his servants we are whom we obey: you know what the Apostle has said, Rom: 6.
16. know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or if obedience
unto righteousness: if sin does rule, and the sinner yields up his heart to
the love and obedience of it: he professes thus much, that Christ is not his
Lord, and the Law of Christ is not the law which he will obey, as these Rebels
spoke of David, what portion have we in the son of Jesse? so here the
sinner, I do not belong to Christ, sin is my Lord, The servant of sin am I,
that is the thing which I have Chosen, and that is it which I will serve; So
that on may without any scruple conclude, that if sin has dominion, the man
has yet noe interest in Christ, noe one degree of true grace, he is a most
wretched sinner: sin is his Lord, God is his enemy, Hell is his portion,
unless he get from under this Dominion.

Secondly, there is no Dominion in all the world so vile: whither you consider
it, First, In the commands of sin, or Secondly, Noe dominion so vile.
In the service of the sinner.

First, The Commands.
The commands of sin are the vilest commands. For, The commands of sin are,
Illegal.


1. They are Illegal, any command which finds ground and title may be
defended, but sin has no reason to command: A condemned man loses all
command; sin is the only thing which Gods law has condemned: And again, it
has no title to the soul, the soul owes not it self to it, either by a
natural, or by a purchased subjection: we owe a natural subjection to God,
because he made us; A purchased subjection to Christ, because he redeemed and
bought us; but sins commands are merely usurped, and Insolent.

2. They are purely sinful: all its edicts and desires are but Rebellions: that
a man should trangresse a righteous, and supreme, Purelly sinful
and good, and holy law: there is not any one thing which sin at any time
commands, but it is that which God forbids, and which God will Judge the sinner
for.

3. They are extremely unreasonable; a command may be esteemed unreasonable,
either when one service runs contradictory Extremely unreasonable.
against another, as to command aman to run and yet to stand; so is it with
sin, it commands a man to such a service as is opposite in particulars, for as
all sin is opposite to grace, so some sins are opposite to others; though not
in the fountain, yet in the actings; or a command may be esteemed unreasonable
when any service tends to the ruin of the obedient; it were an unreasonable
thing, and unjust, to command a man to run into the fire and burn himself,
but the commands of sin tend directly, and intentionally to the destruction of
the sinner, sin injoynes a man much service and pains, and all this is, to
dishonor God, and to damn his own soul.

Secondly, the service. The service of sin.

The service of sin: it is the most disloyal service in respect of God
renouncing him, denying him his due, and conferring it on his only enemy. Is a
disloyal service.


2. It is the most injurious service to our souls.

3. It is the basest service: if a man did serve a dog or a toad, An injurious
service. The basest service.
this were a vile abasing of himself, but it is far baser to serve sin, for
those creatures have some goodness in them, but sin is naturally bad: Nay,
though we do cry out at the devil, as vile and base, yet the Devil himself is
better then sin, for it is his sin only which makes him so base, and he has an
absolute being, which he owes to God; but sin has noe relation to God, and it
is that which imbaseth all beings.

4. It is the drudgingest service: A man who is a servant to sin, he is at the
command of every lust, and is taken captive at its pleasure, The most drudging
service.
and there is noe hoe, nor measure, nor end: all the day will not serve, nor
will the night satisfy: an age of years is spent, and when a man's strength
does fail him, yet sin sets him to work still. The cruelest Tyrant, wearies
himself sometimes by his unwearied commands, but sin never relents nor spares:
Nay that which shows the extremity of this vasilladge, the sinner continues
service there, and then, where he sees and knows his misery; he has felt the
fruits, the bitter fruits of sinning, yet sin still commandes and easily puts
him upon the same service afresh: so that he often tyers his thoughts, and
spends his estate, and consumes his strength, and breaks his sleep, and loses
his friends, his God, his soul, his all, to drudge at the Commandes of his
own base lusts.

5. It is a most unprofitable service: Though in some service there The most
unprofitable service.
may be but an uncertain gain, yet in the service of sin, there is a most
certain and great loss, what profit had ye in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed Romans 6. 21. therefore sins are said to sow the wind, and to reap
the whirl-winde, they deal in vanities which shall not profit, and every sin
is a lie, let it pretend much, yet it advantageth nothing. Suppose a man had an
estate worth 10000 li. and he should receive a baby for it, tell me what he
got? O that precious soul of man which is more worth then a world, is uttelry
lost by sin, what then, does the service of it profit him? for what is a man
profited (says our Savior) though he gain the whole world, if he lose his
own soul; thou Gets a little credit by thy sinning, yea but whith whom? And
what is that whiles the great God does disgrace thee: and thine own conscience
does often shame thee? Thou gets a little wealth by thy sinning, yea, but what
is that Treasure of wickedness, but a Treasury of wrath against the day of
wrath? Thou gets a little pleasure by thy sinning; yea, but what are these
short minutes of joy to those eternal nights of darkness, in which they must
end and be swallowed up? one fall breaks all the glass to pieces, and one
anguish of conscience, or peal of death, blasts and sinkes all the vain
triumphings of a sinful heart: sin may pretend fair, and promise much, but
the wages thereof (i.) that which thou must expect for thy service, is death:
yea, that death which is opposed to eternal life, Romans 6. vlt.

6. It is a most uncomfortable service: How often is the servant of A most
uncomfortable service.
sin in the depths of fear, and in the heights of trouble, his very sinnings
are more his torments then his joys: he is many times vexed with thoughts how
to sin, and afterward he is hewed in his conscience for his sinning; though he
has not grace to make him grieve, yet he has a conscience which can make him
tremble: the very surfeits of his sins do distaste his soul, and make him of
times weary of his very life; he is ashamed of Company, and dares not yet to be
solitary: The night is many times a terror unto him, and the day renewes his
anguish: though the servant of sin (in the transient flash of his spirit)
out-braves al counsel, yet he does ordinarily feel infinite gripes within,
either he is utterly unsensible of his misery, (which is one of the greatest
judgments,) or he his sensible, and then he feels a Hell of horror for his
lewd obedience: Nay, so exceedingly high do the distresses sometimes prevail,
that he his forced to disparie of all mercy, and thinking to ease himself of
some flames, greedily throws away himself into the very gulf of Hellfire:
what shall I say more, where sin has the dominion over a person, a man is a
slave to the Devil, and a servant to that which will vex him and wound him,
and damn him; he never enjoyes himself, nor shall he ever enjoy God, unless
that yoke of service be broken: and therefore good reason has any man to pray
against the habitual dominion of sin.

SECT. IV.
THus for the explication, now something for the Application inquiry? Inquire
whether sin have Dominion over us
what think we of the dominion of sin within our souls.

You will say, we trust there is noe such thing. I Remember we are Abraham's
seed, said they, we were never in Bondage, Joh. 8. 33. But Christ replied,
verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin,
v. 34.

I will premise a few things at this time.

1. No man living but he is borne a servant to sin: sin is his Some things
premised. Noe man but is borne a servant to sin.
Lord before he can tell who is his Master, sin requires not age to set on the
crown, but even in the very womb, does it begin its reign, and poisons, and
impaireth our whole nature, therefore the Apostle says, that by nature we are
the children of disobedience and wrath as well as others, Ephesians 2. 2. it is
the disposition, and sway, and bent of us to sin, and to walk on in sin.

2. It is an hard thing to get off the dominion of sin. Sin is a It is a hard
thing to get off the dominion of sin.
strong man, It has possession, and goes not out by entreaty or bribe, but it
must be by force, by one that his stronger: I assure you, that the almighty God
must reveal his own arm, and he must cast down strong holds, he must work a
kind of a miracle, or else sin will still be a Lord, and the sinner will be a
servant to his lusts: A man may change any Master soever, and with more ease
then sin?

Thirdly, it is very manifest, that sin has the dominion in many It is
manifest that sin has dominion in many, as, In those whom noe kind of
arguments can turn from sin.
persons; I will present unto you such instances which you shall confess do
evince so much.

1. What think you, has not sin the dominion, where noe kind of arguments
and dealings are able to disengage the heart and to turn it? when no kinds of
merciful Arguments, and no kinds of just threatenings, and no sense of
bitterness, can yet discovenant and diservice the soul: but still it holds the
league, keeps the agreement with sin, now then how often has God come to many
persons, and offered unto them his pardoning mercies, and the blood of Christ,
and eternal life, if they would leave such a sin of drunkenness, such a sin of
filthiness, such a sin of worldliness, but unrighteous they were, and
unrighteous still they are and will be: How often has God set the point of the
sword upon the breast of a sinner, revealing his wrath, threatening death and
Hell if he will not leave the service of his sin; nay, scourged his estate for
his sinning, nay, scourged his body, nay, his soul and conscience, and all this
to renounce his sinful Lord, yet men hold fast their wickedness, they yet give
over themselves to sin with greediness, they study how to fulfill their lusts,
and rejoice when they have done evil: does not this show, that the heart is
indeed indeared, and totally emancipated by a strong and elective subjection
unto sin.

What think you of such whose hearts cannot endure the Dominion In those who
cannot endure the dominion of Jesus Christ.
of Jesus Christ, and the service of righteousness; it is even a tormenting
slavery unto them, even the imaginations thereof are so. The Soul of a man
cannot serve two Masters, and there are but two of them upon which our service
can be bestowed, either sin, or Christ: the Apostle intimated as much, Romans 6.
16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey his,
servants ^^ are to whom you obey, whither of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness; so that these divide the soul, if a man does yield
obedience unto righteousness, he is then no servant of sin; if he yields
obedience unto sin, he is then noe servant of righteousness; if he be an enemy
to sin, he is then a servant to righteousness, If he be an enemy to
righteousness, he is then a servant of sin. Yet many persons are enemies to
righteousness, we will not have this man to reign over us, said they in the
Gospel, they cannot endure the dominion of Christ, either in his word, or in
his spirit: The rules and precepts of the word are the cords which they will
break asunder, Psalm. 2. 3. They cast the laws of Christ behind their backs,
and hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50. 17. There is nothing more unacceptable to
them then to serve the Lord Jesus Christ in holiness of heart, and newness of
spirit, and righteousness of obedience. In those who are still overcome of
their lusts.


3. What think you of those who are still overcome of their lusts, and are
willingly entangled; The Apostle Peter Conjectures, that sin has dominion in
such, while they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
Corruption, for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
bondage, 2. Peter. 2. 19.

There is a twofold overcoming of a person, on is only in respect of the
action: Another is also in respect of the affection.

It cannot be denied, but that even an holy man (who is heartily the servant of
Jesus Christ) may be overcome in respect of particular action; relapses are not
impossible to him who is truly good, and they may consist with (though they do
weaken and disconsolate) the service of grace, there is the same natural
principle of sin in the best after repentance as before: there is the same
Satan to suggest and incline, there may be the same occasions and provocations:
But then there is an overcoming in respect of assertion, and this shows the
dominion of sin: Now this overcoming is, either when a man through policy
forbears, or else in passion seems to bid defiance to his sin, being either in
sickness and apprehension of death, or in pangs and distress of conscience
(to which the Apostle seems to allude, 2 Pet. 2. 22. the dog is turned to his
vomit again;) Now he cries out against sin, and thinks he does detest it
heartily, and will not for a world act the sin now, yet when this tempest is
off, when the water grow^ ^ool, when circumstances are free, when the
bitterness either of death, or cross, or conscience is over, and sin tempts
and wooes him again, he yields up himself, he gives over his heart and
affections, he loves the sin and wallows in it as much ^s ever: he turns from
the holy Commandment (as the Apostle speaks, ver. 21.) all his good moods of
holy profession, and purpose are gone off, and he is more entangled, and renews
his bondage with ardent and excessive delight, even with greediness, as the
Apostle Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4.

Now if this be an argument of sins dominion, viz. the willing and affectionate
re-entring of our hearts to the service of sin, then certainly many of us have
just cause to fear and to suspect our selves, who return with the dog to the
vomit, and with the sow to the wallowing in the mire; who not only are
surprised in action, but in affection; nay, and our affections are more eagerly
carried to the sinning now then heretofore; our minds are more on them, and
our desires, yea, and the measures of sinning in the same kind rise in an
higher strength: we are more mighty to drink, more inglorious in swearing, more
unsatiable in earthliness, more vain in conversation more obstinate in our
sinful courses against the reproofs of the Word, the checks of our conscience,
the shame of men, the fear of Hell, and the hope of h^^^en, we grow worse and
worse, etc.

Fourthly, what think you of such who make choice of sin to be In those who
makes choice of sin to be their Lord.
the Lord whom they will serve.

There are but two sorts of people in the world, viz. good and bad, and both of
them do choose their Lords.

The good they choose the Lord to be their God, Josh. 24. And they choose the
things which please him, Esaias 56. 4. And choose the way of truth, Psalm. 119. 3.
and choose the good part, Luke 10. 42.

The bad, they also are said to choose their own ways, Isa. 66. 3. and evil,
Isa. 65. 12. That in which God delights not: yea, and they are said, not to
choose the fear of the Lord: when several things are propounded, and a man
prefers this before that, this is called an election or choice: There is Christ
and his way laid before the sinner, and sin and its lusts laid before him; now
when he prefers the latter before the former, he is said to make a choice:
which many do, they do prefer their sinful lusts before the commands of Christ,
as appears in all the times of competition, and in the courses of action, yea,
and when they may go free, yet with that Hebrew servant they will not, for they
love their Master.

Lastly, what think you of many who love their sins; love is that which bestows
the soul and the service thereof; the In those who love their sins.
whole strength of a man goes that way which his love goes, for it is of a
constraining and most serviceable nature. Now there are many who do love sin,
there is, as it were, a conjugal match and union 'twixt their hearts and their
sins, and be sure of this, that sin has the whole man, if it has won the love
of the heart. A man may deceive himself about the dominion of sin.


4. A person may possibly delude his own heart, and deceive himself about the
dominion of sin, and therefore it is convenient to try our selves whether sin
has not Dominion indeed.

There are many erroneous deceits, Six deceits from The unsensiblenesse of its
power.


1. One is the unsensibleness of its power: when a man feels no violence of
sinful inclination, no stirrings, no opposition, no commands, but there is a
calm and quietness in his spirit, and in hi^ ^ay, which could not be as he
thinks if sin had dominion an^ ^^e in him.

Now this is a deceit; For,

1. It is most probable that sin has the strongest dominion, where the heart
is most unsensible of the Law and commands of sin; when the strong man keeps
the house, all is quiet, said our Savior, where subjection is peaceable; there
dominion is (in all likelihood) most absolute and complete.

Nay, this is certain, that where Christ sets up his Scepter (which cast down
the dominion of sin) there is the greatest stir, the Law of the mind will
war against the Law of the members, Romans 7. 23. And the spirit will lust
against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17.

2. This unsensibleness and quietness may arise, partly from the oneliness of
sin, and partly from the ignorance of a sinful condition, and partly from the
habitual custom of sin: Whether Simile.
the Sun does shine or not, there are as many atoms and motes flying in the
room, there they are really, though not sensibly till the light comes in to
manifest them. When a man Simile.
is in a deadly disease, he may be void of all sense of it, his life may be
even dropping out, and his disease may rule in his body, though he feels not
any aches, or pain; for this unsensibleness depends upon the strength of his
disease, which has not only pierced his natural temper, but his senses also:
so may a person be utterly unsensible of sin for want of all saving light, and
holy experience which arises from a new nature, etc.

Nay, and as we see men in bondage, and slavery, when they Simile.
are long in the same, grow unsensible, and the hand which is used to iron, and
nettles, is not sensible of them; so the frequent actings of sin may suppress
the inward sense of sinning, this being an easy observation, and most true,
that much sinning adds to the strength of sin, and disables the sense of a
sinner, sears his conscience, and makes his mind reprobate, and as it were
without sense. From a freedom from many courses of sinful actings.


2. Another deceit may be a freedom from many courses of sinful actings: when a
man is not like every whore, that prostitutes her body to every lover, so he
does not rage and live in all sorts of wickedness, nay, his ways seem to keep
clear of diverse iniquities: to this I answer.

Sol. Though a man does not all evil, and his ways or courses is not
universally spreading in all the kinds of sinning, yet sin may rule in that
man, it may have dominion; forasmuch, as

1. Particular subjection is sufficient to set up dominion: Particular
subjection is sufficient to set up dominion.
Though a servant has but one Master, and does not serve every man in the
Parish, yet he is a true servant in respect of that one Master: and though a
subject does not obey every Prince in the world, yet if he obeys any one, it is
enough to prove that he is a subject: so though the sinner is not at the the
command of every lust, yet if he be the servant of any one lust, sin has the
dominion over him; for it is not the multitude of sins which does absolutely
and necessarily concur to dominion, but a subjection to the power of any one.

2. A man may do all that service to one sin, which others A man may do all
that service to one sin which others do to many sins
do to many sins; he may devise, and study to fulfill it, he may cheerfully and
greedily receive its commands; he may heartily love it, and go on in it, and
for its sake oppose the Scepter and Dominion of Christ, he may consecrate all
his strength to the obedience of it; Now as they observe in the Politics
Simile.
that there a^e several forms of government or dominion; as Democracy, and
Aristocracy, and Monarchy, sometimes the dominion is exercised by many,
sometimes by one alone, yet the subjection to any of them, is true subjection,
and sets up dominion.

So though in some men many sins do rule, and in others some one only, if the
heart obeys many or few, or one, it is enough to declare dominion: subjection
to no sin, that indeed denies dominion, but if the dispute be of many or few
sins, then this know, that subjection to any a^gues dominion. From the
opposition against some sins, and exemption from other greater sins.


3. Yet again, another deceit may be, not only declination of some sins, but
also opposition; which a man thinks cannot possibly consist with dominion; for
a Kingdom is not, or should not be divided against it self.

Sol. To this I answer, that there may be notable deceit in this also; for as
much as to that of exemption from great and gross sins: it is not the
greatness, but the power of sin which makes it reigning; the Princes in
Germany have dominion; though the dominion of the Emperor be more large. The
least sin acknowledged, loved, served, suffices to dominion: the dominion of
sin is most within the heart.

2. As to that of opposition.

1. There is a double opposition of sin: one depending upon office, another
depending upon nature: a person advanced to some office in the Commonwealth,
may oppose a sin with respect to his office, which yet perhaps he dorh favor
and dearly love in respect of his private nature and practice. A justice of
peace may oppose many sins upon the bench, which yet he lies in, at home in his
own house and dealings.

2. Again, there is a twofold opposition of sin; one, because it is sin;
another, because it is shame, and this latter may befall him, who is under the
dominion of sin.

3. Once more, there is an opposition of a sin, either because of the
opposition which the sin has to Gods will, or because of the opposition which
the sin has to another sinful way and inclination: for though it be true
that all sin has a contrariety to the rule, yet it is as true, that some
sins have a contrariety among themselves, as prodigality to covetousness,
etc. And a man may oppose the one, not from a respect had to its natural
vileness, but from a respect had to his private and personal inclination; this
other being such a way of sinning, as likes not but it would overthrow that
other sin which he has set up, and which he loves, and in which he is
resolved to walk.

4. In a word, it is not particular, but universal opposition of all known sin,
which denies Dominion: A man may oppose many sins, for our sins sake, as
well as act any sin for its sake, and both show sin to be in Dominion.

4. A fourth deceit may depend upon the troubles which a From the troubles a
man may feel after some sinful actings.
man may feel after some sinful actings; his soul may be grievously heavy and
perplexed, and hereupon a person may conclude, that sin has not dominion,
because he conceives dominion of sin to exclude all trouble for sin.

Sol. Nevertheless there may be error in this, for though As trouble for sin
is not an argument of indominion. Proved.
hardness of heart after sin be as ill a symptom of wickedness as impudency
before sin, yet all trouble for sin committed, is not an infallible argument of
in-dominion, which I clear.

1. By instance: if the worst of men may have after-troubles By instance.
for former sinnings, then it is not an infallible argument, etc. (because, if
sin has dominion in any, then surely in the worst of men) but even they may
have after-troubles.

As it is with the most honest wife, and with the most dishonest Simile.
strumpet, both of them, after their childbirth may have their after-throwes,
so the most ingenious Christian, and the most lews sinner may (after their
sinnings) partake of great anguishes and troubles of conscience: I refer you to
Ahab and to Judas, and to those of whom he speaks in Job, that the terrors of
God did drive them to their feet.

2. By Argument: for trouble for sin in respect of the conscience By argument.
only, it is but a judicial act, it is but a part of the wages of sin. Indeed
trouble in the affections (which Divines call godly sorrow) that is an act or
effect of grace, but mere trouble in the conscience, which consists in sense
and accusation, that God brings upon the sinner, for his transgressions; he
awakens the conscience after sin to accuse for sinning, whose directions and
checks could not avail to keep off from sinning: so that a person whose heart
is in no measure changed by grace, (and therefore of necessity is under sins
dominion) he may be filled with extreme wrath, and bitterness; yea, the very
terrors of Hell may shake and amaze, and confound his soul: why? the reason is,
because, though grace be required to raise godly sorrow; yet conscience only
awakened and actuated by light, and divine command is abundantly sufficient to
accuse, condemn, vex and trouble the sinner.

5. A fifth deceit may be in the vacancies, or spaces, or interimes From the
vacancies and intrimes of sinning.
of sinning; because a man does not every moment, or every day lie at his sin,
but there are oft-times some pauses and distances of time 'twixt sinning and
sinning; he therefore conjectures that sin has not dominion over him: why?
because where sin has dominion, there a man sells himself to sin, and
wallows himself in sinning, and makes it his trade, at which he spends his life
and strength.

To this I also answer, that yet sin may have dominion, though there be some
respites and breathings 'twixt sinning and sinning. For,

1. Some respites do not arise from a nature which will not subject it self to
sin, but only from the defect of occasions, and opportunities of sinning: A
thief does not always steal because Simile.
he may be sometimes sick, and there is not always an open convenience for his
hand; the like may be said of any sins which are capable of visible and
corporeal actings.

2. Again, the dominion of sin does not absolutely consist in an uninterrupted
propagation or service of sinful acts, (i.) that a man does not other
particular acts, but sin, sin; the drunkard is under the power of drunkenness,
though he be diverse times sober; and the fil^hy person is under the power of
uncleanness, though he does not every day see and embrace his harlot: But the
dominion of sin is to be judged by the disposition of the heart, and the maine
part of the course; if sin be the main thing which a man intends, and the
singular things to which he resignes and yields up his heart, whether he be
always, or sometimes in the actings, this is not material.

3. Nay, for a man to give no respite to sinful actings, this were against that
wisdom of the flesh, which concurs to make up the dominion of sin; though the
propension to sin may be and is constant, though the love of the sin may be,
and is great, yet the actings of sin may often vary, and be suspended, upon
private reasons and respects, either of safety, or From the practice of some
actions contrary to ourward sinnings.
quiet, or profit, or pleasure, etc.

6. A sixth deceit may be from the practice of some actions which are contrary
to all outward sinnings, at least in respect of exercise: because a man is
perhaps a constant Churchman, and has a course of duties (such as they are)
in his family, and he is much in vowings, and can condemn sin to purpose: now
surely sin has lost its dominion.

I answer, that notwithstanding all this, yet sin may be in dominion: For,

1. The dominion of sin is within.

2. It may consist with many visible acts of piety: I will clear this unto you
by propounding one case, what think you of an hypocrite, has no sin dominion
in him? you will confess it has, and verily it has; but now even an
hypocrite may step forth into all outward conformities, I know no visible act
of impiety, which an hypocrite either does not, or may not perform.

Secondly, though those material good acts be formally opposite to sinful acts
as acts, yet as the denomination of a Christian, so that of a sinner is more
from the affections then from the actions, and indeed this defines and decides
the dominion, or indominion of sin immediately, viz. the disposition of the
heart, which may be really rotten and false, and the true harbor of a sin,
though the person does get out to the acting of some visible duties of piety.
There must be more then externals, in duty to evince, that sin has not
Dominion.

Having delivered unto (in the useful application of the point already) the
natural community of sins dominion, and the difficulty of release from it, and
the probability of its rule in many men's hearts, and the erroneous grounds by
which men cousen and flatter themselves as free and exempted persons.

I now proceed to set down some instances by which it may Five trials. That sin
has not dominion.
appear, that a man is not under the dominion of sin, or that sin has not
dominion over him.

1. If Christ b^ his Lord: the Apostle has a sweet passage If Christ be hi^
his Lord:
in Romans 6. 17. But God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but you
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you, ver.
18. Being then made free from sin, ye become the servants of righteousness,
(i.) you chose Christ to be your Lord, and resigned up your selves to his
service. This is a most undoubted truth, if Christ be my Lord, I am not then a
servant to sin, sin is not my Master. Christ's Dominion is destructive to, and
inconsistent with sins dominion. It ever stands alone.

Obj. But you will say, how may a man know that Christ How this may be known.
is his Lord.

Sol. This is a great point, and much depends on it, I will touch it a little.
One may be a Lord in Respect of Title and Right. Of Authority and
acknowledgement.


You know that one may be a Lord in a double respect, one in respect of title
and right, another in respect of authority and acknowledgement; it is certain
that Christ is the Lord of all the world, all the Nations of the earth are
given unto him, and are in respect of his title and right, to stoop and bow
down themselves, but he is not acknowledged as a Lord, he is not embraced (as
so) by his enemies, yet some there are in whose heart Christ sets up his
authority and rule, and who do acknowledge him, who do make choice of him to be
the Lord of their hearts and lives; (i.) they prefer the government of Christ,
they do consent unto him, that he only shall rule them, and they do resign up
themselves to his will, they do bestow their hearts and service on him.

Beloved! when a person makes choice of Christ to be his Lord, he does consider
the several kinds of dominion (of sin, of the World, of the Devil, of Christ)
he considers them seriously, and compares them, and then he finds that no
dominion for a man's soul, is like Christ's; none so righteous and just, none so
holy and heavenly, none so sweet and profitable: Christ has the only right to
the soul, and his government is infinitely best.

Now the person (hereupon) makes choice of Christ, and comes unto him with
humble tears, and beseeches him to reign over him: O blessed Jesus! (says
the soul) thou art the only Lord, and there is none like thee, or besides thee;
I have been a rebel, an enemy unto thee, I have been disobedient, and have
served diverse lusts and pleasures; I have served the world, and the Prince of
darkness, but now I renounce their service, and condemn my slavery, and come
unto thee to be my Lord. Thy title is just and proper to my soul; it is thy
purchase, and therefore the service of it belongs to thee. Thy precepts and
commands are righteous and holy, therefore does thy servant make choice of
thee, and love them: thou would have my heart, my will, my affections, my
life, and who should have them but thy self, upon thee do I bestow my self, and
most gladly do I consent to thy holy will, and resign up all the strength, and
powers of all that I am, or have, or can do, to the service and honor of thee;
though sin rage, yet I will serve thee; though the world frown or fawn, yet I
will serve thee, though Satan tempt, yet I will serve thee.

My heart I bestow on thee as well as my safeties, my service I bestow on thee,
as well as my hopes; thy honor I desire sincerely to intend, my love I set on
thee, my fear is of thee, my greatest care shall be to obey thy will, and my
only joy to bring thee glory; such a choice of Christ to be our Lord,
infallibly argues that sin has not dominion, forasmuch as this cannot be
without the change of the heart and whole man, which change cannot consist with
sins dominion.

2. If sin and we be enemies, then sin is not our Lord. If sin and we be
enemies. Sin is an enemy, Really.
Sin is an enemy two ways. Either,

Really: thus it is an enemy to him, who yet dearly loves, and faithfully
serves it; thou^h it gives unto a man the wages of unri^hteousnesse (many
sinful pleasures, and many sinful profits) yet in all these, sin is an enemy to
the person; it works his soul off from God and happiness, and holiness, and
exposes it to death and hell.

Practically: thus sin is an enemy, when a man looks upon Practically.
it, and deals with it as with an enemy, he judges of it as of a vi^e thin^,
and hates it, and abhors it as the only evil thing, and enemy to his soul.
Beloved, when sin has dominion, there is then a confederacy 'twixt it and the
soul, the Prophet calls it a Covenant, and the Apostle calls it a contract, or
espous^l^ or marriage, (i.) such an agreement and conjunction where the soul
bestows its choicest love on sin. But when the dominion of sin goes off, then
the Covenant is broken, the knot is dissolved, the affection of love is
displaced. As it was in another case, Amons love turned to the cruelest hatred;
so here, though a man did love his sins, yet now his love is changed into
hatred, and this hatred infallibly argues the indominion of sin; for

1. Hatred includes separation: It is such a quality as draws off Hatred
includes separation.
the sou; love is that which draws on the soul toward its object, and hatred
is that which draws it off; Get thee hence, said they, in Esaias 30. 22. and what
have I to do any more with idol, said Ephraim, Hos. 14. 8.

Now sins dominion consists in the cleaving and united subjection of the
affections, the soul makes sin its center unto which it wholly inclines, it and
the soul are one, when sin reigns, and therefore the separation of the
affections (which is done by hatred) argues that the yoke is broken asunder.

2. Again, hatred includes perfect opposition, the greatest defiance, Hatred
includes perfect opposition.
and contradictions and warrings arise from hatred: we oppose and cross most,
where we hate most: And this cannot be where sin has dominion, for there our
weapons are edged, for our lusts we love them much, and defend them most, and
are careful to preserve and keep them.

Thirdly, hatred inclines to destruction: Ruin is the scope Hatred inclines to
destruction.
of hatred: we seek the death of him whom we hate, and all the evil which
befalls a person hated, is the joy of him that hates. So is it where sin is
hated, a man seeks the death of sin, and therefore such persons as hate sin,
are said in Scripture to mortify the flesh, and to crucify their, lusts (i.)
the killing, and subduing, and rooting out of sin is that which they desire
and endeavor. Now this cannot stand with sin in dominion, where a man is so
far from offering any deadly violence to his reigning sins, that he reputes him
as the greatest enemy, who draws forth any crucifying weapons, and applies
them to the casting down of his strong holds.

3. If holiness or grace has our love, then sin has not dominion over us. If
holiness here our love.


Beloved it is granted, that

1. The Dominion of sin may consist with the naked profession The dominion of
sin may consist with the naked profession of holines^*
of holiness: An hypocrite (whose heart is in the deepest and most
affectionate, and elaborate service of some one particular lust) he may yet
wear the livery, and garb, and profession of greatest sanctity: Nay, he does
therefore seem good that he may (the more inobservably and fully) follow his
sin.

2. The Dominion of sin may consist with the knowledge of holiness; great parts
and intellectual speculations of holiness, And with the knowledge of holiness.
as they may depend upon foreign causes without grace (viz. upon mere study
and frequent hearings, and a natural desire of knowing, and looking into all
intelligible objects, and also on an humor of pride, that a man will be
accounted able to say something in every thing; I say as those intellectual
parts may depend upon weak and vain causes) so they may consist with an ardent
love of reigning corruptions; for learning alters not the nature, nor does more
knowledge overthrow sin: a man may be a learned sinner, and by his knowledge
grow more accurately and inexcusably sinful.

3. The Dominion of sin may consist with some visible actings And with some
visible actings of holiness.
of holiness; as a man may be a Traitor, when he yet does seem to do something
of the service to a Prince: So sin may be a man's Lord, though he does do many
things which seem good: Herod loved Herodias, though he heard John Baptist, and
did many things gladly: there is scarce any man (where Christ is professed)
that is so universally bad, but he may (now and then) do something which may be
particularly good, at least materially considered.

4. But yet fourthly, the Dominion of sin cannot consist with But it cannot
consist with the love of holiness.
the love of holiness; for where sin is in dominion, there sin has the love
of the soul; Now it is impossible for a man to love sin, and to love holiness.
I grant it, that many things may be the object of love, though there be a
numerical variety of them, yet there may be an objective unity, they may all
meet in one common reason, and natural course of love, and therefore may be
loved. But then opposite and contradictory things cannot be both loved at once,
the reason is, because you cannot reconcile them into an objective unity: that
which is a reason of the love in one, is a reason of hatred in the other. Now
sin and holiness are opposite, they are at the greatest distance in spiritual
contradictions, their natures, and courses, and effects, all are opposite, so
that a man cannot (at once) possibly love them both: And therefore if holiness
and grace has thy love, verily sin has not dominion.

I must not insist at large on this: only observe whether thou love holiness
preciselie and purely for it self; what is it which thou esteemest most, which
thou desire most; is the want of it thy greatest grief? is the prosperity of
it either in thy self or others, a true and singular joy unto thee? at what
pains art thou to purchase and increase it? what are thy thoughts of them who
are holy? and of those Ministries which edge and work on thy heart most unto
holiness, these and such like things will show whither thou love holiness,
which if thou do, thy sin is not thy Lord.

4. Whose Laws do thou approve and delight in; according Whose Laws do
thou approve and delight in.
as a man's Lord is, so are his Laws, and according as the man is, so is his
mind and affections toward those Laws of that Lord; you shall find that when
sin has dominion, there sin has several Laws, several commands, the
obedience of which is delightful to the sinner: And therefore such a one is
said to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and to commit sin with greediness,
Ephesians. 4. 19. and to yield himself over unto sin.

Thus it is on the contrary, where sin is broken off from its dominion, and
Christ does rule the heart, his Laws have a mavelous sutablenesse with the
spirit of that man: his Law is written in the heart, (i.) there is a powerful
and answerable inclination stamped in the heart, which gives way to the
command: In the volume of thy book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will, lo I come, Psalm 40. 7. I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea, thy Law
is in my heart, v. 8. Thou saidest, seek ye my face, my heart said unto me, Thy
face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. Lord, what will thou have me to do, Act. 9.
6.

Obj. It is true, that sinful corruption (yet abiding in the best) will make
head against the holy commands of Christ, it will be backward enough, cross
enough, unwilling enough, resisting and striving.

Sol. But yet three things will more habitually appear in a Three things
appear in a person governed by Christ, and not by sin. Approbation.
person, whose soul is governed by Christ and not by sin.

1. One is Approbation (i.) this judgment does highly esteem of the commands
of Christ; Paul counted the commandment holy, and righteous, and good, and
tending to life, Romans 7. 12.

2. Another is consent (i.) his will yields unto it, as to a rule Consent.
most sit to be obeyed, I consent unto the Law that it is good, Romans 7. 16. and
therefore would obey it.

3. A third is inward delight, Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Inward delight.
Law of God after the inward man: The Apostle from this (though he found a
contrary Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind; and much evil
present when he would do any good) yet concludes against sins dominion, Romans 7.
25. so then with the mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh
the Law of sin.

Why brethren? this is a great matter, and a great discovery of our hearts, to
observe, what Law that is with which we take part: which we set up as our rule,
whose authority we do justify: sin will command in him which hates it, (i.)
it will be prescribing to our affection, and our actions, but then if Christ
does rule us, we war against those commands, we resist them, we defy them, we
pray against them, we take not part with them. We acquit that Law of Christ
which we would follow, but sometimes cannot (so fully as we should) we justify
it as a most righteous command, and strive to conform our hearts to that, and
to order our lives by that.

5. A fifth trial may be this, what is the disposition and What is the
disposition of our hearts under the passive captivities of our soul by sin.
course of our hearts, under the passive captivities of our souls by particular
sinnings.

There is a twofold captivity of the soul to sin

One is active, wherein a man does (as Ahab) sell himself to wickedness, or as
Judas, offer himself to betray Christ (he went to the High Priest, what will
you give me, and I will betray him, etc.)

Another is passive, wherein (as Paul complained) he is sold under sin, like
a soldier overpowered, and by strength taken captive, and led away prisoner.
I confess, that this is most true, a good man may sin, nay he does sin, sin
may have many particular victories, where yet it has not a Kingdom or
Dominion: As there may be antecedent differences before sin is committed, and
as there may be concomitant differences, when sin is committing (which may be
as so many lively testimonies against dominion) so there are consequent
differences: there are some things afterward which show that yet sin has not
dominion though it did prevail and overcome.

Three things. Three things discover this. Hearty grief.


1. One is hearty grief: though a good man has not always sufficient strength
to conquer a temptation, yet he has sufficient grace to bewail his sinnings:
though he cannot always rejoice that he stands, yet he can heartily grieve that
he falls, either sin is his conquest, or else it is his sorrow. Though you see
not David cast down by his pleasures, yet you shortly see him cast down
himself by his mournings. Though you see Peter untrusty to his master, yet you
shall presently find himself bitterly weeping for his miscarriage: Whereas the
servants of sin do the work and take the wages, they sin and rejoice when
they have done evil, yet the servants of righteousness actively afflict their
hearts, for that which has deceived them, and prevailed upon them.

Obj. It is granted that terror may gripe an evil heart for evil doing: but
there is a great difference betwixt a sword which wounds, and a fountain that
runs.

Sol. Conscience may be wounded in the good and in the bad: but besides this,
that acted sins are a good man's wound, they are also his great grief of soul.

2. Another is earnest desire of recovery: It is a singular Earnest desire of
recovery.
and observable matter, this when a man has sinned; to whom he holds out his
hand upon it: The servant of sin does work sin, and his hand stretches out
it self as a servant still, as ready to advance and finish the service: sin
is his work and delight, it is the Lord and captain, after which he would yet
march: But an holy man (not under dominion, but surprisal; not under service
but captivity) he is not himself till he has recovered his liberty and
strength: There is such an high displeasure with himself, and with his facts,
that he will go free, he will not have his ear bo^ed to serve such a Master as
sin.

Good Lord how his heart trembles, how his heart meditates, cast about, works,
strives, sometimes he cries out: ah wicked, a deceitful heart; sometimes he
condemns himself, what a beast was I thus to sin? sometimes he looks up toward
heaven, and sighs bitterly; Ah! what a God have I provoked; what mercies have I
wronged? sometimes he looks in, and weeps, and says, ah! what motions did I
withstand? what a spirit have I grieved? how unlike my self is my self?
sometimes he is down in prayer, O Lord forgive, blot out, heal, help, recover
my heart again unto thee: One way o^ other is his soul working like a fountain
in which dirt is cast, till it has purged out the filth: he is not at rest
till sin be more subdued, his heart more changed, his affections more
humbled, his judgment more cleared, his conscience more preserved, his peace
more confirmed, his soul not only recovered, but also bettered; yea, thus it
will be with such an heart (which clears it that sin has not dominion) that
though sin prevail to action, yet it shall not to affection; though I did the
evil, yet I hate it; though it did prevail, yet I will not serve it; though it
has beat me down as a tyrant, yet I will not fol^ow it as my Lord; nay, I am
not at quiet till I can recover the si^ht of my Lord Christ again, and have
made my ^eace, and strengthened my heart for more loyal service unto him.

The third is strong ha^red and conflict: the War is more increased; Strong
hatred.
by victory, revenge is more rai^ed, 2 Cor. 7.

SECT. V.
A Second Use from David's prayer against the dominion thankfulness, to such in
whom this dominion For thankfulness to such in whom the dominion is broken off.
is broken off.

Though there be so much of sin remaining, as may keep thee humble, and
watchful, yet if dominion be gone, there is so much done as may challenge from
thee to be heartily thankful: give me leave to put on this a little. Six
motives. Six motives. It is deliverance from the greatest evil.


1. Deliverance from the greatest evil is reason enough of great thanks: It is
more then if God delivered thee from hell, if he has delivered thee from the
dominion of sin: No hell is like sin ^eigning, for as much as torment in
strength, is nothing to sin in strength: that is indeed a very miserable thing;
but this a very evil thing: sin is worse then all punishment, and reigning
sin is the worst of all sin.

2. None but God could deliver thee, and therefore if he None but God could
deliver thee.
has done it, bless him. A man may deliver his friend out of prison by paying
his debt; A father may deliver his child out of captivity by sending his
ransom; A Country may be delivered from the oppression of an invading tyrant
by great strength of its own: But there are two hands out of which none but God
can deliver, one is Satan's, another is our own. As David spoke in another case;
thou have loo^ed the bands of my distress, and it is the Lord who subdueth the
people under me; and it is not my bow nor my sword, etc. that I say here, it
is not your own arm which has gotten you the victory; no hand but Gods high
hand; which has delivered you from the powers of darkness, which has kept
sin from dominion, which has cast out the strong man, which has cast down the
stron^ holds; thou wast not so much as sensible of thine own vassailage, or of
sins dominion, thou had not power to feel, much less to conquer and
deliver: And when thou were sensible of sin, thy heart did not behave it self
as an enemy, but as a friend most willingly bowing under the yoke, and readily
embracing the lusts and motions of the law of sin: when thou have been called
upon to put off the yoke, and to come out of the house of bondage; the Hebrew
servant (who loved his Master) was never more unwilling to part from his house,
then thy heart was to come off from thy love and service of thy sins. And yet
the almighty God (in compassion to thy soul) has delivered thee: he has
disthroned sin, he has drawn off thy heart to a better Lord, and would not
suffer sin to rule thee: but by the mighty power of his grace, has made thee
free from the house of most heavy bondage.

Therefore not to thy good nature, nor to thy free will, nor to thy abilities,
nor to thy wit, or parts, or reason; but to the Lord be all the glory: the
victory is his, therefore let the praise be his.

3. It is special grace and mercy: Paul styles it rich mercy, and It is
special grace and mercy.
great love, and riches of grace Ephesians. 2. It is mercy to be rid of a disease;
more of a sin; to resist a temptation, much more to take off dominion, the
spirit of Christ only does it; the more singular a mercy is, the more thankful
should we be, Titus 3. 3. We our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures etc. v. 4. But after
that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared: v. 5.
According to his mercy he saved us: thou have in love to my soul delivered it
from the pit of corruption, said Hezekiah, Esa. 38. 17. O then what a mercy is
it to be delivered from the power of sinful dominion? If thou were rid of an
hard Master that would seem a mercy, if of a cruel Tyrant, that would seem a
mercy, if of a desperate enemy, if of bonds, if of a sickness, what then is it
to be rid of the rule of sin? which is infinitely worse then all these.

Fourthly, no Lord so bad, and no command so vile, as those of sin in
dominion, Therefore bless God for your deliverance No Lord so bad or commandes
so vile as those of sin in dominion.
you whose souls are (through the mighty graciousnesse of a good God) rescued
from the powers of darkness, Tell me, what are your thoughts, what your
judgments, what your troubles, for the workings of your vanquished enemy? if
the weakened corruptions appear, yet so vile, what were your reigning
corruptions: If sin be so monstrous unto you now only in remptation; what was
it heretofore in dominion? if the finger be so heavy, what were the loins? if
a particular action does (as you imagine) expose you so dangerously, what did
the service of sin do? under what displeasures of wrath lay your souls, when
sin had fullest affection and complete to obedience.

Rebekah seemed weary of her life, because of the presence of the Daughters of
Heth: If the presence created such an affliction, what might the conjunction
and union have done? verily if sin be (as it is) bad and troublesome in
combat, O it is infinitely worse in the throne, and absolute Empire over the
soul, wherein every faculty serves it with all its strength, and madly strives
how to dishonor God, breaks his law, resists his spirit, to fulfill lusts, and
please the devil, and to damn the soul.

O bless the Lord for his goodness to thee, that yet the dominion of sin is
off: It Is true, corruption yet remains, but yet it remains not as a Lord, but
as a Tyrant; not as a king, but as an enemy; time was that sin had thy love,
but now thou hate it; time was that sin had thy mind to devise for it, but
now those imaginations are cast down: time was that thy will was espoused to
sin, but now a divorce is sued out; time was that thy members were ready enough
to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, but now they are made servants of
righteousness; time was that thou did sell thy self to wickedness, and
was never so joyful, as when thou wast sinful, but now it is not so, thou art
a drudge, a slave, a vassal no longer, thy former ways amaze thee, and the
present Commands of sin are an affliction to thee, O bless the Lord, etc.

5. Again, if the dominion of sin be off, then assuredly the scepter If
dominion of sin be off then the septer of Christ is set up in thy soul.
of Christ is set up in thy soul. Beloved! the soul stands not, abides not in
a middle estate: it must have some one Lord or other, it is necessarily under
some one dominion (either of sin or of Christ) and this know, that the dominion
of sin cannot be taken off in the soul but by a contrary, by a better, by a
stronger dominion, by that of Christ who dispossesseth the strong man, It is he
who has changed thy heart, who has made thy heart to chang its Master, who
has drawn off thy love, thy service, etc.

Now, no dominion in the world like that of Christ. No dominion like Christ's.
None so holy.


1. None so holy, he is holy, love holiness, and all his commands are
righteous.

2. None so Gracious, he does not exact beyond what he gives, So gracious.
and will yet mercifully pardon our true endeavors of service wherein they fall
short:

3. None so peaceable: his very service is a kind of wages to the obedient: a
vassal to sin is like a man laboring all day about So peaceable.
thorns, and nettles: (the more abundance of them grasped Simile.
by him, galls him with the more wounds and pains) no man can be long
cheerfully sinful, either Terror or fear accompanies most sinnings, but the
service of Christ has warrant from the word, and peace from conscience.

4. None so afflicted: his commands are accompanied with So afflicted.
strength and spirit: he bids us to do the work, and gives us his own hand
thereto, imposes duty, and Imprinteth ability, writes the law to the ear, and
writes it also in the heart.

5. None so rewarded, no man serves Christ too much or for So rewarded.
naught: Though all our work be but duty, yet he pays us rich wages, we owe
unto Christ all our strength and the use of all our graces, neither do we
bring in so much of these in full service as we should, yet our good Lord and
Master will give us (if we be faithful servants) at night our penny, and at
the last our crown.

6. Lastly be thankful, for if dominion be off, then damnation is off: There
is no condemnation (says Paul) to them that are in If dominon of sin be off,
damnation is off.
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, Rom: 8. 1. A
man is not damned (merely) because he has sin (for then no man could be saved,
for who is the man that sins not) but because sin is his Lord, and he is the
servant of sin; Not so much because he is bad, but because he will be bad, not
only for the act, but for the love; It Is confessed, that guilt is as natural to
sin, as the shadow is to the body, no man can sin at any time, in any thing,
and yet be Innocent; But meritorious guilt, is one thing, and redounding guilt
is another thing: If the dominion of sin be broken off (that a man loves not
sin, but hates it, yields not up himself unto it, but resists it, is not in
league, but in conflict with it) then the estate of guilt is taken off, so that
it shall not effectually redound to the condemnation of the person, where God
does powerfully subdue the sinful nature, there he will mercifully pardon and
discharge the unwillingly sinning and offending person: if sin be not thy Lord,
then Hell shall not be thy portion: He who is become an enemy to his sins;
grace rules in his heart now, and glory shall crown his soul hereafter.

Obj. But will some troubled (and therefore unably discerning soul reply) we
doubt it not, But that it is a most singular Doubts of troubled souls fearing
they are still under the Dominion of sin.
mercy. A rich grace, worthy of greatest acceptance and heartiest thanks,
where the dominion of sin is broken off; but alas, we fear it is not so with
us, heavy cause have we to suspect that we are captives yet under sins
dominion, so that though others who can happily observe the yoke broken off,
and therefore can be cheerfully thankful, we find it yet strong, O very
strong, and therefore more reason have we of grief and sorrow.

Beloved, it is granted, that if a man finds himself indeed Answered.
beggings at the throne of grace for mercy and for the mighty power of Jesus
Christ to release and deliver his soul: But then let us carefully observe,
whither this of which a man complains, be sin in dominion or not, perhaps it
may be something else, and then the soul must be advised and directed in a more
especial way.

Why I find such strong and manifold inclinations of sin within me: daring
forth into so many vile imaginations, and Doubts for the strong inclinations of
sin.
working down to draw my affections, woe's me? what is the dominion of sin but
this? and who but a slave of sin is hurried with such motions of sin? it cannot
be, that my heart should be good whilst inclinations are so manifoldly bad.

To this, let me shape a few answers.

1. First I demand how the heart stands affected toward these Answered. How
stands ^hy heart
manifold inclinations! do thou approve them or dis-allow affected to these
inclinations.
them: do thou love them, or do thou hate them: verily (says the soul)
I dislike them, and hate them, they are the burden of my soul: And why so,
why? because God is dishonou^ed by them, and they are contrary to his holy
will, and they are evil and filthy; O I had rather be in any miserable estate,
then in this sinful and vile estate.

Now then observe: sin has not dominion in thee, for where sin has dominion,
sin is not formally and purely hated.

The dominion of sin does not consist in the multiplicity of

Of all the signs of a good heart (of a heart that is delivered from sins
dominion) this is one of the best and surest. viz. That it hates, and resists
and bewailes sin when it is only in temptation: when a man has committed a
sin, then the conscience (being made guilty) may alone break and afflict, and
this may befall even a wicked man, there is now some other thing besides sin in
the filthiness of it to work trouble and grief, viz. The guilt and
accusation of it, but when sin is resisted and bewailed in the temptation
before it has got out into actual commission, now the peculiar reason of
trouble is the formal vileness of sin because it is so base, and so opposite
to ^od.

Secondly, I demand, what do thou against these sinful What do thou
against these sinful inclinations
inclinations: every man has some weapons or other, and in case of anguish he
is apt to draw them, what weapons have thou in thy hand; and to what end do
thou manage them: Do not many and strong temptations of sin, occasion many and
strong supplications, the more that sin inclines, the more does thy heart
incline to God by prayer, for more grace to resist, for more strength to
subdue: do thou not by reading, and hearing, and inquiry, labor to find
out the manifold helps and victories of a tempted and an assaulted soul?
do thou not keep the precepts of God in thy heart, and the threatenings of
God in thy heart, that thou may fear to offend him; and the promises of
God, which yet hearten thee to withstand? What does all this demonstrate, but
that sin is not in dominion, it is, I confess; thy troublesome enemy, but it
is not thy ruling Lord: it is that which does molest thee, it is not that which
does reign in thee; it is that which would have dominion, but it is not that
which has dominion: it is that which does assault thy affection, but is not
that which has got thine heart; thou art but in a greater war: Nevertheless
thou art not so much as in captivity, though in a strong conflict.

Yea, but yet I feel one thing perhaps worse then all this, sin Doubts because
of some Special sinful inclination.
sinful inclination in me, and so has it been all my days: if I were to give
you the sum of my life, I could lay out that particular inclination above all
the rest; like a thread which goes through the whole piece, such a sin, which I
have seen long since and felt it, and (I thought) bewailed it, and resisted it
a long time, and yet here it lives still, works still; can it be that sin
Answered.
yet lives?

I must be warily tender to Resolve this scruple, for as much as,

1. Particular subjection is enough to set up dominion.

2. Hypocrites are under the reign of special lust and particular sins, both
which I touched heretofore: But to the scruple take me thus. Conversion does
not totally remove any one sinful inclination.


4. Things.

1. That when God does convert the soul, no one sinful inclination is totally
removed, though every one be in some measure changed: The corrupt nature, does
yet remain, and all its principles, or particular inclinations to particular
sins; for grace does not change us by a present Annihilation of sin, but by a
powerful alienation of our hearts from it. Sin may work in a man when rescued
out of the dominion of sin in a more particular way.


Secondly, note, that sin may work (even in a man rescued out of its dominion
(is a more singular or particular way; my meaning is this, that there may be in
him yet a more particular twange, and more apt inclination, and propension to
some one sin rather then to another: Sin (yet abiding) may take the advantage
of the same complexion still remaining, and of the same condition and calling
yet continuing, and without all doubt, most men living, whether good, or
whether bad, do find more to do with some one sinful inclination, then with
another.

Thirdly, consider: usually, that particular inclination, which was in dominion
before conversion, is most frequent in inclination That particular inclination
which was in dominion before, is usually most frequent in inclination after
calling. Reasons of it.
after our calling.

And I will give you some probable Reasons thereof.

One, because that was the spring of the sin of our custom: which sent out
and fed the issue, by which the soul was so beaten in the path and way of
sinning, so that the old and accustomed nature cannot easily or presently
forget its ancient and wonted bents: a custom will hardly or never go off,
without some after inclinations or dispositions that way.

Another, because the new resistances of a converted heart, and its cares and
studies are most against the particular sin of its special inclinations:
there it deals most, opposes most, humbles most: Now sin does usually stickle
and stir most, where it is most pursued: that particular sin, whose death
thou layest at most, that will strive to assail and perplex, and entangle thee
most: the more humble thou labourest to be, the more shall thou find proud
thoughts to assault, though not to conquer thee; and the more meek thou labors
to be, the more ado shall thou have with thy passions: for as much as no sin
will be executed quietly, and every nature stirs busily in its own defense: we
are weakest there, and God draws our greatest watch and strength thither: a
man sooner falls under lesser conflicts: when a sin has been beaten upon by
much temptation and conflict, the heart grows hereby more ready, resolute: and
you shall find it, that after frequent and long exercise with a particular
corruption, that it shall not easily get within the soul, but upon a pause and
cessation.

Fourthly, observe, that there is a difference twixt the life of motion, and
the life of affection: its true, thy special inclination There is a difference
betwixt a life of m^tion and a life of affection.
lives in thee sti^l by way of motion, but does it live in thee still by way of
affection? it did incline heretofore, and thou lovedst it, it inclines now and
thou hates it: the inclination is the same for the matter, but thy heart is not
the same for the disposition toward it, when the iron is hot, you may bring a
figure, and put it on, and the iron will take the stamp and impression: bring
the same figure and seal to it, when it is col^, now it will not receive it;
the seal, and the figure of the seal is the same, but the temper and the
disposition of the iron, as hot, and as cold is not the same. Saint Ambrose
relates of the young traveller, who went out an unclean person, but returned a
chaste person, and his old queen met with him after his r^turn, and began her
wanton salutes unto him, from whom, and which he angerly turned aside and
neglects her, why, said she, Ego sum ego, yea, but, says he, Ego non sum ego,
I am not; so is it here in this case, the inclination is the same to the same
sin; yea, but the affection is not now to that inclination as it has been But
where sin has dominion affections do concur with the special inclination.

Take all that I shall say to this in a few words.

1. It is certain, that in an evil man there is a frequency in a particular
inclination, and so there may be in a good man, but There is a difference
betwixt frequent inclinations in an evil and a good man.
thus they differ.

In an evil man, the frequent inclination, is the frequent progress of a King:
In a good man, it is the fervent egresse or attempt of an enemy.

In an evil man, the frequency of inclination is to maintain possession; In a
good man, it is but a malicious endeavor, Though the Assault be frequent yet
the Resistance is constant. Not the frequency of inclination but the Ardency of
subjection shows dominion.
by force (if it were possible) to regaine an entrance.

2. This is some comfort, that though the assault be frequent, yet the
resistance is constant, and that concludes against sins dominion.

3. Not the frequency of inclination, but the ardency of subjection evidenceth
sins dominion: not who quarrels with me most, but who effectually commands
me, he is my Lord: not he who makes the most motions, but on whom the woman
casts her heart, that is the husband: it is my love and service, which
infallibly concludes dominion.

Obj. 3. But yet the soul sticks, I am sold under sin, and Doubt from the
prevailing of sin.
taken captive: sin has inclined and prevailed, what surer argument of
dominion then victory.

There are three things which I would say to this scruple. Answered.


1. One is this, that it is a very sad scruple, any particular victory of any
great sin (for to that I intend the case) makes a wonderful change.

2. Another is this, comfort cannot be applied, neither will the conscience
receive it till repentance be renewed.

3. Yet there is a difference twixt a particular victory, and the dominion of
sin; there may be a surprisal, where yet a Kingdom is not established.

1. For the first of these, all particular victories are sad things: Particular
victories are sad things.
I do no not now speak of victories in respect of inward motion, or of passion
or distemper through dullness and melancholy, but of victory in respect of
action, and that not by mere omission, not by imperfection in best services,
but by gross commissions, suppose it David's case, or Noah's case; the one for
uncleanness, the other for drunkenness: These acted wickednesses are sore
evils, very abominable to the Lord, very inglorious to religion, very wounding
to conscience, extremely quenching of the spirit of grace.

For as much as the more gross any sin is, the worse is it in the commission;
every acting of sin receiving some intention and aggravation, from the
immediate kind and quality of the sin.

Again, the better the man is, the worse is a lewd kind of sinning in him, the
quality of the person ever contributing more exceedingnesse to the sin, for he
sins against more light, against more mercy, against more help and strength,
against more active corrections of conscience, with more advantage to the
corruption of other men, with more advantage to the beauty and credit of
holiness: yea, besides these formal vilenesses; O what strange effects break
in upon the soul, what horror, what fear, what mis-givings, what despair
oft-times, with the fruits thereof.

2. Comfort will never be applied to a person in this condition Comfort will
not be applied to such a one till repentance be renewed.
until repentance be renewed:

Beloved, there is a difference of persons, and a difference of actions, and a
difference of times, and a difference of applications.

Do I find an evil man brought to the sight of his sins, to saddest humbling
for them, to sincere desire to come off from them, to pantings after grace, and
mercy, I now come in with the blood of Christ, with the tender and gracious
promises refreshing such a soul with assurance of freest and fullest mercy: Do
I find a good man, weak in duty, strong in affection, hearty against all sin,
yet troubled with the insolent motions of many corruptions? would not do evil,
and yet is not rid of it; would do good, but then finds evil is present with
him; I labor to raise and hold up such an heart to look on God through Christ
for acceptance, to lay hold on Christ, for strength, for life, for power, for
victory.

Do I find a good man weakening himself, bowing under the actual power of some
viler lust, O beloved, comfort is not his medicine, but repentance; comfort is
not his first help, but godly sorrow; sorrow is the work which belongs to a
sinner, and comfort that which belongs to a penitent sinner: until that thou
do thoroughly humble thy soul, till thou do bewail mightily thy
wickedness, till thy heart be turned into extreme loathing of thy sin, and
thy self for so sinning; thou shall not get a good look from God, a good word
from Conscience, any favorable encouragement from the Ordinance. Yea, well it
is, if after many years, that ever thou see God in that way of graciousnesse,
and free communion, as thou did formerly find him; however, be sure of it,
that without repentance thou shall not at all meet with any solid Yet there is
a difference twixt particular victories and dominion.
comfort.

3. Nevertheless there may be some differences twixt particular victories, and
twixt dominion: though dominion be a victory, yet every victory concludes not
dominion, they may be thus distinguished in respect of their subjects, viz.
Good men, in whom sin has sometimes a victory; and evil men, in whom sin has
at all times a dominion. Five differences betwixt them, Particular victory
depends on inequality of actual strength, but dominion depends upon the
fullness of corrupt nature.


Five differences twixt dominion and victory.

First, particular victory depends upon inequality of actual strength, but
dominion depends upon the fullness of a corrupt nature.

There is in all holy men an habitual strength, which is seated in the new
nature of grace or holiness, by which they are inclined to all good, and their
hearts made averse to all evil, it is the natural temper of true grace thus to
work: And then there is an actual strength, by which, when any particular good
is proposed, they incline unto the obedience of it; and when any particular
evil is objected, they strive against it and resist. Now it may fall out, that
when a temptation presents it self and inward corruption works with that
temptation; I say it may so fall out, that the strength of grace may be
insufficient, it may not actually equal or exceed that vehement and actual
strength of inclination and temptation, though it does resist (as a weak man
may a strong enemy) yet it may not be able to conquer, but is surprised and led
captive: and here the fall depends, not on the disposition of the will or
heart, but upon the impotency of resistance; the person does not fall down, but
is beaten down; the sin is acted, not through choice, but through weakness;
not because the person loves it, but because he is not able to conquer the
temptation: But where sin has dominion, there the sinning comes from the
heart, as a stream from the fountain: it is natural and not violent: It is
acted, not because a man is not able to make sufficient resistance, but because
the heart is wholly set that way with fullest complacence.

Secondly, particular victory is a sudden act, but dominion is Particular
victory is a sudden act, but dominion is a more sober work.
a more sober work. In the one the soul is surprised, it is hurried, it is
precipitated, it is in a flame on a moment, a man has not space to weigh, to
judge, to consider; but sin has with mavelous quickness seized on the
understanding, wrought upon the memory, struck into the affections, and is
driven on in a rash and passionate way: In the other the work is more sober,
not only actively devised, but affectionately adhered unto: a natural strength
of corrupt and living affection makes the one; and in-advertency and rashness
may be sufficient to cause the other that arises for want of watchfulness (as
a Camp may be so surprised by an enemy) this arises out of a sworn obedience,
as the soldier follows his Captain.

Thirdly, Where the sinning owes it self, not to Dominion, Where there is no
dominion but victory, the person feels the yoke and would shake it off.
but to particular victory, or tyranny, there the person, when he comes to
himself, feels the yoke, and would shake it off: It is true, that while the
heat of corruption remains, and the force of temptation, yet disables the heart
to recollect it self, it is most difficult for any person to distinguish;
neither is he then come to scruple and question: But when things grow clearer
in the judgment, and more calm in the affections, when the hurry and tempest
is off; that a man beholds his own face, and ways, and actions in a right
glass again. Now it will quickly appear, whether it be tyranny or Dominion.
If it be but a tyrannical victory, Ah! how the soul loathes it self; how it
abominates the sinner, like a man captivated, and rowing as a forced slave, in
the Gally, he would cut the throat of the Master; or like a man in Prison, he
would make his escape with the death of him, who was too strong to keep him.
But if it be Dominion, then a man will not only serve his Master, but plead for
him, he desires not to escape, he loves his Master, and would dwell with him
for ever.

4. Therefore in the fourth place, if it be but victory, the If it be but a
victory, the person is working to recover himself.
person is not only troubled at his fall, not only loathing of the actions, but
he is actively working, he is using his victorious weapons, to raise up
himself, to free himself again; he is grieved at the bondage, desires liberty,
and will fight hard for it: O the humblings, and prayings, and workings, and
applications of the soul to the sword of the spirit, the declination of the
helps of sin, the contentions with the motions of lust, the watchings, the
meditations, etc. which such an heart will use: But where it is dominion, the
sin is committed with joy, and the sinner would continue with it in peace.

It is granted that there may be (sometimes) some distemper in such a heart,
both before the sinning, and after the sinning, but that before the sinning is
raised only upon carnal grounds, because of subsequent shame, loss, prejudice,
and that after the sinning is only judicial, just throws of an accusing
conscience, of which when the vile slave of sin has got free, when the cry of
the world is off, and when the cry of his conscience is down, he prepares his
heart again for the sin, is sad and heavy, until he returns to his vomit
and mire: the work goes on again as freely and as heartily as ever.

Lastly, if it be but particular victory the soul will rise again, In
particular victory the soul will rise again and not without revenge.
and it will not rise without revenge; Though the enemy has got the battle,
yet he shall loose the battle: before the vanquished soul has done, it will not
only rise, but fight, a naked combat shall not suffice, but assault and
pursuit; it will work with the art of holy strength to the more deadly offense
of that particular corruption.

Obj. 3. Yet there is a more difficult case, then any which Doubt from the
renewed actings of sin.
has been already proposed, and that is renewed actings of the same sin: the
person falls into the same sin again and again, and this repetition of
sinful acting, seems to be sin in custom, and sin in custom is sin in
dominion; thus is it with me, or has it been with me (does some troubled soul)
reply, and therefore my case is miserable.

Sol. To which case diverse things must be said. Answered.


1. Repetition or renewing of the same sinful actings, is Repetition of sin is
very fearful.
(without all doubt) a very fearful and abominable thing: what is it else but a
further and stronger wedging in of the corruption: frequent actings of sin do
ever strengthen the sinful nature: Every soul being made more apt to sin by
more sinnings; what is it else but a broading and widening of sin? the sin
grows bigger in the bulk, and higher in the guilt, by a continued, then by a
single commission.

Now a man sins against that which his own conscience has condemned, as well
as the pure word of God: Now a man adventures into troubles against all his
former trouble, he has felt the sin to be bitter, and knows that it must
cost him either Hell (into which God may presently cast hi^* or great sorrow
and repentance, (which God may now judicially deny him.) Now a man sins
against all the workings of grace, so that God may bring forth all the former
acts of the soul, and set them against the thus sinning person: Look thou,
here are the wounds which thou did make heretofore; and yet thou strikes into
the same again. Here are the tears which thou did shed for this sinning
heretofore; and yet thou will provoke me again; here are the sighs which thy
heart did break out, here are the fears which did distress and perplex thy
soul, here are the prayers which thou did make for my tender mercies, here
are the Covenants wherewith thou did bind thy soul, here are the Chapters
which thou did read, to support thee, here is the place where thou did
power forththy anguished heart in fasting and crying, here is that goodness,
and gracious love of mine, whereby I did accept of thee, upon thy humbling
tears, into favor again; here is that peace, which I did thereupon create,
and command into thy conscience, here is that word which thou did say,
should guide and rule thee for the time to come; here is that spirit which I
sent to raise thee again. And yet after all this thou art at the same sin
again, I might have cast thee off at the first, I might have shut up my
mercies, denied thee recovery, avenged my self on thee for thy foul
transgressions, yet I spared thee; though thou did offend me, yet I recovered
thee; though thou did provoke me; when thou did very evil, even so that
thou did admire at the wickedness of thy self; yet I did thee good, showed
thee kindness, would not presently forsake thee, who did so foulely forsake
me; this my free and great grace did then melt thee, did then move thee, did
then excite and stir thee to great sorrow, to much care and love: And now after
all, thou have returned not in inclination, but in action, into, not a little
or small transgression, but into a gross and foul iniquity, yea, ^^en
multitudes of withdrawing arguments did strive against it, when the conception
of that sin, being with so much secret trouble and fear, could not but
presage the great dishonor which would redound unto me, and the fearful
terror which would befall thee, upon the active commission thereof; So that,
beloved, without all scruple, a doubling of sin is in it self a more formal
intention thereof in its corrupt nature, and a more fruitful aggravation of it
in guilt and miserable consequence, etc.

Secondly, consider, that it is such away of sinning as may This way of sinning
may justly stagger a man about his condition.
justly stagger the heart about its condition.

First, in regard of the eminent propriety which it has in persons who do thus
sin generally (though not absolutely and simply) three sorts of persons run
on in the frequent and manifold actings of great sins, viz. Such as are
notoriously profane, such as are closely hypocritical; such as are despitefully
opposing the spirit of grace; these are they who grow from evil to worse, and
add sin to sin, and make and fill up the measures of their particular
iniquities which must needs stagger any soul, though perhaps not yet run on
so far as they, if yet repeating steps in the same paths, which the vilest of
sinners have trod in before it.

Secondly, in regard of that dark and rare exemplarity of such kinds of
sinning, by any, in Scripture canonized for Saints or godly persons: it is
easily admitted, that you may espy, upon some of the best, something of the
worst: and perhaps thickly heaped, upon the same sudden passion and temptation,
but you shall rarely find any one of them often at the same foul
transgression, I say, you shall rarely find it.

And believe me, it will be a staggering case to any sinning heart, where its
wages are such, as to see multitudes of the worst, and scarce any one of good
note so pacing and walking.

Nay, thirdly, until the soul thus sinning does bestow infinite Grace is
hardly discerned in such a one without much labor.
labor, strong care, continued humblings, incessant cries to raise it self
again, in respect of any other evidence, it shall hardly or never distinguish
the yet secretly remaining, the miserably. defaced frame of goodness within
it. A soul in this temper is not so much to dispute and question, as to rise
and work, the case of frequenting or renewing the same sinful acts, will never
be answered in thy conscience, but by fullest humblings, sound judgings, speedy
repentings, careful watchings and declinings, wonderful strengthnings of the
contrary grace and acts, diligent fear, fervent communion with God, and more
upright walking.

Yet fourthly, though it be a rare case, this doubling or renewing Yet this
though it be a rare, is a possible case.
of some great sinful act (very few good men do it, and that too, very seldom,
perhaps as Job spoke, so they may do, once have I spoken, yea, twice, but I
will proceed no further, Job 40. 5. I say, though it be rare) yet it is a
possible case, that sin may have more then one particular victory where yet it
has not dominion.

I speak not this to hearten any man to sin, for this would argue sin indeed
to have dominion, but to recover a man that has sinning, whose soul is
extremely bruised with his second fall, and whose second wound bleeds with such
sad and bitter dejection of spirit for his renewed folly, that this is an
argument, that he is not a cheerful and willing servant to sin, but only an
enemy, not able enough to bear off a second shock or assault.

Object. Yet this satisfies not, for the most still objects But it is a Custom.
this is custom, and custom cannot be without Dominion.

I answer three things. Answered. If it were a custom, it is not best to hold
on.


First, suppose the worst, that it were custom and dominion, what is the
course to be taken? would thou think it best to hold on? would thou live
thus still? God has pardoned and he has changed many a soul which has been
customary in sin, and in whom sin has had dominion, nay, not any before
conversion, but sin had dominion in him, and some sin or other was his
customary path. Thy safest and wisest course were not thus to stick at the
custom and dominion, but to come unto God, and to beseech him to show thee
mercy, and to give thee grace and Christ to subdue the dominion, and to break
the custom. A custom of sinning is a symptom of sin in dominion


Secondly, I think that a custom of sinning is a direct symptom of sin in
dominion. No man can trade in a sin, but you may easily say, who is his
Master? his servants we are whom we obey.

3. But then I would have you to remember, that as all continuing inclinations
argue not dominion, so some continued Yet come repeated acts of sin do not
argue a custom.
or repeated acts of sin, do not always argue custom though custom
necessarily (includes either in good or bad thin^s) a repetition of acts, a
going over of the same part or lesson again and again, it being a path often
walked over* Yet every gemination of acts is not presently a custom, I think
we may thus distinguish twixt sinful acts multiplied by custom (which is
rooted in dominion) and those which fall out by accident, as it were, and
rooted only in tyranny.

Three differences twixt acts geminated and custom. Differences twixt acts
geminated and custom. Renewed acts are acts of custom where the Possession is
strong and quiet.


1. Where the renewed acts of sin owe themselves to custom, there the
possession is both strong and quiet: for (if I mistake not) it is not merely
how often, or how long I have been at, or have dwelt in the house, which makes
custom, and see me, the Lord of that house, but what right, and what peaceable
possession. One stronger then I may hold my land from me, and dwell in my house
a long time, yet if I make my exceptions, and hold a suit against him, his long
dwelling is but an usurping; neither is it a legal custom, though perhaps of
long continuance. Though sin still dwells in a good soul, and continues there
in despite of him; and the person does oft-times (through the captivating
force of it) do many sinful acts, and perhaps the same; yet it is not custom,
unless the possession be quiet and peaceable: if he did like Issachar, bow
under the burden; and yield up the writings and keys, if he did quietly resign
up his heart to sin, and so go on from sin to sin, this were custom and
concluded dominion: But so long as that soul puts in exceptions, prefers a bill
of tears, complaints, supplications to Christ to conquer this usurping tyrant,
to give grace to recover its hold, and strength to withstand and subdue it:
Though the acts be many, and to be bewailed, yet they are not come to a
custom, which sets up Dominion.

2. Where the renewed acts are acts of custom, there the acting is natural and
easy: Custom (we know) is another nature, Renewed acts are acts of custom
when the acting is natural and easy.
and every nature does easily let go its acts, how easy is it for the eye to
see, and the ear to hear, or the water to moysten, or the earth to descend: Let
nature alone, she has no impediment from her self to her acts; and it is her
perfection to act, and therefore her acts are easy. It is thus with sinful
acts flowing out of Custom, they come from the heart as waters from a spring,
and rise from it as sparks from the fire, O how nimble, and dextrous, and quick
is the sinner to sin, you need not tempt him, he can tempt himself; you need
not use arguments to persuade and entise him, the accustomed drunkard knows the
way, alone, to the Cup-house, and the covetous heart to unlawful methods of
gain; Balaam can quickly get on horseback for moneys sake, to curse Israel;
and Judas needs no messenger, he can go himself to the High Priest: But when
the renewed acts depend rather on tyranny then custom, there they come off more
hardly with more difficulty, the sin is marred (perhaps many times before it is
done, the person sees it is vile and resists it, then the pleasure and profit
tempts him, to which he begins to hearken, but presently his heart misgives him
it is not right, and it will end in bitterness, he prays and yet is tempted,
fights and yet is tempted, resists and yet is vanquished.

3. Where the renewed acts owe themselves to custom, there a Renewed acts are
acts of custom when a man is not easily brought off.
man is not easily brought off: it is my custom, says the man, I cannot help
it, and I will not leave it I assure you; where sinful acts rise to custom,
there is no argument, but either a present fear of hell to hold them in, or a
mighty presence of grace to put them off; words will not prevail with men
accustomed to sin: But where the renewed acts owe themselves to tyranny; though
many words did bring into the sin, yet a few words will serve to break off the
sin: one whisper of conscience; ah, what have thou done? one word of Nathans to
David, thou art the man; one look of Christ on Peter made him remember, and to
go out and weep bitterly.

SECT. VI.
NOw I proceed to a third Use, which shall be the last Direction how to get off
sins Dominion.
direction, how to get off the dominion of sin.

You remember that I distinguished heretofore of a twofold Dominion of sin, one
was natural, under which every man is held before his conversion: Another was
actual which consisted in a particular prevalency, even upon a man converted
and changed: According to either there must be distinct Directions;

1. Against Natural Dominion. Against natural dominion.

For this we must consider two things.

First, what keeps and strengthens that Dominion.

Secondly, what may demolish and subdue it: and accordingly apply our selves.

Quest. 1. For the first let us enquire what keeps up and strengthens the
natural dominion of sin, and accordingly work against What strengthens natural
dominion, work against that. Ignorance.
it.

Sol. There are four things which do it.

1. One is ignorance: The blindness of the understanding is a principal guard
of reigning sin: you read that they in Ephesians. 4. 19. Gave themselves over unto
lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness; like a soldier, who
gives himself up, and takes pay, or like a servant who passes away himself to
service; so these resigned up their hearts and lives to all uncleanness; it was
their delight, it was their work, (this showed the dominion of sin) But what
was the cause of this: See v. 18. Their understandings were darkened, through
the ignorance that was in them, because of the blindness of their hearts: The
ignorance of sin kept up their earnestness and practice of sinning. If
ignorance rules the mind, then sin will easily rule the heart: all sinful
dominion is enabled by ignorance: The Devil is a Prince of darkness, and takes
special care to keep men blind: Antichrist is a son of darkness, and
therefore above all, sets up his kingdom by ignorance: So is it with sin it
self, its dominion is mantained by blindness in the mind; and therefore sin
in unconverted men, makes the mighty opposition against the word, and the
means of knowledge: it knows well that no man turns from sin who does not
discern it, nor hates it, who knows it not: The prisoner is sure enough under
a lock, and in the dungeon.

Now then if ever you would get off this natural dominion of sin, you must
get knowledge, a double knowledge in the mind.

1. One direct, and that is a distinct and true apprehension of sin, just as
the Lord reveals it to be, both for its proper nature, and genuine affects.

2. Another is Reflexive: that is sinfulness, (which God has revealed to be
so vile, so abominable, so fearful) It is in you, and it is working in you;
you are under the powers of darkness, you must come to your selves, you must
fetch your souls unto your souls, if you will not get a sensibleness of sin,
(and that is begun by knowledge) you will live and die in your sins.

A Second thing which keeps up the natural dominion of sin, is a violent love
of sin: Love is the sinew of the heart, yea it is the chair of state,
whatsoever sits in it, that is the King of the Violent love of sin.
soul, whether grace or sin: For love does bestow the heart, what our love is
that our heart is, it makes all to stoop, and yield: There is no talk of
parting, while love remains; I will not go free (said the Hebrew servant) for
I love my master Why? the soul and sin are in a sworn covenant (like David
and Jonathan) if the soul does love sin, until you take off the love, you
shall never be able to take down the dominion.

Therefore, this shall be another direction, break down the love of sin.

Ob. But how should that be done?

Sol. First, convince the heart, that sin is no lovely thing; There be three
things which should not fall under our love.

1. That which is the object of Gods hatred, No man may love that which God
hates.

2. That which is the object of Gods curse: that cannot be good which he
curses, and therefore not lovely.

3. That which is the cause of man's damnation and misery, for no man is to love
the cause of his undoing: Now sin is the only thing which God hates, and which
God curses, and which will damn a man.

2. Give to thy soul a solid and full object of love, find out something
which thou should love; Is there not a God, a Christ, an Holy spirit, His
word, heaven, etc. There is no loveliness in sin, and all loveliness in these
things

3. Another thing which keeps up the dominion of sin is error Error and deceit.
and deceit, there is a lie in every sin, and the judgment is deceived where
the sin is retained, either a man thinks he sins not, but is escaped out of
the hands of lust, or that his condition is sound and good; or if it be bad,
yet not so bad as others; or if very bad, yet he can at pleasure release
himself; and thus through a vain fancy, he continues under the bondage of his
corruptions: And so for the actions of sin, he deceives his soul, he does not
behold them in a comparison to the rule, he does not judge of them by the word,
but in a reference to his own corrupt desires and delights, which swallow
down infinite sins, sugared over by pleasure and profit.

Now if ever you would get free from sin, get your judgments to be cured: a
sound judgment may be a good means

4. A fourth thing which keeps up dominion is custom: the heart by customary
sinning grows strong in sin, and resolute and Custom.
is by often committings made more naturally sinful, and more apt for further
sinful actions.

Now observe a little, Give some checks to the ordinary etc.

Ob. But if it were done, this were vain and fruitless, for the dominion of
sin Subsists in the nature, Though manifested in the acts.

Sol. I grant it, yet first If the heart be brought to set against the sinful
acts, it may be brought to set against the sinful nature, secondly, The
abating of the acts, may virtually conduce to the abating of that sinful
nature. What may demolish the natural dominion of sin.


Qu. 2. What may demolish and break down the natural dominion of sin.

Sol. I will Tell you a few things for this, and I pray you to remember them:
That which does this must have a greater power then sin.


1. That which does this, it must have a greater power then sin, for natural
dominion goes not of but by a stronger hand: Satan is not dispossessed but by a
stronger then Satan: And we are not translated from the powers of darkness,
but by an hand of omnipotency. It must be of a contrary nature unto sin.


2. That which does this, it must be a contrary nature unto sin* for no
kingdom can subsist by division, let something come unto the soul which makes
a division, sin will quickly lose its dominion. It must be something may gain
the affections. It must be something that must breed a strife. Directions. Look
up to God and Christ.


3. Again It must be something which may gain the affections; it must be able
to winn the heart, to dispose of love and hatred for dominion is made or marred
by one of them.

4. Again, it must be something which may breed a stiff and courageous
resolution, that the heart will not serve sin, but will go free: And hereupon,
against all inward and outward opposition, breaks forth into the use of
victorious means.

Now then the directions are these?

1. If ever thou would get down the dominion of sin, thou must look up to
God and Christ, they are able to disanull the covenant with sin, and to subdue
iniquities, Romans 8. 2. the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made
me free from the law of sin and death, look as it must be a Rich mercy which
pardons, so it must be a mighty power which conquers sin, why? but what is it
to the Lord to command thy heart home to himself, to cast down the high
imaginations and strong holds? As Jehosaphat spoke against those strong armies,
we know not what to do: yet our eyes are upon thee; so in the sense of thy
natural vileness and sinful dominion, O Lord I am bound, I am in bondage, I
am dead in sins, Lord I am unable to escape, but thou art able to deliver, O
deliver my soul for thy mercies sake, and subdue mine iniquities, and show
forth thy power, etc: who shall deliver me, I thank God through Jesus Christ,
Romans 7. 24, 25.

Secondly, because mere power does not do it, but power in a quality, working
through some quality, Therefore beg of Beg the grace of Gods spirit.
God, that he would give thee the grace of his spirit, it is true, that naked
power takes not off the sinful dominion: nor does the quality alone do it,
but both can do it: If God gives a man grace, and mightily asists and works
by and through that grace; this now will beat down ^he dominion of sin.

The light, though it be but a little at first, yet asisted by a mighty
principle of light shall conquer darkness: pride will have dominion till
humility comes in.

Now, then beg of God, for grace, for his holy spirit, for another heart, for a
new heart and a new spirit.

Thirdly, labor earnestly for faith: if two things were done, Labor for faith.
sin could not possibly continue in dominion. viz.

If Christ did rule in the soul;

If thy love were drawn off from sin.

But faith sets up the scepter of Christ, it will know no Lord, but Christ, my
Lord and my God, said believing Thomas: And faith turns the love to Christ,
makes Christ the center of the heart? O it represents such goodness such
excellency, such propriety, such bounty, such love in Christ, as inflames the
heart and knits it with love to Christ again: Nay to add to all this, faith
bestows the life on Christ too, He died for me, said faith; I judge it
therefore most reasonable, that I should live to him; Now where Christ comes to
rule, and has love and life, there sin without all doubt, loses its
dominion.

4. Lastly, take a courageous resolution: we are held many times by our lusts,
through a faintness of spirit: why? we shall Take a courageous resolution.
never get down these sins, and what will people say? and we know not what to
do.

Sol. Why? up and be doing: for what is past, the Lord will mercifully pardon
all of it, if now the yoke be broken, and be consident of this, if thou art
setting against thy sins, thou do that which God likes very well, for he
has commanded thee it as a duty, and has set out means, and promised his
help and blessing: Therefore stand not hovering and hammering, were I best?
shall I? shall I yet? O no, thy life lies upon this, or thy death.

Therefore resolve on it to set against thy sins, say this with thy self, if I
suffer sin to rule thus I perish, for ever, if I get off the dominion I live
for ever, if I continue in this sinful estate, I must bid God farewell, and
Christ farewell, and heaven; and all the comforts of my poor soul farwell: I
confess I may get a little pleasure by my sins, and a little profit by my sins
but I am not sure to enjoy them one moment, and why should I venture eternity
of misery for one draught of sinful water: If I could get off sins dominion, O
what a God might I look on, plead with, sue unto: what a Savior should I get?
what precious joys? what heavenly consolations: what peace here? what hopes for
hereafter? well, come of it what will, though I have been sinful, I will not
still continue so, to God will I come, to Christ will I go: I will beseech
them to have mercy upon me a sinner, and to give me grace, and to change my
heart, I will not serve my base lusts any longer, I will never leave praying,
hearing, reading, studiing, inquiring, working, till I be delivered from this
bondage, and translated into the glorious liberty of the sons of God? Against
actual dominion. Wherein actual dominion lies.


2. Against Actual dominion.
Thus for directions, Against the natural dominion of sin: Now I proceed to
some helps against actual dominion, which is the particular prevalency of a
sin into act.

Let me premise a proposition or two, and then you shall have the special
directions themselves.

1. Actual Dominion (I speak in respect of gross acts) is usually in respect
of some particular lusts: which works with more strength in the soul then any
other lusts; Though it be most true, that in every man there is an universal
root of sinning, yet you find it in experience that the multitudes of sinful
inclinations, and thoughts and temptations, run ordinarily in some peculiar
way, with most frequency and violence.

Secondly, actual Dominion is ordinarily by such a sin which has the advantage
of a natural complexion, and outward condition, and occasions, and affections,
upon these does sin set the temptation, as an Enginer does place his battery
upon such a Simile.
piece of ground, which does best advantage and further his shot against a City.

A man's natural temper and complexion does mightily facilitate his acts, and a
man's calling or condition of life may (accidentally) be a forcible persuasion
to him to much infidelity, and impatience, and indirectness: And occasions in
conversing actively or passively, have infinite baits in them, and when our
affections may run in some lawful measure and manner, there sin takes occasion
to tempt and prevail with ease; if we look not to it, he may quickly be cast
down by a sinful temptation, who is already prepared thereunto by a sinful
faction.

Therefore if ever you would keep off the prevalency of a particular sin,
observe distinctly, and work wisely, against all the things which may advantage
it in its temptations.

Thirdly, consider that many things may keep back (for a while) the explicit
actings of a particular sin, which yet are not able to weaken the natural
power of the sinful inclination.

There are two sorts of principles (as it were) which have an influence upon a
man: some are violent and forcible, which work by a strong hand thus far
(sometimes) prevailing, to hold back that a man dares not do such an evil (as
shame, love of a man's credit, quiet, profit and safety) and some are powerful
too; but yet inwardly weakening the very nature and disposition, as all sorts of
graces: Now then if ever you would be thoroughly kept from the actual dominion
of sin in gross, do not content your selves with merely forcible restraints,
for as much as these may oft-times fail you, and then your hearts will deceive
you; you will venture to foul iniquities, having nothing now within you of a
contrary virtue: But above all be striving for grace, which is contrary not
only to the sinful acts, but to the sinful nature, which is the fountain
inclining the soul unto them; get chastity into the heart, and meekness into
the heart, and humbleness into the heart, and soberness into the heart, and
heavenliness, and faith, etc.

Fourthly, improve that strength which God has given unto thee every way.

Though this be rrue, that a man by his natural strength can never change his
sinful nature, yet assuredly he may do much against sinful acts; if that he
would bestir himself, why? is not a man able to deny his eye a look, or his
tongue a word, and his feet a walk? you know this, that sin is set on fire by
occasions, and by many things which lie directly under our power? and it may be
much staid by the doing of many things which we are able to do. If a man will
let his eyes still roll upon vain objects, whereas (if he would) he might
check their motion, no marvel if his heart be still set on fire by lust, and if
he will associate himself with persons provoking him to filthiness and
drunkenness, (whereas if he would, he might decline that society) who can
think it strange that such sins should have actual dominion over him. If thou will thou may read, and hear, and apply thy self to all the means by which
grace may be wrought, and sin subdued, and if thou did so, what can thou
tell what God may do for thy soul.

Nay, let me tell you more, that a man who has received grace, (and therefore
more power then a natural man) if he will not improve his strength, he shall
hardly keep off the actual dominion of some one sin or other; if he will not
decline that which he should and may, and if he will not do that which he
should and can, it is not his naked praying that will keep him up: Prayer
(without all question, as you shall hear by and by) is of singular force and
use against the prevalency of all corruptions, but we must not rest only upon
the prayer, but pray and work, pray and forbear, pray and deny our selves, pray
and shun occasions, pray and follow our help, etc.

Now I come unto some special directions against the actual Special directions.
dominion of a particular lust.

Four special Directions.

First, preserve in thy soul a constant and humble fear, and Preserve in the
soul a constant and humble fear.
that will keep off the actual dominion of thy sin. Remember Solomon's advice,
Blessed is the man that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. And Gods promise, I will
put my fear within them, and they shall not depart from me, Jerem. 41. q. d.
without this you are gone, you will quickly loose your standing, if you loose
your fear.

There be some graces which are as it were the guard of other graces: look as
faith is a grace which feeds all the rest: So fear is a grace which keeps all
the rest. This holy and humble fear has these properties (all which
strengthen the soul against actual dominion of sin) It has God still in
eye; it sets a man and his ways, and acts in the presence of an holy and
glorious God: Now says Joseph, how can I do this great evil and sin against
God, Genesis 39.

Again, it prefers Gods pleasure and Gods frown above all encouraging or
discouraging temptations; yea, but I must do this, for God requires it, and
delights in it; yea, but I may not do this, for God hates it, and will be
provoked by it; I prefer his favor above all false honor and pleasure, and I
account his frowns worse then death it self. Now if I should thus sin, why? I
provoke his wrath, and provoke the Lord to jealousy, I cause him to rise in
displeasure against me, i. e. why? how would the Lord take it, if I should thus
sin.

2. Get a sound and incorrupt judgment: there be three Get a sound judgment.
cases in which a man is apt to fall under the actual dominion of sin, and
corruption of judgment is a maine cause of them.

One is, when he thinks or says that the sin is little.

Another is, when he says, that his own strength is great.

A third is, when he assures himself of easy pardon and recovery: sin
usually is a cloud, and then a shower, a corruption in the judgment before a
victory in the affections: a man will quickly tremble under the guilt of some
great commission, who has dallied with little sins, or with the opinion that
they are so: And he who ventures far unto any occasions, upon his own
strength, that man bids fair for some foul fact, under which he shortly
falls, if God show him not the vanity of his self-confidence: And so is he
ready, very ready for a gross transgression, who has secured his soul already
for his pardon: what sin will he stick at, who has persuaded himself, that the
pardon is already granted, although he presume to sin.

Now cleanse the judgment of these corrupt principles and believe it.

1. That no sin is little: That must needs be great which Believe that no sin
is little.
provokes a great God, and endangereth a precious soul; he who is brought to
such an holy tenderness, that he sees greatness of guilt in littleness of
sinning, shall by Gods grace be kept from the dominion of any sin: Every
sin (even the least) is a foul spot: And is the object of divine hatred and
curse, it may prove like a little spark to consume an house, or like a little
leake sufficient to drown a ship; or like a little thrust into the heart,
enough to lose a man his life.

2. That your own strength is not sufficient: even the strongest And that your
own strength is not sufficient
ship left to it self cannot venture far, but it is upon rocks or sands: Any
thing may prove too strong for him, who conceives himself too strong for any
thing.

He that will venture upon sinful provocations, and occasions, disarms his
soul, and lays his very heart naked to a conquest: A Christian may do very much
in good ways, which have Gods warrant to lead him, and Gods promise to keep
him, but if he alone will be presuming, as the Israelites, who would go up to
fight upon their own humor, fell and lost, so shall a man presently learn his
own weakness by the strength of sins surprisal; many a man has been
spiritually wounded, not because he had no grace, but because he would
adventure upon the strength of it without any security from God.

3. That pardon is not so easily obtained; Nor the soul so And that pardon is
not easily obtained.
quickly recovered after particular dominions.

It is an easy thing to slip into sin, it is difficult to get out of it: a
little thing will serve to distemper our health, and yet much Physic is
required to set the humors straight again: All entrances to sin are with the
greater facility; for then temptations and carnal affections blind our
judgments, but the recoveries are the harder; for now the vileness and
heinousness of the sinning appears more distinctly, and the conscience works
more sharply and vehemently, and our very graces are the more disabled.

Assuredly, if you will venture to sin, you lose a friend of God, and
encouragement in conscience, and strength in your souls; this very conceit
that thou should easily make thy peace with God and find mercy (though thou
did sin) I say this very conceit will mightily afflict thy soul, and
aggravate thy transgression, when thou beholds thy soul in blood for sinnings;
mercy is the most singular ground of repentance; and nothing stings us more for
sinning then this, that we abused mercies to invite us: Therefore when sin
tempts thee, resist it, yield not to it, say thus who would adventure the sweet
mercies of a gracious God, to satisfy the lusts of a damnable sin, and why
should I be so mad? having health to make my self sick, to break the bones
which yet are whole; to unsettle the peace of my conscience, to weaken my
graces, to dis-joynt my estate: If as now I am, I have much to do; ah, what
folly is it to make more woeful work for my soul? How justly may God leave me,
who will forsake him for that which I know will displease him? and what if he
should ri^hteously deny me grace to repent, who proudly will abuse his grace to
sin? Beloved! let the judgment at all times be thus effectually convinced,
and it may prove a sin^ular me^ns and help against particular temptations of
sin by which (...) is attained.

3. Be not in the ways of Dominion: great sinnings (...) always prevail at
first sight, but they have a train (...) thod to prepare the soul, and then on
a sudden they violently surprise it.

There are these methods.

First, perhaps naked motions, the vile heart gives up only a show of a
particular sin, in an imagination our thought presents the kinds of sinnin, and
so falls in again.

Then perhaps a careless use of our senses, which wandering (without regard)
light upon some object which fits the former sinful motions, and strongly
inlivens them.

After this active contemplation of these sinful motions, not to detest and
bewail them, but to look upon them in an idle way.

After this a meditation of them, which is a more deliberate entertainment of
them, which now rises to a kind of treaty in the mind, where the sinful
motion craves entertainment, by arguments of profit, or pleasure on credit,
then a darting down to the affections to hearken and delight.

Then upon the next occasion, an acting of all this sinful imagination and plot.

Brethren if you love your souls take off sins in their entrances, before
they gather head; if a man could keep sin from pleading, he might, keep
himself from acting* Break the egg, and you need not fear the flying of the
bird: Crush Simile.
sin in motion, and it is a clear way to prevent sin in dominion: The match
will never be made, if all treaties be rejected: little motions are the
principles of great sins, as springs of rivers, and sparks of flames.
Therefore, let us this do, resist motions to sin as a man should resist the
actings of sin: do not say, it is but a thought, Jehues army came after the
scouts: Great sinning may attend little and flattered imaginations, he who
slights inward thoughts, and is careless of his outward senses, is in a fair
way to become a great sinner. Sue out your standing by by prayer and faith.


Fourthly, sue out your standing by prayer and faith: I will tell you two
things.

1. That the strongest grace cannot free us from the fiercest assaults: even
the best heart, and most eminent Christian is exposed to the foulest and most
violent temptations of sin and Satan.

2. That this resisting strength which keeps sin from dominion, is in God, and
not in himself: As that we become good, is from the goodness of Gods grace; so
that we prove not bad, is from the greatness of Gods power: no man is able to
change his own heart, nor is his heart his own guard.

Therefore under all temptations, be at prayer and faith: These are the two
wings of the soul, etc. Some victories are best had by standing up, but that
against sin is surest by kneeling down: O when the heart is much in prayer, it
is then most in strength; prayer engages all heaven against a corruption: And
God has promised to subdue iniquities, and that sin shall not have dominion,
Romans 6. 14. Now what he has promised, that he is able to perform, and will if
we can pray and believe. We give sin the great advantage, when we slack our
prayers and lay aside our faith.

It is the wisest art of a tempted soul to decline all occasions, to be under
prevailing Ordinances, and to use prayer, and exercise faith according to the
nature, kind and measure of sinful motions and inclinations.

PSALM. 19. 13. Then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from that great
transgression.
CHAP. V.
YOu may remember that heretofore we have handled David's petitions against
sin, 1. In secrecy. 2. In presumption. 3. In dominion. Now we proceed to
speak something of the conclusion or inference, which that holy and sweet
Psalmist draws from all this [Then shall I be upright and innocent from that
great transgression.]

To me it seems that David's special aim, that white or mark which he had in
his eye, was this, to be upright, he knew well, that that was it which God
looked for, which God most of all prized, and which (for his soul) would prove
most necessary and comfortable; and withal he well knew that the allowance of
secret sins, or the wallowing in great transgressions, were quite contrary
thereto; And therefore he prays earnestly against them, that he might secure
and maintain this.

Q. D. O Lord, above all things in the world I desire to be upright, and this I
shall never be, unless my heart be cleansed of secret sins, and my life of
presumptuous and reigning sins, for thy mercies sake cleanse my heart, let me
not love and work wickedness there, and for thy goodness sake keep my life,
let me not act transgressions there, O that thou would do this for me then,
then should I be that which (above all) I desire to be, then should I be
upright.

I will stand no longer about the words, only they afford unto us this
proposition.

THat it should be the great bent, aim, desire and endeavor of a man to be
upright. Genesis 17. 1. It should be the desire and endeavor of a man to be
upright.
I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou upright. q. d. this all in
all which concerns thee, which I esteem, and which thou must study, Deuteronomy. 10.
12. And now Israel, what does thy Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. Q. D. I have done you much
good, thought on you in your afflictions, brought you out of Egypt, preserved
you through the sea, and in the wilderness vanquished all your enemies for
you, presented you into a land flowing with milk and honey; Now all that I
require, and that you are to look too, is that your hearts be upright, that you
bestow your love on none but me, your service on none but me, that I have all
your heart, and all your soul, Josh. 24. 14. Now therefore fear the Lord, and
serve him in sincerity and truth, q. d. this is the thing that does concern you
nearly, this is the end of all your mercies, and the utmost of all your
returns, if you will be any thing, or return any thing to God (who has done
all for you) then be sincere and true, be upright, 1 Samuel 12. 23. I will teach
you the good and the right way, ver. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth with all your heart. Q. D. You have showed false hearts toward your God,
in that you would put off his government, and you may perceive by the thunder
and rain, how he takes this at your hands, but repent, and forsake him no
more, but get you upright hearts to walk with him, and cleave unto him, Phil.
1. 9. This I pray, etc. ver. 10. That you may approve things that are
excellent, that you may be sincere.

I need not quote more places from the Scripture, which abundantly delivers
this truth unto us: only for the farther Explication of it, I shall enquire
these particulars.

Four things.

1. What it is to be upright. 2. Why we should so studiously aim at, and
labor for uprightness. 3. What useful applications in all kinds of this to
our selves. 4. Then the resolutions of some Cases of Conscience for the stay of
those who suspect their own uprightness:
SECT. I.
Quest. 1. What it is to be upright? What it is to be upright.


The Logicians observe a double quid, 1. Quid nominis. 2. Quid Rei, I will
briefly therefore open the several words and phrases which are used in the
Scriptures to The several phrases that import uprightness opened.
import uprightness, and then I shall with more ease, and better satisfaction,
Couch out unto you the lively nature of it.

For the first of these, know that uprightness is sometimes Uprightness
applied.
applied,

1. To God; Psalm 25. 8. Good and upright is the Lord, To God:
Psalm. 92. 15. to show that the Lord is upright, Esaias 26. 7. Thou most upright
do weigh the path of the just.

In this respect, it notes that just and equal nature of God, which is (as) an
answering rule, Righteously disposing of all his acts and dealings.

2. To man; And thus it may be applied both to good men To Man*
and bad men; for uprightness may be considered, either as arising out of a
renewed disposition, or as appearing in the course of a renewed conversation (in
which respects it is proper to good men only) or as manifesting it self, in a
particular fact, and so Abimelech might say, in the uprightness of mine heart
I have done this, Genesis 20. 5. Now uprightness, or to be upright, as applied to
good men, is delivered unto us, both in the Old and in the New Testament by
sundry words and phrases. Sometimes it is called sincerity, as Josh. 24. 14.
serve the Lord in sincerity: that is said to be sincere, which is without
mixture, a metaphor from honey which is then reputed pure and right when it
has none of the wax commixed with it. The heart is upright, when it is
sincere, and then it is sincere when it is unmingled: Beloved there is a
difference 'twixt

Adherence and

Commixture.

To the purest lana there may adhere some thread or spot uncomely, but in
commixture the qualities or substances are in a sort mutually confounded; sin
adheres or cleaves to the nature of the most upright person, but yet it mingles
not, it is a thing which the renewed heart is thrusting off; it would be rid of
it, the new nature like a spring is working it off, so that a man may be said
to be upright, whose heart will not suffer any sin to incorporate or settle
it self: Search me, said David, see whether there be any way of wickedness in
me, Psalm 139. 23, 24.

If a man has an heart, upon which sinful ways do not only fall, but with
which they close, if his heart knows it, and allows it, and will walk in it,
that man's heart is not upright in him; Sometime it is called one-ness, or
singleness, so Jer. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and one way, that they
may fear me for ever, Act. 2. 46. They did eat their bread with gladness, and
sing lenesse of heart.

There are two sorts of persons, hypocrites and upright persons, and the
Scripture opens them by their hearts.

Hypocrites are said to have an heart and an heart, Psalm. 12. 2. with a double
heart do they speak, in the original it is, with an heart and an heart, So Hos.
10. 2. their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty: and therefore,
James 1. 8. they are called men of two minds, double-minded men; they are in
some things for God, and in most things for themselves; now for his service and
anon for their lusts; look as hypocrisy mingles sin and the affection
together, so it mingles God, and sin, and the world together, it does not look
on God for Gods sake, but for profits sake, or pleasures sake, or honors sake;
On the contrary, upright persons are persons of one heart, or of a single
heart: as the Zebulonites are said, not to be of a double heart, 1 Chronicles. 12.
33. which is expounded, v. 38. by a perfect heart: A man's heart is upright when
God alone, and his ways alone, and his truth alone, satisfy, and order, and
bound it; when a man can say in truth, as they in the matter of Choice, Nay,
but the Lord is our God, him will we serve. I have chosen the Lord to be my
God, and his truths to be my guide, and his precepts to be my paths, and his
glory to be my end, and hereto only will I stick, when the soul does not halt
between two, or divides it self in a service of any side or way, but keeps only
to God.

Sometimes it is called perfection: and the upright are called perfect: as Genesis
17. 1. Walk before me and be thou perfect, Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Thou shall be perfect
with the Lord thy God, Psalm 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright.

There is a double perfection:

One Absolute, in respect of degrees (which no man can now attain unto in this
life, no not the most upright: for in many things we offend all.

The other Evangelical, which consists in the evennesse of desire and
endeavor: when a man sets up and exalts the word of God, and strives to square
his heart and his life in all things thereby.

As Paul, exercising himself to have a conscience void of offense, and willing
to live honestly in all things; when a man does (as it were) measure his paths
as by a line, he does set them by the compass of a divine rule or warrant, not
willingly straggling on the right hand, or bending toward the left: not
willingly omit the least duty, and commit the least sin; he is an upright
person when the heart is as large as the precept, and the whole will of God is
complied with, in will, and desire, and endeavor.

Sometimes it is called a spirit without guile, so, Psalm 32. 2. Blessed is the
man in whose spirit there is no guile, and Christ of Nathaniel, Joh. 1. 47.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. An hypocritical heart is a
cunning heart, it has many devises, shufflings, windings, and turnings, this
heart is not plain and sound: Therefore the hypocrites are said to have corrupt
thoughts, and to flatter with their tongu^s, and to have crooked ways: They do
not indeed hate the sin which they pretend, nor love that holiness which
oft-times they praise, and sometimes act: some ends they have of Religion for
their belly, and for their own advantage, but they do not heartily hate sin,
nor truly love holiness. Now on the contrary, an upright heart is without
guile, it is even plain and downright, therefore is it in the parable called
an honest heart, and says Paul, we speak the truth in Christ; and upright
walking is styled a walking in truth, and serving of God in truth and in
spirit; The meaning is this, that the upright man is indeed that which he
professes: his life and profession is not a painting which owes it self to an
Artificer, but a natural color which owes it self to the soundness of temper:
he is one who has truth in the inward parts (as David speaks, Psalm. 51. 6.) He
does without base ends directly love God, and from his very heart hate sin.
Though he cannot express himself in that flourish of formality, yet for
Christ, he can plainly say as Peter, Lord thou know all things, thou know
that I love thee; And touching sins, as David of Gods enemies, I hate them
with a perfect hatred: this he is in good earnest.

Sometimes it is called the allnesse, or whollinesse of heart, so Deuteronomy. 4. 29.
If thou seek him with all thine heart, Deuteronomy. 26. 16. Thou shall keep and do
them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, Psalm. 119. 10. with my whole
heart have I sought thee, etc. when the heart is upright, the whole man comes
in unto God, all the soul, and all the body: none shall dispose of them but
God: And God shall dispose of him in every precept: the very bent of a man is
to please God in all things; and the whole soul, in the understanding, will,
memory, affections, bears a respect to all his Commandments. There be other
phrases to set out this business of uprightness, but I must pass them over,
and pitch upon the description.

2. Now to the second quid Rei, I conjecture that uprightness The description
of uprightness.
may be thus described.

Uprightness is a sound and heavenly frame or temper of a gracious heart or
spirit given by God, by which graces are acted, sins are opposed, duties are
performed affectionately, directly and plainly, In reference to God, and not
for by-respects.

I will briefly open this description in its particulars.

First, it is the temper or frame of the heart: The seat of uprightness The
seat of it is their heart.
is the heart or spirit: hence is it styled uprightness of heart, 1 King. 3.
6. Thou have showed unto* thy servant David my father great mercies, according
as he walked before thee in truth, in righteousness, and in uprightness of
heart: So it is styled singleness of heart, Act. 2. 46. and Truth in the inward
parts, Psalm. 51. 6. and a service in spirit, Romans 1. 9. God is my witness whom
I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son. Hypocrisy is a color but
skin deep; A painting which lies only upon the superficies or surface of the
wall, upon the visibles or outward of profession or action: but uprightness,
like health, it is an inward crisis or temperature; as the conversation renders
it self to the eye of man, so the inward disposition strives to render it self
to the eye of Gods approbation; if a man be upright, it is with him as with
Solomon's Temple, though the outward parts were comely, and uniform; yet the
inside was covered with the most precious gold, and had the sweetest incense.

All counterfeit things are best in their show, and worst in their substance
and virtue: But uprightness is best there where least can be seen: The actions
are nothing to the Inward affections and desires.

We do but as the Queen of Sheba, here, no not half of the goodness of an
upright man by what he does, if you would but look into his heart and converse
with him there a while, you should find, the heart, the disposition, the desire
of his soul, infinitely to exceed all that he does, Psalm. 119. O how I love thy
law, O that my ways were so direct?

The heart oftimes mournes, when the eyes can shed no tears, and the heart
believes, when the tongue cannot speak much faith, and the inward man (the
heart) would do that and much more, then what is done or performed.

Secondly, it is a temper or frame of the heart, a composition: It is the
temper and frame of the heart. It is not a single or transient act or motion.
as it were in which methinks, two things may be observed.

1. One that uprightness is not a single, or transient act or motion: I think
that even an Hypocrite, whose heart is rotten, corrupt, false, abominable, may
yet, as step out into actions materially good, so feel motions within him both
against what is evil, and unto what is good, he may (either through the force
and power of evidence and conviction in his judgment, or through the
unresistable actions, of his inlighted and stirred conscience, or through the
great desire, of a glorious blessedness, have many fits and inward humors of
being good and doing good.

But all this is passion and not temper: the Philosopher In his Rhetoricks
accurately distinguish twixt the readiness, which springes out of a natural
complexion, and that which arises out of a violent Anger and passion which
soon fades off, being not rooted in nature, but in distemper: so is it whith
the Hypocrite. But uprightness is a temper and frame, like an instrument well
tuned, or if that hit not full, like a complexion, which is a uniform (if not
principle yet) instrument of actions. It is like that leaven, of which Christ
spoke, which invades the whole lump, it sweetly seasons and disposes the whole
man for God, as the bent of the stone is to the center, and of the fire to
ascend.

Another, that uprightness is rather a general Influence in It is rather a
general influence in the graces, then any distinct grace.
the graces, then any distinct grace: I will not make this point a controversy,
only so far as I yet apprehend, uprightness is rather the temper of a grace;
then the grace it self; It is not fear, but fear rightly tempered and
ordered, it is not love, but love rightly set; it is not desire, but this
orderly carried.

3. It is a sound and incorrupt and heavenly frame of The qualities of it.
heart.

1. A thing may be termed, sound or solid, either when it is Sound.
real, not light, slight, superficial, or when it can abide trial: as true
gold is Really so and not in color only, and if you reduce it to the
touchstone you shall find it so: if you cast it into the fire, etc. Thus it is
with the heart that is upright, and it has not a form of Godliness, but the
power; and not a name that it lives, but the life it self: it is (indeed)
holy, humble, meek, believing, loving of God and his servants, desirous to
walk with God, Psalm. 116. 160. Lord truly I am thy servant, etc. q. d. I am so
indeed: this is not a complement, a garb, a pretense but a reallity, so is it
with the man indeed: an Israelite indeed, said Christ of Nathaniell, Joh. 1.
47. Yea, so real, that if you bring the heart either to the examination of the
word (which being truth can find out all truth) or to God himself who can
search the heart and reins, or to conscience that hears witness, 2 Cor. 1.
12. or to afflictions, yet even there can upri^htnesse find approbation and
testimony, that the person does love, and serve, and fear him, Job. 1. 8. the
Lord said unto Satan, have thou not considered my servant job, that there is
none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God
and escheweth evil.

2. Again, it is an Inccorrupt frame: though the extreme parts may sometimes
be faulty, yet if the vitalls be sound, if the Incorrupt.
heart, if the lungs, if the liver be so, we say that man is a sound man; In
morals it holds so, that if the heart be void of all obliquity the person is
upright; Many infirmities in action may consist with uprightness, but not in
affection, the very bent of the heart is set against sin, without distinction
of great or less, advantageous or incommodious, honorable or dishonorable; if
it be not so, then the heart is corrupt,; it mingles, it is not sincere and
upright, but of this more anon.

4. Given by God; so the Prophet Jerem. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and
one way? Every man naturally is an Hypocrite, Given by God
would seem to be that which he is not, and so likewise misdirects all his
actions to a wrong end: God has set a certain beauty in goodness, and left a
notion of vileness upon sin, so that most men though they hate goodness, yet
would be thought good (they think it a mo^e Creditable title) and though they
love and act sin, yet would not be thought or reputed evil.

Besides this, if we did but seriously observe and confess how it is in our
own spirits, we should find in all our pious pretenses (take us in our
naturalls) we are all of us most formal and Artificial hypocrites: Draw near
to God with our lips, but our hearts are far from him, and come to Church when
we mind neither prayer nor Sermon, and listen oftimes, and (God knows) not to
obey but to censure, or but to get matter to talk of and the like: and when we
have got ability to speak of any good, the Lord be merciful unto us, we do it
not minding Gods glory, but our own vain applause and estimation; So then
the hypocricall heart is from our selves, but the upright heart is from God;
Every good and perfect gift is from above, James 1. 18. The perfect heart is
from the perfect God, the true heart from the God of truth; It is he who
teaches truth, and makes upright, and writes his law in the inward parts.

5. The fifth thing which I would observe in uprightness, is its office of
administration, it is such a thing as deals, 1. about graces. Its office and
administration.
2. about sins. 3. duties.

1. For our graces] uprightness looks to them that they be rightly acted:
Beloved, uprightness does not give grace: It deals about graces.
but orders and directs the acts and operations thereof.

Two things I grant! that all the habits of grace (are in themselves
intrinsecally considered) really true; and though imperfection may be in them,
yet no moral falsity or counterfeitness: and that the actions of those holy
habits, considered entirely as streaming from them (only as so) are likewise
truly holy, and good.

But then, these acts or actions of gracious habits as working in a subject
which has some falsnesse and bynesse yet remaining, may by reason of that
corruption be misdirected and misguided.

3. For hypocrisy does not only consist in the putting of a good shape upon an
evil action (as a fair color upon a rotten thread) but also in the ill
intention or application even of an act (in it self) truly good. Charity
(without all doubt) is a gracious quallity, yet if uprightness attends not
some of it acts, they may be referred to a private and vain glorious end, the
like may be said of some other graces, as of the love of God, and the fear of
God, etc.

2 For sins) here also uprightness comes into act it self: holiness (which
is nothing else but the newness of Nature) that makes opposition to sin, But
uprightness, that now is an evennesse For our sins.
or impartiality of opposition.

To oppose a little sin, and yet to close with a great sin, to oppose many
sins, and yet to hold a known and a willing confederacy with any one, to
oppose sin in others, and yet to act it our selves, to oppose sin as open to
the eye of man, and yet to fall to it in secret, where it is naked to the eye
of God; To oppose a sin to which constitution and age deny concurrence of
delight or strength, and yet to wallow in others agreeable to our complexions,
conditions, and years; to oppose the unprofitable sin, which brings nothing in
but pain, and yet to admit of gainful sins, which come with rewards of
divination in their hands, to oppose any sin, only because it is paineful, and
not because it is sinful; To oppose sin in our straits, and not in our
liberties, in sickness, and not in health, when only we fear death and not at
all under life and strength; I say all these are but hypocrisies, there is an
unevenness of the heart as was in Saul, who spared the choicest, and mortified
the coursest of the cattle, or as in Balaam, who would have been happy in his
death, though a Curser of Gods people (in respect of his own intention) in this
life.

I Confess this to be true, that uprightness is not the utter Annihilation of
sin, No, that effect appertains to glory, and perfection above; but it is the
even and Impartial opposition of sin: of secret sins, and of presumptious
sins, (as David here in this Psalm) of great and small; in a word it is a
conjunctive opposition of sin, that is it carries the heart against all sin,
Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, v. 3. They do no iniquity
(i) their hearts are for no sin: and the prime reason of all this opposition, I
say the prime and immediate reason, is direct and not reflexive; It is because
sin is so opposite to God and not primarily, because it its so painful in the
event to the person.

3. For duties: here uprightness expresses it self, both for matter,
wherein, it does not shuffle and cut, pick and choose, For duties.
take the lighter (like the hypocritical Pharisees) and leave the heaviest to
others, but it makes a man to have (with David, Psalm. 119. 6.) a respect to all
Gods commands.

For the manner, Any performance will not serve, where the heart is upright,
David danceth before the Lord withal his might; and Paul serves God in his
spirit, That which came next to hand will serve Cain, but Abel must present the
best of the Cattle, not the lame and the blind, the best, God, shall have the
best manner of service, If I hear, that suffices not, unless it be with
reverence and faith; If, I pray, that suffices not, unless with brokenness of
heart, humbleness of spirit, fervent affections, and faith in Christ: A mere
tale of brick will serve for Pharaoh, though the Isralites reputed the service
a bondage, but when we bring offerings to the Temple, they must be willing, and
of the best too.

6. The last thing which I would observe in uprightness is its end and scope.
Its end and scope.


Beloved I pray you to remember that uprightness causes a threefold reference
of our services: one is to Gods precept: that is the square and Rule and
compass of upright motions.

Another is to Gods glory, that is the spring which turns the wheels, the wind
which blows the sails: it is for Christ sake, said Paul: and whatsever ye
do, do all to the glory of God, said he again.

A third is to Gods acceptance and approbation, so that God will accept, and
commend, and approve, 2. Cor. 5. 9. we labor that whither present or absent,
we may be accepted of him, 2. Cor. 10. 18. Not he that commends himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commends.

More plain and punctual is that of the same Apostle, in Romans 2. 29. He is a
few which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit,
and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

The schoolmens observation is sound and true that a particular deficiency is
sufficient to mar a good, morally considered, but an universal concurrence
of circumstances, is required to make the action good. Look, as in reading of
Hebrew, leave out but one tittle, one point, you mar the sense, or as in a
dosis of Physic, leave out one ingredient you spoil all. So our actions if
one circumstance be left out, if the Right and genuine end, be not eyed, it is
enough to blanch them with hypocrisy, though for substance they may be
commanded to pray, and to give alms, no man will question that these duties
substantially considered, are good, and such which the upright person does
perform. But then if a man prays, or gives alms to be seen of men, Christ
tells him that he plays the Hypocrite; If in the performance of any piously
external duty we set our selves as the end, if all these things be done, and
with very much fervency and Assiduity, yet only to play the Merchants for our
selves, to make a bridge over to our own estimation to blow up our names; This
is but Hypocrisy, and I fear a kind of Idolatry, we fall down and worship our
selves, like the men of Shechem who would admit of circumcision, shall not
their cattle, and all that they have be ours; The like indifferentnesse may be
found in men forward for outward duties, shall not profit be ours, preachers
good opinion ours, The Glory and Credit ours, this is a gross Hypocrisy?

Now uprightness consists in this, to devolve all the honor of holy services
on God, like the faithful servant, who works painefully, and speaks
consideratly and all this for his Master; or like the shadow which in the dyall
moves from point to point, and all this points upward to the sun in it
motions; The humble heart knows no fountain but Gods grace. and the upright
heart knows no end, but Gods glory.

They distinguish of a double end.

One is finis op^ris, the end of the work, and that shall be our glory
hereafter, as the Apostle spoke of faith, the end of your faith the salvation
of your souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9.

Another is finis operantis, the end of the workman, and that (if the heart be
upright) is Gods glory, for of him, and through him, and to him, are all
things, to him be glory for ever, Romans 11.

Yet by your favor this I must suggest by the way, (and perhaps shall handle
it more copiously shortly) that in a way of subordination; an upright heart may
do God good service: and his glory no wrong, if with all in its fit place, and
order, and measure, it cast an eye also on its own reward, Moses had an eye to
it, Heb. 11.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. NOw I proceed to a second question why we should strive and aim at
(as David here did) and Why we should endeavor to be upright.
endeavor to be upright.

There are abundant reasons thereof, I will deliver a few unto you.

First, this uprightness is the great thing which God looks for; Uprightness
is the great thing that God looks for.
Joh. 4. 23. The true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
truth, for the father seeks such to worship him. Gods seeking, notes either
his grace which prevents us, or his pleasure which enjoins us: The father
seeks such to worship him (i.) the Lord by all means would have men in his
services to come with spirit and truth, to be upright, Prove. 23. 26. My son
give me thy heart, q. d. though the body be made by me; and every part thereof,
and though that whole frame be made for me, as well as by me, and thou art to
glorify me in thy body, yet that which I principally enjoin thee in thy
services, is to bring them with thy heart, with affections, entirely and not
pretensively.

Nay, secondly, this is it which the Lord looks at: See Jerem. This is it the
Lord looks at.
5. 3. Are not thine eyes upon the truth: q. d. Why? it is not your words which
God does so much regard, nor is it your looks, nor your tears, nor your cries;
that which the Lord sets his eye on, is the truth of the heart, in and under
all these; uprightness there; Excellent is that place in 1 Chr. 29. 17. I know
also my God (said David) that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in
uprightness: As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I have willingly
offered all these things. In that place you find David contributing toward the
building of the Temple, and stirring up others to that work; and David for his
part gave like a King thereto, even three thousand talents of gold, of gold of
Ophir (ver. 4.) And seven thousand talents of refined silver: and the chief of
the Fathers, and the Princes gave also five thousand talents of gold, and ten
thousand d^ammes, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen
thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron, besides precious
stones, v. 6, 7, 8. Now what a goodly gift was all this, but David presently
subjoynes, I know my God that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in
uprightness, q. d. O Lord all this is nothing, thou will not accept of it,
thou will not look upon it, if uprightness be wanting, O that is it which thou
regardest, the heart, the heart thou triest, and if uprightness be found
there, that is it which thou regardest: You read of the Jews, that they made
many prayers but God would not hear them, brought many oblations but they were
vain, (i.) is of no account, Esaias 1. 11, 12. and 15. They remember the solemn
feasts, but prevailed not with God, he did shut his eyes: nay, they were at
their solemn fasts too; but God took no knowledge, Esaias 58. 3. He gives the
reason in both places, in Esaias 1. 15. your hands are full of blood, ver. 16.
wash ye, etc. and Esaias 58. 4. Behold ye fast for strife and debate, to smite
with the fist of wickedness, ver. 6. Is not this the fast which I have chosen,
to loose the bands of wickedness. q. d. away ye hypocrites, do you commit and
allow cruelties, and villainies, and oppressions, and whoredoms, and then bring
multitudes of sacrifices and oblations, and cryings, and think that I am taken
with these; go and cleanse your hearts, mend your lives, leave your sins, be
plain and upright with me, that is it which I look at more then any thing, that
is it which pleases me; Hence it is that oftimes in Scripture, that the Hebrew
word [Jashar] which signifies Right, is many times translated (...), pleasing,
as Numb. 23. 27. perhaps it will seem right in the eyes of the Lord, we
translate it, peradventure it will please God: so true is that of Solomon,
Prove. 11. 20. Such as are upright in their way, are his delight, yea, and so
that phrase of walking with God (which is nothing else but the path of the just
or upright) is rendered by the Septuagint pleasing of God; as Genesis 5. 22. 24.
holy Enoch walking with God: The seventy renders it, he pleased God.

Thirdly, this seems to be the only thing that God expects, 1 Samuel 12, 24.
only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all This is the only thing
which God expects.
your heart, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now Israel what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, and to love
him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
When the Lord did enter into the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. and promised
to be an All-sufficient God unto him: what does he require of Abraham but only
this, be thou upright: when he advanced Solomon to the Kingdom, and enricht
him with honor, and wealth, and wisdom, above all that ever sat on the
Throne, what did he require of him, 1 Kings 3. 14. Walk in my ways, keep my
Statutes as thy father David did; How was that? see back to verse. 6. David my
father walked before thee in truth and righteousness, and in uprightness of
heart. When Paul had commended many singular things of knowledge and duty to
the Corinthians, he closes up all with, finally, my brethren, be perfect, 2
Cor. 13. 11. q. d. Will you have me to give you all in one word, why then be
perfect, be upright.

4. Uprightness does bring the whole man unto God; It is that Uprightness.
does bring the whole man to God.
which commands all, and carries all with it: the thoughts, these inward and
sweet breathings of the mind, Let the meditations of my heart be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer, says upright
David in Psalm 19. 14. The words, Let the words of my mouth be acceptable; so
he there, the mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his talk is of
judgment, Psalm 37. 30. The heart, the Law of his God is in his heart, Psalm
37. 31. my heart is fixed, says David; again, the conversation, that is
ordered aright, Psalm. 50. has a man any gifts, many gifts, why uprightness
brings in their use and strength to God, has he any graces, why? uprightness
brings in their service to God: it keeps us in with God, and are one with God,
and will not suffer us to deal falsely with God.

5. God judges of a man by his uprightness; thou art in his judgment good or
bad, according to the presence or absence God judges of a man by his
uprightness.
of uprightness; this is that which distinguishes twixt the precious and the
vile, twixt the faithful and the unsound. In outward appearances, and in the
color of visible services, the good and the bad may go hand in hand, both may
hear, both may read, both may pray, both may preach, both may receive the
Sacrament, both may give alms, but God judges not as man judges by outward
appearance, he is a spirit, and truth it self, and therefore judges of actions
by the spirit and as done in truth; he searches the heart and reins, and
notwithstanding all the outward appearances of the strict and pompous
Pharisees, yet he reputeth them as hypocrites, and so condemns them, Matthew. 23.
28. metals (you know) are not judged and valued to be gold by the guilt put
upon them, but by that power and excellent substance which is in them. And the
natural gold, though it look (sometimes pale) if yet it has the true nature of
gold is judged and reckoned above all counterfeit and gilted pieces; so even
pompous services, which seem fair and glorious to the eyes of men, may be
rejected of God; and the pretenders severely censured, because their hearts
under these, are false and rotten, like a dead man clothed with a fair robe,
or a Sepulcher garnished outwardly, yet within filled with dead and loathsome
carcases; And the upright Christian, whose works are not so specious to the
sight, whose prayers may be sparing in words, yet filled up with sighs and
g^oanes, and whose services may be interrupted with many distractions (by him
resisted and bewailed) may be graciously accepted and rewarded, because his
sincerity is observed by Gods eye. The poor widow could cast in but a mite, a
very small doit, yet of great account was it, it was more in Christ's
exposition, then the treasure cast in by others, why? because she did it in
uprightness, her heart laid down the mite, and only their hands put in their
gifts; her gift was to succor the poor; the end of their bounty was to flame
their own praise. The Church of Philadelphia has more praise then all the
other Churches, and yet we read she had but a little strength, Rev. 3. 8. A
little strength, yea, but it was upright for she held fast the truth, and God
judged of her by that.

Thus for the explication of the proposition; now I proceed to the Application
of it to our selves, which I shall reduce to these heads.

1. Of Trial and Examination. 2. Of Consolation. 3. Of Caution. 4. Of
Exhortation.
SECT. III.
THe first Use shall be to reflect upon upon our own hearts, To reflect upon
our own hearts.
God looks on, and which gives unto us our denomination; It is not naked action
which make us or marres us, our affections are (in a sort) all in all; God
complains many times of the Israelites, that they brought him no incense, no
sacrifice, no service, why? was there none of these at all! perhaps sometimes
many of these, yet God accounts them none; It is not what we do, but with what
heart, which makes God to reckon of our services. They are but as ciphers
(which makes no number) without uprightness: God you know is truly good, and
infinitely wise and searching, and spiritually holy; that must be brought to
him which is like to him, or else it is not approved. Would you be paid with
counterfeit gold? does the show please you without the substance? will the
complements of men satisfy you without a real friendship? will a gaudy rotten
house content you, which has no solidity and goodness? would you take the
words of your servants, and their legs as sufficient? while their hearts are
false in their callings. Nay, would you be content that God should make a show
only, a pretense that he would pardon you, and help, and comfort, and save you;
and yet deny you real love, real mercy, real comfort, real help and salvation,
then think how God should take shows from you without uprightness of heart.

Therefore I pray you take some pains with your hearts, bring them to the
balance of the Sanctuary, weigh them there, reduce them to the rule, try them
there, whether they be upright or no.

Let me premise a few particulars which may prepare and To quicken you to this
trial. Consider,
quicken you to this trial for uprightness of heart.

Eight things.

First, There is no deceit or error in the world, of more dangerous There is
no deceit of so dangerous consequence.
consequence, then for a man to deceive himself, and to err about the right
temper of his soul. A man may mistake himself in the depth of his riches, or
the altitude of worldly friendship, or latitude of his intellectual
qualifications and abilities, he may think himself rich, and favored, and
learned, when perhaps he is not so; but these mistakes are about nostra, not
about nos, ours, but not our selves, and the danger may be only a tempest, but
not a shipwreck: But for a man to deceive himself about his heart, about his
soul; why? what has he more? what has he like them? they are fundamental
errors; if a man lays a rotten foundation instead of a sound, all his building
at length sinks to the ground: If a man sets forth in a fair ship, whose bottom
is unsound and leaking, he loses himself in the voyage. Why? upon the right
and solid frame of the soul depends the eternity of our happiness; and
therefore the error here is great and irrecoverable: when a man has past over
many years in a form of godliness, in an ingenuity of a civil carriage, in a
courting of God by some external and naked performances, and comes to die, and
then his conscience rises up and opens the secrets of his heart and life, and
makes him to know and feel, that notwithstanding all his pretenses and conceits
that his heart has continually harbored many known lusts, and he did not
mind God, but himself basely in all that he did; what a fearful day will this
be? ho^ will it make the soul to tremble, when it has no more time now but to
see, and eternally bewail its own errors and deceits: O Lord, says that
oppressed man, I have deceived my own soul, I thought my self thus and thus;
but my heart has deceived and beguiled me.

2. Yet secondly consider that Hypocrisy, which is apt Hypocrisy is a very
common thing.
to beguile and deceive us, is a very natural and common thing.

There are three sorts of persons in the world.

Openly profane: who fail in the matter and in the manner; they are neither
really good, nor seem so to be: they are really wicked, and declare themselves
so to be; the plague of their heart breaks out into Carbuncles and Botches.

Closely hypocritical, who fail not so ^^ch in the matter as in the manner;
who are wicked but see^^^ good, who act some good, but love more wickedness.

Truly upright, who are so in the matter and manner of Gods worship.

Now I say that hypocrisy is very natural, it has been and is a very common
sin, Job 15. 34. speaks of a Congregation of hypocrites; as if there were
whole Assemblies of them, or at least some of them in every Congregation. Esaias
9. 17. Complains in his time, that every one is an hypocrite, scarce a man but
did dissemble with God; So Esaias 29. 13. with their lips they do honor me, etc.
David tells us often of the Israclites, that they did flatter God himself with
their mouths: gave him (in their distress) as mournful, and yielding, and
promising language (O what would they be, and what would they do, if God would
deliver them) and yet their heart was not right in them: Joremiah accuses
those of his time for this very thing too; many of them, nay, most of them,
Cried, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet committed
adultery and lies, etc. when Christ was in the world his greatest contestation
was with Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; Paul bitterly deals against those,
who took on them the form of godliness, but denied the power thereof: and in
the 2 Timothy 4. 12. He foretells of much lying hypocrisy which should befall in
the latter times, and verily we need not go far from the proof of it; how
many amongst us, with the foolish Virgins carry Lamps without oil; or with the
fig tree, bear leaves without fruit. Like the Crow which took the feathers, but
kept his own nature; or like the Ass, which took the lions skin, but not his
body. It was Machivels rule, that the show of virtue was easy and profitable,
and therefore he advises men to put that on, but the study and habit of virtue
was difficult, and therefore he advises to let that alone; how abundantly does
this satisfy many, if they can look like good men, though they will not take
pains to be so, if they can speak like good Ch^istians, though they will not
live so: A tradesman many times when he gets a Minister to Supper, will speak
of heaven, and such things as if he were upon his death bed, and y^^ ^^at man
does nothing in the world, but scrape for the w(...), and tiers out his own
soul and body, and his servants in a drudgery for earth, yea, rather then he
will not be rich, he will cast himself upon most indirect means. How ordinary
is it for us to frequent the Church, pe^haps to listen a while (if we cannot
sleep quietly) and then to bestow a little holy water upon the Minister, a word
or two, that he spoke well and home, and yet we strive not to put any one holy
council into the love of our hearts, or obedience of our lives.

Nay, to let these things pass, take us in the general Tenor of our best
ways: The good God be merciful to us, what a distance is there many times (when
we pretend to serve God) twixt our tongues and our hearts, twixt our eyes and
our hearts, twixt our ears and our hearts, twixt our bodies and our hearts. Our
ton^ues are praying, and our mouths singing, and our eyes looking on the
Minister, and our ears as if hearing, and at the same moments our hearts are
plotting, projecting, ordering our own domestical affairs, or which is worse
basely contemplating, and acting of some abominable lust within us. Now call
you this uprightness, if this be not hypocrisy, I know not what is: Nay yet,
a little more take us in our most complete performances, when we bring our
thoughts and intentions, and some affections, some workings to our work, yet
tell me seriously whether in it you are not looking besides God; when you many
times pray long, and with many affections in company (though when you be alone,
a little shall serve the turn) do not you, like the Camelion live upon the
air, is not Jehu's pang in you, Come and see my zeal: is not the Pharisees
humor of vainglory highly acting, to be seen of men, and is not this
hypocrisy, directly and intentionally to justle God aside, to serve our own
praise in a pretense of serving him, that others may admire us, and speak well
of us.

Nay, I could add one thing more (which perhaps may make some of our hearts to
tremble) are there not, who explicitly and deliberately with much studious
art, snatch unto themselves a robe, a look, a discourse, a garb of holiness,
for no other end in the world, but to provoke to sin, and to blind their secret
actings of sinning from the eyes of the world. As the soldiers in the field
cast up a transverse line to cover their dig^ing enterprises from the enemies
observation. This is a most execrable kind and method of hypocrisy, yet as
Gehazi used his Masters name to gratify his covetous desire, so diverse abuse
the name of Religion, only to satisfy their beastly and damnable lust.

Thirdly, am Hypocrite may go very far, and therefore An hypocrite may go
very far
the more reason have we to see that our hearts be upright.

In the general^ I conceive that there is not any one external part of reli^ion
or duty, into which the hypocrite may not only step, but perhaps (for show)
exceed the sincerest and most upright Ch^istian: what Paul spoke in another
case of himself: Are they Hebrews? so am I; are they Israelites? so am I; are
they the seed of Abraham? so am I, 2 Cor. 1. 22. That may the hypocrite say for
his part in this case, about the actions and parts of duty, etc. Does the true
Christian hear? so do I; does he pray? so do I; does he shed tears? so do I;
does he fast? so do I; does he give alms? so do I; does he show respect to the
Minister by salutes and invites? so do I; is he forward? I am zealous; does he
reprove? I do thunder; does he speak some words in prayer? I speak many; does
he any good? I do more, in hearings more, in fastings more, in discoursings
more, in outward actions, every way more: Cast and order duties every way for
object, for place, for time, still the hypocrite keeps up for duties to God (I
mean the external parts of his wo^ship) in praying privately, publicly,
hearing, reading, preaching, yea, and all these with some transient affections
of joy, all this may be in him: For duties to man: why? an hypocrite may be as
civil, as just, as fair, ingenuous, affable, bountiful, compassionate as any
one that I know: The Pharisees (whom yet Christ did condemn for very
hypocrites, yea, even those self-same Pharisees) were yet the punctilioes of
the times, no person living were more exact, they did tithe the very mint and
cummin, as if the would have observed the whole Law to an hair.

Yea, and for privative piety, which consists in exceptions from gross sins,
hear one of them for all the rest, blessing and commending himself, I am no
extortioner, no adulterer, nor like this Publican, etc. I fast twice in the
week, I give alms of all that I possess.

4. His heart is rotten, and his grounds are rotten, notwithstanding The
hypocrite his heart is rotten notwithstanding all his shows.
all this.

Though man cannot discern him, yet God can, and has limmed him out for
unsoundnesse in his word; there is some secret lust which consists, and stands,
notwithstanding all this, either Herod's sin, or Demas's sin, filthiness, or
worldliness; the Pharisees were wondrously covetous.

And his ends are base: the Pyrate may rigge, and trim, and stear, and order
his ship as artificially and exquisitely as any Pilot, who is the Kings most
faithful servant: only their hearts and their ends are different, one is
disloyal, and the other is true; one goes out to catch a prey and a booty, a
prize for himself; and the other sails for his Masters honor and service; The
upright heart falls upon duty with fear, yet with affections, he cannot do so
much, yet it is in truth, and what he does, as it is by his Masters strength,
so it is faithfully intended for his Masters glory. But self-love, and pride,
and vain glory, fill the sails of the hypocrite; If you could pair of those
accidental and by-causes, he were no more able to hold on in duties thus, then
the bird to fly without her wings, or the ship to run, when the wind drives
and fills out the sails.

Will the Hypocrite pray at all times, said he, in Job, so that all which the
Hypocrite does is with a base heart, like a slave, and for base ends, like a
flatterer.

5. It is a vain and foolish thing to be hypocritical in our services. It is
vain and foolish to be hypocritical in our services.


This is certain that a man cannot be an hypocrite, but he must take some
pains, he must be very officious in pretenses and duties, it must cost him some
money to give alms, and much time to pray, etc. And when all is done, nothing
comes of it.

In respect of God, he has no reward with him; there is no reason to give him
wages, who bestows not his service on us: the hypocrite did serve himself and
not God, his own praise and not Gods glory, and therefore he can expect no
reward from him: he cannot say, I prayed for grace, that I might honor thee,
and for abilities that I might glorify thee.

In respect of man: for if a man be known to be an hypocrite, then he loses
himself on all hands; evil men hate him, for the very show of goodness; and
good men scorn him, for his base dissimulation and rottenness.

But suppose he can conceal his hypocrisy, then all the reward* that he has
from men is but an ayrie applause, Matthew. 6. 5. When thou prayest, thou shall
not be as the hypocrites are, for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues,
and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men, verily I say
unto you, they have their reward, (i.) They have what they look for, the
applause of men* and that is all; let them not expect any other reward: And
brethren, this is a sad thing, when a man's reward is only from man: when all
his reward is in this life, and no rewards reserved for him hereafter.

Nay, and the hypocrite is not so sure of this reward from man neither, he may
miss of it, either for the kind or measure of it, and that will vex his
heart: like fiddlers (that regard ear service) whose whole streine is to please
the humors of men; they sometimes get but little, and with that many
reproachful words and blows; so it may fare with an hypocrite, whose actions
are set only to the itch of applause and commendation, etc.

6. Nay, hypocrisy is a most perilous sin, you shall receive Hypocrisy is
a most perilous sin.
the greater damnation, said Christ, Damnation! O that is the eternal grave of
the soul, it speaks misery enough, everlasting separation from God, and
everlasting flames of wrath in hell, yet that is the portion of the hypocrite,
Esaias 33. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

Greater Damnation: An ordinary hell is not all for an hypocrite: As if the
furnace were heated seven times more hot: the lowest and deepest punishment
shall fall on him, who presumes to put on the fairest show with the foulest
heart: And do not think this strange, for what is hypocrisy but a mocking of
God: The hypocrite does (as it were) put tricks upon him, and thinks to cosen
omniscience, and basely esteem of him, as if mere shows would satisfy him,
nay, he does justle God out of his prime place, by referring all his services
to himself, and not to God, and so does adore his own name above the Name of
God. Verily my brethren, these are sad things, and if our hearts be not made of
rock and stone, they may awaken and startle them, to take heed least we be
guilty of this hypocrisy, which is so diametrically opposite to uprightness.

7. Again consider, that it is a very difficult thing to be upright: though it
be that acceptable frame of spirit so pleasing It is a difficult thing to be
upright. If we consider. The deceitfulness of the heart.
to God and so comfortable (as we may hear) to us, yet it is not so easy to be
upright, whither you consider-

1. That dec^^tfulness which is in man's heart: the heart (Jerem. 17. 9.) is
deceitful above all things, q. d. there is not such a cunning thing as it, not
a thing in all the world which can delude us so easily, so often as our own
hearts: O what ado have we with our selves many times to speak a little duty,
what disputes of times against it, many reasonings must be answered and
silenced, before we will yield to do the very work, so much as to hear, as to
pray by our selves, and with others, and to give alms etc: And then if the
work be extorted from us, yet what pumping before any water comes, what
collision, and striking before a few sparks of fire will fly out? my meaning
is, much ado to bring our hearts to our tongues, our affections to our
services, without which they cannot be upright. And when this is done, then to
set up the right end and scope, and their to settle our intention fast and
plain: O how difficult! many by aims and indirect ends do often present
themselves, that it is with us, as with boys in writing, we draw many crooked
lines, or as with them in archery, we shoot by hither or beyond, or beside the
mark; it is not easy to do good because God commands it, or only because he
may be glorifled.

2. That spritualness which is required in upright motions; I tell you that the
very soul must act it self, if the heart or way be The spiritualness required
in upright motions.
upright: not only his lips but his spirit must pray; not only his ear, but
his heart must hear? he must not only profess against sin, but his soul must
hate and abhor it, And there is no revealed and known duty to which his very
heart does not strive to obey: yea, and the ground of all this must be
spiritual and not carnal, from God and for God.

Assuredly, these things are impossible to an evil man, and he who is most
good, shall confess it to be most hard, to be plain with God, and to walk
evenly before him.

8. Lastly to be upright. is a possible thing, a man may attain to be upright
is a possible thing
unto it, Nay every good man does attain unto it? Noah was upright and walked
with God, Abraham was upright before him, David kept him from his sin, and he
did serve the Lord in uprightness of heart, Hezekiah did so likewise, Remember
Lord that I have walked before thee in truth, and with an upright heart: Paul
served God in all good conscience, willing to live honestly in all things?
Though no man can say that he does all that Gods commands require, yet he may
say he has respect unto them all; and though none can say he has nothing in
him, or nothing is done by him, which the law of God does forbid, yet he may
say, I hate every false way, and search me, O Lord, if there be any way of
wickedness within me: and this is uprightness:

Ob. But you will say if the case be so; how may one know that he is indeed
upright?

Sol. There are many discoveries of it, I pray you to observe Discourses of
uprightness
them, and try your selves by them, let your consciences testify for you before
the lord this day.

1. If a man be upright, he will mostly strive for an inward reformation of his
heart.

There are two things which the upright person does most look The upright man
most strives for the inward reformation.
at, his God, and his heart. The Hypocrites (as our savior testifies) they are
for the outside, they wash the platters and the cups, and beautify the tombs,
like an adulteress whose care is to paint, and to set a fair face upon the
matter; all their care is to the eye of man: how to be seen and hard, how to be
well thought on? Now uprightness is mostly for the heart and spirit: not that
an upright person should or does neglect the wel-ordering his life, O no! as to
neglect our hearts, argues hypocrisy; so to neglect our lives argues
profanesse.

But the principle care of uprightness is the reformation of the heart; though
it looks to the cleansing of the hand, yet principally of the heart, according
to that of the Apostle, Jam. 4. 8. Why brethren, it well knows that the heart
is it which God looks for and looks at, the heart is it which God delights in,
if that be right and true he is pleased, thou love truth in the inward parts,
Psa. 51. the upright in heart are his delight. David is full in this concerning
his heart, Psalm. 119. 10. with my whole heart have I sought thee, v. 11. Thy
word have I hid within my heart, that I might not sin against thee, incline
my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness Romans 1. 9. God is my
witness whom I serve with my spirit; the heart of man, is the fountain of life
or death, and every thing is strongest in the heart, and most dangerous: sin
in the heart is worse then in the life: (i.) when a man's heart is set upon his
sin; now Try your selves, in this particular: what care have you of your
hearts? what pains do you take with them? you many times have humble looks,
yea but have you not still proud hearts? you have many times contented words,
yea but have you not still impatient and discontented hearts? you have many
times heavenly discourse? yea but have you not still earthly and worldly hearts?
what do you with them? do you not let your hearts still loose? do you not
give them way to be filled with wicked contemplations, vain imaginations,
filthy inclinations, with envy, malice, unbelief; or do you mourn under
these, do you strive to cleanse within: is it not sufficient that your outward
actions look well, unless your hearts be made better; O if this heart were
holy! If this heart were humble! If this heart were heavenly! If the heart were
believing! The hypocrite cares not though the thread be rotten, if the color
or gloss be fair: but the upright person he is more at substance then show,
and has more to do with his heart, then any thing: he would have the law
written not upon his tongue, but upon his heart cleansed, as well as his life
beautified.

2. If a man be upright, then a little holiness will not serve his If a man be
upright then a little holiness will not serve his turn.
turn, he is not contented with some measures, but strives after perfection,
see this clearly delivered by the Apostle, in Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had
already attained, or were already perfect, but I follow after, if that I may
apprehend, that for which also I am apprehended, of Jesus Christ, v. 13. I
count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before; v. 14. I press then toward the mark, for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus: v. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus
minded, q. d. If you be upright, thus will it be with you, you will not be
satisfied with small beginnings, with received measures, but you will reach on
for farther conformity to Christ.

There is a difference twixt desires of holiness, for it self and God, and for
our selves and ends: An hypocrite could be content to have as much holiness,
as would serve his turn, his own turn, his own ends; as a tradesmen is
willing to be at cost that his apprentice learn to writ and cipher, so much,
and so long, as he may be enabled to keep the accounts; but he will not be at
cost to teach him the excellency of writing or ciphering. But now the upright
person desires grace, and holiness for God; that glory may be brought unto him,
and out of an intrinsecall love of the beauties of holiness, and for the
farther rooting out of sin, And for the better Inabling to holy services: his
ends are public and therefore a little serves not.

3. If a man be upright, then a man will walk by a right rule; an upright man
walks by an upright rule.
he orders his conversation and ways according to the word of God. A right
ordering of all our actions, by a right rule, in a right way, by right persons,
out of right principles, for right ends, this is uprightness.

3. A person may know whither he be upright or no? by the An upright person
has a conformable disposition of heart about all sins.
conscionable disposition of his heart about all sins? D^vid speaking of
such, who were undefiled, Psalm. 119. 1. And sought the Lord with their whole
heart, v. 2. he adds, v. 3. They also do no iniquity, q. d. this is not
their work, this is not the thing which they do approve, or allow, in which
they live and walk; sin is not the upri^ht man's work, it is a strange work,
and a stranger work: and David being to manifest his own uprightness, says
Psalm. 18. 23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from iniquity:
yea Psalm 119. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way: Job was an
upright man one that feared God, and ^schewed evil, Job 1. 1. There was never
any hypocrite living but his heart was false; it did never condemn all sin in
him: peruse the scriptures, and you shall read of none of them but they had
some one way of wickedness or other. Jehu had his calves, notwithstanding all
his zeal for God: Herod kept his Herodias, notwithstanding all his
forwardness and gladness, and reverrence to John Baptist: The Pharisees kept
their covetousness notwithstanding all their formal strictness and rigor:
The young man would not sell all, notwithstanding all his profession of former
obedience and Questionings, what yet lack I; So on the contrary, there was
never any person upright, but his heart made conscience of all sin: what is
that? that is, he would be rid of all, he would not allow himself in any one,
he would not keep up the covenant with sin, by being dispensed with in any
one particular.

Ob. But you will say, this may be hard, for who can say my heart is clean,
even the just man does sin seven times a day.

Sol. Beloved you mistake me; I do not say that this is a sign of uprightness,
that a man has not sin in him, or that he does never act sin, Indeed this were
hard, No man living should be upright by this! But I say that the upright
person makes conscience of all sin, he sets against all sin, he opposes, he
condemns, he disalloweth all sin, he will not be in covenant with any sin.

Ob. Yet you may object, but how may I know that I make conscience of all sin?

Sol. I will not insist on all which may be spoken, only take He that makes
con^cience of all sin.
three things, which will show your uprightness in a conscience of all sin.

1. if you be upright, you will make conscience of secret as well You will make
conscience of secret as well as open sins.
as open sins. Why the fear of man? the regard of our own credit, the love of
our own advantages, may prevail with an evi^l man, with an hypocrite, to keep
in, to work crafti^y? Not to sin at noonday, to hold off in public, and yet
the love of sin prevails upon him with ease, to work wicke^nesse in the dark,
in private, in secret, for he says none does see me; an hypocrite is a secret
sinner, (q.) restraints are then ta^en off. But the upright person, he hates
sin because it is s^n, and therefore he does not act it because it is secret,
or declin^ it because it is open, but he shuns both the one and the other,
because they are both sinful, Jobes heart was not secretly intised Job. 31.
26, 27. Is David in his family? there will he w^lke with an upright heart,
Psalm. 101. 2. Is ^o^eph alone; yet he dares not to do so great a wickedness and
sin against God, ^en. ^9. Nay, David hates all vain thoughts Psalm. 119. And
Solomon says that the thoughts of the righteous are right, Prove. 12. 5. the
upright person strives against secret inclinations, and would have even the
imaginations cast down which are seen only by God.

2. You will make conscience of the least sins, sin, we do usually divide into
gross, and foul; and into little, and small; not that any sin is small in a
relation to the rule; but that one is not so great of the least sins.
and heinous in comparison of one sin with another. Now where sins are reputed
gross, and foul, and palpable, even the civil man, and the formal hypocrite
may bevery precise, very conscionable, verytender, but for lesser oaths, for
usual omissions, for triffles, for sinful atires, for sinful associating with
lewd and vile persons, etc: alas these are poor thins, small things! why should
we stand upon them? Nay be not deceived, God is not mocked, the mote must be
plucked out, as well as the beam; David's heart smote him for cutting of the lap
of Saul's garment, as well as it rose against the vile counsel to cut of Saul's
life? he that is not faithful in the least, will not be faithful in the
greatest: And that man who will dispense with himself in small sins, if
occasion serve, will likewise give himself a commission for great
transgressions: uprightness knows no such distinction (in respect of
approbation and allowance) twixt great and small; it is probable that Ananias
laid down a great part of his estate, yet herein was the falsenesse of his
heart, that he kept back some of the estate; Hypocrisy does not consist in
this, that a man does wallow in all sins, but in this, that a man will allow
himself in some sins: Now try your selves in this, conscionablenesse about
small sins, even lesser sins, (to upright persons) are objects of great hatred,
and causes of great trouble.

3. you will make conscience, of sins which are in a sort more connatural.
Though every sin in respect of the original principle of sin be natural to man
in his corrupt estate, yet their are of sins which are in a sort more
connaturall.
special sins, which have in respect of their actings and course, more
immediate favor and countenance from a sinner: v. g.

Those of particular inclination: and those of custom: and frequent practice,
and those of a man's particular condition and calling, and those of present
profit and pleasure.

I do conjecture that there is scarce any one man living, unless he has
entirely given up himself to Satan, who does cast away himself upon the
service of every sin whatsoever; and that their is scarce a person; who is not
more haunted with some particular sinful inclination more then another.

Now where the heart is Hypocritical? though it will proclaim defiance
against many kinds of sinning, yet as Naaman spoke in another case; so does
the hypocrite concerning some particular lusts, only herein the Lord be
merciful unto me, In this I must be spared: therefore Zophar speaking of the
wicked and the hypocrite, Job. 20. 5. he says) that wickedness is sweet in
his mouth, he hides it under his tongue, v. 12. and v. 13. that he spares it,
and forsakes it not, but keeps it still with in his mouth; he is besotted and
entangled, and sets himself unto the power of some pleasant and profitable
lust or other, and no word of command or threatening, no passage of affliction
and trouble, no experience or sense, no inward accusation and rebukes of
conscience, will ever be able to draw of his heart from it, though the
Hypocrite may contend against many sinnings, yet he never stands against the
sin of his profit or pleasure: like a Fisher he may throw away many of the
small fishes, but he keeps those which will make a sale and merchandise. But
now if the heart be upright, then a mavelous tenderness, and conscience will
be found in thee, even against those sins which formally thou did love as
dearly as thine one life. Thou will set against that profitable sin, of which
Demetrius said, that by this craft I get my wealth: And thou will set against
that sin, of which Herod spoke, that she pleased him greatly, that sin which
formerly was to thy affections, as the oil to the lamp, and as Joseph to
Jacob; Now thou will strive against it, as thy only choice enemy and betrayer
of thy soul and salvation, David (if I mistake not, and Interpreters deceive
me not) made this a testimony of his uprightness, in Psalm. 18. 23: I was
upright before him, and kept my self from mine iniquity; Iniquity may be
called mine, either in respect of approbation and covenant (as a man may say
this wife is mine, this Master is mine) or in respect of special inclination,
so a man may say, this is mine iniquity (i) that sin to which above all other,
I find my self most apt and ready and prone: So David here, I kept my self
from mine iniquity (i.) from the iniquity into which I am naturally so apt and
prone to fall into: And this he makes as an argument of his uprightness, viz.
that as he did not hunt after other sins, so when his special corruption did
incline and tempt, when those did work upon him, unto which (if he spoke but
the least word, and gave the least leave) his natural inclination would have
thoroughly and easily kindled and thrust out it self, yet he would not harken,
but did oppose, he did more narrowly and punctually watch, and besige his heart
in these.

Let me add, uprightness appears thus about sins?

1. It will endure trial. Psa. 139. Try me O Lord, and see if their be any
wickedness in ^e.

2. It will often try it self, and examine it self, least any sin should
settle.

3. It scares it self, and is suspicious, Master it is I, said the Disciple?
and Job offered Sacrifice, least his Sons have sinned.

4. It will bless God for being kept from sin, as David did for Abigailes
counsels.

5. It is most severe against our own sins, an hypocrite is a severe judge of
others, as the Pharisees against Christ; but an upright person throws the
first stone at himself.

6. It condemns sin in all, in parents, as Jonathan did Saul's prejudice
against David, and as Jacob did severely judge and condemn sin in Simeon and
Levy, and in Rachel; and John the Baptist did in Herod, and Christ in the
Pharisees at their own table.

7. It grieves for its own sins, yea and for the sins of others, David does not
only water his couch with his tears for his own sins, but also Rivers of
tears ran down his eyes, because men kept not Gods Law.

8. It is more moved for sins against God, then injuries done un^o our selves.
David cannot bear Goliahs blasphemies and reproaches yet can bear, Shimeis
Railings.

9. Abstinence suffices not without hatred, hatred suffices not without
mortification.

4. Trial of a man's uprightness, may be his disposition and temper about holy
duties and services? Look as a man's heart is false when it pretends a respect
to God, and yet will Uprightness is known by a man's disposition about holy
duties.
allow it self in any sin which offends God, so is it false when
notwithstanding all semblances of pious observances, it will not be wrought
upon to be truly and entirely obedient to God

But I will not digress: I conceive there are five things about our duties and
services which may manifest the uprightness of our hearts, viz. In five things
Universally.


1. Universality? David did take this for a special testimony of his
uprightness; that he had respect unto all Gods commands, Psalm. 119. 6. and
Paul thought it so, who did exercise himself to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God and man, Act. 24, 16. so Heb. 13. 18. we must trust that
we have a good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly: true
obedience does neither dispute nor divide, it is given unto God, upon a bare
command, and it does not crave a dispensation in part, where Gods commands are
more easy, there the upright persons goes on with cheerfulness, and when they
seemstrang and more hard, there also he goes on with readiness: Abraham is
resolved to obey God in all things, though it be to part with his country, yea
with his son. The rule is good and true, Quicquid propter deum fit, equaliter
fit: he who does serve and obey God, for Gods sake, will equally obey all that
God commands him: No one command is unjust or unreasonable to him whose heart
is upright in obedience I Question not, but that the hypocrite may go very
far, in the visible parts of duties and services, you may find him forward and
stirring and not a little boasting with Jehu, come and see my zeal, and yet if
Jehosaphat, had gone a little farther, he might have seen his calves too,
contrary to Gods commands.

An Hypocrites obedience cannot be universal, forasmuch as his ground, and
moti^es are particular: this is a truth, that no motion exceeds its motive:
according to the strength and amplitude or restrictivenesse of it, and a man
set to work.

Now the reasons and Inducements of the hypocrites obedience are partial, and
not conjunctive and common, he may come to hear the word, and he may receive
it with singular joy, he may find his affections marvellously raised, only the
question now is, how far, and upon what grounds? verily, only because, and only
so far as the word is a pleasing word, so far as it is clothed and apparelled
with a spruse elegancy of phrase, or with some unusual notions, or some
delicate elocution, etc. all which do fit his humor, and claw the itch off his
mind. But now he is not equally delighted, this acceptance of the word is not
universal: let the same word be delivered as a searching, and dividing, and
condemning word, then it is otherwise. Now you shall see, that the shaking of
the tree will make the rotten fruit at the core (which yet looked red and ripe
to the eye) to fall to the ground: let the word come close, and lay hold, and
search him to the quick; Now you shall see the hypocrite like the wounded or
crazy part, though clothed as fair as the sound parts, yet if strictly
handled, the party cannot endure, he cannot abide it, he grows impatient and
unquiet. Touch an hypocrite upon the maine duty; Go, says Christ, to the young
covetous person, sell all and follow me; what does he now, who p^etended he had
done all before? the text says, he went away very sorrowful. Herod hears John
Baptist gladly, and did many things, yea, but it is not lawful for thee to have
thy brothers wife, said John unto him, how does this doctrine, this duty go
down with him, John lost his liberty, and then his head for his labor.

2. Constancy of obedience: The Physicians do observe a Constancy of obedience.
Simile.
difference twixt the natural and preternatural heat in men's bodies; the
preternatural heat which arises from distemper, may be more for the present,
but as it exceeds for measure, so it abates for time, because the natural heat
is a more equal, and moderate, and durable heat, every part has an equal
share; and it is not extreme, and yet it continues: Thus it is with hypocrites
and upright persons in the matter of obedience. The hypocrite may (in a kind
of preternatural heat) he may in a fit, in a present heat fall violently upon
duty, upon resolution; O what a man will he become, how shall his family be
reformed; and now he will read, and hear, and pray, and he will leave his
sin; but anon he has lost his heat, the cold fit takes him, he restraines
prayer, he lays aside his resolutions; will the hypocrite pray always?

There are three times wherein an hypocrite may express great forwardness in
duties, in services to God.

1. One, when straits of conscience are on him, and the fear of death are ready
to lay hold on him: In their affliction they poured out a prayer unto me, Esaias
26. 16. Pharaoh and Ahab were much wrought upon in their exigences, Psalm. 78.
when he slew them, then they ought him.

2. Another, when obedience and duty are not dangerous, but calm and
commodious: As the Samaritans, when the Jews prospered, etc. Therefore Christ
sets out an Hypocrite by that ground which was stony, and had not much earth,
upon which the seed fell, and forthwith sprang up (without any more ado) Matthew.
13. 5. but when the Sun was up, it was scorched and withered away, ver. 6. He
applies it to hypocrites, who hear the word, and receive it with joy, verse 20.
And yet this endures but for a while, for when tribulation, or persecution
arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended, ver. 21. If Gods service
be so hot, so dangerous, if it must cost him his liberty, his estate, his
friends, his ease, his life, then farwell it: The house built on the sands, when
the wind arose, it fell, Mat. 7. 27.

3. When he has some props, or in the presence of others. Many do duties while
Moses is present, or Jehoiadah lives, or the good judges continue; but if Moses
be absent, then the Israelites turn Idolaters, and if Jehoiadah dies, then
Joash is naught, and if the Judges die, then the Israelites do what is right in
their own eyes.

But where the person is upright, there the obedience is constant, he does
righteousness at all times; Paul serves Christ in fasting and prayer, in bonds
and affliction, and many temptations: and Job who was an upright person, by
Gods own testimony, chap. 1. 1. he followed God continually, v. 5. and though
that Satan thought that hard exigences would have turned him off from his
obediential course, yet he did still cleave to God, after the loss of cattle,
and estate, and children, yet you may read his constancy, chap. 2. 3. The Lord
said unto Satan, have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like
him in the earth; a perfect and upright man, one that fears God, and
escheweth evil, and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou movest me
against him? Yet mistake not the right compass of constancy in obedience, as
if there were no act of disobedience, as if a man were not upright, unless
there were an inviolable succession of disobedience in every thing, which he
does at every moment; O no! I know no such kind of constant obedience which is
exempted from all interruption, but the constancy of his obedience lives in an
opposition to fits, and starts, and imports the course and bent of his life,
which is always to walk with, and to obey God.

3. Simplicity of obedience: as Saint Austine distinguishes Simplicity of
obedience.
of a love of God, that one may love God for God, and a man may love God for
himself; the same does hold in service and obedience, a man may serve God for
God, and serve God for himself. Does Job serve God for naught? Job 1. that I
confess may be truly a friend of an hypocrite, who has an eye only to the
wages, like the Germans in their wars, do nothing without pay: The unsound
heart will square out his work according to the pay, his eye is much upon this,
how will this make for my profit? how will it advance my pleasure, my credit?
these things fire and inflame an unsound heart; come to such an heart, and say,
such or such a thing is to be done: For it is Gods express will, and it will
make for his glory: these (alone) are cold motives, and weak induce ments to a
false-hearted person. But come and say, God will have you to do it, and if you
do it, you shall be highly thought on, you will be esteemed for it, you shall
have much applause, you may hap to get well by it, why? now the unsound heart
stirs Simile.
as the ship, which has got a right wind to drive it, and carry it on. But
the upright person is simple in his obedience; a naked command is reason enough
for him to obey, and Gods glory is a sufficient motive: If a servant be
faithful in his factoridge: why? it is enough to him in the managing of
business, if he can set forward his masters stock, his prosperity is all that
he looks on: And thus is uprightness descried in our obedience, when we mind
God above our selves, when God alone is cause enough of our obedience unto God.

Quest. How may one know that he looks not at himself, but at Gods commands.

Answ. Thus, 1. By his cordial blessings and rejoycings at the good done by
others, whereby God has glory, though he be not the instrument, as Paul, Phil.
1. 18. 2. By his acting for God under disgraces and discouragements, as David,
and the three children.

Though our services may want encouragement from worldly motives, nay, though
they meet with many discouragements and prejudices to us, yet so that by them
God may receive glory, and I may express my obediential respect to him; here
is wind enough to sill my ^ailes; I dare not do it, because God forbids; I
will do it, because God commands; I will not cease to do it, though I receive
frowns and loss, but will hold on to do it, because Gods receives glory, this
is simplicity of obedience, and this argues the person to be upright: Paul
speaks of this simplicity of obedience, for his own part in the exercise of
his Ministerial function which he well joins with Go^ly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.
12. and verily so it was with him, that the love of Christ was sufficient to
constrain him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. And he went through good and through bad report:
yea, and he was not discouraged by all the bonds which did a tend him, nor
counted he his life dear for Christ; it was all one to him so that Christ
might be magnified, whether by life, or whether by death.

4. Spiritual^ty of obedience: there is a twofold acting of duty. Spirituality
of obedience.


One is carnal, when we do them as ordinary works, as works of course, the
mere material acting of them suffices us: so that we say some words it makes
a prayer, so that we give some money, it makes u^ our charity; so that we be a
Church it makes up our hearing, so that we go over a chapter it makes up our
reading* so that we study and speak a Serm^n, it makes up our preaching; so
that we eat no meat, this makes up fasting. It matters not what melody and
harmony, so that Simile.
we touch the strings.

Another is spiritual, when duties are performed in an obedience to God,
because he commands them, and also the very heart and soul, the spirit and the
affections act themselves, they cooperate with our services: the desires of
our souls is to the remembrance of thee, or as David, with my whole heart have
I sought thee. When a man can say as Paul, whom I serve with my spirit, Romans 1.
9. or as David, my soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise
his holy name; Psalm. 103. or with Mary, my soul does magnify the Lord, and my
spirit does rejoice in God my Savior, Luke 2. or as the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
14. 15. I will pray with the spirit, and with the understanding also, I will
sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also, or as Christ
says, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy might.

An hypocrite, he may do so much about duties as may manifest the excellency of
his gifts, but he does not that about duties ^^ich argues the efficacy of
grace, he may be high and admirable in the visible parts, in the very works he
may hit upon as ample and pertinent phrases in preaching, and sweet expressions
in praying as another: his lips may draw near, but yet his heart is far off,
it can suffice him to do service to the eye of man.

But an upright person, there is fire and incense in his sacrifices: he must
present living and reasonable services: why? if he hears, and not with
attention, not with reverence, not with fear, not with faith, he is greatly
troubled: he knows that God must be served with godly reverence, and fear:
for preaching, let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. If I do this
willingly, I have a reward, 1 Cor. 9. 17. see, 1 These. 2. 4. If he prays, and
his mind be drawn aside by distractions, and his affections work not with
sorrow, hope, with earnest desire, and some confidence, he accounts that the
work is not done, he has said something, but he thinks he has not prayed.
It Is true (and he confesses so much) that the cause of acceptance of all
services is in Christ, yea, but he must serve, and strives to serve the Lord
with all his heart; he looks to the manner of service on his part: In
singleness of heart, as unto Christ, not with eye-service, etc. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6.
see Romans 12. 8. 3 John 5. Thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do.

5. Humility of obedience: why? this does argue the uprightness Humility of
obedience.
of a person. There is no person more proud of his work then an hypocrite:
Christ tells us, that he cannot give an alms, but the trumpet is presently at
his mouth.

There are two things which may befall a man upon the performance of any holy
duties.

One is rejoicing, and this is lawful, when God has enlarged my heart in
prayer; when he has quickened me in his service, raised my affections, animated
my faith, assisted me more then ordinary against my dullness, distractions,
unbelief, temptations, I may rejoice, my heart should be raised to bless the
Lord, and (in some cases to speak) of this his goodness to his glory.

Another is boasting, when a man (like the cock) claps the wing upon his own
body: when he sets out himself the more, deals with others more to admire him,
to extol him, when he blesses himself, and bestows the honor of all his
performances upon himself. Now this is base, and argues that the heart is not
upright, but the upright heart does all the holy performances by its masters
strength, and for it masters glory; when it is to do duty, it begges for Gods
grace; when it has done duty, it gives ^od the glory: 1 Chronicles. 29. 13. Now
therefore O Lord our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name, ver. 14.
But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort, for all things come of thee, and of thine own have
we given thee? Like a faithful servant who craves direction how to sell and
trade; And when that is done, the money which he takes, he puts into his
Masters coffer: Nay, more then all this, the upright heart does much fear it
self, least by any means it should finger any part of Gods ^lory by
well-doing, let any praise from man come near: O says the upright person^ what
have I which I have nor received? Not I, but the grace of God in me; it is but
duty, and that not done so much, or so well as is required: so that God will
pardon my failings, and accept of me in Christ, it is enough.

Obj. It is true, that upon some extraordinary actings, even an upright heart
may feel some secret thoughts of self applause and oftentation.

Sol. But these are felt as temptations, as snares, and resisted, yea, and such
secret flies cause many tears to be cast after singular performance; but the
hypocrite he does seek praise and accept of it, he loves the praise of men, and
knows how to cry up himself: Epam^nondas went weeping because of the vainglory
of yesterdays victory and triumph: the hypocrite is proud even of his humility.

5. A fifth trial, whether a man be upright or no, is, if the bent An upright
person the bent and purpose of his heart is unto God.
and purpose of his heart be unto God: Mere particular actions do not conclude
(either way) the estate of the soul: An hypocrite may do some good act, and an
upright person may do some sinful act; But that which even in such Cases, may
testify unto a man his uprightness, is the true bent and purpose of the
heart: Look which way the heart is set, and purposed in the habitual temper of
it, that does convince either of hypocrisy or of uprightness.

By the heart of man I mean the soul in its principle faculties: as the mind or
understanding, and the will with the affections: If God has these, then
assuredly the man is upright; when a man can say, in respect of his mind, with
Paul, Romans 7. 12. The Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good,
ver. 16. I consent unto the Law that it is good: or with David, Psalm. 119. 1^8.
I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be upright; when he can say
in respect of his will and affections, with Paul, willing to live honestly in
all things, Heb. 13. with him again, Romans 7. 18. to will is present with me,
ver. 19. the good that I would do, v. 22. I delight in the Law of the Lord
after the inward man: or with David, I desire to do thy will, O my God, yea,
thy Law is within my heart, Psalm. 40. 8. And thou art my God; I have determined
to keep thy word, Psalm. 119. This in Scripture is sometimes styled a preparing
of the heart to seek God, as Jehoshap^at, 1 Chronicles. 19. 31. and a cleaning to
God with purpose of heart, Act. 11. 23. all which intimated uprightness.

But you may reply, if uprightness may be truly discovered by the bent of the
heart, then the vilest person may be upright, for they confidently affirm that
they mean no hurt, their desires are good, they would know more, they would
believe and repent, and leave their sins, yea, they do strive to enter in at
the strait gate.

To this I answer.

First, if any man who has been wicked, does now find the purpose and bent of
his heart set for God, that the desires of his soul are unfeignedly to please
God, I should not doubt but God had changed this man, and his heart were now
made upright.

But secondly, I conjecture that no wicked man does, or can have this bent and
purpose of heart to please God, to obey God in all things; for it imports these
things;

1. An inward desire joined with love, Psalm. 119. O that my ways were so
directed, that I might keep thy statutes. But then afterward, thy Law is my
delight.

2. An habitual inclination, not a pang of the soul, not a mood, not a fit of
an ague, not a flash of lightning, not as the morning dew: But my soul
breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times, Psalm
119. 20.

Thirdly, an active purpose; Herein I do exercise or endeavor my self (said
Paul) Acts 24. 16. though the purpose in an upright man does exceed his
actions, yet there is some active and working ability with his purpose, he will
be doing service to all, to God. It is with evil men in their purposes, as with
Pilate, he was purposed to let Christ go, but yet he gave sentence: so they
pretend a purpose to please God, but still live in their sins, and do not
stir up themselves at all, to all the means by which they may get grace and
strength.

6. There are many other trials which I shall but mention unto you, v. g.

1. The upright person will not baulk the greatest duty, nor the least sins.

2. He will serve God, though alone, Josh. 24. 15.

3. His care is to order his conversation by the word, that is his rule.

4. His motives which sets him to work, are direct: not the breath of the
people, praise of man, love of himself: It is a great matter to observe what
sets the soul on work.

5. His dearest communions are secret.

SECT. IV.
A Second Use of this point shall be for comfort to such as are upright: There
are many sweet comforts which may greatly revive and cheer up such as are
upright; I will touch For comfort to such as are upright.
some of them at this time.

1. One comfort is this, that there is a gracious acceptance of their weak
services: The King of Persia did lovingly accept the poor man's handful of
water, and put it into a golden vessel, There is a gracious acceptance of their
weak services.
and gave him that vessel of gold. To set this on, Consider,

First, that all our holy services, they are the tithes (as it were) of our
graces, the rents of our helps, a certain homage, which we bring in to God:
they are such expressions or actions by which we strive to bring God glory, and
to please him.

Secondly, that the best services are imperfect: as no man does so much as he
should, so the best Christian does not so well as he should: Look, as the
highest grace is still in defect, so the most solemn duties are still in
default. It is with the best man in duty, as with the Moon, though it be at the
full, and shines most clearly, yet even then it has its spots; so when the
heart is most enlarged with intentions and heavenly affections, there is yet
some contrary twange, or some shortness, some blemishablenesse notwithstanding.

Therefore Aaron was not only to bear the iniquities of the people, but he was
also to bear the iniquity of the holy offerings, Exodus 28. 38.

For as it was with Jacob after his earnest struggling with the Angel, he arose
with a lame and halting thigh, so is it with all of us, both in and after our
most affectionate performances, we are weak in our feet: that is not good which
is done by a good man; and though he does much which God does reward, yet he
does nothing so completely, but God needs in something or other of it to pardon
and cover. Not only our sins can accuse us, but some sinfulness in our best
actions: no man prays, or hears, or reads, or acts any service of piety or
charity, in that full and ample eminency or integrity of degrees, but that he
may with the Elders in the Revelations, cast these Crowns down to the ground.

Thirdly, that by reason of these imperfections in duties, there is more reason
(in a strict way of Justice) that God should reject all, then that he should
accept of any thing.

Beloved, it is granted, that God does not reject the services of his servants;
nay, as he does requite them, so he will accept of them, and reward them; but
this is not for the dignity of the servant, but from the graciousnesse of the
Master. For if God should answer any imperfect service (yea, that which has
but a very little, and particular imperfection, suppose them to be some
contrary transient thoughts, or some thinner indispositions hanging about us in
our duties) I say if God should answer them from the court of pure Justice, you
should find that the mixture of a little sin would easily cry down the
acceptance of much good: The most good which I bring in my services it is but
duty, and the least evil which I bring is besides the duty, and the evil in
duty, be not able to make that part which is good to be bad, yet it is able to
shut out the service from acceptance, because, by reason of that evil, the
service is not so good as God may and does require, if he should stand with us
upon terms of strict Justice.

But then fourthly; though there be many imperfections cleaving to the services
of men, yet if they be upright, God will (for all them) graciously accept of
their services. Though I pray (and with many distractions) and though I hear
(and within my interpretations) yet if I be upright in the performances of
these (i.) if my heart be for God (indeed) under these that I bring in the
truth, and present strength of my spirit, with all humble respect to Gods
commands, and unfeigned integrity of aiming at Gods glory, the services are
graciously accepted with God.

Yea, though I cannot always use so many words in prayer, though expressions
are not so many at this time as at another; nay, though I find not that
livelihood and cheerfulness now as heretofore, yet if the heart be upright, the
service is done and accepted. There are two things which may assure a good man
that his services are accepted.

One is faith, when he presents his services in the name of Christ: look, as
every sinner needs a Mediator of redemption, so every good man still needs the
same Christ as a Mediator of intercession for his services: And though
services (as done by us) can find no favor, yet as presented by Christ, they
are always a sweet savor before the Lord, he is that Angel, who has a golden
Censer, and has much incense, which he offers with the prayers of all Saints
before the Throne, Rev. 8. 3. though our services be but weak testimonies, yet
Christ's intercession is a strong and mighty ingratiating both of our persons
and actions.

Another is uprightness; when the heart is true and plain in what it does:
Beloved, remember this, that as God does not respect the strongest parts, which
are passive, as I may say, and are idle, so he does not reject the meanest
abilities, if uprightly employed. No, not the day of small things is despised
by him; if the flax be smoking, though it flame not, he will not quench it,
that is, he will not only, not slight it, but cherish and accept of it, 2 Cor.
8. 12. The widows mite, the cup of cold water was accepted.

If a man can truly say, Lord, I would believe more steadfastly if I could, and
I strive to believe, and I would pray better, if I could, yet as well as I can,
I now present my supplications before thee, I would serve thee more fully, more
entirely, that is the desire of my soul, and my endeavor, if I had
wherewithal, thou should have a better heart, more lively affections, more
ample and cheerful duties, all should be better, if I had a better power: I say
that notwithstanding the many imperfections, yet this uprightness, this holy
frame of a complete and active will (wherein all the powers of the soul are
bent to services according to the present power of the measure of grace
^^^eived) is a most sweet smelling sacrifice, and mounts into the most gracious
acceptance of God in Christ. I pray you remember that of David, like as a
father pities his child, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, Psalm. 103.
13. And that of the Prophet, I will spare them as a man spares his own son
that serves him, Mal. 3. 17. The father commands his child to lift up the
weight, and the child readily addresseth to the obedience, he lifts, and
assayes, and still he gives another ha at it, but perhaps he cannot get it
quite up; why? the father likes his child for this, and though perhaps the
weight be where it was, yet he calls this act of his child true obedience, why?
because, though that be not done which the father imposed, yet it had been done
if the child had more strength, and he endeavored with all his strength for to
do it. Or thus, the father wills the child to shoot an Arrow, the child draws
the Arrow, perhaps but half way, and though his eye were upon the mark, yet his
arrow falls short many Bows length; why? the father will yet commend all this,
for though he sees that the Arrow is short, yet he observes that the Bow was
drawn, and although the mark be not hit with the Arrow, yet it was aimed at
with the eye of the child: so is it with God our father, who commands such and
such duties, to which, if we address our selves with uprightness, he will wink
and pass by the weakness in action, whiles he both observes and accepts the
integrity of intention and affection.

Obj. O says an upright person, I find such infinite heaps of other thoughts,
such dullness and deadness of spirit, such untowardlinesse, so many weaknesses
every way, all which are the grief of my soul, and it troubles me much, that I
cannot do the good that I would) how will the Lord take such broken services
from me.

Sol. I answer if thy heart be upright in these interrupted services, God has
mercy to pardon the weaknesses, and he has wisdom to find out the
uprightness, and he has graciousness to accept of the dutifulness.

A Goldsmith will not cast away those lesser rays of gold, though mingled, and
(to an inexpert person) confounded with various heaps of dross and ^^st: now,
he has an art to find out the little gold, and put side the dross. Though
with all our holy actions there be much corruption and weakness commixt, yet
there is such a wise art in Gods gracious mercy, as to find out uprightness,
and holiness of desire and endeavor in a service commanded with many
infirmities, 2 Chr. 30, 18. the Lord pardon every one, v. 19. That prepares
his heart to seek the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary, verse 20. And the Lord
hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.

2. A second comfort is this, that if a man be upright, he shall not only find
acceptance for services, but also indulgence for offenses. If a man be upright
he shall not only find acceptance for service but indulgence for offense.


You must ever distinguish twixt the cause and the subject; the cause of all
pardoning indulgence, is the free grace of God in the blood of Christ, but the
subject of indulgence, is the person to whom God is pleased to give his pardon
and release.

None comes in under the wings of the mercy-seat so as the upright persons:
Uprightness in Scripture has (in a well understood sense) seemed to cover
all: you read of King Asa, and of many passages which did greatly blur him both
as a King, and as a good man, he did not break down the high places, he sought
to the Physicians, he joined to the King of Syria, he cast the Prophet into
prison, who reproved him for it, yet (2 Chronicles. 15. 17.) the heart of Asa is
said to be perfect all his days: How? all his days: and yet such sinnings
sometimes; yes, all his days, for sins stand upon the account, and seem to
be reckoned, not so much when they are done, as when they are done with a
sinful heart.

And they lose upon the account, they are struck off, God passes over them,
when the bent of their heart is against them: see that place and passage of
David, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered,
ver. 2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no iniquity: verily
brethren, that man's estate is blessed, whose sins are pardoned; O! if the Lord
be reconciled to a man, if the Lord covers his sin, (i.) will not look upon
them in a judicial way, so as to account and reckon with the sinner for them;
if the Lord will not impute iniquity to him (i.) though he has iniquity, yet
the Lord will forgive it, it shall not redound unto him in punishment: but it
shall be blotted out, and be as if it had never been: tell me seriously, is not
this a blessed thing; tell me now you whose hearts are ready to break asunder
with the sense of guilt, whither pardoning mercy be not a most blessed and
desirable thing. You will freely confess it is, but then the question is, who
is that man that is so blessed, what is his temper how is he qualified.

See on (in that ver. 2.) he is one in whose spirit is no guile, what is that?
that is, he is the upright person, whose spirit is really and plainly for God,
who in truth desires to please him, who in truth hates all sin. This is that
blessed man, and in this is a great part of his blessedness, that the Lord
will not impute his iniquities unto him, but will forgive and cover them (i.)
so forgive them that they shall not rise upon the account any more: Paul did
upon this conclude by way of testimony to himself, and for others, that there
was no condemnation unto them, Romans 8. 1. why? what was Paul? what was his
temper? verily it was upright.

Obj. Upright, why? he complains of sin, that he was sold under it, he
complains of the Law of his members warring against the Law of his mind, he
complains that he was brought into captivity; he complains that when he would
do good, yet evil was present with him. How then can be say, that there was no
condemnation for him? how was he upright?

Sol. Thus, his being upright did not consist in this, that he had no sin in
him; nor in this, that he did no sin; nor in this, that he did all the good
which he saw should be done: But in this, that he hated the sin which dwelt in
him, that he resisted the evil working in him; that his inward man approved the
good, and condemned the evil; that his inward man hated the evil, and was
delighted in the Law of God. This was his uprightness, and upon this he
concludes, that there was no condemnation, (i.) his sin should not sink his
soul to hell, they should not separate him from the love of God in Christ, they
should not be imputed to him, but Christ would take them off. An upright person
the Lord is his God in covenant.


3. A third comfort to an upright person is this, that the Lord is his God in
Covenant.

You are not Ignorant of the Covenant which God did stipulate with Abraham,
Genesis 17. 1. I am the Almighty (all-sufficient) walk before me and be thou
perfect, what is the meaning of that? In a Covenant you know there are two
parties, and they mutually undertake and agree: so, here* is God on the one
part, and here is Abraham on the other part, and God promises, and Abraham
promises; God promises to be All-sufficient unto him, and engages himself in
an everlasting Covenant to be his God, ver. 7. now Abraham promises to walk
uprightly before the Lord: and this is all that the Lord agrees with him for
(walk before me and be upright) and then I am thy God, and I will be thy
All Sufficiency.

Obj. Why? you will say, this is granted, it is clear, that God Covenants to
be a God to an upright person, But what, so great comfort in that?

Sol. Nay then, I have done, if yet you understand not, If yet you think it so
poor, so mean a thing for God to be your God in Covenant. I tell you
brethren, when God becomes your God in Covenant, when he says to a person, I
will be a God unto thee; it is infinitely more then if the Lord should say to a
man, I will give unto the all the world: O for God to be my God, what is it but
this, I am thine, and all that I am, or have, or can do shall be thine and for
thee. I am an holy God and that shall be to make thee holy, I am a merciful
God and that shall be to pardon thy sins, I am a powerful God and that shall be
to help thee, to deliver thee, to conquer for thee; I am a faithful God and
that shall be to make every promise good which I have made unto thee, I am a
wise God, and that shall be to bring in thy comforts, thy deliverances, thy
helps in the most desirable season.

When sins trouble thee I will pardon them; when they are too strong for thee,
I will subdue them; when thy heart is sorrowful, I will comfort it; when thy
graces are weak, I will strengthen them; when men disgrace thee I will honor
thee, when dangers arise I will preserve thee, what thou need, that I will
give thee; what thou have, that I will bless to thee; all this, and far more
then this, it is for God to be our God in covenant! Nay, and all this is ours
by covenant, that is? it is not a fair and empty pretext, it is not a glorious
and vain complement, but really so, and firmly so; the Lord if he be our God
in covenant; does bind himself to be all this unto us, by the fidelity of his
nature, by the truth of all his promises, by the seal of the blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now what think you? do you now not think that the people happy, who are in
such a case whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15. I tell you we are not able to
Imagine the height and depth: and breadth of this one comfort, that God is my
God in covenant, and yet whatsoever you apprehend of it, whatsoever you feel of
it; whatsoever it is; it is the portion of the upright persons, thou art my
portion O Lord for ever said upright David Psalm. 119.

4. Uprightness intitles the person to all blessings of heaven and
Uprightness intitles to all the blessings of heaven and earth.
of earth, as David spoke of Jerusalem, that I may say of the upright person,
all my springs are in thee; or what Jacob said of Joseph, that he was A
fruitful branch or bough; uprightness is like Arons Rod full of blosomes, you
know that place, Psalm. 84. The Lord God is a sun and shield; the Lord will give
grace and glory, no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly,
what is the sun? but the great and inexhausted fountain of Light, of life, of
heat, of influence, of comfort, that will God be to them that walk uprightly;
what is a shield? but the defense and safeguard of a person against shots and
blows, that also is God to them, that walk uprightly.

Will grace do their hearts good? will glory do their souls good? is there any
good which respects the militant condition? is their any good which respects
the triumphant condition? neitheir grace nor glory, nor any good shall be
withheld from them that walk uprightly: Noah was upright, and had an Ark,
Ebedmelech had his life given him for a prey, Jerem. 39. 18. Amunitions of
Rocks for the upright, Esaias. 33. 15, 16.

What shall I say brethren? (all the promises which you know) are the treasures
of heaven, the cabinets of our comfort, the storehouse of our wants, the hand
which holds and delivers out all our supplies, why? all of them do (as it were)
beset and incompasse the upright person, art thou an upright person, and looks
upon thy family? Prove. 14. 11. The tabernacle of the upright shall flourish,
art thou an upright person, and castest an eye up to thy posterity? why? Psalm.
112. 2. The generation of the upright shall be blessed, Art thou an upright
person, and desire such or such a necessary outward comfort? why? Psalm. 37.
4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy
heart: Art thou an upright person; and suspectest the continuation of thy
outward estate? why? Ps. 37. 18. The days of the upright and their inheritance
shall be for ever? Art thou an upright person? and thy comforts seem a while to
be clowded, Neither cannest thou espy, any one hopeful crevise or future joy?
why? Psa. 112. 4. Unto the upright their arises light in the darkness; and
Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous: and Joy for the upright in
heart? Art thou an upright person, and know not how to break through the
manifold fortifications, and strengthen of envy or power? why? The Lord will
bring forth thy righteousness as the light, Psalm. 37. 6. what can keep down
the rising of the sun? And the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through all the
whole earth to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Uprightness will comfortably season all
our conditions


Fifthly it will comfortably season all our conditions, you know this life of
ours is capable of many changes, (the weather does not alter so often, as our
temporary conditions do) calmes and tempest, light and darkness, comforts and
discomforts, friendship, and then malicious opposition; health, and then a
painful fit of sickness; Riches; and then a sinking poverty, liberty, and
then some hard restraint or exile, one day gain comes in, another day it is
dashed out by the greatness of loss, this day full of joy, the next day all his
forgotten by the abundance of sad tears, for the death of a parent, of a
yoke fellow, of a child, of a friend, etc: Nay, and the soul has its changes
too: sad conflicts, bitter assaults, strong accusations from Satan and the
like: What now? is a choicer Arc to bear us up in all these waves; what
harbor like to this of uprightness? why? says David Psalm. 73. 1. Yet, or
(however) God is good to Israel even to the upright in heart, and Paul 2. Cor.
1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world.

O Brethren! a false and base heart, nothing sets on affliction, a loss, a
scandal, an accusation, so close as it: when a man's heart can smite him for an
hypocrite, for a lover of sin: hypocrisy sinkes the conscience under these
burdens: But uprightness can look an accusation in the face, and bear up the
spirit in a storm, and though uprightness may be exposed to many crosses, yet
it can comfort a man in the sadest day, for it has always a good friend
abroad, of God, and within of conscience.

6. Here is another comfort, uprightness will be a good friend Uprightness
will be a good friend in death.
in death, Psalm. 37. 37. mark the upright man, and behold the perfect, for the
end of that man is peace: The upright person has most conflicts (ordinarily)
in life; and most quiet (ordinarily) in death.

O When death shall approach the dwellings of the profane and hypocritical,
and shall say I have a message unto thee from God, he has commanded me to
arrest thy soul, and to present it before his judgment seat: How does the
heart of a profane wretch gather into fear and horror, yea, and how does
fearfulness and confusions fly up in the breast and countenance of the
hypocrite! his conscience delivers up his morsells from which he would not
part, and shames and strikes him for his abominable collusions and Glosings in
the service of God: reports unto him that he must presently stand before a God,
who is spirit and truth, and never could abide unsoundnesse, but will be
avenged of hypocrisy, good Lord! how the heart of this man trembles and sighs,
he would thrust out the thoughts of dying, but cannot, he would stay a while
longer here below, but may not; O! now he is gasping, trembling, sighing dying,
and gives out life and all with heartbreaking despair: But now if the person
be upright, even the message of death may be welcome. If the Lord calls for me,
I may answer, here am I, O Lord, look upon me and accept of me in Christ: and
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee, in truth
and with a perfect heart; and have done that which is good in thy sight, I have
fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, I have finished my Course, etc. 2.
Tim. 4. 6, 7.

More particulars might be added. as,

7. uprightness begets conscience toward God, the upright has boldness, he
may freely make his prayer, and be sure to be heard, 1. John. 3. 21, 22.

8. It will hold out in evil times, Luke 8. 15. the fourth ground held out,
even in times of persecution, because the word was received into an honest
heart.

9. The upright person is sure of salvation, Psalm. 15. 1. Lord who shall dwell
in thy holy Hill? v. 2. he that walks uprightly, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Object. But all this will not strike into some hearts: whiles we suspect our
estate, we always deny our comfort: O says a person, I fear I am not
upright, and so this comfort belongs not to me.
I fear I am not upright, therefore all this goodly portion of sweet comfort
appertains not to me.

I Answer to this a word or too in the general.

Answered.
1. A man may be upright or hypocritical in a double respect, either first
Really, or secondly in opinion and fancy: If a man be Really an hypocrite,
though in his proud opinion and fancy he will think himself to be upright, I
say, to such a man that no one portion of that comfort before delivered,
belongs unto him: sound comfort was never (by God) laid up for a false heart.

Again a man may be really upright and yet have a false opinion of himself
that he is an hypocrite. It is thus with the best, that they oftimes both
suspect and falsely charge the true estate of their souls: a child in a
distemper may question the inheritance which is intailed on him: yet if the
heart be truly upright, all comfort is thy portion: as our distrustful fears
do not prejudice the reallity of the estate of grace, so our frequent
suspicions, do not cut us off from the title and right of promised comforts.

2. All prevalent disputes about our personal uprightness, they do hold off
the application and taste of comforts, though they do not disanuall the title
and right: even the good man will walk uncomfortable, so long as he concludes
and strongly fears that his estate is sinful; for sensible comfort rises or
falls, comes on or goes off, according to the strength of our judgment
and present apprehensions: It is not what indeed our estate is, but what we
judge of it, which breeds in us sensible comfort; or discomfort: a false heart
may (even) break with a timpany of foolish joy, upon an erring persuasion of
his estate; and so may a sound heart be very heavy and disconsolate, upon an
unsound misconstruction and judgeing of its true condition.

3. there are sometimes, which are very unapt, for an upright person to sit
upon his estate and to pass sentence: the best soul has diverse changes and
streits, sometimes it is clear and free, and able to see things as they are:
other times it may be boystrous and perplexed, and then it is apt to Judge of
it self by feelings, and new representations, not according to secret truth
and substance; remember one thing, times of conflict and aflictions and
temptation, are best for praying, and worst for ^udging: If a man will (at such
times) pass sentence on himself or estate as a judge, he will judge
uprighteous judgment, for then the soul is not it self, and is apt to take
Satan's works for its own p^oper accounts? yea, and then usually it will see
nothing, but what makes against it self.

In passions and temptations we neither see God aright nor our selves.

Fourthly, we must never stand to that judgment which we pass upon our inward
frame, which is Irrational or without sufficient ground? Look as we may appeal
from all the sentence of our judgment, which acts its self in time of
passion, as he did from Alexander to, Alexander, etc. so neither must we
vainly vex our hearts, and dash out our uprightness, when Simile.
this sentence is rather of imagination then of reason: when a man thinks, and
thinks that he is not upright, though all the evidences of uprightness
appear in him, and when he cannot produca any one inherently distinguishing
ground of an hypocrite in himself; why? this is but an imaginary judgment,
and utterly unreasonable, this is to condemn the innocent without cause.

That soul will never be settled with comfort which gives way to its one
imaginations: and has a conceit, that every sinful thought, or violent
temptation, or more durable conflict with an inward corruption, or frequent
distractions in holy duties, cannot stand with uprightness: where a man has
either no grounds at all, or those that he has are false, he should never
settle so on them, and yield and entertain them, as to question his estate for
them, or for them to shut off himself from comfort.

5. If ever we would decide our uprightness, and so take our parts in promised
comforts, we must follow the voice of the word, and subscribe to the sentence
of conscience following that word.

Be sure of this, that if the word will allow and warrant thy inward frame; If
it approves of it as sound, assuredly it is so; for that Rule cannot err, nor
is divine judgment (which is contained in the word) capable of falsehold or
deceit, actively or passively: If God says thy heart is right with him,
maintain it against all disputes whatsoever.

Yea, and if thy conscience enlightened, rectified and quickened by the word,
does acquit thee for upright, that now standing before the presence of the
eternal God and all knowing judge, it can say thus much for thee, that though
heretofore thou did love and allow thy self in sins, yet now thou hates all
sin, and there is no known way of wickedness; and that though heretofore thou
did shuffle and cut, dealst falsely in covenant, would not obey in all
things, but now thou have respect to all Gods commands, and all out of a
respect to Gods glory: I say thou art an upright person, though thy mis-giving
fancy or judgment may give up to the contrary.

But may some troubled and mis-giving heart reply, nay, it Diverse cases about
uprightness.
is not thus and thus with us; sure we are, that we are not upright, and the
grounds which make us thus to conclude, are not imaginary, but real; true it is
we do labor to abstain from 1. Case. Our abstinence from sin is out of fear
of judgments, and therefore I am not upright.
sin, but this is out of a fear to God judgments, and we confess that we
perform some or many duties, but these are done out of a fear of Hell: now
none of this can consist with uprightnesss, for as much as uprightness shuts
out all duty, out of a pure love to God, and not out of a base fear, which
may befall the vilest person, what think you? can the man be upright whose
services depend on fear.

This is a notable case, and craves a solemn resolution, toward Answered.
Somethings granted. All abstinence from sin is not an infallible testimony of
uprightness.
which observe two things.

1. Some things that must be granted, v. g.

1. That all abstinence from sin is not an infallible testimony of
uprightness, forasmuch as there may be many arguments which may be sufficient
to hold us in from the acting of sin, yet which are not effectual to strike of
the love of sin: shame of men, love of estimation, fear of death, the
accusation of a stinging conscience, defect of occasions, denial of
opportunities; may be cords to bind the hand, and yet not be plasters to
heal the heart: a man may deeply love that which he does seldom act: if his
abstinence from sin be grounded only on private respects, and not on a divine
command, and new nature, I say that such an abstinence may befall a man whose
heart is so far from uprightness, that it may be either grossly profane, or
basely hypocritical: Not so much the naked absence as the grounds and
immediate causes thereof, demostrate uprightness All doing of duty is not a
convincing argument of uprightness.
or hypocrisy.

2. This also must be granted, that all doing of duty is not a convincing or
immediate argument of uprightness. Uprightness is not so punctually decided by
matter as by manner: as he spoke of gifts which should be reputed virtuously
liberal, Non qua manu, sed qua mente. The quality of the mind consigned them
much rather, then the bounty of the hand: That may be safely affirmed of all
duties, not so much what is done, as how it is done, argues our uprightness:
Let never so much be done, out of base and sorded motives and ends, for by and
vain glorious respects, or merely servile reasons, without a voluntary and
dutiful affection, all the work, though much, though great, though frequent,
yet it does not infallibly assure and conclude uprightness Some things we must
be informed of.


Some things though we must be informed of, v. g. 3. things.

1. That all abstainings from sin, out of fear, or performing of duties from
it, do not necessarily conclude t^a^ a man is not upright? Nay, a man who is
upright, may abstain from the one, and perform the other without any check
or prejudice to his All abstaining from sin out of fear and doing duties from
it, concludes not against uprightness
uprightness.

Which I shall clear by these arguments.

1. If a man may be upright who in duties has an eye to the reward; then by
the same argument he may be upright, who in them has an eye to the punishment:
forasmuch as both these Proved.
are extrinsecall motives, and alike conclude for a respect to a man's self? But
a man may, be upright who yet in his duties v. g. Moses who was faithful in
all the house of God, Heb. 3. 2. (i.) very upright, had yet in his obedience a
respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26.

If persons, reputed in Scripture to be upright, have yet abstained from sin,
and perform duty out of fear: (and these acts of theirs have been approved)
then services done out of fear, may consist with uprightness. I confess that
all which has been done by upright persons, does not presently testify
uprightness, but that which has been done by them, and is rewarded by way of
approbation, that I say does not prejudice uprightness.

But the upright person in Scripture have abstained from sin and have performed
obedience out of fear, and this has been approved of, Ergo,

Job was an upright person by Gods own Testimony, cha. 1. 1. The man was
perfect and upright: yet the fear of Gods wrath kept Job from sin, see Job.
31. 1. I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid;
he durst not give way to wanton looks, nor unclean thoughts: why? what with
held him! see v. 3 Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment
to the workers of iniquity: q. d. this were the way to wrath and plagues, to
judgment and to Hell: So v. 21. He durst not lift up his hand against the
fatherless, (i.) wrong, oppress or defraud them, why? v. 23. For destruction
from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure,
Paul you will think that he was an upright person who did exercise himself to
have a conscience void of offense toward God and man; who had the Testimony of
his conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, he had his
conversation, yet was he the more diligent and the more conscionable in his
ministerial discharges out of fear, see 2. Cor. 4. 11. knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord, we persuaded men; (i.) we know that we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, and every one must receive according to
that he has done, whither good or bad? and it will be a terrible day to us: if
we be found careless and negligent, and we knowing this terror therefore we
persuade men.

3. Nay, a man cannot be upright in duties or services if he does them not out
of fear: The fear of God is the inward principle of them: It is that which God
requires, with uprightness: What does thy Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear him and to serve him with all thy heart and with all thy soul? Deuteronomy. 10.
12. Why? What is that fear of God, but an awefull regard to God, as when
Joseph forbore to sin against God out of a regard to his greatness, Genesis 39. 9.

4. Yea, Lastly let me add one thing more, viz. Jesus Christ requires nothing
of us which will prejudice uprightness, but he has willed us to fear him,
who has power to cast into hell, Luke 12. 5. yea, I say unto you fear him.

1. For my part, I know no more reason, why service done through fear, should
prejudice uprightness, then the services which are done through love; for
as much as the motive of my service in both is God immediately, but then in the
second place, observe

2. That there is a double abstaining from sin, and doing of duty There is a
double abstaining from sin, and doing duty out of fear.
out of fear.

One is single and absolute, when fear is all the reason or motive, as were
there not wrath, were there not punishment, were there not an hell, I would not
abstain from sin, I would not do any one duty, or act of obedience unto God?
Like an unwilling slave, who would break away, or would not put forth himself
in acts of service, were it not the mere fear of the lash Simile.
of the whip did force and awe him.

Another is mixed and compounded: when though a man does abstain and act out of
fear, yet not only principally out of fear; but also out of love commixt
with that fear: as a child who though he does forbear many things out of a
respect to his fathers power, and displeasure, yet withal he does cease them
out of a love to his fathers goodness, and kind affection; thus may it be
with a person who is upright, he may forbear sin, out of a fear of Gods
power, and justice, and displeasure: and yet withal out of a love to an holy
and gracious God and a father, for both of these may have their work in him
without Simile.
a prejudice one to another, or either to the temper of uprightness, Hosea. 3.
5. they shall fear the Lord and his goodness. The love of an upright man is
so pitched on Gods goodness, that withal it gives way to fear, to apprehend
his greatness, and yet the fear of his God is not so awed by greatness, but
withal love may come in to inflame the soul to make it either abstain, or
act out of a respect to Gods goodness. Therefore Paul, though he did persuade
men because he knew the terror of the Lord, yet was also exceedingly
industrious, because the love of Christ did constrain him, 2. Cor. 5. 11 14.
Both had an influence upon the Apostle, Terror and love, Simile.
judgment and mercy, as we read of the woman who departed from the sepulcher,
that it was with fear and joy, with the one and with the other: so may our
services come out, and our sins be held of both, out of love, and out of fear.
For these two are not opposite one to another, as grace and sin, but may mingle
together, as several ingredients in the same Physic.

Yet one word more must be added by way of distinction: that there is a twofold
fear: A twofold fear. Servile.


One is servile, which depends entirely on compelling arguments, without any
natural inclination or disposition of the person; The acts here are drawn
out, not from any aptness of the will or private approbation of the judgment,
nay these absolutely considered, sway and incline a man a quite contrary way,
contrary to the acts of abstaining o^ acting: if a man (who works only with
servil fear) might do what he liked, and might chose his own way and service,
he had rather A thousand times be at his sins, and lay aside his work of duty.

Now I said, if a man does abstain from sin, or act duty, merely out of a
servile fear, he is not upright, why? because in uprightness, the heart is
carried against sin, and the will is inclined to duty, both which are wanting,
where fear is only servile. Fillial.


Another is ingenious and filial, which is an enlarging fear, such a fear as
is not only not against the holy bent and inclination of the heart, but it is
likewise a furtherance an adiument, it is as it were a farther strength
imprinted into the Bowl which is rightly framed to run and draw with a true
by as? This fear does consist, with uprightness, and is necessary to every
good Christian, who ought to set up all the arguments which God is pleased to
propound to the soul, either to keep it off from sin, or to draw it out to
duty, yet so as love acts its part too.

Ob. But now there will fall in one scruple with all this, how How shall I know
my abstainings from sin, and acting duty springs out of naked fear, or a fear
commixt with love. Where they proceed out of mere fear.
may I know whither my abstainings from sin, or acting of duty, springs out of
naked fear, or else out of a fear commixt with love; And rather out of love,
then fear.

Sol. To resolve you in this (and let me tell you) this conduces much to the
discovery of uprightness; consider

1. That where they proceed out of naked and mere fear. Two Things.

1. There is a contrary annd full regreeting of the heart against There is a
contrary regreet of the heart against them.
them: the bent of the heart is otherwise set for all acts of mere fear, (I
speak of moral acts) are reputed, violent and involuntary: they arise from a
constraint, and all constraints urge out acts, which the nature, (if it were it
self) would not incline to; nay, the nature draws against, what it does, if
it does do any thing out of mere fear.

2. Acts depending upon naked and mere fear do cease, when Acts depending
upon fear cease when the motives of the fear cease.
the motives or causes of that fear do cease and are still? As the fable has
it of the frogs, that though naturally they are inclined to croke, yet when
Jupiter threw down the tree amongst them, they were all hushed, and silent, yet
at length seeing no harm to ensue; they set up their ugly note again; so
evil men, whose hearts are bent to sin may yet in the time of fear, draw in,
hold off from sinning, the beastly drunkard will not call for a cup to carouse,
nor the filthy wanton for his Queen to embrace, on his deathbed he fears the
flames of hell instantly to claspe him; But let the motives of fear cease,
why? he is as averse to that reformation which he professed, and he is as
facill and forward to that evil which he seemed to defy, as the water is to
fly out and run in its course, which has been for a while violently barred up
and stoped, As the Israelites who came off from sinning, and into obedience,
upon the mere call of the stroke either of the sword, or of the plague they did
start aside Like a broken bow, Psalm. 78. 57. they served under the rod, but
when that was off; they returned to the accustomed bent of sinning presently.

2. That where they proceed out of fear mixed with love, and Where they proceed
out of fear mixed with love. A man has an eye to divine glory more then to his
own safty.
rather out of love.

Four Things.

1. If love is mixed with fear in the obedience; there a man has an eye to
divine glory, as much if not more, then to his own safety? Where mere fear
prevails to the work, there it sati^fies the man, if he may after all, sleep
in a whole skin if he may be preserved, and be secure, what glory God may have
he cares not, nor minds it directly: But now, if service spring out of love to
God, here my safety, satisfies me not, I do aim at Gods glory, for I love him,
and love his praise, as on the contrary, where a man abstaines from sin out of
mere fear, he does it not, because else God shall have dishonor, dishonor to
God is not it, which prevails, but his own quiet and personal exemption from
pain, and wrath, and infamy, these only sway with him, and.

2. where love and fear concurres to set out the obedient acts, there
acceptance is propounded by the soul as well as recompense; it will not
suffice me that I shall have my pay, but it Acceptance is propounded by him as
well as recompense.
more affects me that God will be pleased to accept of me. This is a truth that
nothing but love will satisfy love: the love of acceptance, exceedingly
answers all the acts which come from the love of obedience: that I shall
decline vengeance by such duties, alas, that is not all, Nay, but I bend and
strive to find acceptance with my God and Father. love is the most predominant
cause.


3. Love is not only commixt with fear: but is a more predominant cause in
abstaining from sins, where the contrariety of the act to God swayes, and
works more upon the soul, then the contrariety of the punishment to the man:
what is that! that is the offense, by the vileness of sinning is far more
grievous to my soul then the sense of punishment for sinning, nay, when the
soul (in a free and able estate to judge) can utter from a sound conscience,
that were it to make its choices it had rather a thousand times submit to the
punishment of sin then to the acting of sin, verily, if such a person abstain
from sin, the abstaining is not out of mere fear, but out of love joined with
fear, nay, rather out of love then fear.

4. Lastly, much may be guessed by the strong and habitual Much may beguessed
by the act^ngs of soul in times of security and of perplextity.
actings of the soul, in times of security and in times of perplexity; when a
man dares not yet to break out to sin, when all his quiet, and full of
peace, but desires to keep ever lasting friendship with his God, and communion
with his God when a man will not fail in duty, though God fails in courtesy
(i.) seem to deal hardy and harshly with him, yet he will serve him, this
argues a predominancy of love in our obedience that case, in P^^l. 44. 18, 19.
I fear I am not upright because of my particular sining*


A Second case, in which a man may fear, that he is not upright, may be this,
viz. his particular sinnings, the case goes thus, uprightness is an even
carriage of the heart and life, and every sin is an unevenness in motion (it
is a wrinesse a crookedness, a derivation from the right rule and path,) yet
this is my condition says a person, and therefore just cause have I to
question whither I be upright or no? for the upright do no iniquity: Psalm. 119.
2. he walks according to the rule; he departs from sin; though the line may
be strait, which has many blurs, yet it cannot be so, which has many, or any
windings and turnings.

I will speak something to this case; And it is worth the while, to open unto
you; whither and in what respects, any How far any sinnings may consist with or
contradict the frame of uprightness. Particular sinnings may consist with a
gracious frame but not with a gracious condition.
sinnings may consist with, or else contradict the frame of uprightness? for
the assoyling of which observe the propositions, viz.

1. That particular sinnings are compatible with a gracious frame, though none
are with a glorious condition, Though no darkness, no clouds can be mixed with
the sun in heaven, yet both may be in the air which is enlightened below; our
best estate on earth is mixed, and not absolute: glory annihilates all sinful
principles, but grace only weakens them, an upright man, is an imperfect good
man, and has reason daily to bewail his failings, as well as cause to bless
God for his performances. You never read of any upright person in Scripture,
but you find some scarres on his ways, Like Jacob halting one time or other:
David, very good, yet not upright in the matter of Uriah, Noah, one that walked
with God, yet overtaken with excess of wine etc. Such twinklings do, and will
accompany the highest and fairest stars, as he who footes it best, may be
found sometimes all along; so the most even Christian may be surprised with
many unevennesses.

2. There are some kinds of sinning which do contradict uprightness: Some
kinds of sinning do contradict uprightness. There is a double uprightness.
give me leave briefly to distinguish.

There is a double uprightness.

One is habitual, which is the constant frame of the heart, and the general
course of the life, bent, and inclination to God in duty, and for God against
all sin.

Another is actual, which is the even carriage of the heart or life, in
respect of this or that particular act or motion.

There are two sorts of sinning.

Some are particular, and by way of fact, when this or There are two sorts of
sinning
that fact, is inconsonant to the rule, and by it condemned.

Others are General, and by way of course, when the frame and tenor of the
life, is either notoriously vile or in some private path of wickedness
constantly drawn out and followed.

Out of these distinctions, observe these particular conclusions, viz.

1. That particular sinnings, or sinnings in respect of particular The
distinctions applied.
fact, though they cannot stand with actual uprightness, yet they may consist
with habitual uprightness: Look as tripping or falling, though they be
opposite to standing or moving on, in the particular, yet they are not so
opposite to the course of motion in a journey, that a man by reason of them,
should be said not to be going on in his journey. Or Look as every particular
stain, does not blemish the universal finenesse of the cloth, so neither does
this or that particular fact disprove and deny the general bent of the heart:
particulars may not decide the estate either way: it is true a man by a
particular sinning is denominated guilty, but by no one particular, can a man's
estate be challenged either for good and bad, Asa in some particulars, was very
faulty (as you heard heretofore) yet the scripture says, he was perfect all
his days: and David? though some grievous sins fell from him which did not
stand with actual uprightness (hence that clause, except the matter of Uriah)
yet his epitaph is written by God himself from the general bent of his heart
and course, that he walked before him with an upright heart.

2. That Courses of sin, known and allowed courses, do directly contradict
uprightness, you must distinguish twixt frequently temptations, and daily
inclinations, and twixt courses of sin: even the most upright heart may be
frequently assaulted by Satan, and daily molested with inward corruption
tempting and entising, but all this may be with resistance, detestation, sorrow
and grief, so that the heart may be very upright, notwithstanding all these
disquietments;

But if the heart has a way of wickedness; if it has a path of sinning, in
which it will walk assuredly, such kinds infallibly testify, that the heart
is false and not upright.

He who knows sin, and yet will sin, he that does sin and allows himself in
sinning, whither the kind of sinning be single, or multiplied, one or many, as
the Prophet spoke of the proud man, Hab. 2. that I say of this man, his heart
is not upright in him.

There be two things which show great rottenness of heart.

One when any sin has our warrant sealed with secret allowance.

Another when we drive on the sin with a customary trade and continuances. It
may befall the most upright heart, as it does the pest metal blade, it may be
made to bow and bend, yet there it stands not, but returns to its straitness
again, so even an upright person may step into an uneven path, but there he
walks not, he quickly returns to the Kings highway, into the ways of
obedience and righteousness, but it is with a base heart, as it is with base
metal, it will easily bow, and steadfastly keep its crooked figure; the bias
draws that way, the heart is set on sin and regardes it, does sin, and allows
it, will sin and loves it. Now this is an infallible sign of a false and
hypocritical heart, that it regards any known iniquity; as David spoke Psalm.
66. 28. or that it has a wickedness, as he spoke Psalm. 139. 24. Doubts from
inequalities in holy service.


A third case in which a man may fear his uprightness may be some
inequalities about holy services, it goes thus, sometimes a man finds his
heart much enlarged in duties, yet other times, much contracted and straightened:
sometimes he is full of life and quick affections, yet other times, he feels
no active or lively disposition, he can find no mind or heart almost,
insomuch that either he can do little or nothing, and what is done by him, is
but done; all cheerfulness and quickness seems to fall off, like the green
leaves from the tree: so that nothing, but a mere naked carcass of duty is
acted by him.

Now the case is, whither a man may be reputed upright who many times finds
himself thus in his services.

This is A case which ordinarily does perplex many a good heart, how cunning is
Satan still to vex the soul if he can prevail with us to omit duty, why?
then thou art plainly wicked, if the soul be less free and compliant in the
duty, why? then it is secretly hypocritical, thus he insnares us, but to the
resolution of the case thus, Answered. All inequality in holy service concludes
not against uprightness.


First, all inequalities in holy services, do not conclude, that a man is not
upright. Look as the natural life has many spaces, and as it were degrees of
latitude, a man may be able to run, and yet sometimes be scarce able to go,
these motions (you will say) are unequal, nevertheless the man lives, both
under the one and under the other, so may it be with the spiritual life, for it
has also its different and unequal spaces, sometimes a man may do his
services all in Joy, other times all in tears, sometimes his will is great and
performances answerable, other times his will is disposed, but he cannot act in
any proportion, yet his heart lives uprightly in either.

Nevertheless we must distinguish of inequalities in holy services, Dinguish
of inequalities.
there are two sorts of them.

Some arise from weakness of strength.
Others arise from falsenesse of heart.
You see a man sometimes able to move a weight of an hundred pounds, at another
time he is scarce able to lift a From weaknese of strength.
walk-ingstaffe, why? because his strength is failed, and then no marvel that
his actions vary: so it may be with an upright man, God is pleased sometimes to
afford unto him a strong degree of heavenly assistance, he clears his judgment,
inables his faith to apprehend and discern, quickens his affections, restrains
Satan, puts down the force of the inward contrarieties, why? at such a time
the soul is mightily active in the power of received and conferred strength.
At another time the wind slackes, and then no marvel the ship does not post
so fast, the spirit blows when, and where, and how he lists, there is not
always such a communication of actual strength, and then our desires may be
great, but our performances will be unequal: And this observe by the way, that
if the inequality depend only on weakness of strength, there the heart still
keeps its bent, nay, is most inwardly stirring in desires and propensions,
though it be not able to do the good that it would.

But there are also inequalities which arise from falseness of From falseness
of heart.
heart; As when a man has an Ague, which infects his humor or spirits, or
both, he has one good day, and another bad day; or as it is with a land-flood,
this hour posting in with such an high speed, as if it would domineer over all
the County, and yet by and by it spends away it self, there is no more of it to
be seen: so it may be with a man whose heart is false to God: it may be with
him thus, he may have his moods, his starts, one while like those, accompanying
Christ, and magnifying him with an Hosanna in the highest; another while quite
turned, and crying out, Crucisie, Crucify him: So here one day, or week, who
but God, and what but duty, not a Sermon missed, not a prayer neglected; yet on
a sudden slow to hear, careless to pray, indifferent to any holy performance.
When inequalities arise from falseness of heart.


Now if the inequality arise from the falseness of heart (and I pray you to
observe this) that it is ordinarily in three cases.

1. When the performance was attempted merely to compass some outward good; a
very Hypocrite may take much pains for his own ends of honor, profit,
pleasure, etc.

2. When the performance was attempted merely to remove some inward or outward
evil, as pangs of conscience within, or shame and censure without.

3. When the old lust is returned to new strength, the bitterness of death is
off, or the like; and now the heart returns to its former haunt and natural
bent, to the love and practice of such, or such a sin, which will easily beget
and declare an inequality There are two sorts of inequalities about holy duties.
in duties: for love and practice of sin, will either make all duty to cease,
or any method of duty to stagger and change.

2. Observe that there are two sorts of inequalities about holy services.

Some respect the Will, and Actum elicitum, as the Schoolmen speak, the first
springings of it, its secret inclinings and motions.

Others respect the Exercise or Fact, and Actum imperatum, as they call it;
from these I infer two conclusions, viz.

1. That inequalities of holy services, in respect of the exercise or fact, may
consist with uprightness, v. g. A man one day may The inequalities of holy
services in respect of the exercise, may consist with uprightness.
be able to find words more readily and abundantly in prayer, and livelihood
in his affections, then at another time, and yet be truly upright: Look as a
Preacher may be able to study, and to preach one day better then another; and a
Tradseman to follow his particular Calling; yet both the one and the other, be
truly upright in their particular Calling; so I say of the expressed and
external acts which respect the course of our general Callings, etc

2. That intrinsecal inequalities, those in the will and purposes Inequalities
in the Will and purposes thereof, argue defect of uprightness.
thereof, argues defect of uprightness; When a man's will is one while strongly
purposed for duty, and by and by it is totally bent and set for sin, here the
inequality does depend upon the division of the heart, which is Hypocrisy and
falseness.

3. Cheerfulness or uncheerfulness in the performance of duties, Cheerfulness
or uncheerfulness in duties, are not infallible symptoms etiher way.
are not infallible symptoms either way. By Cheerfulness I mean the liberty or
freedom of the spirits; and by uncheerfulness the sadness, heaviness or dullness
of them. As it may be a day, though the sun shine not; nay, as the sun does
keep on its natural course and motion under the Ecliptic line still, whether
you see the cheerful body of it or no: so a person may pass on from duty to
duty with all affectionate uprightness, though there be an habitual cloud of
sad spirits still seemingly wrapping up all his performances.

I think, that we do not distinguish always aright, and therefore perplex our
hearts, there is a difference twixt Affections in Duties, and Cheerfulness in
Duties; as much difference as twixt life and livelihood, twixt burning and
flaming. A brand may be red hot, and burn to purpose, and yet not flame at all:
so a man may bring living affections to his services, he may present them, and
offer them out of the dearest love to God, and truest respect to his honor,
who yet may not feel any such sparkling and flaming inlargements of his spirits
in the times of disgrace of such services. Defect of affections is one thing;
of livelihood and cheerfulness, that is another thing: If I serve God without
any degree of affection, then I am not upright; but I may, and do oft-times
serve him without cheerfulness, with much dullness and heaviness resting upon my
spirits, and yet may be upright. For uncheerfulness does not necessarily, and
absolutely, and only arise from want of grace; It may entirely depend upon
natural causes: A man's natural temper may be sad and melancholic,

4. Though cheerfulness does not always accompany our Duties, Though
cheerfulness does not always accompany our duties, yet uprightness may be
evinced by other things.
yet uprightness may he evinced by these things.

By being humbled that we cannot serve with that livelihood, as we do desire.

By mantaining the services even ont of a respect to God, I will yet serve him;
though I find reasons to humble me, yet I will not, to keep me off from Duties:
though I do want spirit yet I do find an heart to pray, and to read, etc. If I
cannot serve God with smiles, yet I will with tears: If my body will not carry
my soul to duty, yet my soul shall hale my body unto it.

By bringing in the present measure of strength: so much as I can do, Lord, I
do now unto thee; if I were able to utter more, or better, or longer, why, thou
should have it.

When I am humbled that I can do no better, and when I strive to exceed my
self, when I will serve God for Gods-sake, and do not willingly withold my
strength, and yet present all in the name of Christ for acceptance, this is
uprightness, though the looks and spirits may be heavy and clouded, etc.

4. Whether all self-love does contradict uprightness; As suppose Case 4.
a person does act his duties out of a regard to himself, Doubts of uprightness
from self-love.
whereas uprightness seems rather to set up all work with a single respect to
Gods Glory.

Sol. I will not insist much on this; only observe a few particulars, viz.
Answered. God has implanted self-love in every man.


Answ. 1. Self-love (naturally considered) is an inbred quality by which a man
affects his own good and benefit, this God has implanted in every man, to
desire and work for his own safety; the first care and respect should be for
God, the next for our selves, and the rest for others.

2. Self-love, as it is natural, (so absolutely considered) Self-love
absolutely considered, is very lawful.
it is very lawful. He that said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, said also, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: if as our
selves, then is it lawful to love our selves; yea, and the Apostle says, no
man ever yet hated his own flesh, and advises every man to love his wife even
as himself, Ephe. 5. 29, 33. Duties may lawfully be discharged out of self-love.


Duties may lawfully be discharged out of a self-love. A man may (in their
discharge) have a lawful respect unto himself, (i.) he may regard his own
comfort, and peace, and mercy, and happiness: as thus, now I may lawfully apply
my self to the hearing of the word, to reading, to praying, to a very careful
walking with God, because I would preserve the peace of my conscience, because
I would keep up my comfortable interviews of Gods loving kindness, because I
would be saved and eternally blessed: A man may lawfully aim at comfort and
salvation in his duties, this does no way contradict or disanul uprightness.
Forasmuch as God propounds these things in his Word (which is our rule of doing
and working) as motives to set us on to our labor, Be abounding in the work of
the Lord (says the Apostle) forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see
God; Mat 5. 8. Blessed are you when men speak all manner of evil of you, ver.
11. For great is your reward in heaven. Verse 12. He that continues to the end,
shall be saved. Repent that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. And will
render to every man according to his works, to them who by patient continuance
in well-doing, seek for glory and honor, and immortality, eternal life, Romans
2. 6. 7. Whatsoever God propounds as a motive to Duty, and whatsoever God
promises as an encouragement or reward, on that the soul may most lawfully fix
the eye. What does the Apostle press the Philippians to mutual love and accord,
by the consolations of Christ, by the comfort of the spirit, Phil. 2. Why does
he press the Romans to the service of righteousness, by the assurance of
eternal life? Romans 6. If that to cast an eye on these were unlawful, or that a
man could not be upright who did so.

Nay, Verily not only that which God has propounded, and that which God has
promised, but that which I may pray for, on that I may cast an eye. Now may not
the upright person pray for peace and quiet of conscience? May he not pray for
the joy and comfort of Gods Spirit? May he nor pray for the salvation of his
soul? Nay, that which another good man may pray for me, may I not pray for that
my self? Now says Paul, My hearts desire to God for Israel, is that they may
be saved.

Why? It is granted by us all, and it is practiced by us all, that we desire
heaven; and what is it to desire heaven, but to desire salvation? and whar is
it to desire salvation, but to desire a real, and glorious, and blessed, and
eternal union with God? and what greater good can a man desire to, or for
himself, then this? There is a twofold self-love of subordination-


4. But then in the last place, there is a twofold self-love.

One Subordination, wherein my aim is first and most to Gods Glory: to my self
indeed there is a respect, but not first of all: not most of all, not only to
my self such a self-love in the discharge of Duties, is very lawful, and the
upright have it.

Another of Competition, wherein I regard not the glory of Of competition.
God; I mind it not, or else I respect my self more then it: so that all may be
hushed up, so that I might have joy, and heaven, and escape Hell; I care not
for the glory of God, I would not do duty, but to preserve my self: Such a self
love as this, is opposite to uprightness; for though God gives us leave to mind
and respect our selves, yet he commands us first, and most to respect and aim
at his glory. Doubts of uprightness from self-applause or vasn-glory.


Whether all self-applause, and vain glory, be incompatible with uprightness?

Sol. I shall briefly assoyle this Inquiry.

1. Selfe-applause is the magnifying of our selves for duties Self-applause
what it is.
happily performed; It is a kind of adoration and admiration of our selves by
higher opinions of our selves, or thoughts also, that no others will highly
imagine of us, and admire the eminency of our parts, and gifts, and quick
abilities, and enlarged affections.

Now this I say, that though a man may be lawfully enlarged with joy and
thankfulness to God, who has graciously assisted and enlarged him in the
performance of duties, and his spirit thereupon may be the more cleared. Yet
self-applause is naught, and opposite to uprightness; it is nothing else but a
forgetfulness of our God, and of his strength, and of his grace, by which we
did his service; It does not spring from humble uprightness. but from a proud
conceitedness; and is the After-clap of Satan, and our sinful hearts, which
kick down, and undo that work which otherwise had been very well done.

2. Again, Vain glory is the setting forth of our selves in duty, Vain glory
what it is.
it is the using of our Masters coin for the servants benefit: When a man does
hear, or preach, or pray, or give alms, only or principally to be seen, to be
esteemed, to be spoken of, his own credit is the end of his work. This is a
manifest fruit of Hypocrisy, Christ has delivered it fully in Mat. 6. Look as
he plays the Hypocrite, who does some good, but yet will will not do all duty,
and who does much duty, but loves some sin; so likewise he plays the
Hypocrite, that does all duty, merely to advance and trumpet out his own name,
and estimation, and glory. Self-applause is a subsequent Hypocrisy which
follows the work; Vainglory is an Antecedent Hypocrisy Distinguish of
self-applause and vain glory.
which moves us to the work.

3. Nevertheless, you must distinguish of self-applause and vainglory, that
they are either,

1. Naked Acts or Motions. 2. Habitual qualities or Dispositions.
Even the most upright person may find them in respect of motion, but the
Hypocrite has them in respect of disposition. In the one they arise up as
temptation, for it is a most difficult thing, totally to be rid of our selves,
either before, or in, or after Duties. In the other they rise up as natural
affections; the one feeds on them as on meat; the other is troubled with them
as with poison: they break the heart of the one with pride, of the other, with
sorrow and humbling: In the one, they are approbations; in the the other, they
are vexations: In an Hypocrite they are like the wind which fills the sails; In
an upright person they are like the wind which troubles the stomach. The Duties
done by an Hypocrite, are like glasses made and blown up, only by breath: the
Applause of men breaths strongly upon his affections to set out his services.
But it is with an uptight person in this case, as with a leaf on a tree, a
little breathing of the air makes it to tremble: An upright person is afraid of
his own high opinion, or the commendation of others; He can be highly glad when
the honor is cast on God; and if any after-risings begin to grow for former
Duties, he is not well, till he has cast them down, by after-humblings. The
upright person is much with God before duty, and all for God after it: He takes
all the strength of Action out of Gods hand, and therefore would not finger the
least scruple of praise: He looks on inward applause as a cross, and on
public as a danger: In the one I hate my self, in the other I fear my self.

Object. It is lawful (I confess) to know what God has given us, and to
acknowledge the good which he has done in us, or by us, how else can we be
thankful?

Sol. But then, it is necessary to make him the end, whom we acknowledge to be
the cause; to give unto God the glory who has given to us the strength.

No more to this case, but this, beg for much grace to do duty, and when you
have done it, beg for much strength to give God the glory of it: An Hypocrite
is made up of himself and men; but the upright person is made only by God, and
for him.

SECT. V.
A Third use of the Doctrine shall be to stir us up to get Uprightness, and to
keep it, there are two things which Labor to get uprightness, and keep it.
here offer themselves, viz.

1. Motives to persuade us. 2. Means to direct and help us.
1. For the first of these, what shall I say? how shall I persuade! If all the
Arguments of heaven, or earth, might be available, I have them at hand to
present them unto you, to Motives.
excite your hearts to this labor: If there be any regard of a God, of a
Christ, of your souls, of your comforts here, of your happiness hereafter, then
think of Uprightness, content not your selves till you have it, Why?

1. God regards you not, if you be not upright: his eyes are upon the truth,
and he will be worshipped in spirit and truth; thousands God regards you not,
if not upright.
of Rams and rivers of oil, daily oblations, solemn humblings, cryings and
callings, he cannot away with them, he hides his face from them, if the heart
under these be false and doubting.

The Word of God condemns you; if you be not upright, it will not acquit you;
if you have Lamps without oil, a form of godliness without the power thereof,
though you make many prayers, though long prayers, though you give much alms,
yet if your hearts be not upright in these, the Word will condemn you for
Hypocrites, and will give you your portion, with them who shall have the
greater damnation.

Your conscience will secretly reproach and vex you in the day of your
calamity; when any judgment hangs over thy head, or any affliction comes near
unto thee, then will thy conscience rise up, and gall and wound thee for thy
close unevennesses and hypocritical practices of sin against thy better
profession of holy walking. What the Prophet spoke of the unjust gainer, He
gets riches, and not by right, he shall leave them in the midst of his days,
and at the end he shall be a fool: That say I of the Hypocrite, he heaps up
duty upon duty, works upon works, but the day of trial comes, and then he shall
appear to be a fool. Ah, vain man! to think there is not a day for the
discovery of secrets, or that there is not a God who searches the hearts and
reins, who greedily hunts after the applause and credit of men, and declines
the approbation of the great Judge. O when thy accounts are to be presented and
given up before the tribunal seat of the holy, and true, and terrible God; and
thou shall then say, O Lord, all the outward good I did, I did it only to get
my self a name; all the services of Religion, I labored in them only that men
might think well of me: some of thy precepts I did like, but others I did not
care for, because they thwarted my ends; much good I did, but it was only to
cloak and cover the much secret evil which I did love, and in which I did walk:
so many years I lived, and kept company with Christians, against whose
powerful practice of holiness my heart did rise; many a time did their
heavenly discourses find out and condemn my private lust, yet I bleared their
eyes, I yet wrested with my conscience, I would not yet leave all my sins, and
now woe is me! thou do love truth in the inward parts, this I knew, yet I
played the hypocrite. Nay, if more may be added, then take this, the Lord God
after death will shut the door against such foolish persons who content
themselves with lamps without oil, and do cry, Lord, Lord, have we not
preached, etc. and heard thee in our streets, and yet were workers of iniquity.
Look as the Lord takes notice of a man's Hypocrisy now, (so this people draws
near unto me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me) so he will take
notice of the Hypocrite hereafter, not only to shut heaven against him, but to
cast him into everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. so then, methinks, here were
motives enough to stir us up to be upright, because else the Lord regards us
not, neither persons, nor works; yea, his Word condemns us, and our consciences
do condemn us; we walk under a sentence, and shall die under a curse, and God
will be against us too in Judgment, he will not know us, but abominate us from
his presence.

2. But then if you consider on the other side, How acceptable Uprightness is
very acceptable unto God.
a thing uprightness is to God, what delight he takes in such-persons, how his
Covenant is with them, and what infinite promises are their Treasuries, how God
will hear their prayers, accept of their person, pass over their weaknesses,
increase their blessings, establish their comforts; what defenses, and secret,
and strong, and comfortable acquittances Uprightness breeds in the conscience!
what considence it gives in our accesses to God, what solace under all our
crosses! what peace, and quietness, and strength, notwithstanding all contrary
suggestions! what boldness in death, what grounds to Implead with God! what a
certainty of acceptance now, and truest Glory hereafter! O how might these
things work upon our hearts, to labor to be upright, etc.

Object. But you will say now, why, what may we do to get uprightness, and to
maintain it?

Sol. Now we come to the means of uprightness, for which Means.
take these particulars into your consideration;

1. Directions for the getting of it. 2. Directions for the preserving of it.
3. Some other considerations and meditations: for the Directions to get
uprightness of heart. Go to God for it.
first, I commend these things unto you.
1. If ever you would have upright hearts, you must then go to God for them.
Hypocrisy is a natural weed, we need not go beyond our selves to find a cause
of it: even a Child is able to frame actions to the eye of others: but
uprightness is a flower of heaven: only that God who can make new, is able to
make the heart upright. I pray you to consider that all the holy qualities and
tempets of the new Covenant, come from no other spring then Gods grace; none
can bestow them but God, and he can do it. Now the upright heart is a spring of
the Covenant, Jer. 31. 39. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they
may fear me for ever. Is there here a person this day who is sensible of the
guile of his spirit, of the hypocrisy in his heart, that he cannot be so for
God as he should, that he is uneven, and oft-times crooked in his walkings?
why? go to God! pray with David, Psalm 51. 1. O create in me a clean heart, O
Lord, and renew a right spirit within me.

But you will say, may an hypocrite come to God, will God regard him though he
calls upon him, will he not shut out his prayers; will he hear the prayer of
him who regards sin in his heart.

I Answer.

Sol. It matters not how much hypocrisy has been hatched within thee. and
acted by thee heretofore, If now thou come to be sensible of thy hypocrisy
and to condemn it, and to bewail it, and to abhor it, if former hypocrisy be
now come to hearty conflict, though be giving out into many thoughts of self
and base ends, yet be not dismayed, go to God, he can subdue it, and he can
take out that guile of thy spirit, and he can fashion a straitness and
rightnesse of heavenly frame within thee; he is able to make good whatsoever he
has promised.

Secondly if you would find uprightness in you, then get an Get a predominat
love of God and his ways.
exceeding and predominate love of God, and his ways: Love is of great force
and influence to a man's ways and actions, it is like the Rudder which does
master the ship in the motion, it can turn and wind it any way; so does love
prevail with the soul: it has a command over it, about a man's ways and
actions; if a man had a strong love of God, if he did heartily, and with great
affections, incline and strive for God, for his glory, for his truth, this
would prevail with him to be upright, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. the love of God is put in
as a means to walk in all his ways, and to serve him with all our hearts.

The want of uprightness, comes from the want of love; as the falsnesse of a
woman to her husband, grows upon want of conjugall love: it is the love of the
world which draws a man so often aside, which makes him off and on, and it is
the love of sin, which makes a man so hypocritical.

If a man could love God above all, he would delight to walk with him, he would
be careful to please him, fearful to offend him, ready to obey him, would be
kept in for God, he would not make so many strayings, he would mind Gods glory
more.

Thirdly get to hate sin, A secret love of sin (after all restraints and
pauses) will draw the soul aside, It will (like a covered Get to hate sin.
disease) break out again.

There are three things in hatred which contribute to uprightness.

1. It is an inward aversation: the very heart is drawn off from an object,
and the heart is filled with a loathing and a detestation of the evil: not the
tongue and looks only, but the very inclination of the will is turned aside.

2. It is universal, for hatred is of the kind: the will in the whole
latitude of it, is the object of hatred, I hate every false way, said David,
Psalm. 119.

3. It is permanent and durable: passion is a storm which will quickly off,
but hatred is a settled quality, arguments allay it not, nor does time remove
it: what have I to do any more with Idols, said Ephraim, Hosea. 14. 8. They
shall defile their coverings, and say unto them get thee hence, Esa. 30. 22. So
that if a man could get the hatred of sin, he should quickly find an even
uprightness.

The cause why a man is not even in his walking, is either because,

1. His heart is not bent against sin, but gives a delightful way unto it, it
does not resist and loath it, but harbors and favors it.

2. Some one particular lust winnes and gains upon the soul; though some are
unacted, yet one special lust is retained which has power to command and rule
the life.

3. He is carried against sin upon mutable, and decaying grounds, which being
removed, the heart then returns to its proper and natural bent.

But now if spiritual hatred of sin were implanted, then the combat twixt
sin, and the person would be inward, the very heart would loath the nature and
inclinations of it, and it would be universal and constant, so that here would
arise a general evennesse in a man's coversation. Unevenness though it appear
without, yet it begins within the heart, is the maine wheel of a man's course,
and therefore if love gets the heart for God, and hatred rules the heart
against sin, you may very well believe that these two will yield out a very
upright endeavor and course of holiness. In spirituals, that which keeps the
fountain, does keep the stream, and that which betters the heart, does
likewise well order the life.

2. For the second which respect the preserving means, take Directions for
preserving it.
these directions.

1. First if you would preserve uprightness, you must preserve Preserving a^
holy fear of God.
an holy fear of God; you know the promise, I will put my fear into their
hearts, and they shall not depart from me, Jere. 32.

Sinning is the only departing from God, He never leaves us but for sin, our
departing is our unevenness, and we never leave him but by sin, and our
unupright walkings; but that now which keeps us from departing, is fear? The
fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death,
Prove. 24. 27. If a man could always keep an awful and powerful regard to God:
that he stood in awe of his attributes, and of his word, he would keep plain
with God, he would not transgress for a morsel, nor think that it may be safe
for him to sin.

An Holy fear of God has these two Properties.

1. It puts the soul and actions, in Gods presence, one says that God is all
eye to see every thing, and all ear to hear every thing, so does holy fear
represent God, as one who is now beholding all that I do, and as one who
understands my thoughts afar off, from whom no not the whisperings of the
mind; nor the imaginations of my heart, nor the closest, and most secret
actings can be concealed. Its stands in awe of this all discovering God, how
can I do this great wickedness and sin against God, said Joseph, when there
were none but he and his mistress and his God together, Genesis 39. 9. I fear
his justice, that it will break out upon me, if I should dare to sin; and I
fear his mercy, that it will draw off, if I presume to offend, Psalm. 4. 4.
Stand in awe and sin not, Psalm. 119. 161. Princes also have persecuted me
without a cause, Why? this might stir up strange qualities in David, O no)
but my heart stands in awe of thy word, q. d. I dirst not break out to sin
for all that; thy word which I feared kept me in.

2. Faith breeds and preserves uprightness and evennesse, I ^aith preserves
uprightness.
remember the Apostles caution, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed, brethren, least their be
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God:
unbelief it is the root of all hypocrisy and appostacy that men are but half
in duties, it is because they do not (indeed) believe the extent of obedience
to God; and that they keep some private lust, it is because they do not
(indeed) believe the truth of Gods justice, and power, and wrath. But says
causes evennesse, forasmuch

1. As it sets up prevailing argu^ents, the soul never doubts in the way, but
by the strength of false arguments, either false pleasures, or false profits is
forcible with the heart, and insnares it; we step aside always by the cunning
of error. But faith not only discovers false inducements, but also bringes
better and stronger motives, it knows and teaches where the soul will be at
a loss, and holds it off by the goodness, and kindness, and loving favor of
God: who would venture his comfortable aspect of God, and sweet communion with
Christ, for a morsel of stolen bread, or for one draught of unlawful pleasure?

2. It constraines the heart to singular love of God and Christ: the more faith
the more love: all true faith is inflaming, for it sees and feels much love,
and therefore kindles much; now much love raises much evennesse in walking,
whiles the love is kept up close to God, the heart and life ordinarily are kept
in an upright motion: for all true love is tender and careful, and pleasing.

3. It purifies the heart: Faith is like fire, which has one quality to ascend
and another to burn: so faith it negotiates for us at heaven, and likewise it
breeds more intrinsecall renovation of the heart by holiness: faith is the
best friend to our graces, the surest help to our affections, the strongest
prop to our duties, and the sorest enemy to our sins: No grace does so much
for the heart as faith, our assistance for good and our resistance of evil
depends most on it, we find experimentally, that many sins then break out
when we loose the sight of God: as long as we can eye God, the soul is safe;
see God in his promises, see God in his precepts, and see him in his
Threatenings, and then we hold up and go on: but if once we lose him in the
sight of his promises, then impatience and murmuring, and discontents, and
unlawful projects, and ways appear in the heart and life, so also if we lose
him in the sight of his precepts, which guide and bind, Now loosnesse, and
carelessness, and indifferency appears: and lose him in the sight of his
threatenings, now pride and presumption and other bold adventurings appear. But
if we could by faith see him who is invisible, if we could see the goodness
and fidelity and immutability of his promises for all kind of good supplies
and if we could see the power, and authority, and equity of all his precepts,
respecting our actions and ways, and if one could behold the justice and terror
of the Lord by faith in all his threatenings: O how might the soul be bounded
and kept! like a river twixt its banks in a constant and sweet course of even
and upright walking.

3. If you would preserve uprightness, then you must get and Get and preserve
humbleness of heart.
pr^serve humbleness of spirit, Remember this, that the humble Christian
receives most good, and lives best. The slow hands writes the fairest copy; and
the low valley, of all the parts of the earth is most yearly fruitful:
Highness of spirit and much unevenness, ordinarily keep company.

There are three properties in humbleness, which show that Simile.
it much conduces to uprightness.

One that it is much with God: hence we read of the cries of the humble, and
the desires of the heart; the humble soul is like the weak Ivy which clinges
about the strong oak, so it is much with a mighty God; you shall seldom find
the humble person without a tear in his eye, a complaint in his tongue, a
prayer in his heart, either you find him upon his feet standing, to hear what
God will say, or upon his knee, craving what God will give.

2. Another, that it ha^h much from God: There be high mountains which be
above all clouds; the proud heart is most empty, because most lofty, but God
gives grace unto the humble, Jam. 4. the poor beggar gets the alms, and the
low valley gets the showers; and the humble heart the grace of God; and that
both preventing grace which makes good an assisting grace with holds on in
good, thou have hard the desire of the humble.

3. A third, that it does all for God: there are two things which the humble
person does most eye.

One is Gods rule, another is Gods glory, as a good servant who takes commandes
from his masters mouth, and lays out himself for his masters advantage: All
is from him, and by him, and therefore all must be to him, says the humble
heart.

Now all these conduce directly to uprightness, he is best in walking with
God, who is most in calling up on God; prayer being like the firm and solid
ground which enables the feet to stand best. And God is near to the humble: the
weak child is preserved from most falls, which is held by the hand of the
mother, or carried in the bosom of the Nurse: Where divine strength is most
communicated, there the life is most uniformly ordered: and then humbleness
refers all to Gods glory, it puts the cause of gift upon him, and the honor of
their use, which is directly opposite to Hypocrisy; therefore labor to be
humble, get to be sensible of your selves, both for naturals, and also
spirituals; in the one, see your vileness; in the other, your emptiness, etc.

Fourthly, If you would get and preserve uprightness, then Get your hearts to
be crucified to the world.
get your hearts to be crucified to the world. Hypocrisy and worldliness are
seldom far asunder; It is rare to find an Hypocrite, but he is one, who is
either strongly ambitious of honor, or greedily desirous of Riches: search the
Scrriptures, and you shall find it so, and very clearly in the Pharisees. Now
when the heart is set upon the world, it is easily drawn aside; it will ever
and anon be uneven: the bowl which has a bias cannot run long in a strait
line. They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, etc. For the love of money is the root of all evil,
2 Timothy 6. 9, 10. A thing of naught turns aside the heart which is worldly: the
look of a man, the hope of a nod, a change of garments, a morsel of bread, a
meals meat, a few pieces of silver, all of these are to a worldly hearr, like
the wind to the ship which turned the sails round about. Therefore take heed
of the world; most of our uneven carriages arise from want of faith to exalt
God, and from the enthraling of our hearts to the world, we are under either
the discouragements of the world, and the fear of them make us to step awry, or
else the encouragements of it, and the hope, and love of them makes us to omit
duties, or put out our hearts to wickedness. The sear of man, and the too high
account of carnal power, and too much love of our selves, and the world are
sore enemies to uprightness of heart or life; he who will know no Lord but
Christ, and no safety like that of God, and no good like that which is
heavenly, his spirit is sound, and his life will be upright.

3. Now to all that has been said, let me add a few daily meditations, which
may be of great force to keep us in upright walking. Considerations to keep us
upright. God searches the heart, and beholds our ways.


Four considerations more.

1. One, that God searches my heart, and still looks upon my ways. Whether
shall I go from thy presence, said David, Psalm 139. And all things are naked,
and open to him, with whom we have to deal, said the Apostle, Heb. 4. There can
be no action hid from an all-seeing eye. Nor can the ground, and motives, and
ends of our actions be secret to him who searches the heart and reins, and
understands our thoughts a far off: we may blind the eyes of men, but we cannot
delude the eye of God. The Lord sees me in the dark, and my private courses
are as obvious to him, as the mountain to the sun at noonday; what way I take
he well observes, and which way my heart runs, what it favors, and what it
dislikes; what I do, and what end I have in all my doings, and what principles
and rules sway within the chambers of my breast: This daily meditation may be
of force to look both to the matter of our doings, and to the manner; and so
incline us to upright walking.

2. Another, That I must one day appear before God, and then I must one day
appear before God, and then all my secrets will be disclosed.
all secrets shall be disclosed. The upright man may be shaddowed out by an
heart in a clear glass, through which any one may see the pulse and motion of
it.

But this is sure, that however in this life, our actions and ways may be
wrapped up with many devices and hidden conceits of Hypocrisy. Yet at the day of
Judgment every man shall be thoroughly opened, anatomized, as it were, and
orderly cut up. What his heart did love or hate, what public or private
wickedness it did act, and would not forsake, what pretenses to cover secret
sinnings, what bawlkings and declinings of known duties, what ingenuous or
sordid ends in all, and every performance; all these, and more then these must
be spread open at the day of Judgment, before the eyes of men and Angels.

Of which did we believingly consider, probable it is that we would attend to
uprightness of heart and life, to present a fair copy of our selves to the eye
of God.

3. A little unevenness will mar the comfort of a great deal of A little
unevenness will mar the comfort of our uprightness.
uprightness.

There are two sorts of unevenness in walking. One, is Habitual and allowed,
which marres the just hopes and expectations of glory. Forasmuch as that is
either gross profaneness, or cunning Hypocrisy, both which are excluding sins.

Another, is Actual, which is a trip, a stumble, an out-stripping in the course
of a pious walking. I confess it may befall the best, yet it will imbitter our
souls: All the good course which a man has led, and actions which he has
sincerely done, cannot so much comfort him, as many particular obliquities and
unevennesses may sad and perplex him. As in a Simile.
wrinch of the foot, the present pain shuts out the sense of all former
strength; or as in the sickness of the stomach, the present disease closes up
the sense of all health; so the particular miscarriages in a Christian course
they may fold up, or at least suspend the taste of all the sensible comfort
which uprightness formerly yielded and shot forth. They may break the bones of
David, Psalm 51, and melt the soul of Peter, and cast us both to darkness of
trouble and sorrow, and the labor of many active endeavors, before we can see
God to be our God again, and be persuaded that our estate is really right and
sound.

4. That God is to be set up above all. It is an hard (yet it is That God is to
be set up above all.
an useful) thing to ascribe unto God the Original of excellencies, that he is
God, and that Power, Might, and Glory, and obedience, belongs unto him, that he
made us, and not we our selves, and that our beings as they are depending upon
his power, so our ways, upon his Rule; and he is Lord of Lords, all are under
him, and being the universal efficient, he ought also to be our universal end.

God is set up above all other. 1. When his Rule and Word swayes us against all
other. 2. When his Glory is singly or supreamly aimed at above all other
things, and both these complear uprightness

FINIS.
THE THRONE OF MERCY, AND THE TRIBUNAL OF JUSTICE, ERECTED In the
Remissibleness of All Sin, and in the Irremissibleness of the SIN against the
HOLY GHOST.

In two SERMONS on Mat. 12. 31. Preached before an Honorable Auditory.

By Obadiah Sedgwick, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Adoniram Byfeild, at the sign of the three Bibles
in Cornhill near Pope's Head Alley, Anno, 1660.

THE THRONE of MERCY, AND TRIBUNAL of JUSTICE.
MAT. 12. 31. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men.
THE best of actions are oft-times subject to misconstructions; and a busy
malice will either find or fasten spots upon the purest innocence. This Chapter
is the Map wherein you may read these truths. Christ cannot speak or do, but an
envious Pharisee will pry, and censure, and slander. Nothing is more offensive
to an ill eye, then the light; and that which much afflicts an ill heart, is
the beauty of that good which it sees in, or done by others.

Let Christ's Disciples pluck but some ears of corn, only to make necessary
satisfaction to natural hunger, verse 1. the Pharisee will presently pluck at
Christ himself, and murmur him not to be a pattern of obedience, but a pattern
of licentiousness, Behold thy Disciples do that which is not lawful on the
Sabbath day. verse 2.

If Christ does step from the field into the Synagogue, verse 9. there also
shall he have the catching attendance of the Pharisee. Malicious hatred is like
the shadow which will pursue the body of pious actions. Here he no sooner finds
a fit object for his mercy, but the Pharisees endeavored to divert the
execution by an ensnaring scruple, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days,
verse 10. as though the duties of piety jusled out all offices of charity, and
that God, who commanded sacrifice, had not also preferred mercy. They
themselves would reach forth the courtesy of relief to a distressed beast, v.
11. and therefore Christ might justly lend his hand of merciful Charity to a
diseased person, verse 12.

In the 22. ver. He heals one possessed of a devil: a miracle that begat
amazement amongst the people, and some kind of credence concerning his
Divinity; but in the Pharisees it vented plain Blasphemy. This fellow casts out
devils by the prince of devils, verse 24. A bitter and high reproach, and such
as was for the truth, neither probable nor possible; For, First, Will Satan
cast out Satan? He that seeks the constant support, will he willingly overthrow
his own Kingdom? Secondly, Can Satan cast out Satan? he that is cast out, must
be of lesser power; and he that does cast out, must be of greater power: but
can Satan be greater and lesser then himself? These Arguments could not but
convince their judgments, yet they did not extingush their malice; they could
not deny these to be truths, yet will they pertinaciously deny their affections
to them; what they could not answer, they would resist; and though they saw
sufficient reason and evidence, yet they are resolved not to believe, but to
contemn Christ; Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, etc. Which
words are like the two mountains of Moses, Mount E^al, and Mount Gorazim, of
blessing and of curses: here is the sweetest mercy, and the purest Justice, or
the Throne of Parts of the Text.
Mercy, and the Tribunal of Justice; or here is set out two glorious Attributes
of God, Mercy and Justice.

I. You have the Throne of Mercy erected in these words, The Throne of Mercy.
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven; wherein you have,

First, The universality of the object; not quoddam, but The universality of
the Object.
quodvis peccatum, (...), every sin, or all manner of sin; which yet must not
be taken simply, but restrictively; not all manner of sin in comparison of sin
to the rule that forbids it, for then the sin against the Holy Ghost should be
remitted; but all manner of sin in opposition to the sin against the Holy
Ghost, i. e. any sin that is pardonable, all manner of sin,

First, Whether you respect the several species of sin may be remitted, Noah's
drunkenness, Abraham's lying, David's Adultery, Manasse's Idolatry, Peter's
denial of Christ were remissible.

Secondly, Whether you respect the many degrees and intentions of sin, either
in the multiplied iterations of sinful acts, or in the accessory aggravations
of them from the force of circumstances in time, place, person, object, end,
etc.

And that we may not doubt hereof, a special instance is given Blasphemy what
it is.
in a sin of deepest dye and desert, viz. Blasphemy, this also may be remitted.
The schools tells us, it is such a sin as either detracts from God that which
belongs unto him of right, or fastens on God reproachfully and disgracefully
that which is not convenient to so pure and sublime Essence and Majesty.

And the Scripture tells us, that it wounds or strikes through the name of God,
Lev. 24. 16. nothing so dear to us as our name and reputation, and therefore we
are sensible of the least indignities which touch there; God does himself
profess how tender and jealous he is of his name and glory; it goes very near
to the quick; yet such is the Miracle of his gracious disposition, that he has
mercy even for Blasphemy. I was a Blasphemer, (says Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13.) but I
obtained mercy. Only know, that Blasphemy here pardonable, is not that which
springs from malice and hatred after conviction, but that of ignorance, as
Pauls's, or of infirmity, as Peter's.

Secondly, The quality of the act [shall be forgiven;] No The quality of the
Act.
such word as that for a sinner, his life and joy lies in it. Some by these
words understand,

1. Certainty of pardon: Thus Theophylact, who holds the event so sure, that
there needs no repentance to obtain pardon for sins not committed against the
Holy Ghost. This erroneous opinion need the kindness of a large pardon.

2. Desert of pardon: Thus Origin, l. 1. (...), c. 3. Qui peccat in filium
hominis venia dignus est, quia videtur in ignorantiam decidisse; there is some
ground of Apology in this: this opinion is not very unsound, but not genuine.

3. Facility of pardon, thus Jansenius in Concord. Evang-Remittetur, non quasi
cunctis hominibus remittetur, sed quod facile remittetur; there is not so much
difficulty to get these, as the other to be pardoned.

4. Not Eventum infallibilem sed possibilem, shall be forgiven, i. e. they are
such as are not excluded from hope and offer of pardon, not that they are
certainly remitted to all in the event, or that they deserve pardon, or that
they are easily pardoned; they do not contract a peremptory incapacity of
Mercy, but that they may, and if repentance follow, shall certainly be forgiven.

Thirdly, The indesiniteness of the subject (unto men) not The indefiniteness
of the subject.
a man guilty of any manner of sin, except that against the Holy Ghost; but
such is the rich grace of the great Court of Mercy, that he may take out his
pardon. Christ does not say, not one sin, but All sin,; not all sin of one
kind, but all manner of sin; all sin of any kind shall be forgiven, not to one
man, but to any one; unto men, unto any one of the sons of men: whence we may
conclude this comfortable truth.

DOCTRINE. There is a possibility of pardon to any sinner for any sin, except
the sin against the holy Ghost.

THat there is a possibility of pardon for any Sinner whatsoever, and for any
sin whatsoever, to all men for all manner of sin, except the sin against the
holy Ghost. Hence the infiniteness of Divine Mercy is in Mica 7. 19. compared
to the depths of the sea: The Ocean is of that vast capacity, that it can
swallow up the highest mountains, as well as cover the lowest Molehill. And
Isa. 44. 22. it is compared to the strength of the sun, which can scatter the
darkest clouds, as well as consume the thinnest vapors. There is in man a
continual fountain of sin, in God a continual fountain of Mercy, Zac. 13. 1.
still running; yea, there is in man multitude of sins which stream from that
corrupt fountain; and there is in God Multitudes of Mercies to heal and stop
those various currents; Psalm 51. 1. According to the multitude of thy tender
mercies blot out mine offenses.

In the prosecution of this Truth, I shall speak to three things; 1. The
Explication of the terms. 2. The demonstration of the Truth. 3. The
Application. The explication of the terms. Forgiveness described. It is an Act
of God.


1. The Explication of the terms.

1. Forgiveness of sin is a gracious act of God in and through-Christ,
discharging the believing and repenting sinner from the guilt and punishment of
sin.

It is an Act of God.] The Donatists hold that man could forgive the sins of
men: and St. Austin chalengeth them for so bold an Assertion, that in this they
are worse then the Pharisees who maintained this truth; Who can forgive sins,
but God?

Object. It is true, Christ committed to his Apostles a Ministerial Absolution;
in his Name, and virtute officii, to bind and lose sins.

Sol. But if we speak of an Authoritative Right and immediate Power, thus only
God forgives. Life and death are only in the absolute power of the Supreme
Lord, and because our sins are directly committed against his Justice,
therefore it belongs only to his Mercy to forgive.

2. It is a gracious Act.] No way deserved by the sinner: A gracious Act.
Gratia indebita liberata, said St. Austin. Hence in Scripture you find our
forgiveness like a stream issuing out of rich Mercy, Great love, and the riches
of Grace: and the Prophet speaking of forgiveness, usually adjoynes, For thy
Mercy sake, for thine own sake, intimating that forgiveness is a free Act, not
purchased, but given, not merited, but granted. There is I acknowledge, A
double graciousness in the discharge of an offender.

One without any satisfaction at all. I am much mistaken if Socinus and his
Atheistical Accomplices run not this way.

Another is, When the satisfaction of a surety is accepted for the principal
debt. In this respect is our forgiveness gracious; not that Justice is not at
all satisfied, but that the offender himself never satisfied it; he is
discharged by the price which a blessed Mediator laid down.

3. Discharging the sinner of guilt and punishment.] There Discharging the
sinner of guilt and punishment.
are two things in sin.

One is the stain, pollution, or defiling quality of it, and this is the Object
of Sanctification, which is to it as a medicine to a disease, or as water to
spots, or as health to sickness, gradually altering, healing, cleansing.

Another is the Guilt, which binds over the sinner to punishment, wrath and
damnation; this is the object of forgiveness; in it sin is not healed, but
pardoned: the disposition of the sinner is not altered, but his condition. When
the King pardons a thief, his theft now shall not prejudice him, so in Gods
merciful forgiveness, sinful guilt is so effectually removed, that finally
and redundantly it shall never prejudice the eternal life and salvation of the
person: much more might be said of this subject, but I am unwilling to insist
on any more then serves to inlighten the point in hand.

2. Of this Forgiveness there is a Possibility; you must distingush twixt the
Of this forgiveness there is a possibility.


Infallibility of forgiveness, which is not to every sin whatsoever, or to any
sin whatsoever, without some condition: A grant of actual pardon issues not out
of the Court of Mercy, unless persons believe and repent. It is true, there is
an infiniteness of Divine mercy considered in it self: but in the dispensation
and exercise of it, it is pleased to bound and confine it self to some sinners
only, namely to such as forsake their sins.

Possibility of forgiveness. Though perhaps the sinner never comes actually to
partake of mercy, but perhaps refuses his pardon, yet is there a possibility,
and that in a twofold respect:

One, In respect of God, who does not in his Word shut the door of Mercy
against him, nor exclude him; nay, so far is he from that, as that he offers
freely the blood of Christ, which was shed for the Remission of sins.

Another, In respect of the sinner, there is (except he sin the sin against the
Holy Ghost) a Receptivity; he is not utterly incapable, he has not such
absolute contradictions to the Tenor of Divine Mercy, but that God may without
violation of his Glory, confirm mercy on him; my meaning is, his condition is
not peremptorily sealed up for wrath, but there is a space and away for mercy,
and some pleas may be made for it.

3. Though the sins of a person may be for their nature For what sins.
great, for their kind, gross, vile, abominable, for their circumstances, high
and crying, dyed over with many intensive aggravations, not only
surrepstitious, but flagirious enormities as well as infirmities, iterated as
well as acted: Before Conversion, and after Conversion, all these are capable
of pardon.

2. The Demonstration of the truth. The Extent of Mercy, The truth demonstrated
from the Records of heaven in
whereupon arises the possible pardon of all manner of sin, is most evident to
any considerable apprehension, which can or will seriously weigh.

1. The volumns and records of heaven, I mean the sacred Word revealing and
testifying this.

1. In the commands of the vilest sinners to repent; They in 1. Commands.
Esa. 1. who for the fouleness of their wickedness are styled Rulers of Sodom,
and people of Gomorrah, verse 10. and their sins are called scarlet and crimson
sins, verse 18. yet, verse 16. are called upon to repent, Wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of you doings from before mine eyes; Cease to do evil,
learn to do well. So in Jer. 3. 1. Though their sin was spiritual Adultery,
they had forsaken the true God, yet are they called upon to Return: Now this is
a truth, that though the Precepts of Repentance do not imply an infallibility
of the practice of Repentance, yet they do imply a possibility of it, and
consequently of Mercy.

2. In the vastness of pardoning promises: the promise of 2. pardoning promises.
pardon is equal to Repentance. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Here he
speaks to the wicked and to the unrighteous person, and indefinitely to any,
and every one of them: and assures them if they do repent, God will have mercy
on them.

Object. And whereas they might object, yea, but our sins are many and great.

Sol. He replies, that God will abundantly pardon, he will multiply pardon, as
if he had said, do but repent, and fear not Mercy, whatever your former sins
have been. So in Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes -- verse 22. All his transgressions
which he has committed they shall not be mentioned unto him: Mark that phrase,
All the sins which he has committed. The actual grants of pardon.


2. The actual grants of mercy and pardon to the greatest sinners; to instance
only in a few.

Adam was one of the greatest sinners that ever lived, though not in this
respect that he continued long in the practice of sin, yet in a causal sense,
he not only committed a most high sin himself, but was also the cause and
occasion of all the horrible sins and dishonours against God that ever was, or
all the sons of men have done, or will commit, yet God pardoned him, when he
made a Covenant with him in Christ, Genesis 3.

Manasseh seems to be a volumn bound up with all kinds of notorious sins, and
with every kind of sinful aggravation: view his description in 2 Chronicles. 33. 3.

3. He reared up Altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the
host of heaven, and served them.

4. Yea, In the house of God he built Altars.

5 For all the host of heaven did he build Altars in the courts of the
Multiplied Idolatry. Audatious Idolatry, Unnatural Idolatry.
house of God [A most audacious Idolater who durst provoke God to his very
face, in bringing of the Ark and Dagon together.]

6. And he caused his Children to pass through the fire in the valley of the
son of Hinnom.

7. He offered his own Children in sacrifice to the devil.

8. Also he observed times, and used enchantments, and witchcrafts, and dealt
with a familiar spirit, and with Wizards, and Sorcery.
wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke to Anger. Deliberate and
intentional provocation.


9. He made Judah and Jerusalem to err, and to do worse then the Heathens.

10. And the Lord spoke unto Manasseh, but he would not Diffusive Idolatry.
hearken.

One would scarcely imagine that the heart of man could be Intensive Idolatry.
Convicted, and yet obstnate.
the womb of such hideous villainies, or that Mercy would ever respect such a
sinner, yet verse 12. He humbled himself greatly before the Lord. verse 13. And
prayed unto him, and God was entreated of him, and heard his supplication.

Who would have risen so high in sin, but a Manasseh? and what mercy would have
so exceedingly condescended to forgive, but that of God?

Paul, before his Conversion, his sins were very high, so high, that as
Theophilact, and others well observe, they had but one ingredient to stave them
off from being the sin against the Holy Ghost, viz. Ignorance, 1 Timothy 1. 13. he
presents a brief survey of his great transgressions.

He was a Blasphemer, (i.) one who did cast contumely and reproach on God and
Christ, whose nature was Divine, and therefore every way venerable, but he
scoffed and mocked at Christ and his Truths.

He was a Persecutor too, he did not only deride Christ, but endeavored to
exile and banish him out of the world, to thrust him away from the society of
sinners, who in so great mercy came to save sinners. Whereupon St. Austin
judged well, Nemo acrior Paulo inter Persecutores, nemo ergo pejor inter
peccatores; Paul was the quickest persecutor, and therefore the vilest sinner.

Nay, and he was injurious; he did not only exercise his thoughts and heart,
his tongue and invectives against Christ, but his hand and strength; he did
consent to the death of persons for Christ. To have a hand in blood is a crying
sin, but how heinous is it to have a hand in the blood of Christ! to crucify
him afresh in his members, yet says he, I obtained mercy, A blasphemer, yet I
obtained mercy; A Persecutor, yet I obtained mercy; Injurious, yet I obtained
mercy: I will give you but one instance more, out of 1 Cor. 6. 9. Neither
fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, not effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with mankind.

verse 10. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Here are some sinners which have destroyed a whole world, and others which
have started up hell on earth to devour sinners, and all of them such as
meritoriously shut the gate of happiness, yet mercy has stretched out the
Scepter to some persons guilty of them.

Verse 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God.

3. The essential and natural disposition of God. The Essential and natural
disposition of God.


Mercy is not a quality extrinsecally imposed or acquired, but intrinsecal and
most natural, and therefore exerciseable with freest facility, and readiest
constancy. The eye is not weary with seeing, nor God with pardoning, because
that is natural to the eye, and this is to God: This you know, the power of any
thing is answerable to the nature. The nature of God is infinite, and so is his
power: Omnipotente Medico nullus insanabilis occurrit languor, says Isidore
Pelusiota. And St. Austin, Grave est quod habeo sed ad Omnipotentem fugio. In
Psalm. 51. Therefore is it that his Mercies are styled, Riches of mercies, and
multitudes of mercies, and great mercies, and compared to the depths of the
sea,, Mic. 7. and to the strength of the sun, Isa. 44. and to the vastness of
the heavens in comparison of the earth, Isa 55.

As Mercifulness is natural in him, so is it gracious; The Lord merciful and
gracious, Exodus 34. If mercy were to be bought, there were no hope for any
sinner, but being free, now there is a possibility for any. A sinner may plead
for mercy even out of the goodness of mercy.

As it is disp^nsed graciously without desert on our part: so likewise
delightfully without repining on Gods part. He delights in Mercy, says the
Prophet, Mic. 7. 18. It is a work that God would do. Two things God delights
in, Our Conversion, and our Remission.

4. The virtue and sufficiency of the blood of Christ which was shed for the
remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28. that was The virtue and sufficiency of the
blood of Christ.
one end to procure our pardon: but for what sins, that is not expressed,
because no sin is excluded: you cannot say that Christ dyed only for small
sins, or only for great sins; nay, the offer of Christ to all sinners does
confirm it; How can this offer be indefinite? How can it be said, Whosoever
believes shall be saved, unless you grant a possibility of mercy.

5. The effects of mercy in the Creature, which point to an infinite fullness in
the Creator. The virtue in the cause ever The effects of Mercy in the Creature.
exceeds that in the effect; and according to the generality in the cause, is
the intention of the virtue in that cause. If I discern any light in the beams,
I apprehend much more in the Sun: If I feel any moisture in smaller drops, I
know there is much more in the large ocean. All the mercy in the Creature is
derivative, and as so many beams and drops lead us to the infinite fullness of
mercy in God, the universal and prime fountain of all compassion. God himself
reasons from the compassion of a mother to her own; and Christ tells us, If we
forgive those that trespass against us, our heavenly Father will also forgive
us our trespasses. Surely if we must forgive seventy times, God does much more
multiply forgivenesses.

6. It is all one to the Lord to forgive great sins as well as small. It is all
one to God to forgive great as well as small sins.
Luke 7. 41. There was a Creditor which had two Debtors, the one ought him 500.
pence, and the other 50. pence, and when they had nothing to pay, he frankly
forgave them both. There was a difference of the debt 50. and 500. one of them
many hundred times exceeding the other; the debts were different, but the
forgiveness was equal, and the manner of forgiveness, the easiness was alike,
both of them was frankly, (i) freely, readily forgiven.

Now I proceed to the application of all this. Is there a Information.


1. An impenitent sinner is utterly inexcusable, who will continue in sin where
so much grace does abound. I do confess, that An impenitent sinner is utterly
inexcusable
many turn the grace of God into wantonness, and because of the richness and
readiness of divine mercy, therefore presume to add drunkenness to thirst,
giving the reins to all licentiousness and obduration of Spirit, and why?
because God is merciful. But hear what the Apostle says: Romans 2. Know thou
not, O man, that the mercies of God should lead thee to Repentance; but thou
through the hardness and impenitency of thy heart, treasurest unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath. I pray you to remember,

1. That the end of mercy, is not confirmation in sin, but a Reformation of
sin. There is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared, said David.

2. That Mercy is the sweetest cord to draw us off from sin. When God might
justly doom a sinner, yet he graciously presents his mercy to pardon him. Lo,
yet there is mercy; I beseech thee by the mercies of God, to leave thy sins;
this is a melting argument.

3. That Mercy is the strongest argument to draw men off from Sin. The torments
of hell cannot work so much as the mercies of heaven. Nothing in the world will
prevail upon a sinner, if mercy does not.

4. If mercy does not prevail, a man's Damnation befalls him without all
Apology. Ah, what a sad appearing will it be for us, when we must die, and
stand before God, and the Lord shall in that day object to us before men and
Angels. This is the person unto whom I freely offered the pardon of all the
sins that ever he committed; and offered him in the word of God, that if he
would leave his sins, I would forgive them, but he preferred his sins before my
mercy; For lying vanities he forsook his mercies. And thy own conscience shall
then testify that thus it was, I had mercy offered again and again, and yet I
would continue in my sins. Judge what blackness of darkness, and degrees of
eternal confusion thou shall contract, when so great a door of mercy is opened,
but for a lust sake, thou will not enter in, thou will not accept of it.

2. Then no sinner has cause sufficient to despair. I know full well that
before God makes us sensible of sin, we are apt to No sinner has cause
sufficient to despair.
presume, but being once made sensible, we are very apt to despair. It is the
great art of the devil, either to make us die in a senceless calm, or else to
perish in an unquiet storm; either to make us undervalew our sins, and so to
slay us with security, or else to undervalew mercy, and so to sink us with
despair: Oh, says the awakened conscience, my sins are so many, and so great,
I have continued long in them, gone on in them after knowledge, after the
invitations of mercy, after the strokes of afflictions, after many a secret
check, and bitter words from my conscience; now there remains no hope, no, no;
others whose sins are fewer in number, lightet in weight, not edged and raised
by such circumstances; they may hope, but I can have no confidence; mercy will
never look upon such a one as I am; Nay, but read thou not the Text, and
they are the words of a Savior, That all manner of sin may find forgiveness:
though there because enough to despair of thy own strength, yet there is no
cause to despair of Gods mercy.

Two things only remember here.

1. Despair is no remedy to any sinner. It may bind on his sins the faster, but
never heals the soul, nor eases the conscience, nor pleases God.

2. Whatsoever thy sins have been, if at length thou can find an heart to
repent, God can find mercy to pardon. I affirm it, no sinner ever perished
because God wanted skill to help, but because he wanted a heart to make use of
his help. To persuade men to make out for pardon.


3. But the main use I would make of this point, is To persuade men to make out
for this pardon: you see here the extent of Mercy, the possibility of pardon.
Why do you look one upon another? (said Jacob to his sons) Behold, I have heard
there is corn in Egypt, get you down thither, that we may live, and not die:
Why stand you amazed and backward, you that are so full of spiritual wants; why
come you not to mercy that you may live and not die? here is a storehouse of
mercy, Behold, said the servants of Benhadab, We have heard that the King of
Israel is a merciful King, let us go to him, peradventure he will save thy
life, 1 King 20. 31. We hear that the King of heaven is merciful, and yet we
address not our selves unto him; we hear that there is Balm in Gilead, yet we
sue not to be healed; we hear that the Arms of Christare yet open, and we run
not to be embraced; Ah! our folly and madness, that being so greatly diseased,
we fly our Physic, that being so in deep rebellions, we lay not down our
weapons, and submit not upon the tender of the freest pardon. As I live, says
the Lord, I delight not in the death of a sinner; Why will you die, O house of
Israel? Why do we by lying vanities forsake our Mercies? how my soul bleeds at
the wretched hardness of our hearts. God is merciful, and we are sinful; yea,
we are the more bold in sin, because God is the more abundant in mercy,
Continue in sin, because Grace does abound, Romans 6. 1. Thus do we abuse the
grace God to wantonness, and bane our souls by the sweet Remedy of sin. There
is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, said David: and he who
confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy, says Solomon: and know
thou not that the mercies of God should lead thee to Repentance, says Paul:
consider,

1. The presence of Mercy saves not, but the acceptance: the offer of a pardon
delivers not the Malefactor, but the receiving of it: only the embracing makes
us happy: mercy proves not mercy, but by acceptance; the contempt of it
strangly alters it into Justice.

2. The despising of mercy leaves without all excuse; what have thou to urge
against God, who could not urge and fasten his mercy on thy soul? yes, thou
would have a license but not a pardon. I know thou warmest thy soul with the
sound of mercy, not to abate, but to encourage thy sinful appetite: Why do
thou not break thy arm, because there is a skillful Surgeon, or fall into
the strongest diseases, because there is a skillful Physician?

3. Continuance in sin, and efficacy of Mercy are inconsistent: thou through
thy impenitent heart, in stead of mercy, treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5.

Now that which I would persuade you too, is to be wise for Get your sins to be
forgiven.
your souls, and to get your sins to be forgiven and pardoned. If a company of
sick men did hear of an able Physician that could and would heal them, who
would not be carried to him? or what Malefactor is there so out-ragiously mad
but that would make out to the King, if he were assured that the King would
pardon him.

Two things only I will propound, Motives and Means.

1. The Motives to stir us up to get our sins forgiven, are these; Motives.


1. We are in such a case that we need pardon: yea, that pardon We need pa^don.
should be multiplied unto us. Indeed were we not sinners, then we should need
no forgiveness, or could we of our selves make or exact satisfaction to divine
Justice, then might we stand off from mercy: but alas! we are sinners by nature
and by life; all our days are days of sin; the hairs are not more on our
heads, then the number of our sins are on our consciences: they are so many
that who can tell how often he offends; therefore we need mercy to forgive:
yea, and we are without strength: we can find strength to sin, but who can
discharge for those sins: the price and ransom could never yet be found in any
sinners hand. An unprepared condition is woeful.


2. How woeful is the unpardoned condition: men go on in sin, and make a work
of it, but speak slightly of it, but the truth is,

1. Sin makes God our enemy, therefote it is called enmity in Sin makes God our
enemy.
Ephe. 2. and a provocation, because it stirs up the wrath of God against us,
which wrath if it should seize on thy soul, Ah, miserable man then, thou can
neither suffer it, nor decline it. Jesus Christ standing in our stead, felt
some of it, and it made him sweat drops of blood, and to cry out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? How then shall a poor weak guilty sinner stand
under the fierceness of his indignation?

2. Sin unpardoned makes conscience our enemy. As long as the Lord Conscience
our enemy.
has a quarrel with us for sin, conscience may not speak any peace unto us.
Now the Lord be merciful unto us, if the Lord should awaken thy conscience,
and set thy sins in order, who knows what would become of thee? Know thou
the power of conscience when it is opened to behold a God angry, and sin
unpardoned. Read the vigor of it in Cain, and the terror of it in Judas, how it
crached their spirits, and brought the one to the utmost desperation, and the
other to the grave and hell in despite of all former advantages.

3. And who can tell how soon he may die. Go and listen Who can tell how soon
he may die.
sometimes at a dying bed, the person quakes, and the bed trembles, and the
heart sighs! what is it that the man speaks so to himself? Ah, Lord, says he,
I would not die! and then tears trickle down his cheeks, and his heart is ready
to fly in pieces. But why would thou not die; O no, my sins are many, I now
see them, and feel the bitter wrath of God for them; Oh! my sins they are not
pardonable, and who can dwell with everlasting burnings, or stand before the
holy and just God.

3. What unspeakable comfort is it to have our sins forgiven. It is unspeakable
comfort to have sin pardoned.
Son said Christ, Mat. 9. 4. Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.
When the Israelites got through the red sea, and looked back, and saw their
enemies all drowned, what reviving was this; if the drowning of corporal
enemies be such a cause of joy, who could but kill our bodies; what cause of
exultation for the drowning of spiritual enemies, of sins in the depths of
mercy, which else would have destroyed oursouls. How shall I express the
comfort of it? David says all in one word, The man is blessed whose iniquities
are forgiven. Now blessedness is the center of all joy and comfort. Tell me
brethren what think you?

1. Of freedom from hell, that you shall never see the place of the damned; Is
that a matter of comfort? why? If sin be pardoned, hell is discharged. There is
no condemnation, if Remission.

2. Of Gods loving kindness. David said, it was life, nay, better then life:
Oh, what is this? God is reconciled unto me in Christ: he looks on me not as a
Judge, but as a fathet with ardent affections and compassions; why? if sin be
pardoned, God is reconciled, enmity slain, all differences twixt you and God
are taken off.

3. Of the blood of Christ. Is it worth the having, or of interest in Christ,
it is worth the enjoying; why? if pardoned, then doubtless united to Christ;
and how many and great are the benefits that result and follow upon union.

4* Of Peace of conscience. It is a mercy that Conscience can and may speak
peace, cheer us up, assure us, stand for us against men and devils: Why? when
sin is pardoned, conscience may not accuse; it has nothing to do, but direct
us in good ways, and to comfort us with the testimonies of our pardon and
Reconciliation with God.

5. Of all outward mercies: Oh! what a life does a pardoned sinner live. If he
looks up to heaven, all is peace; if he looks down to earth, all is comfort: he
has lands, and sins pardoned too, wife, children, honors, friends, yea, and
his sins are pardoned too.

6. Lastly, What think you of confidence in death. When you are leaving the
earth, then to be assured, your next journey is to heaven. After grace to find
glory: would you ever be willing to die; be confident in death, live in death,
live after death, O then get your sins, whatsoevet they are to be pardoned.

11. The Means: if you ask what may we do to get our sins The means.
forgiven, I shall answer briefly.

1. Find out your sins, and know them: and that is done by the study of the Law
which gives us the knowledge of sin.

2. Beg of God for a contrite heart, so as to be sensible of sin, and weary of
it, and broken for it. The weeping woman was forgiven, Luke 7. 44, 47.

3. And also for a penitential heart. Repent, says Peter, that your sins may
be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. See Isa. 55. 7.

4. And for a Believing heart in the Lord Jesus. In whose blood, and for whose
sake we obtain Remission of our sins, 2 Cor. 5. 20. God was in Christ
reconciling the world, -- not imputing our sins.

5. And for a forgiving heart: see Mat. 6. 14, 15.

6. Make it a daily and vehement petition for Repentance and forgiveness, as
did David, Psalm 51. and sue all out in the name of Christ.

Object. But these things are hard and laborious.

Sol. But they are for mercy. O Mercy, I perish without thee, and therefore I
will not live without thee, sleep without thee, die withou thee. I will pray
for mercy, I will go to Christ for mercy; and shall it seem so grievous to me,
to leave a sin which will damn me, to get mercy which will save me.

II. The Tribunal of Justice erected in these words, But the Blasphemy against
the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven.

These words are the saddest expressions of purest Justice that ever were
uttered. Oh, what is the height, what the depth of this, for a sinner to rise
to such a peculiar degree and form of sinning, as for ever to distinguish
himself from all hope of mercy, never, never, never to he pardoned.

In this there are two things to be inquired into,

1. What this Blasphemy against the holy Ghost is. What this sin is.
2. The irremissibleness of this Blasphemy.
Touching the first of these, there are several opinions, and no marvel; for to
find the right nature of this sin is a work not of the least difficulty; In
Scripturis sanctis nulla major question, nulla difficilior invenitur, says
Austin.

1. The Novations thought every sin after Baptism, especially Quid est, quod
Novato succenseamus tollenti poe^itentiam dicentique nullam eos veniam
obtinere, qui post lavacrum peccant. Athan. Tom. 1. in hoc subject. p. 776.
denial of Christ in time of perfection, to be the sin against the Holy Ghost.
I deny not, but each sin that a Christian commits, may in some sense be called
a sin, but strictly it is not the sin against the holy Ghost. This error is
abundantly refuted by Cyprian, Hiero^, Austin, etc. and is repugnant to all
religious reason; because,

First, Thus there should be no opposition twixt all manner of sin, and the sin
against the Holy Ghost in the Text.

Secondly, Thus no man should ever be saved, or have sin pardoned. And for the
Denial of Christ in time of persecution, though indeed it be a very great sin,
yet because it may arise not out of the strength of hatred against Christ, but
out of the strength of fear, and from humane weakness, it is without doubt an
act, though sinful, yet pardonable, yet it has been pardoned, as we read in
Peter.

2. Origin thinks, that the Defection from participation of the Holy Ghost, is
this Blasphemy, and so he places the nature of it L. 1. (...), c. 3. p. 776
in Apostasy. Qui dignus habitus est spiritus sancti participatione, and retro
conversus fuerit, hic reipsa and opere blasphemasse dicitur in Spiritum
sanctum. This is in part true; for Apostasy is a necessary concomitant of this
Blasphemy: but yet it expresses not the full, and complete, and certain nature
of this sin, because,

First, Every defection from the truth, or defection alone, is not sin. One may
be an Apostate, and yet not sin the sin against the Holy Ghost; he may recedere
a fide, and yet not in fidem irruere, and therefore St. Hierom upon this very
agreement to Marcella, says well, Aliud est Christianum se negare, Tom. 4.
Fol. 26.
aliud Christum Diabolum dicere: and to that purpose likewise St. Cyprian,
Epist. 53.

Secondly much more is required to the constitution of this sin then a
defection; yet we deny not, but that an universal apostasy is necessary
hereunto.

Thirdly, Austin delivers his opinion by diverse phrases in diverse places, but
most fairly in Epist. 50, which is ad Bonifacium comitem, It is Duritia cordis
usque ad finem hujus vitae, qua homo recusat accipere remissionem peccatorum:
where you may apprehend, according to his Judgment, three acts in this sin;
First, Hardness of heart. Secondly, Perseverance in this hardness. Thirdly,
Refusal of remission, which is through malicious obstinacy. This opinion,
though it be true in part, yet it is not complete and punctual, because,

First, All this may be without blasphemy.

Secondly, All this cannot be till the last gasp, and yet so may the sin
against the holy Ghost be.

Fourthly, The Schoolmen generally run one after another, and place the nature
of it in obstinacy or malice: so that to sin against the Holy Ghost, is with
them to sin out of a resolved or determined malice: this you may see more fully
deliveted by Aquinas and Alexander Ales; which sinning of malice, is not barely
a vicious and habitual inclination, but further it has the access of
contemptuous rejecting of those things, which might remove this malicious
sinning. Hence it is, that they break this general into many particulars, as
First, Of Desperation, whereby the malicious offender casts away the anchor of
hope, wilfully perishing in the gulf of sin. Secondly, Of Presumption, whereby
he wilfully rejects all fear of God. Thirdly, Of Impenitency. Fourthly, Of
Obstinacy. Fifthly, Of Impugning known truth. Sixthly, And envying and
maligning of Grace in our brethren.

But to omit diversity of opinions in this argument, I shall as fully as I can
touch the nature of this blasphemy against the holy Ghost in this brief
description.

It is an extraordinary sin wherein the apostatizing Blasphemer despitefully
rejects, and maliciously persecutes the Gospel This sin described.
and Truth of Christ after a manifest conviction by the holy Ghost, let us take
this description assunder, and consider these parts.

First, It is an extraordinary sin] both for subject, and for degree. An
extraordinary sin.
For Subject because it is a sin (in comparison with other sins) nothing so
frequent, it is not so common in practice. And also for Degree, it is a sin
made of the very cream and spirits, as it were of the vilest and most
condemning forms of transgressing; but to let that go as being only general.

Secondly, The subject of this sin, An Apostatizing Blasphemer. The subject of
it. An appostate.


1. An Apostate, and therefore in Heb. 6. 6. where this sin is described, the
persons guilty of it are said to fall away: not only to fall (for so may the
faithfullest servant of truth do, he may fall in the way) but to fall away, to
turn the heart, and to turn the back upon truth, to renounce our colors, it
Greg. de. Val. Tom. 7. disp. 1. q. 12.
is an uniuersal Apostasy. The Schoolmen well observe two things in a
Apostasy! One is Recessio a fi^e: the other is, Accessio a^ sectam, and I think
there was never any branded with the sin against the Holy Ghost, but proved
guilty of both; as Julian forsook the truth, and turned Pagan: Hence that
conclusion arises amongst them, Omnis Apostata est Hereticus.

2. A Blesphemer. What a Blasphemer is, you may collect A Blasphemer.
from the description already given of Blasphemy, he is one who is contumelious
or opprobrious to God and Christ, either in Nature, Name or Doctrine; such as
the Pharisees here, who fastened on Christ the most reproachful obloquies, of
a Samaritan, Devil, companion and friend to Publicans; or as Julian stiling
Christ in derision, the Galilean and the Carpenters son. To understand this
more clearly, know that Blasphemy is sometime taken,

First, Most generally, and so it may be terminated in man Blasphemy how taken.
as the Object. Tit. 3. 2. Blaspheme no man, (...); Thus he is a Blasphemer,
who assumes any disgraceful term, which may blemish the credit of a man.

Secondly, Less generally, and so it is appliable to any word uttered in the
reproach of God, or Christ, or the Gospel of Christ, whether deliberately or
unadvisedly: in which respect it may be verified in some cases of the best
Saints, who affix that unto God in their have of spiritual trouble, which
unbeseems his purity and truth.

Thirdly, Strictly, and so it is a malicious reproachful word against the
known Doctrine of Christ: so that the Blasphemer, who is the true subject of
this sin, is not he that speaks evil of other men, nor he, who through
inconsideration, or violence, or vehement distemper of passion, or any
extrinsecal pressure, lets fall some unbefitting speeches of God, or Christ, or
his Gospel, but he that does this out of a resolvedness and wilfulness.

A man may blaspheme two ways, either Enunciative, as A man may blaspheme two
ways.
to affirm that Christ is a Devil, or God is unjust, or the Scriptures are a
lie; or Imperative or Optative, by wishing any unglorious thing on God, or
Christ and his Truths; both of which may be in actu signato, when the person
does express out in words all this: or in actu exercito, when all this is in
conceptu mentis and proposito. Though perhaps he does speak what is true, and
honorable of God and Christ, yet it is modo irrisorio and contemptivo, (as
Cajetan observes) after a disgracing and despicable manner. Now then the
subject of the sin against the holy Ghost is such a Blasphemy, who does most
unworthily think of Christ, and this is verbum mentis, inward Blasphemy in
conceptu, and who does basely deride and scoff at him and his Trurhs, jearing
at his holiness; and the excellency, and purity of his ways, and this is
verbum vocis outward Blasphemy. The which is not occasioned by coaction of
Tyranny, as some through torment may speak with their lips that which their
heart abhors; nor by the phrensy of the disease, when a person not mentis
compos, talks idly he knows not what, but it is a set Blasphemy and deliberate;
formal Blasphemy arising from a direct intention to eclipse, and despise, and
diminish and disgrace the glory of Christ in himself, truths, ways, servants:
and it may be that even in this sense those that thus sin, are said to put
Christ to an open shame, Heb. 6. 6. The Object of the Gospel.


3. The object of this, the Gospel of Christ. The common Object of Blasphemy is
God considered in Essence and Revelation, and man: The Object of Blasphemy less
generally taken, goes not lower then God and his Truths; but the special Object
of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, is the saving part of the Word, It is tht
Gospel of Christ: Heb, 10. 29. The Son of God, and the blood of the Covenant,
are the Objects of this impiety. O how this raises this reproachful sin: It is
a high sin to reproach any Attribute of God, to reproach any part of the Truth
of God; but to fasten disgrace on the mercy of God, to pour contempt on the
Gospel of God, there where his compassions yearn to sinners, there where his
freest grace calls upon sinners, there where the Sun of Righteousness and
salvation shines to sinners, this is the highest Injury; yet on this most
amiable countenance and tenderest affections of Heaven, does this blasphemer
cast his most impure, and foulest indignities, which appears in the Acts
incident to this Subject.

Thirdly, The Acts, they are two. The Acts of it.


1. A malicious rejecting of the Gospel, both in the Truth and in the Goodness
of it. The Gospel may be not hearkened to A malicious rejecting of the Gospel.
Where it is represented, and yet the person not guilty of this sin; It may be
refused, though it be hearkened to, and yet we guiltless of the same: All
Refusal, all Disobedience unto it, does not necessarily infer this sin, but
there must be a malicious Rejecting which notes two things.

First A complete and free disposition of the Will: he sins (...), A complete
and free disposition of the Will.
non per ignorantiam, non per violentiam, sed motu spontaneo; for there be some
actions which arise parrly from the will, and partly from externally impulsive
Causes. Secondly, Which arise immediately and totally from the Will: such is
this rejection, it is not caused through the darkness or mistake of the
understanding, nor through the powerful impression of persecution, nor through
any violent distemper or sudden motion of the affections, nor through the
importunity of temptation, nor through any phrenetical disease, but through the
natural and internal inclination of perverseness in the Will, when the person
is set in the fairest of Circumstances and conditions, not blinded, not
agitated, but voluntarily and wilfully rejects the Gospel of Christ.

II. Access of deepest malice, and constant hatred in the Access of deepest
malice. Tom. 2. q. 155.
Will; Therefore Alexander Ales says well, that the Motus hujus peecati habet
originem a certa malitia, i. e. ex malignitate animi cum conscientia peccati,
and ex quadam mentis perversitate, when the person does it of set purpose, and
with a sectet complacence, he is gladded that he can despite and injure Christ
and his Gospel. This despitefull rejecting is expressed in Heb. 10. 29. By,
First, Treading under foot the Son of God, the most base esteem of Christ,
respecting him no more then the impurest dirt in the streets, or the most vile
thing, as Ambrose expounds it. It were fault sufficient not to accept of
Christ, it is a deeper treason to scorn and reject Christ and Mercy; but how
infinitely vile is it to do this with a disdain, and with a despitefull humor,
with a purpose to vex and dishonor Christ and the Gospel. Secondly, Counting
the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing: The blood of Christ is the blood of
the new Covenant; it is it wherein Promises of life are made, it is it whereby
reconciliation with God is effectually made, it is it by which we obtain
salvation, and this blood it is called Precious in Scripture: but he that sins
against the Holy Ghost, vilipends this blood, he does no more account of it,
then the blood of a most common thief and unhallowed person.

2. ly, A despitefull persecuting of the Gospel] as it is evident here in the
Pharisees, who hated the light, and bitterly persecuted A delightful
persecuting or the Gospel.
the light: and thus was it with Julian, Lucianus, Porphirius, and other odious
Apostates, who were so hellishly incensed against the Gospel of Christ, that if
it had been possible, they would have plucked this Sun out of the Firmament,
they would have rooted out the very Name and naming of Christ; the reasons
whereof I conceive may be th^se.

First, The strong possession of their hearts by Satan, who communicates unto
them this eternal malevolence and hatred of Christ.

Secondly, The inward persuasion in their own consciences, that they shall
never have part in Christ, whereupon in the fury of despair. For themselves
they are maliciously bent against the possible benefit that any other may draw
from Christ.

The Formal Aggravation of these Acts, after manifest The formal aggravat^on of
these acts.
conviction by the holy Ghost. A man may reject the Gospel, a man may persecute
the Gospel, and do it with his very soul and heart as Paul, who breathed out
persecutions, and destroyed them that called upon the name of Jesus, and
compelled many to blaspheme, and waxed mad against the Saints, yet not sin
against the Holy ^host; for all this may be through ignorance, the
Understanding not knowing, the Conscience being not yet convinced, nay, it
being persuaded of the contrary as fit and lawful, Acts 26. 9. The thing
therefore that formerly Doing th^s after conviction by the Holy Ghost.
contains the nature of this sin, is the doing of all this after and against
Conviction by the Holy Ghost. Hence does this sin borrow its denomination
against the Holy Ghost. Now here I shall briefly open,

First, How the Holy Ghost is taken.

Secondly, What the Conviction by the Holy Ghost is.

1. The Holy Ghost is sometime taken; First, Essentially, How the Holy Ghost is
taken.
for that one infinite, indivisible, independent Deity. Secondly, Personally,
as the third person in Trinity proceeding from the Father and the Son. Thirdly,
Virtually, In respect of Energy or operation, and this Origin calls,
Proprietatem Loc. cit.
gratiae, and Aquinas bonum spirito appropriatum: for though external
operations be common to the Trinity, yet the immediate manner of working is
more common to one person then another, as the work of Creation to the Father,
Redemption to the Son, Illumination and Sanctification to the Holy Ghost. Thus
is the holy Ghost here considered in his proper operation, viz. Conviction.

Secondly, The operation or conviction of this person by the Holy Ghost,
consists in these particulars. What this conviction is. Objective. Patifactio.


First, The clear Revelation of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, both in respect of
Truth and Goodness; of Truth, that he is the true and only Son of God; of
Goodness, that he is the Redeemer of the world, and assured Savior to
Believers.

Secondly, There is by the Holy Ghost wrought in them an Apprehension of all
this by a supernatural illumination, as in Heb. 6. 4. They were once
enlightened, not naturali lumine, for by that of conscience every one is
enlightened, but lumine supernaturali, by that of the Spirit.

Thirdly, Not a sleighter apprehension, but a more determinate Conviction; so
that they cannot deny the truth; the light whereof shines with such clear beams
upon the understanding. The testimony of the conscience determinately assents
with the testimony of the Spirit, that this Revealed Gospel, is indeed the
Gospel of Christ and of salvation. You know who I am, and whence I come, says
Christ to the Pharisees; yea, themselves professed so much, because ye say we
see, therefore your sins remain, John 9.

Fourthly, Nay, yet undeniable Conviction is not all, there is also some kind
of approbation of those truths, which the Apostle calls A tasting of the
heavenly gift, and a tasting of the good word of God, and of the powers of the
world to come. A man may have a little taste of Honey, so that he can say, I
know it is sweet; and of wine, that he can say, it is comfortable: In like
manner, they who sin this sin against the Holy Ghost may feel his operation,
not only in an objective revelation, not only in a subjective apprehension, not
only in an undeniable conviction, but also in some degree of approbation. There
may drop some effects from the truth imprinted upon the affections that the
Conscience may be persuaded, and give testimony assuredly that these are the
very truths of Christ. All which is very evident in some of the Pharisees, who
had Christ revealed to them, who did know, and were convinced in their own
hearts who Christ was, and what his Doctrine was, yet did they with inward
malice break out against him, and his Doctrine, and in words poured the basest
contumelies and blasphemies upon him; and in their pertinacious workings did
constantly persecute him, even to the most reproachful death of the Cross, and
all this against the clearest Convictions of the Holy Ghost in their own
Consciences.

Thus for the nature of the Sin. Consider the Irremissibleness The
irremissibleness of this sin.
of it.

It shall not be forgiven unto men.

The Arrians, Eunomians, Macedonians, and other Heretics said, the Holy Ghost
was a Creature, and the Photinians denied to him a real substance, i. e. a
Personality, Vide Aug. Ep- 50. ad Bonifacium. Comitem. Vide Athan. Tom. 1. in
Ep. ad Serapionem, p. 344. of this very Argument.
as Erasmus interprets it; yet many of these repented, (if we believe Saint
Austin) and obtained pardon.

The same Father fitly removes this scruple, by distinguishing between
erroneous opinions concerning the Holy Ghost, and this unpardonable blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost. It is one thing to mis-apprehend the Essence, or
personal subsistence, and hereupon to pronounce according to the dark
misconceits of the holy Ghost. It is another thing to blaspheme Christ and his
Gospel after clear conviction by the Holy Ghost, this is the sin which shall
not be forgiven.

Hence it is, that this sin is called, 1 John 5. 16. A sin unto death. And H.
b. 6. 4, 6. A sin that casts a man into an impossibility of renewing. And Heb.
10. 26. All sacrifice for this sin is taken away. Which places strongly refell
Concord Evan li. 2. de poenit. c. 16.
the errors of Jansenius; and Bellarmine, and other Papists, who interpret this
of the difficulty and the ra^ity only of this remission, not of the
impossibility.

Quest. Why is it that this sin shall never be forgiven?

Answ. 1. It is not because the Holy Ghost is greater Why is it pardonable.
then the Son; for there is not Major and Minor, where every one is equal in
Nature and Dignity.

2. Nor is it because this sin is so intensively great, that exceeds the
absolute power of God to forgive it, or the infinite Merits of Christ.
Omnipotenti Medico nullus insanabilis occurrit languor; Isidore.

But the Reasons given are these.

First, Because it is Repugnant to the immutable Statute and Decree of the
Divine Will. It is Gods absolute pleasure, It is Gods absolute pleasure not to
pardon it.
who of himself sets the extent of his Mercy, and the bounds of his Justice.
Though he will be pleased to allow a possibility of Mercy to other sinners; yet
as a King for some facts will not allow an Offender his book; so God is pleased
here to deny Mercy. This Reason is true, but because it is of common equity to
some other sins, therefore further satisfaction may be sought.

Secondly, It directly resists, and repudiats the matter of pardon and
remission, viz. The blood of Christ. If a Contrariatur per ^e gratiae
remissionis, Alex: Ale^. Tom. 2. q. 155. m. 6. It rejects the pardon.
Patient could be healed only by one Medicine, and he did wilfully reject that,
it is impossible he should recover, not that the medicine is not of virtue, but
that he wilfully rejects this virtual Medicine: so here, there is no other name
under heaven by which we can be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ; no
plaster but the blood of Christ, which yet this sinner despitefully rejects,
etc.

Thirdly, It contemptuously, and with a wilful obstinacy resists that spirit
which should apply this pardon and Remission. He willingly resists the spirit
who should apply the pardon.
Pardon cannot be obtained, unless the Spirit apply it, but here the sinner
fights against the Spirit of God, and despites the Spirit of Grace, and will
not permit any operation, any saving operation of the Spirit to fasten on the
soul, all fitness and disposition for pardon is from the Spirit, who is here
rejected.

Fourthly, The constant order of operation in the Trinity He sins against the
order of Operation of the Trinity.
suggests unto us the reason of the irremissibleness of this sin; which order
is always by descent, and not by regression. If a man sin against the Father,
the Son has an operation for the sinner; if a man sin against the Son, the
Spirit has an operation for the sinner in working upon his conscience, and
offering of Christ; but if a man sin against this Spirit, whether should he go?
or who is to present pardon? To the Father he cannot go withour the Spirit, to
the Son he cannot go without the Spirit, but the Spirit is by him rejected and
despitefully scorned. He that sins against the Holy Ghost, sins against the
whole Trinity, the Fathers love, the Sons death, and the Spirits operation. I
know that Hierome says, this sin shall not Epist. ad Marcellum. Epist. ad
Bonifacium
be forgiven Propter blasphemiam, and Augustine, propter perseverantissiman
cordis duritiem; and the Schols, Propter defectum excusabilitatis and
indignitatem; and others, quod qui sic peccant traduntur in reprobum sensum,
thus Hilary, Athanasius, and some of our modern Writers.

Use I.
THE Uses from the explication of this high sin shall serve us both for, first,
Information: And secondly, Information.
Caution: Thirdly, Direction.

First That the greatest illuminations in the understanding, The greatest
illuminations are not able of themselves to save a man.
and determinate convictions in the Conscience, are not able of themselves to
save a man: A person may have a deep insight in the Mysteries of Heaven, an
ample apprehension of supernatural truths, a large acquaintance with the Rules
of Grace and life, a yielding in his conscience to the revealed testimonies of
the spirit concerning Christ and his Doctrine, yet be so far from the assurance
and possession of glory, that he may be reprobated to the lowest gulf of misery
and damnation, for the damned Devils are invested with most general extent of
objective knowledge; and these here who sin against the Holy Ghost do
participate of divine illumination, even to the measure of approbation in the
conscience touching the truth, yet you see that their condition is utterly
incompatible with the just hopes or expectation of happiness, it is not capable
of remission, and therefore eternally desperate of salvation: all which must be
so understood by you, not that spiritual illumination is not necessary, but
that it is not alone sufficient to save. The strongest abilities of knowledge
may only serve to purchase us a more learned and full damnation.

Secondly, That greatest knowledge may be in a subject The greatest knowledge
may be in a subject void of Grace, and an enemy to it.
both deprived of the inexistence of sanctifying grace, and also filled with
bitterest enmity and malice against the truth of Grace. I justly question,
whether any persons incapable of Glory are convinced with more supernatural
light then these who sin against the Holy Ghost; yet sure I am, none are more
enraged Lions against the innocence and simplicity of Holiness, and true Grace
then these.

A person may put on (...), as the Apostle 2 Timothy 3. 5.
speaks, and yet his heart be void of the inward power of Godliness. A dead man
may be clothed with beautiful Garments; and a heart utterly void of the life
and quicknings 1. Privation.
of Holiness, may yet be adorned with the fair robes and endowments of
knowledge.

Nay, Do but consult with the Records of the spirit in the Scripture, and the
examples of persons, and attempts in all Ecclesiastical History, you shall not
only find knowledge divided from grace, but oft-times making strongest
oppositions against it. None with-stood 2. Opposition.
Christ more then the learned Scribes and Pharisees; none withstood Paul more,
then the learned Athenians: Whom have we in our age more eager against the
Doctrine of faith, then the subtle Jesuit? and against the independency and
immobility of grace, then the Arminian. Dull and blind apprehensions are not so
serviceable Engines for the execution of Diabolical malice: the most
advantageous servant that ever Satan had, was a learned head and a graceless
heart: Abstract knowledge will easily blow up pride, and pride will easily fire
our malice, and contempt, and these will suddenly break out into our tongues
with derision and persecution of Grace.

Thirdly, That our greater knowledge (without sanctifying Great knowledge
without grace adds to misery.
Grace) adds to our greater ruin and judgment. This illation is most
conspicuous in the subjects of this sin, whose Judgment becomes the more
heinous and inevitable, because of the greatness of their illumination and
conviction.

I know the schools deliver unto us several circumstances whereby a sin common
with another in identity of nature, is yet by the access of them variously
altered: but amongst all the intensive perfections of sinful guilt this
addition of knowledge is one excessively aggravating. If ye were blind, (says
Christ, John 9. 41.) ye should have no sin (comparatively for measure) but now
you say, we see, therefore your sin remains. An ignorant Offender may have
some plea and excuse, but a wilful sinner is without all Pretext. None shall
find greater stripes then he who knows and does not, or he who sees to do, but
will not. As the most practical Christian shall rise to the highest seat and
Throne of happiness in heaven, so the most illuminated sinner shall sink into
the deepest dungeon of misery in hell.

Use II.
NOW I come to Caution: you have heard what this sin Caution.
is, and you have heard the sad condition of this sinner, that he may for ever
despair to see the face of God! I dare not fasten the complete guilt of this
sin on any who hears me this day: Only remember that of the Apostle, Heb. 3.
12. Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. Take heed of.


Yet because this sin is possibly incident unto us, who take upon us the
profession of the Gospel: it shall not prove I trust an unseasonable endeavor,
if I describe unto you some few steps by which the soul gradually descends unto
the bottom of this damned impiety.

First, Regardless receiving of the Gospel of Christ, which Regardless
receiving of the Gospel of Christ.
is done three ways.

1. When the Judgment has no reverent estimations of God in Christ, and of
the Promises made in the blood of Christ, or of the necessary conditions of the
Covenant of Grace to be performed by us.

Secondly, When the heart either in hearing or reading is without life and
affections, so that the Gospel draws not our love, and joy, and delight, or any
adhesion of the mind. Paul tells us, 2 These. 2. 12. of some to be damned. And
verse 10. They were such who received not the truth in the love of it.

Thirdly, When there is no conformity to the Gospel-rules of life. Now what
shall I say of our selves? what accounts have we of this pearl? what affections
have we to this Doctrine of Grace? Have we any impressions of Reverence, any
impressions of love unto the Ministry of the Spirit? Alas! our stomachs begin
to loath the honey comb, and we are almost as weary of this Gospel, as the
Israelites were of their Manna. Why else those many neglects Acts 7. 5. Ye
resist the Holy Ghost.
of this word of grace, why else our slight entertainment of it? why else our
very scorn and contempt of it? Shall I speak the truth? the heavenly strains of
the Holy Ghost in the Gospel fall too low, and sound too flat in our curious
ears. The sharp inventions of some Poet, or the brain-Raptures of a Comedian,
shall relish our Palats with more pleasure then the sweerest principles and
lessons that ever the wisdom of Heaven has dedicated. The plain tune of
Scripture striks us not, unless there be also smart descantin^s of humane wit.
Mistake me not, I speak not this to banish the convenient use of fitting
expressions in our delivery of the Gospel of Christ, by condemning our
inaffectionate attentions to the simplicity of Christ. I do not hereby
apologize for the language of rudeness; (no, I would not have the highness of
the word to be made offensive by my Barbarisms) only let me tell you, that
where the Word of life, coming in the strength and beauty of its own elegant
plainness, finds not only coldness of respect and love, but the lashes also
of ignorant censure and scorn, we are mounted upon an high step of
profaneness, and are descending to that unpardonable sin against the Holy
Ghost.

Secondly, Private or public scorning of holiness. Holiness it is the Glory of
God, and in a sort the rectitude of all his attributes. God delights to reveal
himself in Scorning of Holiness. Heb. 12. 14.
this holiness, and tells us, that without holiness none shall see his face. It
is the most distinguishing effect of the Spirit of God, and that which is both
an assurance of divine Election, as also the secular zeal of our salvation. Yet
may not I confidently affirm to you, that nothing is more fallen into the base
derisions of witless sinners then this glorious image of heaven. Strip me a
person of the well-spoken complements of dignity, wealth, conceited projects,
and deportments for the itch of the times, and suppose him only clothed with
the endowments of true grace and holiness; who is there that is set forth with
more disdain, and derision, and jeering, then such a person; this is the only
reason of our scornings that he is aperson of purity, one of the Spirit; A
religious David is the song of Drunkards, and the Innocent, Objects of
mockings, reproaches, scorns and jestings, Bonus vir, perhaps, but Christianus,
so now bonus vir sed Bonus vir Cajus Seius, sed malus tantum quod Christianus,
Tertul. Apolog. p. 810. Christianus, si nullius criminis, nomine reus est:
valde infestum si solius nominis crimen e^^. Ibi- p. 809.
Religiosus; Lord, What think we of God, or his Spirit, or Heaven! is holiness
beautiful in God, admirable in the Spirit of God, lovely in the Word of God?
and yet contemptible effectively considered in the servants of God. As sure as
the Lord lives, if the bounds of public Authoity did not awe, and the sectet
suspicions of public shame did not bank these enemies of Grace, their private
Sarcasms, and blemishes of Grace would break forth into public fury against
all real power and practice of Grace.

Who but an Ishmael will scoff at an Isaae? and who but a Cain will hate his
brother, because his works are good? and who but an ignorant wretch agitated by
the Spirit of darkness and perverseness, will fly out with hellish invectives
against holiness in heart, and practice, which is the Glory of God, the
perfection of Angels; the sacred work of the Spirit, and the pledge of our
immortal inheritance in the heavens.

My brethren, be cautioned to sorrow for this, and reform in offering violence
to holiness in man, thou fastnest indignity upon the very image of God, and
despite upon the Holy Ghost, who is the immediate efficient of Holiness in the
Creature.

Thirdly, Sleighting the checks of conscience. Conscience Sleighting the checks
of conscience.
especially enlightened, it is our Angel-Guardian, the private Register of our
courses, and the faithful Monitor within our own breasts: it is the eye of the
soul to oversee the whole occasions of heart and life, and it is the tongue,
that reports to us the rectitude or aberration of our ways. The Law testifies
de jure, and this de facto.

There is not I believe a sinner partaking of any illumination general or
particular under the powerful presence of a sound Ministry, but his Conscience
sometimes in the hearing of threatenings from the Pulpit, sometimes in his
retired secessions or withdrawings from company, does lay unto him the guilt of
his sins, and perhaps stings him with unquestionable convictions and horrors,
it tells him that his heart is yet desperately foul, and that his ways are not
the ways of life and comfort. Zach. 7. 11.
But now for this person to stop his ears at this faithful voice of conscience,
for him to deal with this, as Felix did with Paul discoursing of Judgment to
come, go thy way for this time, when I have convenient season I will Act. 24.
25.
call for thee, or else to quench and drown their private clamors by the
untimeliness of other discourses and fouler actions; O what direct injury do we
hereby offer to the workings of Gods Spirit, and what stronger power do we add
hereby to the workings of our heart.

A tender conscience is like a tender eye or stomach: but neglect of motions in
the conscience prepares for hardness of heart. It will be with us in sinning,
as it is with the iron, which becomes the more hardened after the fire, and the
sinner more sinful, after the slighting of the checks of conscience; or as
with a disease which grows incurable by neglect, yet might have been cured and
healed by observance; or as a tree which after many shakeings takes deeper
root, and hold in the earth. It is a fearful Judgment to sin against
Conscience, this will breed custom and delight, and defense, and at length
hatred of that Truth, which shall present light for Reformation. Hereby we
grieve the Holy Spirit, and quench him, and cauterize, or sear our consciences
with senselesness, whence arises a greediness to sin, Ephesians 4. 18.

Fourthly, Be not peremptory for worldly ends: he who Be not peremptory for
worldly ends.
sets up his resolution, that he will be some body in the world, he will have
his covetous ends, or ambitious projects, no marvel, if such a person sleights
the checks of Conscience, and derides the beauty of holiness, and looks on the
Word of Grace without all esteem or affection. Let God say what he will, he
will do what he please.

The Pharisees guilty of this great sin would not, could not believe Christ;
what was the reason? See John 5. 44. How can ye believe, which receive honor
one of another? Balam for gain will ride to curse the Israel of God, and Judas
betray his Master; and ambitious Haman, rather then his proud humor shall be
neglected, he will endeavor the ruin of all the Jews. What was the reason of
Demas's Apostasy? The embracing of this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. O! when
the heart is resolved for carnal courses, it will easily part with, nay, rather
then it will be crossed or disappointed, it will fall foul upon the very Truths
of God. The greatest enemies and opposers of Truth have been a covetous
Demetrius, Acts 19. or a proud Diotrephes, 3 John, verse 9. Be therefore
submissive in your worldly resolutions; and to bend the mind hereunto, weigh
Christ, and the whole world in the same balance: see whether Christ be not
more advantageous Caution.
every way; weigh you souls, and the world in the same balance: see whether
the saving of the soul, be not better then the winning of the world.

Use III.
THE last use shall be to exhort us, to use all the means we can to prevent it,
and to this end I will commend Exhortation.
these Advises.

1. Let divine Truths reform as well as inform: a naked Let Truth reform as
well as Inform.
sword may do much hurt, and a bare knowledge may prove dangerous: but where
knowledge has heat as well as light, it is Medicum utile: he is right whose
knowledge does not make him more cunning to sin, but more careful to avoid it,
and forsake it.

2. Strive to love the truth and holiness. Paul's temper Love the truth and
hol^nes^.
was excellent, We can do nothing against the truth, but for the Truth; Why?
What was the reason? surely his great love to Christ and his Truth. Love,
entire love to Christ will disarm us of all malice, and opposition against him.
Yea, and get love to the Gospel, wherein lies our life, our hope, our stay, our
comfort, our all.

3. Get faith, beg it of God, and the Father of our Lord Get says.
Jesus Christ to give thee faith: Faith would not only see a Christ, but prize
him too. Two virtues there are in a true faith, Singular estimations, and
Inseparable affections. Faith subjects the heart to Christ, and gives it unto
him, having none in heaven or earth in comparison of him. Should I oppose him
or his Truths, who is the best of all good, and my Savior, he came to save me.

4. Repent in time: often sinning, weakens truth in the mind, and raises ill
dispositions in the will. By much Repent in time
sinning a man becomes a very slave to sin, and a strong adversary to truth.
But speedy Repentance draws off the heart, and being often renewed, keeps it
tender and fearful to offend. Divine Truths make easy and ruling impressions
upon an heart graciously turned and mollified.

To close up all, Let the Word of God really affect us, let holiness in the
power and beauty of it affect us, let the fair and living checks of Conscience
seasonably affect us; let the blood of Christ, the eternal salvation of our
souls affect us, so shall we not be guilty of that blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost which shall never be forgiven.

Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, see these Authors.
1. Fathers, viz. Origin in Mat. and in l. 1. (...), c. 3. Hierome in Epist. ad
Marcel. Augustine especially in Epist. 50. ad Bonifacium. Athanasius Tom. 1.

2. Schoolmen. See Aquinas 2 a. 2 u. q. 14. art 1. etc. Alexander Ales, Tom. 2.
q. 155. m. 4. etc.

3. Papists, Bellarmine l. 2. de Paenit. c. 16. Jansenius in Concord. Evan.

4. Protestants, Calvin in Concord. Evan. Zanchins, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 9.
Scharpius incursu Theolog. Pareus in Heb. 6. and 10. Ursinus in Catech.
Piscator in Mat. Beza fusius in John 5. 16. Byfield on the Creed, Gouge on this
Argument. Perkins in the beginning of his cases of conscience, etc.

FINIS.
A Table.
A
Accepted. TWO things assure a Good heart his services are Accepted. p. 220
Uprightness is very Acceptable to God. p. 250.
Acts. Whether the Interruption of sinful Acts does impeach sins Dominion:
Answered. p. 115
Actual, vid. Dominion. Adam. Adam one of the greatest sinners, yet pardoned. p
270 Apostasy what it is. p. 282
Approving. A twofold Approving of our selves to God. p. 25
Assent vid. Dominion. A double Assent that sets up sin in Dominion. p. 106
Austin. Austins Opinion of the sin against the Holy Ghost. p. 281

B
Blasphemy. BLlasphemy what it is. p. 265 How taken. p. 282 Several Opinions of
the Blasphemy against the H. Ghost. p. 280 This Blasphemy described. p. 281,
282 The Subject of it. p. 282 The Object of it. p. 282, 283 The Acts of it. p.
283 The formal aggravations of those Acts. p. 286 The Irremissibleness of it.
p. 288

C
Captivity. A Twofold Captivity of the soul to sin. p. 141, 142 Three things
in a passive Captivity to sin. p. 142, 143
Cheerfulness. Cheerfulness or Uncheerfulness in Holy Duties, no infallible
Symptoms of Uprightness, or of the want of it. p. 243 How Uprightness may be
evidenced where Cheerfulness does not accompany holy Duties. p. 244
Christ. How a man may know that Christ is his Lord. p. 136 Three things appear
in a person governed by Christ, and not by sin. p. 141 No Dominion in the world
like that of Christ. ibid.
Cleansed, vid. Secret. What it is to be Cleansed from sin. p. 10 Comforts for
such as desire to be Cleansed from secret sins. p. 28, 29
Command. The Commands of sin are the vilest Commands. p. 122, 123 How a man
may know he looks not at himself, but at Gods Command in Duties. p. 213
Conscience. Checks of Conscience not to be slighted. p. 91, 295
Consent. Consent of the will how far it sets up sin in Dominion. p. 107.
Whether a good man may not yield a plenary Consent in whom sin has no
Dominion. p. 111.
Conversion. Conversion does not totally remove any sinful inclination. p. 150
Reasons of it. p. 151
Conviction, vid, Holy Ghost. Custom. Whether Custom in Sin can be without
Dominion. p. 160. The difference betwixt Acts geminated, and Custom. p. 161,
162
Conviction. The greatest Convictions of themselves are not able to save a man.
p. 290

D
Deceit. NO Deceit more dangerous then to be deceived about the right temper of
our souls. p. 194
Despair. No sinner has cause sufficient to Despair. p. 274
Dominion, vid. Consent, Custom, Holiness, Knowledge. What Dominion of sin
does import. p. 101 What is Dominion properly. p. 102 Dominion of sin what it
does imply. p. 103 Sins Dominion in respect of Assent. p. 105 Whether the
Interruption of sinful Acts impeach sins Dominion. Answered, p. 115 Dominion of
sin is either habitual or actual. p. 116 Whether sin in Dominion may befall a
regenerate person. p. 117 Distinctions about it. ibid. A complete Dominion of
sin cannot befall a regenerate person. p. 118 Why David prays against sin in
Dominion. p. 119 Why we should pray against the actual Dominion of sin. ibid.
Actual Dominion, though it conclude not the absence, yet it weakens the
strength of Grace. p- 120 Actual Dominion, though it cut not off the union, yet
it checks the Comforts. p. 120, 121 Distinguish betwixt Dominion of sin, and a
strong inclination to sin. p. 112 Why we should pray against the habitual
Dominion of sin. p. 122 Instances of sins Dominion in many. p. 126, 127 Deceits
about the Dominion of sin. p. 129 viz. unsensibleness of its power. ibid.
Freedom from many sins. p. 130 Opposition against some sins. p. 131, 132
Troubles after some sinful actings. p. 133 The Interims of sinning. p. 134 The
practice of Actions contrary to our outward sinnings. p. 135 Trials that sin
has not Dominion. ibid. Motives to Thankfulness to those in whom sins Dominion
is broken. p. 144 Differences betwixt the Dominion of sin, and particular
victories of sin. p. 154, 155 Directions against the natural Dominion of sin.
p. 163 What strengthens the natural Dominion of sin. ibid. What may break down
the Dominion of sin. p. 167 Directions against actual Dominion of sin. p. 168
Wherein the actual Dominion of sin lies. p. 169 The ways and methods of sins
Dominion. p. 173, 174
Doubts. Doubts of troubled souls fearing they are under the Dominion of sin.
p. 148 Doubts from the strong inclinations of sin; Answered. p. 148, 149 Doubts
from some special sinful Inclinations of sin. Answered. p. 150, 151 Doubts
from the prevailing of sin. p. 153 Doubts from the renewed Actings of sin. p.
157

F
Faith. FAith breeds and preserves uprightness. p. 254 How it does it. p. 255
Falls. The great Falls of others should work in us four things. p. 79. 80
Fear. Fear of God from what sorts of sins it preserves. p. 38 Preserve a
constant and humble Fear. p. 171 Services done out of Fear do not conclude
against uprightness. p. 232, 233 A double abstaining from sin, and doing duty
out of Fear. p, 234 A twofold Fear. p. 235 Whether Abstaining from sin, or
doing duty springs out of naked Fear, or Fear commixt with love. ibid.
Discoveries of springing from Fear, p. 236 From Fear with love. ibid. A holy
Fear of God preserves Uprightness. p. 253, 254
Forgiveness. Forgiveness of sin described. p. 267 There is a possibility of
Forgiveness in a twofold respect. p. 268, 269 Motives to get sin to be
forgiven. ibid.

G
Gods. GOds eye upon the secret frame of the soul. p. 14 Pardon of sin is Gods
Act. p. 267
Gospel. Take heed of regardless receiving the Gospel of Christ. p. 293 How
many ways this is done. ibid.
Gracious. Its a Gracious Act. p. 267 A double Graciousness in the discharging
of an Offender- p. 268

H
Hatred. HAtred of sin infalliby argues the indominion of it. Proved, p. 138
Hatred of sin how it contributes to uprightness. p. 252
Heart. When the bent and purpose of the Heart is to please God, what it
improves. p. 217
Holy Ghost, vid. Blasphemy. Conviction by the Holy Ghost, what it is. p. 286
How the Holy Ghost is taken. ibid. Wherein the Conviction by the H. Ghost
consists. ibid.
Holiness. Holiness has a Contrariety to all sin. p. 15 Whether a man can be
truly Holy that has vile inclinations and Abominations working within:
answered, p. 29, 30 If Holiness has our love, sin has not Dominion. p. 138
What of Holiness, and what not consistent with it. p. 139 A little Holiness
will not serve the upright man. p. 203 Take heed of scorning of Holiness. p. 294
Hypocrisy Hypocrisy distinguished. p. 20 Hypocrites and upright persons
described by their hearts. p. 180 Hypocrisy a natural and common thing. p. 195
An Hypocrite may go very far. p. 197 Yet his heart is rotten. p. 198 It is a
foolish thing to be Hypocritical in service. p. 199 Hypocrisy a most perilous
sin. p. 200 Three times wherein an Hypocrite may express forwardness in Duties.
p. 211 Hypocrisy how discovered by self-applause and vainglory. p. 247, 248
Humbleness. Humbleness of heart preserves uprightness. p. 256 Three properties
in it. p. 256

I
Illumination. THE greatest Illuminations are not able of themselves to save a
man. p. 290
Inclinations. There is a difference between frequent Inclinations in an evil
man and in a good man. p. 152. Dominion of sin, and a strong Inclination to
sin, differenced. p. 112.
Inequalities. All Inequalities in holy services do not conclude a man is not
upright. p. 241 Inequalities in holy duties arise either from weakness of
strength. ibid. Or from falseness of heart. p. 242 What Inequalities arise from
falseness of heart. ibid. Two sorts of Inequalities about holy services. ibid.
Conclusions from grace. p. 243
Infirmities. Infirmities distinguish from presumptuous sins. p. 83, 84, 85
Sinful Inclinations, vid. doubts, vid. Holy. Impenitent. An Impenitent sinner
is utterly inexcusable. p. 273
Judgment. A sound Judgment a means to keep a sound heart. p. 165 Corrupt
Judgment a main cause of Dominion of sin. p. 170 The corrupt principles in the
Judgment which must be removed. p. 172

K
Knowledge. KNowledge of God a double kind of it. p. 2 Knowledge necessary to
get off the Dominion of sin, and what knowledge. p. 164 The greatest Knowledge
may be in a subject void of grace, and an enemy to it. p. 291 Great Knowledge
without grace, adds to our misery. p. 292

L
Life. THere is a difference betwixt a Life of motion, and of Affection. p. 152
Love. Love of Sin a means to keep up the Dominion of sin. p. 164 A predominant
Love of God and his ways, a means of uprightness. p. 252

M
Manasseh. MAnasseh his notorious sins, yet pardoned. p. 270, 271
Mercy. Improve Mercy aright. p. 94, 95 The intent of Mercy, inpardon of sin
demonstrated. p. 269 The actual grants of Mercy and pardon to the greatest
sinners. p. 270 Mercy is the essential and natural disposition of God. p. 272
The Influence of Mercy upon repentance. p. 274 Mercy abused in presumptuous
sinning. p. 74

N
Novatians. WHAT the Novatians thought to be the sin against the Holy Ghost. p.
280

O
Obedience. A Twofold Obedience unto sin. p. 113 Distinctions about Obedience
to the Commands of sin. p. 114

P
Pardon. There is a possibility for a Pardon of any sinner, and any sin, except
the sin against the Holy Ghost. p. 266 Persuasions to make out for Pardon. p.
275, 276 We need Pardon. p. 277
Pardoned. How woeful is an unpardoned condition. ibid. Comfort to have sin
pardoned. p. 778 Means to get our sins pardoned. p. 779 Paul his sins were very
high, yet pardoned. p. 271
Prayers. Diverse qualities about our prayers. p. 42 Many and great petitions
may be put up at once in Prayer. p. 41 Reasons of it. p. 42, 43
Presumptuous. What Presumptuous sins are. p. 53 Presumptuous sins described.
p. 54, 55 Two things on which a presuming sinner does imbolden himself. p. 56,
57 Why David prays to be kept from Presumptuous sins. p. 70 Reasons in respect
of himself, ibid. An Aptness in the best to Presumptuous sins. ibid The best
has a self-inability to keep from such sins. p. 71 Reasons in respect of the
sins themselves. p. 72 Presumptuous sins are amongst the highest ranks of sins.
p. 73 Mercy abused in presumptuous sinnings. p. 74 Reasons in respect of
others. p. 75 Presumptuous sins in a godly man are examplary. ibid. Such sins
would be Trophies to evil men. p. 76 Reasons in respect of God. p. 77 We should
be afraid of presumptuous sins. p. 78 Degrees of presumptuous sinnings, though
very fearful, yet recoverable. p. 81 Discoveries of presumptuous sinnings. p.
82 Considerations to quicken our care against presumptuous sins. p. 86, 87, 88
Rules to be kept from presumptuous Sins p. 89
Principles. Two sorts of Principles which have an influence upon a man. p. 169

R
Regenerate. WHether sin in dominion may befall a Regenerate person. p. 117
Relation. Our special Relation to God should work a care not to sin against
him. p. 50 Reasons of it. p. 51
Repent. A difficult thing to Repent. p. 95
Repetition. Repetition of sin is very fearful, p. 157 Repetition of sin may
justly stagger a man about his condition. p. 159
Resistance. Whether all Resistance impair dominion of sin, and no Resistance
does always infallibly argue it. p. 110
Restraint. Restraint what it is. p. 60 Whence it arises. ibid. What it
presupposes. p. 61 All Restraint of sin is from God. p. 61 Alll evil men not
equally restrained. p. 61 Restraint of sin an act of merciful providence. p.
62 Both good and bad restrained from sin. p. 62, 63 God diversely restrains man
from sin. p. 63 Differences betwixt the Restraints of good men and evil men. p.
65, 66, 67 How many ways God restrains his servants from sin. p. 68, 69

S
Sanctification. SAnctification imperfect in this life. p. 15
Secret. Secret faults a holy person desires to be cleansed from them. p. 6 In
what respect sins are called secret. p. 7 No sin secret to God. ibid. Sin is
secret to man in respect of the person sinning, or the manner of sinning. p. 8,
9 Why we should desire to be cleansed from secret sins. p. 11 Why secret sins
deceive us most. p. 12 Secret corruptions are the Christians trouble. 16 Many
wallow in secret sins, with the Aggravations of it. p. 18, 19 The principle of
sinning is secret. p. 19, 20 Discoveries of a desire to be cleansed from secret
sins; Negative and positive. p. 21 Motives to enforce our care against secret
sins. p. 31 The Lord knows our secret sins early. ibid. And will make them
manifest. p. 32 And judge them. p. 33 A twofold manifestation of Secret sins.
p. 32 Secret sins more dangerous then open. p. 33 In what respects they are so.
p. 33, 34 Aggravations of secret sins. p. 34, 35, 36 Means to be cleansed from
secret sins. p. 36 Great sins should be feared as well as secret sins. p. 45
Reasons of it. p. 45, 46
Secure. Be not secure because of Gods present silence. p. 92 93.
Self-love. Self-love implanted in every man, and is natural. p. 245 Duties
may lawfully be discharged out of self-love. p. 245 So it be a self-love in
subordination, not in competition. p. 246
Servant. A good man is Gods servant. p. 47 Two forts of servants under God. p.
48 His plea that we are Gods servants should be used to move the Lord to help
us against sins. p. 49
Service. The Service of sin is the vilest Service. p. 133, 134, 135 Gods
gracious acceptance of our weak services. p. 218 Diverse considerations about
our holy service. p. 218, 219
Sin. Sin wherein the strength of it lies. p. 13 Sins diversely distinguished.
p. 54 Beware of a course of little sins. p. 89 Take heed of the Iterations of
sin. p. 90 A twofold obedience unto sin. p. 113 Several distinctions about
obedience to the commands of sin. p. 114 Every sin as acted is therefore the
worse. p. 119 The commands of sin are the vilest commands. p. 122, 123 How sin
and we are enemies. p. 137 Our strength against sin must be improved. p. 17
Particular sinnings are compassable with a gracious frame, not with a glorious
condition. p. 238 Tho things in sin. p. 268 Sin, vid. Dominion of Sin. vid.
Forgiveness. Sin makes God our enemy. p. 277 Sin against the Holy Ghost, vid.
Blasphemy. Schoolmen wherein they place the sin against the H. Ghost. p. 281
What this sin is called. p. 288 Why it shall never be forgiven; Negatively. p.
288 Affirmatively. p. 289 Means to preserve us from falling into this
unpardonable sin. p. 297

U
Vainglory, vid. Hypocrisy Upright, Vprightness. Case I. I fear I am not
upright because of my particular sinnings: Answered. p. 120
Case II. Doubts from inequality about holy services. Answered. p. 240, 241
Case III. Doubts of Vprightness from self-love? answered. p. 244. 245
Case IV. Whether all self-applause and vainglory be incompatible with
Vprightness: Answered. p. 246, 247 Motives to get Uprightness. p. 249 Means for
the getting of upright hearts. p. 251 Go to God for them. ibid. Means for
preserving Uprightness. p. 253 Considerations to keep us upright. p. 258, 259
vid. Cheerfulness, Uprightness, vid. Fear of God. vid. Faith. vid. Holiness.
vid. Hypocrites. vid. Hatred of sin. vid. Humbleness of heart. Some kinds of
sinning contradict uprightness, and what they are. p. 138, 139 A Christian
should endeavor to be upright. p. 177 What it is to be upright. p. 178
Uprightness applied severally. p. 178, 179. Uprightness expressed by sundry
ways and places. p. 179 Uprightness described. p. 182 Uprightness how it deals
about Graces. p. 185 Sins. p. 186 Duties. p. 187 Uprightness its end and scope.
p. 187 Why we should endeavor to be upright. p. 189 God looks for it, and at
it. ibid. Its the only thing he expects. p. 191 It brings the whole man to God.
p. 192 God judges a man by it. ibid. A difficult thing to be upright. p. 201
To be upright is a possible thing. p. 201, 202 Discoveries of Uprightness. p.
202 The principal care of Uprightness is the reformation of the heart. ibid.
The upright man makes conscience of all sins. p. 204 How this may be
discovered. p. 205 Wherein Uprightness appears about sin. p. 208 Uprightness
discovered in our disposition about duties. p. 209 By universality of
obedience. p. 210 By simplicity of obedience. p. 212 By spirituality of
obedience. p. 213 By humility of obedience. p. 215 An upright person the bent
and purpose of his heart is to God. p. 216 The upright person finds indulgence
for offenses. p. 222 An upright person the Lord is his God in Covenant. p. 224
Uprightness intitles the person to the blessings of heaven and earth. p. 225
Uprightness seasons all our conditions. p. 226 Uprightness will be a good
friend in death. p. 227 I fear I am not upright. Answered. p. 228. Diverse Cases
about Uprightness. p. 231 In case our abstinence from sin is out of fear of
Judgment, therefore not upright. p. 231

W
Weakness. Great Weakness in the strongest Christian. p. 80
Will. Three things appertain to the Will. p. 109 There is a twofold will.
ibid. There is a double concourse of the Wills consent to sin. p. 111
World. Hearts crucified to the world preserve uprightness. p. 257 Be not
peremptory for worldly ends. p. 296
Work. All the work of a Christian is not abroad. p. 17


FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed or sold by Adoniram
Byfield, at the three Bibles in Cornhill, next door to Pope's Head Alley.
THE History of the Evangelicall Churches of the Valies of Piedmont, containing
a most exact Geographicall description of the place, and a faithful account of
the Doctrine, life, and Preservation, of the Ancient inhabitants, together with
a most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. And a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1658. Justified partly by diverse
Ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther, by
Samuel Monland Esquire. in fol.

Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the moresecret and
undiscerned differences between the hypocrite in his best dress of seeming
virtues, and form of duties, and the true Christian, in his real graces and
sincere obedience, by Mr. Samuel Crook. in fol.

A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis by that Reverend Divine
Mr. John White, late of Dorchester, in fol.

An Exposition upon Ezekiel, by Mr. William Greenhill in 4o.

The humble sinner resolved what he should do to be saved, or faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ the only way of salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick in 4o.

The Riches of grace displayed in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick in 12o.

The fountain opened and the water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing
of thirstly sinners, wherein is set out Christ's earnest and gracious invitation
of poor sinners to come unto the waters: His complaining expostulation, with
the ingratitude and folly of those who neglect so great salvation. His renewed
Solicitation, with all earnestness, and the most persuasive Arguments to allure
thirsty sinners to come to Christ, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in 4o.

The Plain Doctrine of the Justification of a sinner in the sight of God,
justified by the God of Truth in his holy word, and the cloud of witnesses in
all ages, wherein are handled the causes of the sinners Justification,
explained and applied in a plain, doctrinal and familiar way, for the Capacity
and understanding of the weak and ignorant, by Mr. Charles Chauncy, in 4o.

The Gospels Glory without prejudice to the Law, shining forth in the glory of
God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for the salvation of sinners who through
Grace do believe, by Richard Byfeild, in 8o.

A Declaration of the Faith and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational
Churches in England agreed upon, and consented unto by their Elders and
Messengers in their meeting at the Savoy, in 4o.

Habbakkuks prayer applied to the Churches present occasion, and Christ's
Counsel to the Church of Philadelphia, very seasonable and useful for these
times. by Mr. Samuel Balmford, in 8o.

A short Catechism by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick.

Hidden Manna, by Mr. Fenner in 12o.

Safe Conduct, or the Saints guidance to glory, by Mr. Ralph Robinson, in 4o.

The Saints longing after their heavenly Country, by Mr. Ralph Robinson in 4o.

A Sermon at a Fast by Mr, Nathaniel Ward, in 4o.

Moses his death, a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Edward Bright Minister, by Mr.
Samuel Jacomb, in 4o.

A short and plain Catechism, instructing a Learner of Christian Religion what
he is to believe, and what he is to practice, by Mr. Samuel Jacomb in 8o.

The Hipocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed by Mr. Samuel
Jacomb. in 4o.

A Sermon of the baptizing of infants, by Mr. Stephen Marshall in 4o.

The unity of the Saints with Christ the head, by Mr. Stephan Marshall.

There is now in the press that long expected book. The Bowels of tender
mercy Sealed in the everlasting Covenant, by Mr. Obadiah Sedwick in fol.


