The Best and the Worst MAGISTRATE: OR, The People's Happiness and Unhappiness,
Laid open in a SERMON Preached at The late Election of the Lord Major FOR The
famous City of London, Sept. 29. 1648.

BY Obadiah Sedgwick B. in D. and Minister at COVENT GARDEN.

JOB 29. 14. I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was as a
Robe and a Diadem. JOB 29. 15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the
lame. JOB 29. 16. I was a father to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I
searched out. JOB 29. 17. I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil
out of his teeth. London, Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1648.

To the Right Honorable, John Warner, Lord Major of the City of London, Abraham
Reynardson Lord Major Elect; AND To the Right Worshipful, the Aldermen and
Sheriffs of the same City.
My Lord,
IT was your pleasure to put the Service of Preaching at this Election upon me;
and it is your common desire to have that brought to your eyes, which lately
was presented to your ears: Assuredly, I neither value my self nor this Sermon
at that rate, as to make it thus public; what is now done, is only to express
my due respects unto your strong commands, for such I do interpret your desires
of Printing this Sermon to be: It is now no longer mine, but yours; For you I
studied it, to you and the City I Preached it, at your request I publish it,
and to all of you I humbly offer it; and be you pleased to remember, that Verba
Dei sunt vivenda.

I have little else to say unto you in way of Epistle, only this, You are a
City upon a Hill, the whole Kingdom looks upon you, and are apt to move as your
Orb moves, all Public Places and Persons are exemplary: You have been famous
for your Piety, for your Charity, for your Fidelity, for your Unity; Give me
favor to apply unto you those words which Christ delivered unto the Church of
Thyatira, I will put upon you no other burden, but that which you have
already, hold fast; Perseverance in well doing, is one step further in the path
of Duty, and the very next step to Glory; continue therefore in the love of
God, in the obedience of his Truth, in zeal for his Glory, in regard to his
Servants, in Peace amongst your selves, and in one United Heart for the
Public good; This will be your Honor in life, your Comfort in death, your
Crown for ever: For this above all, you shall have the choycest of his desires
unto the Father of mercies, who is,

Your Servant in Christ, OBADIAH SEDGWICK.

The Best and the Worst MAGISTRATE: OR, The Peoples Happiness and Unhappiness,
Laid open in a SERMON UPON Prove. 29. 2. When the righteous are in authority,
the people rejoice: but when the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.
YOu are met this day (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Beloved) about a
very solemn work, The choice of a Magistrate, of a chief Magistrate for a City,
for the chief City of this Kingdom; and the more weighty that this business is,
the more commendable is your custom, that you first begin with God, from whom
alone all Wisdom and Blessing flows.

There are three things for which God should be earnestly sought; one is, A
good Christ: The second is, A good Conscience: And the third is, A good
Magistrate. For Magigistrates are like the Prophets figs, Those that were good,
were Ier 24. 3.
very good; and, those that were bad, were very bad; or (as P. Martyr observes)
they are like the Angels: Good Magistrates are like the good Angels, which are
sent forth to minister for help and comfort; and wicked Magistrates are like
the evil Angels, which go forth to molest and hurt. If Magistrates be good,
they are a public Blessing, and if they be bad, they are a public Plague;
they are the Summer or the Winter, either as Heaven or as Hell unto a people:
Heaven is a place of joy and gladness, and Hell is the place of torment and
weeping. And thus is it with a people, as the Magistrate is who is over a
people, When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when the
wicked bears rule, the people mourn.

In these words you may behold (as in a glass) two different The division of
the Text.
faces of people: 1. The face of joy and gladness (The people rejoice.) 2. The
face of sadness and grief (The people mourn.) And both these are presented with
their different causes; The cause of the peoples joy, is the goodness of their
Rulers [When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice;] And the cause
of the peoples sorrow, is the wickedness of their Rulers [But when the wicked
bears rule, the people mourn.]

Although Authority be (formally and intrinsecally) the same, and varies not,
as to its essential consideration; yet circumstantially considered as in the
hands of good or evil men, and is by them differently managed, it does now
produce different effects or passions in a people. It is not with political
Authority as it is with renewing Grace, where the subject is changed, and acts
according to the nature and power of that Divine Principle, making a person
good, and disposing him unto good: No, Political Authority does not work thus;
It does not work Admodum Principii or Agentis, but only Ad modum Subjecti or
Recipientis; just as the same Pen writes fair or blots, as his skill or
rudeness is who uses it; or as an Instrument sounds pleasantly or harshly, as
the hand is which fingers it, or as a Sword defends or wounds, as the man is
who employeth it. Hence it is that the condition of inferior people comes to be
so often changed and altered; sometimes it goes well with them, sometimes it
goes ill with them; one while they rejoice, another while they mourn: of which
variety, although there may be internal Reasons in the people themselves, yet
many times the causes are external, and (in particular) do owe themselves to
the goodness or wickedness of Magistrates, as a man's health or sickness do owe
themselves to the change of Air, or as the Childs condition does to the change
of his Nurse.

I shall not (at this time) trouble you with a Discourse of Authority or
Government, either for the nature and kinds of it, or for the order and
degrees in it: Neither shall I trouble you with that Dispute about the
lawfulness of a Christian to be a Magistrate; the Text presumes it as a great
Blessing when the righteous are in Authority: Nor will I lose any time in
handling those Vicissitudes and Changes, whereof both the Governors and
governed in a Civil State are capable; All that I intend shall have reference
unto your present occasion, and I will present the sum of it in these two
Propositions:

1. That much of a Peoples joy and happiness lies in a righteous Two
Propositions from the Text.
Ruler or Magistrate. 2. That much of a Peoples misery and sorrow lies in a
wicked or unrighteous Ruler.
I begin with the first of these, viz. That much of a Peoples 1. D.
joy and happiness lies in a righteous Ruler or Magistrate; or take it thus,
That it is a great Blessing to a people when righteous men are in Authority:
[When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice.]

Take Authority in all the sphaeres of it, either in the highest, 1. True in
all sorts of men being in Authority.
as is that of Kings; or in the midst, as is that of subordinate Magistrates;
or in the lowest, as is that of Masters in Families, It holds true of all of
them, if they be righteous (when invested with Authority) they are a Blessing
unto those who are under them. If Kings be righteous, they are to their people,
like the Sun to the world: If subordinate Magistrates be righteous, they are to
the City as the Clouds to the Earth: If Masters be righteous, they are to the
Family as the Spring is to the Garden: David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiab,
were righteous Kings; What a joy and blessing were they to the people? Joseph,
Daniel, Mordecai, and those Magistrates which some of the good Kings set up,
what a public good were they to the Places and Provinces over which they were
set? And for Masters of Families that have been righteous, how great blessings
have they been? Abraham, God says of him, I know him, that he will command his
children and household G^n. 18. 19
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord; and Joshua, But as for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord: What a Josh. 24 15
blessing are they who are a means to bring the God of all blessings? Righteous
men are such who count no blessing sufficient for themselves or theirs, but God
himself.

Again, I desire you to remember, That there is a twofold 2. True in two sorts
of Righteousness.
Righteousness: 1. One is Political or Civil, which consists in the due
administration of Justice and Judgment. 2. Another is Spiritual and Heavenly,
which consists in a renewed Conformity of man's heart and life to the revealed
will of God.

If Magistrates be Politically righteous, so that in the times of their
Government, Judgment runs down as waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
stream, as the Prophet Amos expresses Amos 5. 24
it; If they relieve the oppressed, judge for the fatherless, plead for the
widow, as the Prophet Isaiah delivers it, Even Isa. 1. 17.
under this consideration alone they are a joy and blessing to a people: It is
a great blessing in a Commonwealth, To enjoy our possessions, to possess our
labors, to go out with safety, to come home with peace, to be kept from wrong,
and to be righted with Justice.

But if Magistrates be (also) Spiritually righteous, if they be such as rightly
know God, truly fear God, cordially love God, zealously act for God; if the Law
of Righteousness be written in their hearts, these men are blessings indeed,
and a joy indeed, though not in the opinion of wicked people, yet in the
opinion of God, and all his people. And this I shall demonstrate unto you by
four particulars:

1. By the Metaphors, under which they are shadowed. Four Demonstratiens of it.
2. By the Titles, with which they are described. 3. By the Abilities, with
which they are furnished. 4. By the Services, in which they are engaged.
First, By the Metaphors under which righteous and good Magistrates are set
forth (in Scripture) as public Blessings, and special causes of joy unto a
people: If you please to cast Judge. 9. 9, to 14.
an eye upon Jothams Parable (in Judge. 9. ver. 9. to 14.) you may find good
Magistrates or Rulers compared To the Olivetree, to the Fig Tree, and to the
Vine-tree: Now there are three things, observeable in all these Trees;

1. Every one of them is fruitful: The Olive Tree is Baccifera, and the Figtree
is Pomifera, and the Vine-tree is Vvifera; not one of them is barren, but
fruitful, very fruitful.

2. The fruit of every one of them is very good, all for common good; not one
of them but is so rich, as to set up and maintain a public Calling: How many
of you are enriched and maintained every year, some by the Olive Tree, others
by the Fig Tree, and others by the Vine-tree? Almost all the Kingdoms on Earth
fare the better for these three trees.

3. There is a distinct and special virtue in the several fruits which grow
upon these several trees: The Oil is of an healing Luke 10. 34
and strengthening virtue; The Wine is of a cleansing and Psalm. 104. 15. 1 Samuel
30. 12.
quickening virtue; The Figs are of a pleasing and nourishing virtue: And all
this is a righteous Ruler to a people, He is fruitful, and fruitful for their
good; To evil men he is as searching and cleansing Wine; To good men he is as
sweet and nourishing Figs; To all men he is as healing and strengthening Oil:
God and man are the better by him.

Secondly, By the Titles (in Scripture) ascribed unto religious or righteous
Rulers, which also show them to be a blessing and comfort unto the people. They
are called

1. Shields: The shields of the earth belong to God, says David; Psalm. 47. 9.
those whom he calls Shields, are the very same whom he calls Princes, or
Rulers: A shield is to cover the body, and it is to defend the body against the
injuries of Darts which are thrown at a distance, and of Spears, which are near
at hand to wound; and with these shields anciently those Commanders and
Soldiers stood guarded, who were in the Front, ready to receive the first and
strongest Charge from the Enemy: Of this use is a righteous Magistrate, in
covering and protecting the people from wrongs and injuries; He shall deliver
the poor and needy, and him that has no helper, Psalm. 72. 12. A righteous Psa.
72. 12.
Magistrate is the poor man's Harbor, the innocent man's Succor, and the unjust
man's Terror.

2. Shepherds; so the principal men are styled, Micah 5. 5. Now Luke 2. 8. 1 Samuel 17. 35. Ezekiel. 34. 2. Isa. 40. 11. Ioh 10. 11.
a shepherd Watches his flock, Rescues his sheep, Guides them, Feeds them,
Gently leads them, and many times carries the lambs in his bosom, and will give
his life for the sheep; All this is a righteous Magistrate unto a people, He
watches for their good, Appears for their good, Consults for their good,
Provides for their good; He has the shepherds Arms for the weak, the shepherds
Rod for the wicked, the shepherds Staff for the distressed, the shepherds Fold
for all.

3. Heads: Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made Exodus 18. 25.
them Heads over the people, Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of hundreds: And
the Head, as it is most eminent for place, so it most excellent for use; It is
the seat of those singular gifts of Understanding, Wisdom, Judgment, Counsel;
it is the fountain of all Sense and Motion: The Head is the Bodies Overseer,
Watchman, Counselor, Helper, all the body is the better for its influences: Of
what benefit the Head is to the Natural Body, of the same is a righteous
Magistrate to a Political Body, studying, foreseeing, forecasting, counselling,
ordering all for their good.

4. Pilets: I think the Prophet has an aim at this, in Ezekiel. 27. 29. All the
Pilots of the Sea shall come down from their Eezk. 27. 29.
ships: The Contingencies in this world are a Sea, The people who are exposed
unto them are the Ship, and the Magistrate is the Pilot who sits at the Stern:
The Pilot has the life and death of all the Passengers in his hand; If he
steers amiss, the Ship splits; if he observes his compass aright, they are
preserved; if he be ignorant, all miscarry in the storm; if he be discreet and
vigilant, the Ship bears up, and sails through waves and tempests: Of such a
common safety is a righteous Magistrate, He is your Blessing in prosperous
times, and your Security in dangerous times.

5. Physicians: He who is called A Ruler, Isa. 3. 6. is called An Isa. 3. 6, 7.
Galen.
Healer, Isa. 3. 7. A good Magistrate is a good Physician: One reports, That
anciently Emperors Palaces were sick men's Hospitals: A righteous Magistrate
will cure as many Diseases in the lives of men, as the Physician can in the
bodies of men; He can cure Idle people of the Lazies, and Drunken people of the
Dropsy, and Murmuring people of the Sullens, and Mad people of their Rage
against Godliness, and Proud people of the Fever, and Tumultuous people of the
Ague; His Courts, his Prisons, his Stocks, his Posts, his Sword, are notable
Physic for notorious Sinners: And besides this, he has admirable Cordials,
Restoratives, Preservatives in his Favors, Rewards, Encouragements to hearten
and strengthen honest persons. Surely a good Physician is a common Blessing.

What need I to add any more of their Titles? They are also called Builders,
Repairers, Fathers, Nursing fathers, nay Isa. 58. 12. and 49. 23. Neh 9. 27.
Psalm. 82. 6.
Saviors, nay Gods: Look of what use the Builder or Repairer is to an house, of
what help a Father is to Children, of what tenderness a Nursing father is to
the little Infant, of what joy a Savior is to oppressed Captives, of what good
and blessing God is to the world, of the same (in a proportion, and under God)
are righteous Magistrates unto a people.

I cannot yet fall off from this, without one special Observation, and that is
this, All these Titles do assure us, That righteous Rulers are a singular good
to all sorts of men, in all conditions, in all places, and at all times: If
Wars break out, they are a Shield; if Peace falls in, they are a Shepherd; in
Straits, they are a Head; in Tumults, they are a Pilot; for Exorbitancies, they
are a Physician; for Wants, they are a Father; from Oppressions, they are a
Savior; and under all Discomforts, they are as Gods.

Thirdly, By the Abilities with which they are furnished: There are particular
qualities which are proper to men in Authority, and do fit them and enable them
for the public good and joy of a people; I will mention only five of them,
Five Characters of fit Magistrates.
and every one of them is to be found in those that are righteous.

1. Rulers or Magistrates must be men fearing God: Thou shall provide out of
all the people able men, such as fear God, Exo. 18. 21.
said Jethro to Moses; He who fears God, he only is fit to rule men: That
Judge who said, I fear not God, said immediately, Luke 18. 4.
I regard not man. Now take the fear of God

Either Comprehensively, as it contains in it the whole Worship and Service of
God (The fear of God is an abridgement Eccles. 12. 13.
of all Religion:) Thus the righteous persons are the only persons who fear
God; no men are truly religious, but such who are sincerely righteous.

Or Distinctly, as it is a peculiar Grace, setting a person always in the
presence of God, and affecting of him with an holy and reverential awe of God,
In this notion also none fear God but righteous persons, it is their peculiar
Character that they fear God.

And verily, as this fear of God is the safeguard of all our own Graces (Timor
est custos virtutum) so it is the welfare G. Paris.
of a people, if it be found in a Ruler; nothing avails more to keep his eyes
shut, his ears open, his hands free, his heart sound: The fruits of the fear of
God.
This preserves in him Conscientiousness, Uprightness, Faithfulness, Care,
Diligence, Impartiality; This keeps him from Negligence, from Oppression, from
all Injustice; A man who fears God, dares not to be wicked, or to deal
unrighteously. When Joseph's brethren thought that he would have dealt hardly
with them, O no, says Joseph, I fear God; and Job durst not to Genesis 42. 18.
Job 31. 4.
do the least wrong to any man, For, says he, does not God see my ways, and
count all my steps?

2. Rulers or Magistrates must be men of Understanding, Judgment and Wisdom;
and therefore Solomon when he was to enter upon his Government, prayed, Lord,
give thy servant 1 Kin. 3. 9.
an understanding heart, to judge thy people, that I may discern betwixt good
and bad: for who is able (he means without this) to judge this thy so great a
people? Beloved, there are such multitudes of businesses, such variety of
causes, such diversity of The necessity of wisdom in Rulers.
circumstances, such cunning of pretenses, such newness of occurrences, such
difficulties of resolution, such dangers in mistaking, that do of necessity
require wisdom and understanding in Rulers: Wisdom and understanding are
necessary for them to keep up their Authority, to direct them in the exercise
of their Authority; they are an ornament to Rulers, and an advantage to the
people. By a man of understanding and knowledge, Prove 28. 2.
the State (of a Kingdom) is prolonged.

Now righteous men are wise and understanding men; wicked Righteous men are
wise men.
men are more crafty, but righteous men are more wise: A righteous man and a
wise man are (in Solomon's opinion) reciprocal terms, as a wicked and a foolish
man are. Consider wisdom

Either in relation to the Soul and Spiritual estate, as it appears in the
minding of the best part, in the eying of the chiefest good, in pitching upon
the choycest means, and in ordering of man to the glory of God, and the certain
fruition of most perfect blessedness, This wisdom the righteous enjoy alone,
none else are wise unto Salvation.

Or in relation unto secular administration for the civil good of people; even
under this consideration the most righteous Instances of it.
have been most wise: Joseph was a righteous man, and a most wise man for Rule;
Can we find such a one as this is, Genesis 41. 38.
a man in whom the Spirit of God is? said Pharaoh of him, when he presented a
method for the preservation of Egypt: David was a righteous man, and in all his
employments, whithersoever Saul sent him, he went and behaved himself wisely: 1 Samuel 18. 5.
Daniel and the three Children were righteous men, and in all Dan. 1. 20.
matters of wisdom and understanding, they were ten times better then all the
Magicians and Astrologers: How wisely did Moses allay the distaste which some
had taken against Eldad and Numb 11. 28, 29.
Medad? How wisely did Gideon smooth off the fierceness of the men of Ephraim?
Is not the gleanings of the grapes of Judge. 8. 2.
Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezar? How wisely did Solomon decide the
dispute about the living and the dead 1 King. 3. 26, 27, 28.
child?

3. Magistrates or Rulers must be just men: He that rules over men, must be
just, says David; and without all doubt 2 Samuel 23. 3
Justice tends to the joy and welfare of a people: Solomon says, That it
exalts a Nation; and we find it to be a sure Pro. 14. 34.
hand, a sure convey of blessings, in the Scriptures. Read that place
concerning Abraham's posterity, They shall keep the way Genesis 18. 19
of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
that which he has spoken of him: And to this purpose the Prophet Jeremiah
speaks, Did not your father Ier. 22. 15.
do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him?

He said not amiss, who spoke that (Justicia was Reip. columna, and Corona)
Justice was the Pillar, and the Crown of a Kingdom: The throne is established
by Justice, said Solomon, Pro. 16. 12. Job 29. 14.
there it is a Pillar: My judgment was as a Robe and Diadem, said Job, there
it is a Crown. There are four Ornaments for men; Eloquence is an Ornament for
an Orator, Humility is an Ornament for a Christian, Conscience is an Ornament
for a Minister, and Justice is an Ornament for a Magistrate. P. Martyr 2. Sam.
page 269.
One says, That to do Justice (Audire causas, Juvare pios, punire sceleratos)
it is munus Angelicum, imo Divinum, This is Angels work, nay it is work fit for
God himself.

And are there any men more just, then men truly righteous? Righteous men are
just men. Number. 16. 15.
I have not taken one Ass from them, neither have I hurt any of them, says
righteous Moses: Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and
before his anointed, whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom
have I defrauded? or of whose hand have I received any Bride to blind mine
eyes therewith? spoke righteous Samuel. 1 Samuel 12. 3


4. Rulers must be men of Mercy, as well as of Justice: I will sing of mercy
and justice, says David; The Mercy-seat Psa. 101. 1.
was the best seat that ever was set up for Sinners: and it is the excellency
of Christ's Government, that it is full of Purity, and of Equity, and of Mercy.
One relates of the Jews, That they would have none to be Magistrates, who were
not Fathers of Children; they thought their fatherly relation would be a motion
to mercy. Now Mercy in a Ruler is a joy unto a people, and conduces unto the
public good: The throne is upheld by mercy, says Solomon; and no persons are
more Pro. 20. 28.
merciful then righteous persons, they are begotten by the Father of Mercies,
and are Children of Mercy: David says, They are gracious, and full of
compassion; and Solomon says, Psa. 112. 4. Pro. 12. 10.
The righteous man regards the life of his beast, much more then the estates
and lives of men.

5. Rulers must be men of Courage: Be strong, and of a good courage, dread not,
nor be dismayed; So David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22. 13.
when he was to succeed in Authority. You read in 1 Kin. 10. 20. that Solomon
placed six Lions upon the one side, as he went unto his Throne of Judgment,
and six upon the other side, by every step there were two Lions, to intimate,
That men in Authority must be men of Courage. Magistrates (you have heard) are
called Gods, and why should Gods fear the faces of men? If men will dare to
smite with the fist of violence (Isa. 58. 4.) you should dare to smite with the
sword of Justice (Romans 13. 4.) Magistrates should be like David, who had
courage to rescue the sheep out of the mouth of the Lion and of the Bear, 1 Samuel 17. 35.

And Courage in a Ruler is of wonderful good for a people: The good which comes
by Magistrates courage. Numb. 25. 8, 11. 2 Chro. 15. 8, to 17. Righteous men
are courageous men, Pro. 28. 1. Neh 6. 11.
What good did Phinehas's zeal bring unto Israel? it pacified God, and stayed
the plague: What a notable Reformation did Asa's courage produce, even that
which made all Israel to rejoice: And no Magistrates are so courageous as
righteous men; Grace makes the best hearts, and breeds the highest fortitude.
The righteous men (says Solomon) are bold as a Lion: Should such a man as I
flee? said Nehemiah: They who truly fear God, do fear nothing, but to sin
against God.

Fourthly, It may appear, That righteous Magistrates are a blessing and joy
unto a people, if you consider their Services or Practices in which they are
engaged: Righteous Magistrates do conscientiously set their just Authority on
work for those common and good ends for which Magistracy was ordained. The
Magistrate may be pictured like Atlas bearing up the poles of Heaven; or he may
say as David (Psalm. 75. 3.) I bear up the pillars of the Earth.

There are four singular Services which Magistrates are to Four works for
Magistrates.
perform:

1. The first is, To maintain and support true Religion; and therefore that
Emperor set his Crown under the Bible: And Summa ratio est quae pro Religione
facit. Papinianus
Plato would have the Palaces of Princes joined to the Temples of the gods;
their chief care should be to uphold that which is the chiefest.

2. The second is, To protect and encourage well-doers: Mine eyes (says David)
shall be upon the faithful of the land; and Psalm. 101. 6. and 16. 3. and 72. 7.
My delight shall be in the excellent: In his days shall the righteous flourish.

The third is, To intend and preserve the public welfare: Non mihi sed
Populo, said Adrian the Emperor; Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity
within thy palaces, and I will Psalm. 122. 7, 9. Esth. 10. 3.
seek thy good, said David for Jerusalem: They must be like Mordecai, who did
seek the good of his people, Non suum, sed suorum.

4. The fourth is, To punish sin and wickedness in the several kinds and
authors of it; and therefore is the Sword of Justice put into their hands, To
be a terror to evil works and evil Romans 13. 3, 4.
doers: And questionless all those acts and services do exceedingly contribute
toward the good and joy of people. A people are like a Garden, Religion is
like the Sun, Peace is like the Clouds, Good men are like the Plants, Wicked
men are like the Weeds, Justice is like the Wall: Now no men can or will
improve Authority thus, but righteous men. Righteous men, they only are the
Servants of God, the Lovers of Truth, the Friends to Godliness, the Enemies of
Wickedness, and the Channels of all public good: Of this you may be
confident, That the Gospel never spread more, that Godliness never ripened
more, that Wealth never thrive more, that Tranquillity Peruse the History of the
Judges and of the Kings.
never settled more, that Safety never compassed a Nation more, then when Rulers
(men in Authority) have been most sincerely righteous and pious. And thus you
see the first Assertion demonstrated unto you; namely, What a Joy, what a
Comfort, what a Blessing righteous Magistrates are unto a people. I must now
turn the Tables, and show unto you what a Curse, what a Misery, what a Burden
wicked Rulers are unto a people; for so it follows in the Text [But when the
wicked bears rule, the people mourn.] Hence the second Proposition,

That much of a Peoples misery and sorrow lies in wicked Rulers; 2 D.
or, That wicked Rulers are causes of woeful mourning unto a people.

When Pharaoh bare rule, what a mournful time was it with Instances Exo. 2. 23.
the Israelites? The Children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up to God.

When the wicked Judges bare rule, what a woeful time was it with the people?
the Enemies break in and spoil the Country, Judges 2. 14, 15.
trey, and the people hide themselves in Dens and Caves.

When Saul bare rule, what a mournful time was it with David (he is forced to
fly from place to place) and with the 1 Srm. 26. 30.
Priests of the Lord? of whom he caused to be slain in one day Fourscore and
five persons; and besides, He smote Nob the city of the Priests with the edge
of the sword, both men and women, 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19.
children and sucklings.

When Ahab and Jezebel bare rule, what a mournful time was it? many of the
Prophets were slain, others hid themselves 1 Kin 14. 4 and 19. 10. and 21. 13.
in Caves, Elijah flies for his life, and Naboth was stoned to death for his
Vineyard.

When Haman bare rule, what a mourning did his wicked design occasion? The City
Shushan was perplexed, and in every Esth. 3. 14. and 4. 3.
Province there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping and
wailing.

When Herod bare rule, he made it a mournful time, for he slew all the Children
that were in Bethlehem, and all the coasts thereof, from two years old and
under; And now there was Matthew. 2. 16, 18.
a voice heard in Ramah, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning.

And truly, if you consider either the persons, or their dispositions in
Authority, or their Actions, or the consequences of Four Demonstrations of the
Point.
their evil Government, it will plainly appear, That there is nothing in wicked
Rulers, or from them, but what is very mournful.

1. Consider the persons themselves; Wicked persons are filled with woeful
Principles: When Hazael came to the Prophet Elisha, Elisha wept, and Hazael
said, Why weepeth my 2 Samuel 8. 11, 12.
lord? who answered, Because I know the evil that thou will do unto the
children of Israel; Their strong holds thou will set on fire, their young men
thou will slay with the sword, and wilt dash their Children, and rip up their
women with child. O Sirs, the Principles of wicked men are cruel Principles,
covetous Principles, oppressing Principles, unjust, false, corrupt, and
irreligious Principles; their Principles are (certainly) against God, against
Christ, against Truth, against Holiness, against Justice, against Faithfulness,
against all the good of public Society.

And is it not lamentable to see such men bear rule? that the defense of the
Gospel should be committed to him who is an enemy to the Gospel? that the seat
of Justice should be put to him who is, and cannot but be unjust? That the
protection of Truth and Holiness should rest in his hands, who (with all his
soul) hates the one and the other? That the care of public good should be
Leased out to him, who altogether consults his private gain? That the
administration of Government should be given unto a lawless man? The Sword of
Justice to a mad man? The power of differencing of Causes to a fool? Common
safety to one who is a common Plague? Were it not woeful to have the raging Sea
to rule the Ship? or the furious fire to govern an house? Every wicked man is
the one and the other.

2. Secondly, consider their dispositions as in Authority, and Wicked Rulers
sadly expressed in the Scriptures.
you shall find still more cause of mournfulness. The Scriptures compare
wicked Rulers

1. Sometimes to the Bramble, Judge. 9. 14. There is no fruit from a bramble,
nay not so much as leaves to make a shadow; nay, in stead of these, it is full
of sharp pricks, which scratch, and tear, and wound, and pain us: No other
thing is a wicked Ruler; take him at his best, he is but an Inutile pondus (a
George on horseback) and take him in his proper disposition, he is (as the
Prophet speaks) A pricking bryar, and a grieving thorn. A Eze. 28. 24.
wicked Magistrate, this is the sum of him, He is a great man's Slave, a poor
man's Curse, a good man's Foe, a wicked man's Friend, and all men's hurt.

2. Sometimes unto the Lion and Bear: I confess that the Pro. 30. 30.
Lion (often times) is the Emblem of Majesty, Strength and Courage; but under
this notion a wicked Ruler is not intended: You read in Scripture of the Devil,
that he is called A roaring and devouring Lion; to such a Lion is a wicked
Ruler 1 Pet. 5. 8.
compared: As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Pro. 28. 15.
Ruler over the poor people, says Solomon. David speaks in one Psalm, That the
Lions roar out for their prey; and in Daniel Psa. 104.
you read, That the Lions brake in pieces the bones of those accusers: The very
like does the Prophet Micah affirm of Dan. 6. 24.
wicked Rulers, They pluck off the skin from my people, and their flesh from
off their bones; They eat also the flesh of my Mic. 3. 2, 2.
people, and flay their skin from off them, and break their bones, and chop
them in pieces, etc. Is it not lamentable to have a people thus abused?

3. Sometimes unto Scorpions: The Prophet Ezekiel is said Ezekiel 2 6.
to dwell among Scorpions; All wicked men are Scorpions, and especially wicked
Rulers. There are four things which the Naturalists do observe in Scorpions; 1.
They are venomous Beasts, full of poison. 2. They are mischievous Beasts, apt
to harm: Pliny says of them, That they are (Semper in ictu) always Plinius,
Eglinus.
thrusting out their Stings. 3. They are troublesome Beasts, and therefore in
those countries where Scorpions abound, the Inhabitants dare not to lodge low,
and are forced many times, Ocreatos dormire. 4. They are tormenting Beasts,
they lick you, and wound you, and torment you; Their torment was as the torment
of a Scorpion, when he strikes a man, Rev. 9. 5. Now all this are wicked
Rulers, they are as he spoke of Nero, Veneum terrae: The poison of Adders is
under their lips, they are full of mischief; David says, That mischief is in
their Psalm. 36. 4. and 28. 3. and 140. 9. and 26. 10.
heads, Psalm. 36. 4. and in their hearts, Psalm. 28. 3. and in their tongues,
Psalm. 140. 9. and in their hands, Psalm. 26. 10. And besides all this, they are
but a torment and vexation to a people, They have vexed the fatherless and
widow, Ezekiel. 22. 7.

4. Sometimes unto Wolves, Ravening wolves (Her Princes Eze. 22. 27 Zeph. 3. 3.
are like wolves ravening the prey) and evening wolves: (Her Judges are evening
wolves) and what the disposition of these are, I need not discourse of amongst
you.

3. Thirdly, survey a few of the actions of wicked Rulers and then judge
whether they be not causes of woeful mourning to a people: Their actions or
works have been such as have overthrown Religion and Justice, and so
consequently the Souls and Bodies of men, and what more can be said to express
lamentation and mourning?

1. Concerning Religion (in which bottom all our Souls are embarked) were it
not most amazingly sad, if a people should forsake the true God, and set up
Idols, and Sacrifice to Devils, nay Sacrifice their Sons and Daughters to
Devils, renounce the Son of God, the Truth of Christ, the Gospel of Salvation?
O in what a lamentable condition are such a people! Yet wicked Rulers have done
all this themselves, and have caused Flagitiosissima feceri facinora secuti
morem Imperatoris sui. Salust in Iugurth.
the people to do all this by their examples, by their persuasions, by their
commands, by their threats, by their power, as you may read (for some part of
it) in the History of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and (for the other part of
it) in Ecclesiastical Histories since Christ.

2. Concerning Justice (which is the Ark of a peoples safety) how woeful have
the actions of wicked Rulers been against it? Justice is like that goodly
spreading Tree, spoken of in Daniel, The leaves whereof were fair, and the
fruit thereof Dan. 4. 12.
much, and in it was meat for all, the beasts of the field had shadow under it,
and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed
of it; yet wicked Rulers are (in this respect only) like him that cried aloud,
Hew down the Ver. 14.
Tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit;
let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches.
Whatsoever tends to the utter subversion of Justice, the same has been done by
wicked men when they bare rule: At your leisure peruse the Scripture, and that
will report unto you

Their neglecting of Judgment: They judge not the fatherless, neither does the
cause of the widow come unto them; Isa. 1. 23.
They overpass the deeds of the wicked, and the right of the needy do they not
judge. Ier. 5. 28.


And their perverting of Judgment: They afflict the just, they take a bribe,
and they turn aside the poor in the gate from Amos 5. 7. 12.
their right; They turn judgment into wormwood, and leave off righteousness in
the Earth, says the Prophet Amos: They justify the wicked for a reward, and
take away the righteousness of the righteous from him, says the Prophet
Isaiah: And are Isa. 5. 23.
not these the things which will make a land to mourn? Amos 8. 8.

4. Lastly, consider the Consequences which befall a people for all these
things: The times of Gods Judgment upon a people are mournful times, and times
of wickedness make times of judgment, and the times of wicked Rulers do make
the times most wicked, and therefore expose them to the greatest of Gods
judgments. It were easy to show unto you, That God has, even for the
wickedness of Rulers, 1. Departed from a people, forsaken them, cast them off.
2. Has removed all their outward blessings, the Corn, and Wine, and Wool, and
Flax, and Plenty, and Peace, and Honor. 3. Has denied them many blessings,
denied them the fruits of the Earth, the showers of Heaven, the seasons of
Harvest, Help, Succor, Preservation, Deliverance. And 4. Has inflicted upon
them the sorest of judgments, Plague, Famine, Sword, and has rooted them out
of their Land, and scattered them over all the quarters of the world.

And now I think you may safely subscribe unto the truth of this Assertion
also, That wicked Rulers do make a peoples condition very lamentable and
mournful; as on the contrary, Righteous Rulers do make their condition very
happy and joyful. There remains nothing but the Application of all this to your
selves and your present occasion, which I shall finish in three Uses: 1. The
first shall be a word for you who come this day to choose a Magistrate or
Ruler. 2. The second shall be a word unto him whose lot it may be to be chosen
by you this day. 3. The third and last Use shall concern all of you, whether
Electors or Elected, Magistrates or People, and the Lord direct what I have to
say unto all your hearts.

First, For you who are (this day) to choose a Magistrate, Three Advices to
those who are to choose a Magistrate. Alvares.


1. Be very serious: One said, That it was as hard a task to obey well, as to
command well; and I think it is (almost) an equal weight of difficulty to
choose a good Magistrate, as it is to be a good Magistrate. Alvares reports of
the Aethiopians, That they placed many empty Chairs about the Judge's Seat,
supposing that the gods came down and sat with him; This was but a fiction,
and yet it served to work an awful care in Judges to sentence righteously:
Nevertheless, this is a Truth, That God himself looks upon every one of you in
this work, and considers what you intend or act. Magistracy is his Ordinance,
as well as Ministry, his Image of Authority shines in that, as his Image of
Grace appears in this; and his Honor is as much interested in the former, as
your Salvation is concerned in the latter.

There are six Arguments which unto me seem sufficient to Six motives to be
serious.
persuade you to be very serious in your work of choice:

1. The Office is high: There is nothing (no, though never so small) wherein
the Name, or the Image, or the Work, or the Honor of God are involved, but has
Majesty in it, and challenges reverential seriousness from us: And all these
do center in Magistrates; for Magistrates 1. Do bear the Name of God, God
himself does call them Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. 2. They do bear the Image of God:
Dominion is a part of Gods Image, Genesis 1. 26. on it are engraven the large
Characters of his Greatness, of his Goodness, of his Wisdom, of his Mercy, of
his Justice. 3. They are in the place of God, they are his Deputies or
Vicegerents here on Earth. 4. They bear the Sword for God, their Office is from
him, and their work is to be for him, Romans 13. 1, 4. 5. They are entrusted with
the Honor of God, even with as much of it as both the Tables of the Law of God
do contain, of both which they are Custodes. Should you not be serious in that
which has (in and about it) so much of what is Sacred and Divine?

2. The Trust is great; and according to the nature of a Trust, should be the
proportion of every wise man's care. Whatsoever is dear to God, and valuable
with you, the Magistrate is (in some degree or other) trusted with; The
Magistrate is a Pilot, and this City is a Ship: Are you not careful unto what
Pilot you commit the Ship? especially a Ship so richly laden? and more
especially in times of Storms and Tempests? The Magistrate is a Commander, this
City is a Castle: Are you not careful into whose Custody you render the Castle?
especially a Castle of so great a strength, and in times of such danger,
wherein many have betrayed their Trust? A Magistrate is (as you have heard) A
Shepherd, and this City is as a flock of sheep: Are you not careful unto whose
watchfulness you leave the sheep? especially should you not (at this time) be
so much the more careful, when so many Wolves do abound, and (perhaps) run up
and down amongst the sheep? A Magistrate is a Nurse, the City is the Child:
Are we not serious unto whose Arms and Breasts we lend and recommend our
dearest Children? Religion is a Jewel, Justice is a Jewel, Trading, Safety,
Prosperity are Jewels; will you not be advised in whose hands you deposite such
precious Jewels?

3. The Employment is difficult: We look upon Authority as a great Dignity; and
so it is; (every Magistrate is a Star of the greater Magnitude) but withal
remember, That the Magistrate has as well the Chain about his shoulders, and
the Sword in his hand, as the goodly Collar of Essees, and his pompous Robes:
The Chain of many Duties, which he is bound to act, and the Sword of Justice,
which he is bound rightly to wield: As the wheels in Ezekiel were full of Eyes,
so a Magistrates Calling is full of Cares and Services. There are two Callings
which are the highest in the world, and also the heaviest in the world; 1. The
Ministers calling, (Who is sufficient for these things, said Paul.) 2 Cor. 2.
16. Exodus 4. 13.
2. The Magistrates Calling (O my Lord, send I pray thee by the hand of him
whom thou will send, said Moses.) Trajan said of his Imperial Crown, That he
who knew the cares of it, would not stoop to take it up: And Demosthenes
professed, That if there were two ways before him, the one leading to
Government, and the other to Death, he would rather choose that which did lead
to Death.

You read of Paul, that he complained, All the care of the Churches were upon
him: O then, what a burden must lie upon that man, upon whom must fall all the
care of this great and mighty City! It is a great care to look to one Parish,
It is a great care to look to one Family, It is a great care but to look to one
Soul, What is it then to have the care of so many millions of men lying upon
one shoulder? To take care that so many milions lie down in safety, Trade in
safety, walk in safety, and live in peace? To take care that God be wronged by
none of these, That his day be profaned by none of these, That not one of them
be wronged, That not one of them do wrong, but he shall suffer according to the
wrong which he has done? Has every man shoulders sufficient and
proportionable to bear so vast a burden? Therefore be serious.

4. The Mistake is dangerous, Error Personae is as dangerous in Magistracy, as
it is in Marriage, much more dangerous then Error Fortunae: All the danger lies
in Error Personae; for of all men, wicked men are the worst; and of all wicked
men, wicked Rulers are the worst: The Leprosy in the head was the worst of all
Leprosies; Poison in the Fountain is most influentially dangerous: A Canker in
the Root of the Tree, is pernicious to all the Tree; If the eye be blind, the
whole body is full of darkness, says our Savior. The Devils are the worst of
all Creatures, for they are Principalities, and Powers, and Rulers of darkness,
Ephesians 6. 12.
and are wickedness in High places: Wickedness is bad enough at the lowest; but
it is intolerable when raised or high with power. A wicked Ruler is a fiery
Arrow, shot out of the wrath of God amongst a people: Do you not by all this
discern what the danger of your mistake may be? And yet men are subject to this
dangerous mistake, even Samuel was subject unto it; Surely (said he) the Lords
anointed is before him: But the Lord said, Look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature, 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7.
etc. yea, and (sometimes) they who would be chosen, do trap and beguile us
into this Error by goodly pretenses, as Absalom did, 2 Samuel 15. 4. and by
courteous and fair carriages, as Galba did, of whom Tacitus writes, Omnium
consensu capax imperii nisi Imperasset.

5. Your Opportunity is honorable: There is no new Magistrate to be chosen by
you for this City, but God at such a time presents unto you four great
advantages: 1. One is, To make Christ very glorious. 2. A second is, To make
Religion very prosperous. 3. A third is, To make this City very happy. 4. A
fourth is, To make the whole Kingdom (upon which this place has such an
exemplary influence) very safe.

Beloved, you have in your hands, This one day, All the next years Mercies, and
Blessings, All your own Comforts, and, All your Brethrens Comforts: A good
choice is a full years Blessing. And verily, as such an opportunity is
precious, so the honor which God puts upon you in that opportunity is very
glorious; for as Magistrates are Gods in respect of Office, so are you (who
come to choose) you are also Gods in respect of the fruit of your Choice, for
according as your Choice is, you make day or night, light or darkness, good or
evil, joy or sorrow unto the people, which works God owns for his works in
Scripture.

6. Lastly, The very individual action is weighty: For it is Election, and
Election is a weighty action; it is an action which naturally calls for, and
depends upon Judgment, Counsel, Deliberation. There are some Magistrates by
Succession, whom people receive, but choose not; and there are some Magistrates
by Nomination, who are chosen for us, but not by us; and there are some
Magistrates by Election, who are (if I may so allude) our own Creatures and
Workmanship: And we, we are the more entitled unto their good or evil
carriages, by how much the more they are formed up into their place of
Authority by our own wills, not merely consenting, but distinguishingly
choosing and raising of them; so that if they be good, the first fruits of the
comforts are your portion; and if they be bad, the bitter water of Curse is
likely to be your draught first: O therefore how serious should you be in this
work! you should use the Touchstone and the Balance, Try men, and Weigh men.
Election (they say) is only Paucorum, and Bonorum, and Optimorum; Well, since
the Office is high, the Trust great, the Administration difficult, the Error
dangerous, the Opportunity honorable, and the Action weighty, here are Reasons
enough why you should be serious.

2. My second Advice unto you is, That in this work you be Religious: When you
are to choose a Magistrate, choose him first by the Book, and then upon your
Knees, and last of all by the Vote.

1. By the Book, Da Magistrum, said Cyprian; or as one writes of Boleslaus
(King of Poland) who still carried about him his Fathers Picture, and when he
was to do any great work, he would look on the Picture, and Pray, That he might
do nothing unworthy of such a Fathers Name. The Scriptures are the Picture of
Gods will (there his will is drawn out to the life) before you choose a
Magistrate, look there, and read there, what manner of Person God commends as
fittest for Rule; and whom God does choose, do you choose; and whom God
rejects, do you reject: as the Tirshatha did put them by from the Priesthood,
Neh. 7. 64.
whose Register could not be found in the Genealogy.

2. Upon your Knees: For a good Magistrate, as he is for God, so he is from
God; Every blessing comes from the Father of Blessings: Our Miseries begin
below, on Earth, but our Mercies and Comforts spring from above, in Heaven;
there is not the least Mercy but is above our Deserts, and worth a Prayer.
Public Officers may prove the more woeful, because private people are less
Prayerful. The Israelites desired a King, but they did not desire a good King,
and they sped accordingly: Moses his Prayer should in this case be our Pattern,
Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all flesh, set a man over the
Congregation: Number. 27. 16.
I know no reason why there should not be as solemn Fasting and Praying before
the choice of a Magistrate, as (anciently) there have been before the choice of
a Minister.

3. Be concientiously Resolute: Choose no man but him whom (in your Consciences
well enlightened) you believe fittest for so great a Place and Charge.

Do not lay aside a person for any private grudge; look on no man as your
Enemy, but as Adrian said of one ('twixt whom and himself there had been a
personal quarrel) when he came into his Authority, Evasisti; so let every one
of you say of any one with whom you have had any private differences, Evasisti,
I must not think of my Enemy this day.

Nor yet lay hold on any Person for any private interest: As you must not
remember who has been your Enemy so you must forget who has been or may be
your Friend: There is this difference 'twixt Bowling and Shooting, in Bowling
we consider the Byas, but in Shooting we fix our eye only upon the Mark: In
this business of choice you should not consider, how good a Friend, but how
good a Magistrate; Not what preferment may come to you, but what Emolument may
come to the City; Not how able the person is to head a Design, but how fit he
is to rule so great a people: And therefore, as he said of a Judge, (before
whom a great cause Cause came) Dare now to be just; the like I say unto all
you, who come to choose a public Officer this day, Dare now to be
conscientious.

Know you a person to be a a Scoffer at the Word of God, an Hater of Godliness,
an Enemy to Godly Persons, Profane, Loose and Irreligious in his walking? dare
to reject him from being your Governor, who rejects God from being his Governor.

Know you a man to have been unfaithful to the Kingdom, unjust in Inferior
Trusts, cruel in his Dealings, turbulent in his Spirit, Revengeful in his
Disposition, imperious in his Place, who will take no wrong, and do no right,
Dare to hinder him this day from rule. Is he fit to be a Shepherd who plays the
Wolf? or to be a Father, who tears and rents like a Lion? Is he fit to sit on
the Bench and Judge, who deserves to stand at the Bar and to be judged?

Know you a man who prefers his private Interest before the public good, who
consults his own ease and safety before the welfare of Religion and Justice,
who like wax may Of every one of these it may be safely said, what Solomon
Jarchi fancies Moses to have said to him who at the election of the seventy,
drew that black which was called H^el^k, Non ^^pit T^ Deus.
be tempered to receive any impression from a friend, who may be bought and
sold by a Bribe, turned any way by hopes or fears, who looks on this Office, as
Demetrius did upon Diana, for gain, who is of that Emperors mind, when a poor
woman delivered him a Petition, he answered, Non esset otium: assuredly her
reply is a good caution for you, Noli ergo Imperare: this is the man who will
be a plague and curse to you.

But on the contrary, If upon mature observation and experience, you find a
person (as I trust many there are in this Society) who is religious with
Joshua, zealous with Josiah, just with Samuel, meek, and composing of
differences amongst Brethren with Moses, wise with Solomon, fearing God with
Job, seeking the welfare of his people with Mordecai, loving of the excellent,
and frowning on the wicked with David, unmovable in the ways of Righteousness
with Paul, above fears with Nehemiah, against Bribes with Elisha, whose honor
lies in Gods honor, and his happiness is abundantly made up in your common
welfare and blessing; resolve on him, this is the man, this is the Righteous
man, who being in Authority, will give occasion of joy unto all the people: The
Lord direct you to light on such a one this day, and this is all which I have
to say unto you.

I have in the next place a word to say unto him, whosoever

Sir, As your choice, so your work is likely to be in a troublesome time; you
well know how divided, how broken, how shivered our public condition is; and
when the Ship is in broken Seas, the danger is the greater, and the Pilot has
reason to be the more careful and circumspect: Assuredly, your Piety, your
Sincerity, your Fidelity, your Wisdom, your Meekness, your Zeal, all the
Abilities which you can possibly ascend unto, will meet with occasions
sufficient for their trial and improvement.

But, Sir, though it be some part of your unhappiness, to appear upon the Stage
in divided and distempered times, yet it will be the more for your honor, if
you can with your singular wisdom, and expedient meekness, calm our seas,
quench our fires, steal into joint our broken bones, bind all of us up into an
Unity and Love, who are started asunder so much through our own frailties, and
(I fear) the more through other men's subtilties. It was the work of Jesus
Christ to harmonize God and man, and it will be your praise as well as duty, to
close up Christians and Brethren; But I shall spare further discourse for this.
One reports of Hippocrates, That he gave an Oath unto his Scholars to look
well to his children: An Oath is beyond me to impose on you, nevertheless, I
would (with all humble and dutiful respect) commend (and that from God) unto
your choyest care, two Children, and both of them belong to God; the mentioning
of their Relation, has raised in you already both a Reverence and a
Resolution: But what are these two Children? Sir, As you have but two farthings
to commend unto God (Bernard calls the one of them your Soul, and the other of
them your Body) so God puts the care but of two of his Children unto you, to
Nurse them for one year; the one is Religion, and the other is Justice: If you
be pleased to look well to them, you may be confident that God will look well
to you: These are the two Legs upon which the Political Body stands, nay they
are the two Pillars which hold up Heaven and Earth: These are Solomon's Jachin
and Boaz; These are (in their peculiar Services) that Moses and Aaron who
brought the people of Israel out of Bondage: God commends and charge the care
of these two (Religion and Justice) upon you.

Some of the Jews (as I find it in one whom I have perused) do relate
concerning the six Steps by which Solomon ascended unto his Throne, That upon
every Step in his Ascent, one cried aloud unto him to Remember some special
thing appertaining unto him in his Place: When he advanced his feet upon

1. The first Step He cried [Lo titeh mishpat] Judicium ne inclinato, Wrest not
Judgment. 2. The second Step He cried [Lo tikir panim] personam ne respicito,
Accept no person in Judgment. 3. The third Step He cried [Lo tikahh shohher]
munus ne recipito, Take no Bribes. 4. The fourth Step He cried [Lo tittang lech
asherah] Non plantabis lucum, Thou shall not plant a Grove. 5. The fifth Step
He cried [Lo takim lech matzebah] Noli erigere statuam, Set not up a Pillar. 6.
The sixth Step He cried [Lo tikbahh shor] Ne mactato Bovem, Kill not an Ox ^i.)
Sacrifice not to Idols.
The meaning of all this was, That Solomon (and so every Ruler) ought to have
an exact care of Justice and Religion; the which if you shall faithfully
perform, you shall reap the comforts of both in your own Conscience, and see
the fruits of both in the prosperity and safety of this great people committed
by God and man unto you.

There is one word more which I have to say, and it concerns

1. To be Righteous: As Moses wished, That all the Lords people were Prophets;
so do I wish, that all the people of this City were righteous, that the City
may be called (as Isaiah Isa. 1. 26.
speaks) The City of Righteousness, and then it should have that Name which
that City in Ezekiel had, the Name of the City Ezekiel. 48. 33.
was, The Lord is there; and if the Lord be there, all blessing and comfort
shall be there.

2. To love, regard and countenanee Righteous Persons: Your glory and strength
is in those, as your reproach and misery is in the wicked: Is it not better to
see a City like an Orchard, set with excellent Trees and Plants, then to see it
like a Wilderness, overrun with noysom and hurtful Beasts? The Righteous are
the excellent on earth, so said David the father; The Righteous is more
excellent then his Neighbor, so said Solomon his son: All men are the better
for Righteous men; the better for their Graces, for their Prayers, for their
Services: Laban fared the better for Righteous Jacob, and Egypt the better for
Righteous Joseph: You may truly say of Righteous persons, as he of the Prophet,
The chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

3. To abound in all the fruits of Righteousness, but especially in Love and
Unity, in Love and Peace amongst your selves, which are the glory of
Righteousness, and your own common Safety and Preservation: Jerusalem (says
David) is builded as Psalm. 122. 3
a City that is compact together; you of this City call your selves, Brethren,
Brethren of such and such Companies; Now says David, How good and how pleasant
is it for brethren to dwell together Psalm. 133. 1
in Unity: Some things are neither good nor pleasant (as the Torments in Hell)
some things are pleasant, but not good, (as the Delights of Sin) some things
are good, but not pleasant, (as the mortifying of Sin) but Unity amongst
Brethren is both good and pleasant.

Solomon (in the Canticles) sets out his stately Chariot with much
magnificence: The pillars thereof were made of silver, and the bottom thereof
of gold, and the covering thereof it was of purple: But then he adds that
which was the accent of Cant. 3. 10.
all, The midst thereof was paved with Love: All our excellencies appear with a
greater excellency by the flames of Love and Unity: Our Savior (who was Amor
mundi and desiderium mundi) tells us three things of this Love; one, That it
was the sum of the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and, Thou shall love
thy neighbor. A second, That it was the substance of the Gospel, A new
Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another. A third, That it was the
character of all his Righteous Servants and Disciples, By this shall all men
know that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

John Gerson (in an Oration of his to the King of France) assures us, That all
the sorts of man's life consist in Love and Unity: There is our Vita personalis,
and that consists in the Unity of Soul and Body; There is our Vita Spiritualis,
and that consists in the Conjunction or Union of God with the Soul; And there
is our Vita Civilis, and that consists in the Unity of men one with another:
Our Souls are saved by Love, and our Safeties are preserved by Unity. I will
but tell you a fancy which the same Author mentions, of a dispute betwixt Mars
and Pallas, which of them should have the honor to give the Name to the City of
Athens, at length it was resolved, That he should give the Name, who could
find out that which might be of most good and benefit for that City; Hereupon
Mars gives a stately Horse, which signified Wars, Divisions, Tumults; but
Pallas gave an Olive Branch, the emblem of Peace, Love and Unity; the City of
Athens presently chose Pallas to be their Guardian, rightly apprehending, That
Love, Unity and Peace, conduced most to their Prosperity and Safety: you may
with ease make the application to your selves.

And now what can I say more unto you? you have heard where joy does lie and
misery, your comfort or your sorrow, in Righteousness or in Wickedness: If you
choose to be Righteous, and to live Righteously, God will delight to be with
you and bless you; And how will he bless you? He will bless you with Peace,
which is the effect of Righteousness, Isa. 32. 17. He will bless you with
Prosperity, which is the shower poured down upon the head of the Righteous,
Prove. 10. 6. He will bless you with Safety, which is the wall of Salvation for
the Righteous, Isa. 26. 1, 2. He will at length bless you with that glorious,
perfect, everlasting happiness, which the Apostle calls, The Crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Unto which the God of Righteousness bring us all
for his sake, who is, The Lord our Righteousness. Jer. 23. 6.

FINIS.

