A second view of the Army REMONSTRANCE. OR Justice done to the Army.

Wherein Their Principles are new modeled, brought out of obscurity into
clearer light.

BY Which the Army and the whole Kingdom are under the conduct of the Spirit
of God, led out of a Wilderness to the view of a Canaan.

Dedicated To the General, and the Council of War.

By William Sedgwick.

In the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall
be said unto them, ye are the sons of the living God, Hose. 1. 10. LONDON,
Printed for H. Hills, and G. Calvert, and are to be sold at his house over
against S. Thomases Hospital in Southwark, and at the Black Spread-Eagle at
the West end of Paul's, near Ludgate. M.DC.XLIX.

TO His Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, GENERAL Of the Parliaments Forces, AND
To the General Council of War.
I Have done Justice upon you because I saw evil in you; There is a holy One
likewise in you, I must do him Justice too; I have smitten you, and not you
only, but the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek: It pleases me to
bruise him, and him as much to be bruised; it is his advantage, and therefore he
freely submits himself to be chastised: Ephraim is my dear son, a pleasant
child, For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still;
Therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him,
says the Lord.

It grieves me to see you as a Woman with child, big with justice,
righteousness, reformation, etc. and know not how or which way to be
delivered: Here is an arm stretched out to you that will gently lead them that
are with young, and guide the blind into a way they know not. You have high and
great designs, but are imprisoned in the darkness of flesh that you cannot get
out into a clear and strait way; My intent is to open the two-leav'd gates and
free you. I have opened the left already, and so turned aside that dark and
evil spirit that lay in your way; and shall now unfold the right, which brings
you into light, and so makes crooked places strait for you, etc.

You are upon the execution of justice, I would not have you go blindly,
passionately and rashly upon it; but accept this anointing of God prepared for
you, which will fill you with wisdom and righteousness. Ascend this Throne
of majesty first, that is here set up for you: Arise from the common and dark
nature of man into the holy nature of God, and then you will be able to judge;
suffer this holy child Jesus to come forth, and then go on in the name of God.

Read it, and if you see a little truth in it, read it again; the light is
dim, but it is a morning and growing light, and will shine more and more until
perfect day. This I dare challenge of you from that great and public trust
that is committed to you, in which we have all a deep share, from those high
and weighty affairs that you are upon, of such mighty concernment to the glory
of God, and the good of his people, from that ingenuity and freeness that you
have professed to receive advise from all, and to give satisfaction to all, and
especially upon the authority of him whose name I here declare and set up, that
you will not slight what is offered to you, and lay it aside unconsidered; but
that you will give it due hearing And if in any thing you dissent from it, I
may know it, and either receive or give satisfaction; or if it be doubtful to
you, I may have opportunity to clear it; or if these things appear true (as I
believe they will) but yet at a distance from you, that I may by removing that
out of the way that hinders you from fellowship with them, bring you into the
power and possession of them; And to this end I am, and would be more.

Yours, W. Sedgwick.

Justice done to the Army REMONSTRANCE.
I Told you when I was administering Justice upon your Remonstrance, that it was
a mixed thing of good and evil; that the Lord was in it, but hid under so much
filth that we could not discern him. You are Sion, but not perfect, and
therefore we must wash away your filth and purge away your blood by the spirit
of judgment and the spirit of burning: The Lord is amongst us, and sits as a
refiner and purifier of silver; he is set to it close, and will make it his
constant business, and do it hotly, sharply; even the silver, the sons of
Levi, the people of God, must pass through this sire; and therefore Who may
abide the day of his coming, and who may stand when he appears? Many cannot
stand before it, but are overturnd into a beastly ditch of rage, fretting and
foolish passion; this is a bastard spirit that cannot endure chastisement: But
others do stand in peace and quietness, there we see the spirit and strength
of the Son, who willingly suffers chastisement, knowing that he is chosen in
the furnace, and that by it he is made partaker of Gods holiness; purified
from humane holiness, which is at best but filthiness, into the divine
holiness: And to such I apply that of Solomon, As the fining pot for silver,
and the furnace for gold, so is a man to his praise.

The fining pot and furnace are for the best metals, and it is for their praise,
that they may be brought forth in a more noble form, and fitted to receive
some excellent impression.

Now therefore having cast you into the fire, and taken away your dross, we
shall hold you forth with a beautiful stamp of the majesty of God upon you:
That vail of an unclean spirit being rent away, we now behold your face
shining with the glory of God upon you; Now we have taken away the scum, and
cast it into the fire, we may safely eat of the meat, having done justice upon
the fleshly, worldly part, we must do justice to the heavenly and holy part.

The Remonstrance of it self is as the earth, without form and void, there is
a face on it, but it is deep, and darkness is upon it: But the spirit of God
moving, or brooding, upon the face of the Waters, brings forth a new creation,
which is blessed and good.

The Kingdoms of the earth, and the way of Gods dealing with them in these
last times, are described in Nebuchadnezzar and his Vision, Dan. 4. A Kingdom
is a great tree growing out of the earth unto a great strength and height,
reaching unto heaven, and the sight thereof unto the ends of the earth; it
grows out of the people, and receives its life and nourishment from the lowest
element the inferior people, but arises up to such a height as touches heaven,
i. e. comes near the heavenly glory, the Kingdom of heaven or Christ; This
tree has fair leaves and much fruit, meat for all; it brings forth honor,
order, peace, justice, love, riches, advantage to all; Kingdoms afford a
universal benefit: The beasts of the field have shadow under it, and the
fowls of the heaven dwell in the boughs thereof, and all flesh feed of it: All
sorts of men receive protection from it; those that labor and toil as beasts
in the earth, they enjoy their wealth and safety under it; and those that fly
in the air of wisdom, learning, they make their nests of honor and
preferment in it, and all live upon it: Or the beasts, men of earthy and civil
employment; Fowls of heaven, men of religious and heavenly employment, all
have their peace in this Tree.

But behold a watcher, and an holy one came down from heaven; This watcher is
the watchman of Israel, that keeps us and looks to us while we sleep; or that
thief that comes in the night, secretly stealing in upon us while we see him
not; and a holy one, though a thief, and in the night breaking down the
house, yet a holy Child Jesus, a holy Lamb, and we may know who he is, he came
down from heaven.

It Is the coming of Christ from heaven that does this, He cried aloud, and said
thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and
scatter his fruit, let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from
his branches: Here Is harsh, cruel doings from one that comes from heaven; Cries
aloud, it is not the still voice; and nothing, but destruction; Hew down the
tree, lay the ax to the root; cut down all government, dominion, King,
Parliament, with all power, order; cut off the branches of laws, offices,
places; Scatter the fruit, let there be no safety, peace, getting of estates;
Let the beasts get from under it, and the fowls from the branches; let the
inhabitants be scattered, let wealth be removed, let honor and preferments
cease.

Nevertheless leave the stump of the roots in the earth, with a band of iron
and brass in the tender grass of the field, and let it be wet with the dew of
heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth; let
his heart be changed from man, and a beasts heart be given unto him, and let
seven times pass over him; There is not utter destruction, though the glory,
honor, riches, peace of the Kingdom be cut down, yet it remains in the
stump, and is sure there: There Is nothing left but the stump of the roots in the
earth, some life in the lowest people, and that bound down, yet safe kept by a
band of iron and brass, by the power of the sword: In the tender grass of the
field, in the wide field, not in a settled, built City, rather a wilderness,
amongst some weak, tender spirits, some small blades of grass that are grown
up: And wet with the dew of heaven, lying open to heaven in the night of
darkness, expecting continual dews of favors and providence; It Is a desolate
and poor condition though it has a blessing in it; they that are gathered
into the City of God live better: Let his portion be with the beasts, let him
eat grass as the ex; It is not the condition of one man only, but of the
whole tree, the spirit of dominion in the Kingdom is changed from man to
beast; driven from men.

Man is a wise, lordly creature, that exercises dominion by wisdom and
understanding, and is invested with majesty, which is honored and reverenced
by others: The new man is the Lord from heaven, living in the light and
understanding of God, and of excellent goodness and righteousness; and is
therefore honored because he is the true and great Lord of al, and does good
to al, exercising righteousness in wisdom to al; such a heart now appears
not amongst us in no sort of men, but a beasts heart, rage, violence,
fierceness, exercise of force one to another, compulsion, driving in herds;
not wisdom to compose al into one body; These eat grass as oxen, live, as
oxen, a laborious, traveling, painful life, without any settled rest: And eat
grass: All flesh is grass; the highest and best men feed upon what providence
daily brings for^h to them, and that of a fleshly, fading, dying nature: Not
upon the living bread that comes down from heaven; not upon the fatted Calfe
killed and offered up; not on meat roasted by the everlasting fire; not eating
the spice nor drinking the wine of the Spirit; and this till seven times pass
over thee: Till the complete measure of Gods justice pass over: which I would
gladly restrain to seven years. This is the state of this miserable Kingdom.

The intent of God in this which is sure and decreed, and the demand by the
word of the holy one; It Is required and shall be effected; That the living may
know, First, That the most high rules in the Kingdom of men; God will make
you all know that himself, the most high, not a minister or angel of his, not
a vicegerent, not a civil Magistrate only, but the high God, the highest glory
of God rules, not only over, but in the Kingdom of men: This, beastly
ignorant man knows not, but you must know it, though you oppose it; and would
uphold an earthly Kingdom in which men may rule without God; no, the Lord
himself and his most high excellency shall rule and be known to rule.

Secondly, And gives it to whomsoever he will: He rules not in an abstracted
sense without us; but he gives it to whom he pleases, will bestow it upon men;
administer this Kingdom in his highest glory in men: And in bestowing of it,
will not be bound to any person or family, as King, nor to any society or
company of men, as Parliament, nor to any form or custom of men, but when he
pleases; will pull down some, and exalt others; will not be fixed upon this or
that person or thing; but walk up and down with it at his pleasure.

And thirdly, sets up over it the basest of men: will not leave till he set
the bottom upon the top, advanced the basest, mean, common sort of men, men of
basest account, of lowest, smallest worth not renownd either for honor,
riches, learning, wisdom or any other excellency; but set up men of base
ignoble birth, base spirits etc. over it.

These three things has the majesty of God written out clearly in these times;
the most high rules in this Kingdom; and first gave it to the King, but he
did not know the Lord that gave him his dominion, power and glory; nor govern
his People in the goodness, strength and light of GOD, but served and pleased
himself by it: and so abused that rule and authority that God gave, to
tyranny, covetuousnesse, oppression, and to self-pleasure and honor: for this
the Lord blasted his Majesty, cursed his government, rent his Kingdom and filled
it with troubles and distractions, and forced him against his will to call a
Parliament, which was virtually, or in a kind a resignation of his dominion
into their hands: For his great design before was to rule without them, and to
uphold his own interest in opposition to theirs, looking upon them not as a
help to him, but as enemies to his prerogative, being set upon principles of
government in contrariety to the Parliament; and his calling them being not
natural or voluntary, but forced (the union being first violated by his
dis-affecting and disdaining them) it was an erecting or setting up another
power distinct and divided from his own; and by that God passed from him to
the Parliament, left him, and set up majesty, power and glory in the
Parliament, and gave hearts, affections, honors, riches and strength into
their hands, and so seated himself amongst them.

They as ignorant of God as he, and not exalting the name of God that gave them
their power, but seeking their own and a worldly good, divided from the Most
High, they corrupt likewise; And God finding no satisfaction or rest amongst
them, blasts and withers their glory, and fills the Kingdom with such wrath; or
raises such storms in the nation, that they could not guide the ship, but are
forced to cast themselves, and the government and safety of themselves and
Kingdom upon others: Not being able to support their own and the peoples
good, they let all fall upon the people, and do expressly in their declarations
appeal to the people to judge, and require them to defend their own safety;
and upon that ground summon them to arms, or raise an Army; as may appear in
their Declarations at the beginning of these troubles; and thus they erect and
set up another power, The Army.

Now it is exactly to be observed how secretly God passes out of one form into
another, as from King to Parliament, and from Parliament to the Army; and not
so secretly, but his footsteps are seen visibly upon and in the actions of
men, and he rides his journey upon their backs. This very much concerns the
clearing up of the Armies case, and the scattering the mists that yet cover
them and hinder them from seeing their own right, and others from discerning
and acknowledging their power; and therefore I shall endeavor to unfold it in
these five particulars.

1. That there is a transmitting or translating of power from the Parliament to
the People, or Army. 2. That this change of power from Parliament to people is
according to humane and divine reason. 3. That this power of the People so
raisd by the Parliament, is a superior and stronger power then that of the
Parliament. 4. That this Army is truly the people of the Kingdom, already
formd into a body of an Army. 5. That this form of an Army is the most
excellent, agreeable to God, and fittest for the present work, and the mother
of other powers.
First, The Parliament having all power by the presence of God with them, and
the majesty of the King dying into them; they do, by the will of God, convey
all that they had to the people gathered together in arms for their own
security.

1. They themselves cease and expire, their end ceasing. The end of a
Parliament is the execution of justice, reforming of corruptions, preserving
the peoples liberties, etc. Now 'twas manifest the malignancy of the Kingdom
was such, as they could not heal it, and their liberties so endangerd they
could not save them, 'twas beyond their power and skill: And so becoming
useless, surrender to others.

2. Besides they raise up another power that is inconsistent with their own;
for civil, legal or Parliamentary power cannot subsist together in the same
Kingdom with military; but the military will, and necessarily must, silence,
enforce and subject the other at his pleasure. The power of the sword in a
foreign nation may be inordinate, but at home, being raisd for its own safety,
'twil be master, and eat up, or trample upon the other.

3. As an Army, being rough, thrusts out the civil power, being the gentler, so
the people being raisd, abolishes the representatives; for the figure or image
ceases when the substance comes in place, it loses its use and employment when
the body it self appears.

4. The raising of the power of an Army is an act of God, who is the Lord of
hoasts, and has a peculiar prerogative in gathering them together, and
delights much to show himself in this forme^ and the Parliament were but
instruments, God the main in raising an Army for his own great designs; and
therefore as soon as these are set up, he begins to show forth his glory in
them, and to withdraw himself from the other; leaves the Parliament to
weakness, divisions, vanities, disgrace, and appears in the Army in union,
success, power, vigor: The Parliament since the Army was on foot could do
nothing that had the face of majesty, justice or goodness: On the other side
the Army go on with great honor and glory in their work, being as full of
power as the other empty.

The Parliament doing nothing suitable to their trust, or worthy of a
Parliament, the Army discharge their place, gallantly, faithfully and happily:
So that we see the Parliament has expowerd it self and impowerd the people,
emptied and made void themselves of authority, and filled and formd the people
with it; and that there is a transition of the glory of God from one to the
other, and so a translation of dominion from the Parliament the representative,
to the body of the people, themselves.

Secondly, We must know this, that this descent of power is most natural and
according to the will of God, or agreeable to humane and divine reason: It is
indeed very harsh and unpleasing to those beasts and fowls that live under the
shadow and in the branches of this great tree of the Kingdom, and had their
interest and subsistence in royalty, in offices, in preferments, etc. It seems
to them nothing but confusion, that all this glory, and with it their lives,
should go into the earth, and remain in a stump of the root; but if they had
the wisdom of God, and did see his counsel and end in it, they would be
satisfied.

For 1. It Is exceeding natural that when the sap of the tree has risen to its
height, and brought forth its fruit, it should, when the fruit falls, and the
winter comes, sharp and cold seasons, return into its root.

Power did arise from simple, poor man, had its original from the dust of the
earth, common people, and receives its life and being from humane nature in its
simple state; there it was purest, unmixt from pride, cruelty, deceit, it was
quietest and at rest without violence and disturbance, though in a mean and
rude manner: And thence it rises into the glory of Kingdoms, into Lordship,
Monarchy, and all such greatness: Now when it comes to the top and begins to
corrupt, finds storms of wrath, malice and mischief, in those heights it
naturally returns to its center, and retires for its own safety, and recover
to it self in the roots of the earth, the people: Hence it is that bodies
politic, Kingdoms, have their several ages of childhood, youth, firm or
full age, and old age as well as the body of man; and one as well as the other
lies under this sentence, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; at
best they are but the people dresd or set out with some outward honor, and
therefore they must return to mingle themselves with dust of common men.
Again,

We know, honor est in honorante, honor is in him that honors, its seat
and subject is in him that gives it, and therefore in the people, who do by
their breath create any man honorable or great; and their breath is the life
of all greatness and honor, it being but an empty Idol, a dead image, if not
quickened by the affections of the people: It Is they indeed, or God ordering
their spirits, that make men honorable; if they give him not respect, means,
tribute, honor, their greatness dies at heart, and becomes a heavy burden and
a curse; and therefore it is very natural for it to come down to its own
original from whence it came, and does by that recover it self; for as the
people receive it into them, so they will quickly send it forth again with
greater power, and with increase.

This course of things has its method from the mind and will of God, who has
said, He will set over it the basest of men, Dan. 4. He raises the poor out
of the dust and lifts the needy out of the dunghill: That he may set him with
Princes of his people, Psalm. 113. The Lord has said he will exalt some and
pull down others; Scatter the proud in the imagination of their hearts, put
down the mighty from their seats and exalt them of low degree, Luke 1. It Is a
great sport and pleasure the Lord takes to set up and pull down, to bring
great things to nothing, and to exalt nothing to be all things; its excellent
justice to pour contempt upon Princes, to tread upon them as mortar, to bring
them under as the basest, vilest creatures, and to pour riches, honor and
greatness upon mean and base men, is as excellent love and goodness. This he
has said he will do, and this he does do, and it is his prerogative.

This too is taken out of a higher copy, the way of the Son of God, who is in
the form of God, in the highest heaven, and from thence descends into a low
state of a servant, to be borne of a woman, to be a carpenters Son, to be with
people of no account; to descend into the lower parts of the earth, to make his
grave with the wicked, to descend into hell, and from thence to ascend again
far above all heavens. It Is the great God the king of kings, looks down amongst
men of low degree, and is content to have his foundation in the dust, and so
arise that he might fill all things and take up the lowest into the highest,
and be the highest in the lowest, and so comprehend all things in one glory;
that he might fill lowness with majesty, and majesty with lowness, that there
might be a perfect agreement tween the greatest God, and the porest man.

Thus we see the second thing manifested; That this passing of power from the
Parliament, or any higher or Politic body into the lower, or natural of the
People; is rational, orderly, and and according to the original rule and
measure of all things which is the mind and way of God.

Thirdly, the people so raised and called up, are the supreme power or superior
to all others; even to them that begat them, the Parliament.

1. The Parliament call (as is manifest in their Declarations) to judge;
saying, let the People judge: they appeal to them and so they have subjected
themselves to the people: and it is but reason they should judge; for the people
themselves, have in themselves, the truest and purest light of judging which is
reason; and the most exact sense of their rights, and of good and evil
respecting their liberty and safety: and those principles in them of discerning
men, and things relating to public weal or woe; are more clear, more
incorrupted then they are in men raised by them into place and office;
especially when all high places are poluted by the devil, and the minds of
men grow worse by preferments and honors, as it is manifest they do in these
times of defection, wherein scarce any man in place, either Parliament or else
where, retains his integrity, and the Parliament it self is one heap of self
seeking, they being generally bias'd, both on the one side and the other, with
places, advantages, offices, particular interests, and so not fit to be the
judges of public and common right. Therefore it is reason that God should call
up the people, who though they be rude, despicable and unlearned, yet have a
plain and honest s^nse in them of good and evil: and they are now set up to be
judges of the affairs of the kingdom by God, and by the Parliament as his hand.

2. As they are higher being made judges and appeald unto, so they are the
stronger and more able to do justice and defend themselves then any instituted
power: in all representatives there is some weakness being but figurative:
They are indeed very elegant, beautiful and stately administrations of justice,
but have not that inward sufficiency and fundamental, stable strength that is
in the people: And being but forms of government, we have found them, as in
this Parliament, trifling about punctilio's of honor, circumstances and points
of privilege and prerogative, and not gone downright to the root of the
matter; which lightness of spirit is not a proper remedy for the huge bulk of
wickedness that has gotten into this Kingdom; nor able to stand against the
height and pride of injustice enthornd in the nation, and would be a whole age
and more in purging out these evil humors in their dull, formal and
customary way of proceeding, which is wholly unsatisfactory to the justice of
God. Yea iniquity grew upon them, and appeard in such an overflowing malignity,
and in persons of such eminency, that they feared to meddle with it, or feared
they should be swallowed up with it, and therefore sought the people to stand
up and do that which they could not; whose weight and strength is only able to
cast out the wicked spirit that had universally possesd it self of all parts
of the Kingdom, especially the superior parts: And the people thus authorizd
and empowerd by the sword, and inflamed with wrath and zeal against their
adversaries, have with much difficulty along while contested with these evils,
and at last got the better of them, which would have long ago (as it is most
evident) have swallowed up the Parliament; and by this it is evident this of the
people is the stronger power.

Thirdly, There is a third consideration proper for this, which is the power
that is committed to the people; its the power of the sword, and that in a
military way: If I give a man my sword I make him my Lord, and give him my
life: so did the Parliam^nt in committing the sword to the people, submitted
themselves to them; And with it they have declared, that they would live and
dye with those they have so entrusted: It Is as much as to say, we give our lives
to your command; our prosperity and being is only in you, we must live only
upon you: Now it is reason that those that give life should give laws too; and
them upon whom we depend for our being, we must depend upon them likewise for
out rule: so that the Parliament have made the Army the Lords protectours of
themselves, and of the right and interest of England; which while it stands, is
the chief power: What makes a public person above a private, but that he
has the civil sword in his hand to administer justice? Now the military sword
is sharper, its a trust more absolute and independent, more exercisd by will,
and less subject so the forms of law; and therefore they that have it are
much more Lords over those that are subject to it, and so the Army more
superior to the Parliament then they to others.

This I know will seem strange to many, and is not clear to the Army it
self, that the Parliament should become a subordinate and inferior, and they
a higher and supreme power. But God has made it so, and that (as you see)
according to the reason and actions of men; And let men consider but the
actings of Parliament and Army, they shall find the same thing expressed in
deeds; which is a sensible and experimental discovery of truth. Since these
wars we know the maine business of the Parliament has been to serve the
Army, to gather, borrow and assesse moneys for them, and to provide them
necessaries; some things of government have passed from them, but in a low,
weak, in considerable way; and in them they have been up and down, high and
low, this way and that way, as they received impression from the Army. Its
true, this has not been spoken expressly, but implicitly and darkely it has,
and the Parliament have felt it really: therefore you must be content to bear
this yoke: You have endeavored to acquit your selves of it, but cannot: You
have already lost your authority, when you turned England into a camp, and set
up martial power: when God leads them to restore it, as he did you to give
it, you shall have it, and not till then.

Fourthly, This Army are truly the people of England, and have the nature and
power of the whole in them.

1. They are of a popular stature, men of the common and ordinary rank of
people, most of them of trades and husbandry, (with a small mixture of the
Gentry) which are the body and strength of the Kingdom, and in whom the common
interest most lies.

2. They are the heart and life of the people, men in whom appears strong and
lively affections for public good, manifested in their great labors, and
hazarding their lives so often for the Kingdom; by which they have merited the
honor to be accounted the very breast and strength of England, and to have in
them the soul and life of the nation.

3. They did accept the appeal of the Parliament, and answer their call of the
people to judge, and accepting of it, its reason they should have it; if others
either are senseless and cannot judge, or sluggish and cowardly and will not
through fear adventure; or entangled with principles of slavery, or engaged by
particular and self-respects to a malignant party, and so oppose them; yet they
seeing and apprehending the danger of the Commonwealth, hearing the call of
the Parliament, and being valiant for the truth, to step up upon this throne
of judicature offered to them, they are unquestionably to be entitled the
people of England.

4. To this may be added the concurrence of the affections, prayers, councels,
pens and purses of the honest spirits in the Kingdom, who have at some time or
other sealed to them, and contributed their best help to them: Although it may
be since, many through darkness, weakness, temptations, divisions, petty and
inferior factions, have been distasted at them, and withdrawn themselves from
them: But these earthly and carnal distractions arising, partly from the
Armies miscarriages and weakness, partly from others passions, cannot
obliterate and blot out the many subscriptions of their names in heaven to and
for the Army in their prayers and speakings, especially in their distress: And
after these mists are blown away, God will lead people back to their own
hearty and earnest desires of a blessing upon the Army, as on those in whom
their lives and the life and safety of religion and liberty lay, which are
enrolled in heaven; and so show them, though they are divided below, they are
one in the highest, best, and most general actings of their spirits.

5. This Army in their general carriage toward the people, have by their
tenderness of them, care of preserving them, forbearing to plunder and spoil
them, though absolutely in their power, have showed that they have a public
spirit, and that the peace and good of the nation lives in them: And although
they be not so absolute and perfect in this, but that there be some sad
examples of violence and wrong, by many ill members amongst them, yet they have
generally, through the excellency of command, and the good spirit of God guiding
of them, so behaved themselves, that the people every where have witnessed
their great approbation of them, as saviors or preservers of them, by joy in
their presence and tears at their departure: It Is true, the Army has of late
for their iniquities, by the judgment of God upon their miscarriage, layne
under the curse of many people, and under a black and thick cloud of wrath:
But former kindness will be remembered, and God will give them greater honor
and acceptance, and let us know they are our selves, and as we have said, the
people of England; having public spirits, and minding the good of every
person in England as their own.

So that they are rightly and truly the people, not in a gross heap, or in a
heavy, dull body, but in a selected, choice way: They are the people in virtue,
spirit and power, gatherd up into heart and union, and so most able and fit for
the work they have in hand: The people, in gross, being a monster, an
unweildy, rude bulk of no use; but here they are gathered together into one
pure, excellent life, and so useful and active for their good and safety. The
clear understanding of this will be a great means to compose the
dis-affections of people to them, and to draw their hearts to them in love,
being themselves formd by God into this body, and that now their interest lies
as truly in the Army, as ever it did in King or Parliament, and will too be a
guide to lead the Army into ways of common good, and will enlarge their
principles to a general love of all, and a desire of making all happy as
themselves.

The Fifth and last particular is very considerable, and is that which the
evil spirit of darkness has obscured from the Army and the Kingdom, and by
it denied them the comfort and us the benefit of their being; and that is this.

That the Army are the People gathered and united into a most excellent and
divine form: Or an Army is a singular Ordinance of God appointed for special
purposes, and at this time raisd by God as most fit for those noble, honorable
and difficult works he has now in hand.

For the clearing of this I would have considered; That Army is a peculiar
Ordinance of God wherein he has a special delight, and appropriates it to
himself as a power that has more near relation to him, and more immediate
dependence upon him, and in which he will most visibly show himself, and
therefore chooses so often to be called the LORD OF HOASTS. And though they have a
very dark and black outside, being the instruments of his wrath, so they have
a very sweet and precious inside, when God brings forth his own name upon
them, and discover them to be his: As the blackest afflictions have in them the
choicest mercies; the cross of Christ has glory in it; and privation it self
obtaines the honor to be a cause, and to bring in new and more excellent
forms: so an Army that in the outside sounds dread and terror, yet has
riches treasured up in it; which when we see, we shall not fly from it, but
rejoice to have it near us, and to go into it for subsistence.

1. When God brought forth the first creation he cast them into this mould, an
Army, and so laid the foundation of all his works in the camp, Genesis 2.1. When
he had finished the heaven and the earth, and all the host of them: In this
posture has he put all things, not only the stars above, who fight in their
order, march in their course, but the very locusts go forth by bands. The
reason is, that they might all quietly serve him under the protection of an
Army; and that if they be infested with any adverse power, they might have
force to retreat to: In this military wisdom has the Lord of Hoasts made and
established the world.

2. When God expresses his presence with his people in the world, he manifests
himself to be in a military state, I will encamp about my house: Pitch his
tents about them; so in a second, middle or angelical state he is an Army,
while he preserves us he gathers his Ministers about us in a body, an Army.

3. When he comes in his last and great glory, he brings his hoasts with him,
and comes as a General and Lord of Hoasts, thousands of thousands attending
upon him, all his Saints and Angels; so that wherever the Lord appears, it is
in this state, either in the rear or lowest, in the body or midst, in the van
or highest, it is in this order; the creatures a camp, the Church militant a
camp, the Saints in glory a camp or host likewise.

In the providence of God in the world, God has made great use of Armies.

First, They have been the parents of all the Empires and Kingdoms of the
world; all the present Commonwealths upon earth must own the sword to be
their original, and confess that from it they had their beginnings; and it is
rational, for an Army has in it all government, and all parts of government,
order, justice, etc. in highest and noblest virtue and majesty.

Secondly, As all Kingdoms come out of an Army, so are much cherished and
upheld by the same; most Kingdoms flourishing while their military virtues are
kept bright and clear by use; and quickly languish when the sword is wholly
laid aside; The presence of the sword keeping off destruction from them.

Thirdly, As Kingdoms are begotten and nourished by Armies, so do they again
resolve into them as into their first principles: And when by strength of
wickedness civil societies are disturbd, they naturally retire to a military,
as unto their own Father, for safety; for they have a peculiar majesty,
severity, activity and masculine virtue or force to uphold a state against such
evils as are in the world, which no power besides has: And therefore Armies
are not such hideous evils, as some imagine, but are beautiful, glorious and
exceeding profitable societies; not only scourges, but saviors and
protectors; they have motherly bowels as well as iron hands: and so in Gods
raising and supporting this Army there is a most perfect wisdom of God;
casting his people into this form is very seasonable and proper for us at this
time.

For we are at this time become a wilderness, the pale of civil power being
broken down, and men let loose to furious and beastly lusts, such as would
lead them to inhume and brutill villainies, were there not this curb in their
mouths; nor could any man promise himself security in what he has, but that
God is a wall about us in this Army: And wise men will easily see, if sense of
some present suffering, or adhering to another side or party did not blind
them, that the violent and exorbitant lusts of men in this age, is no way to be
restrained but by this sharp bit, an Army: It Is true, it is our wickedness has
brought us to it; but seeing it is so, it is mercy in God to put himself and
people into such a posture for our defense: And this is the mind of God1
formerly decalred, not only to break nations, but to rule them also with an
iron scepter.

2. The work that God has now in hand is not an earthy, fixed thing, but he is
upon motion, marching of us out of Egyptian darkness and bondage, into a
Canaan of rest and happiness; and therefore it is proper for him to gird up
himself, to contract himself from a vast body of a Kingdom into a narrower
compass, into a few spirits in an active body, such as an Army is, loose and
free from the clogge of old forms and customs, to act lively his pleasure and
to follow him into those new ways and paths of truth and liberty, that he
shall lead them: and because this work is attended upon with difficulties, and
through a wilderness full of wild beasts and enemies on all sides, its his
great wisdom to Arm himself and to employ men skillful at the sword as well
as at the truel, to build Jerusalem with weapons in their hands, our great
dangers requiring it. And we know the beginings of God's great works of good to
his people, have been by Armies: as their deliverance out of Egypt and Babylon,
in the same part does he walk still, and therefore does he now in his last
appearing gather his host about him, and put us into this state as he has
foretold, Rev. 20. The camp of the Saints, The Armies in heaven.

Thus have we brought you forth as the Virgin daughter of Zion, a select and
chosen Generation, a lovely and precious people: But yet a femall, a woman, and
so in flesh and weakness being subject to sin and suffering: a state that must
be tried, and by temptations improved: it is no sure nor stable condition, being
not in complete and eternal union with God: you have had the love of
espousals, many kind favors from God, a Father, a Lord: but have sind against
them and him, for which he has caused you a while to wander in dark and
troublesome ways, and not admitted you to that state of rest and glory which
he intends to you. He has taken the Crown and Diadem from off your head, for
your unbelief and departure from him, and for that impurity which was in you:
he stripped you of your beautiful garments of Praise and Honor that once
clothed you, and so exposed you to wrath, curses, reproach, and put you again
into a new fire of trouble to purify you, to make you seek the Lord. But he
has not dealt with you, as he has dealt with other people: he has refrained
for his namesake, that he might not make an utter end of you. Because he will
have a people that shall bear his name. Has he smiteen him as he smote those
that smote him? Or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are
flaine by him? No, In measlure when it shouteth forth thou will debate with it,
be stays his rough wind in the day of the east wind. By this therefore
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
his sin. When he makes all the stones of the alter, as chalk stones that are
beat asunder, etc. Isa. 27, There is a a shouting forth of the righteous branch
in you, and therefore we must stay all rough winds, and breath gentle gales
upon you: your iniquity being taken away, we will present you holy to the Lord,
and marry you to the God of your salvation.

Know therefore, that the Lord, the most high God is in the midst of you, is in
you and with you in a glorious presence, as you have professed: The glorious
God, or the glory of God, dwells with you, or God in his highest glory rests
upon you; so that you are not only the People of England, but the People of
God, sanctified by the holy, mighty, wise spirit of God, and en lowed by the
divine wisdom, strength and justice; and you are as an Army, so the LORDS
host; or the Lord himself in his great majesty appearing amongst men in an
host; the whole host of heavenly and blessed men and Angels, with all their
various and innumerable excellencies and perfections gathered together, and
embodied upon the earth in you. An earthly Army in union with the heavenly
host, or the Lord of hoasts in Mount Sion among his people gloriously: This is
your Righteousness, the Lord Jehovah is your covering, your garment of
salvation, and only this can justify you; honest intentions aid good meanings
are rotten rags, and too narrow to cover your nakedness; we shall therefore
open and unfold this glory unto you, and bring forth this your righteousness.

First, The Lord is with you in his highest and greatest majesty, there is no
power, no glory of God, but it is in you and with you, and no power nor glory
greater then that which dwells in you, none besides, none above, none beyond it:
The Lord is here, the most high God, and with him all power in heaven and
earth; there is no wisdom or strength that you have not, and all imaginations
of a power absent from you either in heaven or earth, is an injury or
accusation to Gad and to you, is theft and robbery, stealing away the riches of
God from you and from himself in you; if you look upon the Kingdom of God,
the new creation, new heavens, and new earth, as absent or to come, you deny
the holy one with you, who is present in deed and power, though under your
weakness.

Secondly, The Lord is with you in perfect union and communion; you are what he
is, he is what you are; whatever is in him it is communicated to you, and
whatever is in you, is communicated to him: Is there power or glory in God? it is
in you also: Or is there weakness in you? it lies upon him: Or is there
righteousness in God? it is in you as it is in him, to live in it, act in it and
by it; to employ and bring forth: And is there infirmity in you? it is in him as
it is in you, a clogge, a burden, an enemy hated, separated, taken away, etc.
Nothing now is spoken of God, but may be spoken of you; you being in union with
him: or nothing spoken or done to you, but it is done to God with you, you being
one: And it is the blasphemy of hell and devil to separate God from you, or you
from God. Will men say you are Rebels, Destroyers; they say it of the Lord: or
will you, or satan in you, say you are weak, and men, and cannot do such high
things: they are too great for us, you and they will know you speak the same of
God, and so judge him as weak and unable to do them. For in nothing you must be
divided: or if you think that is God's, but this is our work, you wrong God,
and your selves: you must speak the words and do the works of God: God is
now, God in the earth, and you an Army in heaven.

3. The Lord is with you in spirit and truth, eternally, inseparably, in a
kingdom that never shall be destroyed: in an everlasting covenant that cannot
be broken. The kingdom is so with you the Lords people, as it shall never be
taken front you; but shall endure for ever, and all oppressing fears or dark
doubts, they are of the malicious one, your enemy, and the darkness of hell
that obscures the glory of God, which is an everlasting light, a Sun that will
not set: and all attempts of Satan or his instruments, will be as waves against
a rock dashed in pieces, and you shall grow from a little stone, to a great
mountain: from a little branch, to a great tree, that shall spread it self and
fill the earth with fruit.

Upon this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest. Having laid this
foundation; now shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and
the glory of the Lord shall be thy rerc-ward: you shall at once have light,
clear light to walk by, health to cure your diseases, to make you strong: and
Righteouesse to justify all that you do: For these cannot be separated when
the Sun rises, with light to direct he is a Sun of righteousness; to justify
and take away sin and shame, and has healing in his wings, gives life and
strength to do what he leads us to do.

1. Seeing the Lord has passed from other powers to you, and exalted or set up
you as the present standing power of the Kingdom, and has given himself to
you, and taken you up into his glorious presence; then must you exalt the Lord,
publish, declare the name of the Lord. Confess him to be in the midst of you:
sound him forth evidently, boldly, aloud; say the LORD lives with you, that he
is come to reign amongst you gloriously. Bring him forth in brightness and
power: let this oppressed one go free; tell it to all the nations, the Savior
of Israel is come to redeem his people from all their enemies: you do mutter
it, and speak it softly, and by halves, but declare it fully, that we may hear
the shout of a King in the camp, that God himself is in you of a truth: Let us
hear the sound of that Trumpet in the Camp, which the seventh, last and
blessed Angel sounds; And those great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms
of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever: Do you, not in words but in power and truth,
cast your crowns down to the earth, fall with your faces to the earth; your
crown of successes, victories, lay them down in the dirt, being but earthly;
and your faces, your excellency of honesty, valor, wisdom, honor, lay it
down to the earth, for it is but dust; and do you worship God, live God,
confess God, exalt God, his righteousness and power which is worthy, perfect,
almighty; Say (and do) we give thee thanks, O Lord God almighty, which art,
and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and
have reigned, Rev. 11. Give tip your selves from humane, weak and fleshly
state, as thanks or a free will offering, to the glory and majesty of God, to
act and live the life of the Almighty, put on the Almightinesse of God, be
clothed with God Almighty; and know the Lord is with you who art, deny not his
present being in power and glory in you, and confess he always has been
with you; which wast, and that which is to come, that which is eternal and
everlasting, is present; disjoine not these, let not him that is now with you,
be another from him who is to come, or from him who was; but say and swear in
truth, that he who is to come, in all that he will do, is now present with you
to do it; He has taken his great power and has reigned; he has already
begun, has taken his last and great power, and is in the exercise of it.

Therefore, Arise and shine forth, for thy light is come, and the glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee: For behold the darkness shall cover the earth, and
gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall rise upon thee, and his glory
shall be seen upon thee; And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings
to the brightness of thy rising. This lifting up the name of the LORD in you
will have a very great effect upon others and your selves.

1. Upon others; Sad darkness now covers the People of this Nation, and they
are in perplexity, not knowing which way to go: Do you shake your selves from
the dust of your own vileness, and put on the goodness, power and wisdom of
God, and all people will flow in unto it for help and succor; you will
presently cause all to gather about you for relief: The glory and light of God
will melt the heart of your adversaries into love to you; The sons of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending into thee, and all they that despised thee
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and call thee the City of
the Lord, the Sion of the holy One of Israel: Holding forth the goodness of
God you will be a joy of many generations; revive the Nation now lying in a
grave of misery: And those that continue obstinate, the name of the Lord will
be a terror to them, fill their faces with shame and confusion; 'Twill be as
lightning, immediately blasting and withering them; 'Twill pierce through their
heads, hearts and loins, and for ever disable them from any undertakings or
practices against you.

2. For your selves; This presence of God will burn up all those low and base
spirits that are amongst you, covetousness, pride, self-love, shall not dare
to abide in the camp: 'Twill be an anointing to you, filling you with royal
and Princely minds, create majesty, power, wisdom, justice and truth amongst
you; fill you with light and understanding, so that all your ways shall be
clear and plain before you, and every one shall be more mighty then a hundred,
able to fill the earth with righteousness and truth.

Secondly, You being the People of England, and all power and dominion
descending and coming down into you: You are the Mother of the Nation the
earth, basis and foundation upon which all lie: and being thus, in the light
and strength of God, you are Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all:
And therefore must,

1. Spread your arms to receive the whole Nation, open your bosoms to us, and
let us see that you carry in you all the happiness and welfare of the
Kingdom; manifest the largeness and comprehension of your spirits, that you
have in you the King and his royalty, the Parliament and their wisdom and
majesty; these two in Treaty nay in perfect union, that religion, trade,
justice, order, covenant, settlement, reformation, riches, honors, propriety
lies treasured up in your breasts: What you have not, gather into you all the
offices, treasure; authorities, seals, judicatures, all the prerogatives and
privileges of the Nation, let nothing lie out of you and be lost, but be you
the center of all, and call in all into you.

2. Let it appear that they are in you as in the Lord; In the Lord in you, and
so are in you most excellently, safely; that though we have them not in a
visible and sensible way, yet let all know they are in you as corn sowd in the
earth; that you do embrace them all in your tenderest bowels of love and care,
and but entrusted for a time with them; that as all have seen a seeds time, a
fall of the fruit and leaf, so we may expect a spring; as we have seen a
death by you of all, so we may hope to see a resurrection.

3. Receive them and retain them all in judgment, make a through digestion of
the good and evil of them all; keep them as in a fire, by the sword of divine
justice, with the exactness of God; cut off all evil things and persons,
separate the precious from the vile in the Commonwealth, and let nothing that
is of particular, or hurtful interests remain, but be a merciless grave to
all tyranny, oppression, to all ungodliness and unrighteousness; let all
things that are just, good, holy and honorable, incorporate with you, receive
a new life from you: Know the Lord is upon his Throne amongst you, and every
one, and every thing that is not his must be rejected; Every plant that he has
not planted must be pulled up; there must be no judge but the Lord; and no rule
of accepting or refusing, but the divine law of the spirit of God: What God
will own and say, it is mine, shall live, and what he will disclaim, must dye,
and the poor, narrow minds and fancies of men must not be enthroned, nor have
leave to judge amongst you.

4. So receive and retain them as ready to restore them when they are tried
and purified; let it appear that you are the womb of the Kingdom, that will
with labor and travel conceive, breed and nourish it: But that it is to you a
burden, and when the appointed time comes, you cannot but desire to be
delivered of it; and that it is your sorrow to have it in you, and will be your
joy to bring it forth unto others. By letting forth this public and good
spirit you will be carried up above that petty, low spirit of malice or enmity
to any; you will kill and tread upon this serpent, which is a base principle
and unworthy of God, and would keep you down in earthy and dark ways; but
coming forth into the largeness of God, you will act in high, noble and
generous ways.

And by being thus enlarged you will be as the walls of the Nation, enclose and
embrace all men, and all interests, and of a sudden gather up all men into your
selves, surprise and catch men's hearts before they are aware: and begirt the
Kingdom with your arms, and bind up all her breaches in union with your
selves: and be a present ease and stay to men's sad and aching spirits: that
whereas they are now in a wilderness and know not where they are, they may of
a sudden, their eyes being opened see they are in the hands of a wise and good
God, taking care of them by his own people whom he has blessed with
largeness, judgment and goodness for their safety. That men may see that
though they are fallen, yet not into a pit of utter destruction, or not into
the hands of enemies, but unexpectedly upon a very good bottom; a people
having the tenderness and goodness of the Nation, and the firmness,
largeness, judgment and stability of God in them, both in civil and spiritual
things: and discover a foundation, a firm rock and beginning of peace and
happiness to the Kingdom arising up in the midst of us.

Thirdly, Let me bring you forth too as the highest and strongest power in the
Nation, being superior to King, Parliament and All, in a true and good sense:
It Is God and Nature gives it you, and you wrong the Kingdom and your selves,
till you come forth in a clear and free owning of it: You darkly and in the
twilight steal it by your actions, but deny to profess it, which subjects you
to reproach and scorn as adulteresses and thieves, if you could boldly and in
the light and strength of God challenge it as your right and manifest it; what
is now feared would be embraced: Truths while they are faintly owned and by
halves are abused and rejected: when they lie low in the dust and are obscured
by darkness are terrible, and men fly from them: but when we lift them up
into our faces, and give them a throne in our open and free possession of them
they are lovely and acceptable; and command subjection in all: Besides the
Kingdom is unstable and looks this way and that way for a head: some look to
the King, and others to the Parliament, and neither appears to head them, which
keeps them still in a wavering state, far from any staidness or
setlednesse: Now lift up your heads, be upright: stand up in the name and power
of God, and this will compose the divided and doubting minds of men, knowing
where to fix, and attract and engage all to you: for you appearing their
natural and head cant be disowned.

It Is true you may be thought a Jacob a supplanter of your elder brother of his
birthright: But you having the blessing too, it will bear you out: God gives
it: The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord bath
blessed. God give thee the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine. Let people serve thee and nations bow down to thee:
Be Lord over thy brethren, and cursed be every one that curses thee, and
blessed be he that blesses thee. Show forth that riches of heaven, that light
and glory of God, and that fatness of the earthy, that goodness, power,
justice and kindness that is in you, and then all power must bow to you, all
will seek to you.

While you hold it forth in a night dream, as Joseph does his brothers sheaves
bowing to his: they despise and envy you for it, but show your selves possessed
of all the corn of Egypt, of all the good of the land, and then your brethren
there being a famine in the land of peace and righteousness, they will be glad
of you, and come and remove all their substance to you, into the Camp, to be
preserved and kept alive by that store at health and salvation that is in the
presence and goodness of God laid up amongst you and in you.

Your halting in this point is very dishonorable and unsatisfactory, to write
your selves the servants of the Parliament, and yet to exercise power over
them: And it puts you upon gross and unseemly actions: to patch and bodge, to
pick out and cull some from the Parliament that go against you, and leave
others that are as unfit to govern as they you refuse, only because they vote
with you: This has great appearance of siding and partiality: it were more
justifiable far to dissolve the whole and stand upon your own absolute and
supreme power: For while you go as a Snail with that old house upon your
heads, you will never make any dispatch in your business, they being in that
state in which you own them, an empty vain idol of no use at all, but will be
a clog to you perpetually, and make you formal, low, servile, and tedious in
all your actions.

Therefore ascend into that height into which you are called, shake your selves
from your dust of formal relations to other powers that are ground to powder by
the justice of God, that you might come forth of them: Loose your neeks from
your b^^lls, be no longer captives: They have and God has made you Judges, and
given you authority and dominion: The mountain of the LORDS house, shall be
established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and nations shall flow unto it.

It shall appear that you are indeed the supreme power taken up into the throne
of God, living in the secret place of the most high. That the most high God
rules in you, and gives his highest wisdom and justice to you: And that you
have a more exquisite sense of the good and evil of the Nation then any, and
more able to judge what is truly for their good, and to resolve those questions
and controversies which yet lie in doubt and darkness amongst us.

And that you are in the power of God mighty to save them when men cannot,
being the people of GOD, or qualified with a divine strength: Though the
Kingdom be miserably broken, and those that have attempted to heal it through
unskilfulnesse and unmercifulness have more abused the poor people: yet there
is hope in Israel concerning this thing. There is balm in Gilead: Though there
be none in the ways of men, yet there is amongst the people of God in Israel,
that is a prince with God, and prevails over men: Though the Sun be turned
into darkness, and the Moon to blond: there is confusion, shame and despair,
in and upon the greatest lights of the world: Yet in mount Zion and in
Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the LORD has said, and in the remnant whom
the LORD shall call, Joel 2.31, 32, in the LORDS people, a despised remnant is
Englands salvation.

Therefore let them know, that though through the flood of wickedness that is
broken forth amongst us, religion be laid waste, order and government in Church
and Commonwealth be dissolved, and the honor, royalty, greatness, riches,
trade of the Nation be visibly lost, yet there is a power with you that can
recover all these into light and health again, to the satisfaction of all that
desire to see good days: This al-creating, al-restoring power is with us, and
will not fail us in our work: Isay. 58.11, 12. The Lord shall guide thee
continually, etc. Thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
water whose waters fail not: Thou shall build the old waste places, thou shall
raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be called the
repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in: There is a fountain
and spring of the spirit of God that shall run over the whole Kingdom, and not
fail in any work you are upon, be it never so high, great and honorable, and
all that is excellent in the Kingdom, though it be sunk into the foundations,
yet you will restore and repair them again.

Fourthly, I present you to the Kingdom, and so must you present your selves
to them as the fruit of their own womb. The son of God begotten by the Spirit
of God, of this Nation, formed and shaped by the divine wisdom out of the
bowels of the people: Or that little stone, a precious stone, being irradiated
with the holy and divine nature, cut out of the mountain or the Kingdom
without hands: There is in you the life and spirit of the Kingdom: the vigor
and strength of the Nation: her firstborn you are: the staff and strength of
her age, and although of all the children that she has formerly brought forth
by her elections, laws, customs; there is none that can take her by the hand,
and guide her out of her distress, yet you will kindly put under your
shoulders to carry her in your arms to a place of rest.

Cast away therefore that vail of a party of any particular interest, and look
forth in your own true face a child and heir of the Kingdom, our own flesh
and blood, of tender affection to us, and pity of us; we have given you lite
and being by our purses, prayers, persons, councels; it is our life, religion,
estate, cause, blood that runs in your veins, and therefore you owe to us your
selves, life, strength, pains, labors, watchings, and ought to lay them all
out freely for us, purely in love, and repayment of the debt you owe to us; And
coming upon these terms as the child of our travels, pangs and distresses, the
child of our desires and prayers, the issue of many consultations, affections,
disbursments, fears, hopes, the first borne of our own Lord and Husband, God,
and bearing his own image upon you, holiness, righteousness, goodness; we
cannot but with joy embrace you after our sore travels and afflictions; and
though many people dying in fear and despair, as Rachel, call you BEN-ONI,
The Son of my sorrow, yet your Father who lives will call you BENJAMIN, the Son
of my right hand.

Let the Spirit of the Lord file off your roughness and un-evennesse, and blow
away that dust that covers your beauty, and we shall see you a stone solid,
firm and stable, that cannot be broken by any devices or force; a precious
stone, that contains in it all the interests, all that is good or worthy in the
Kingdom; That you are as cut out, so laid by the hand and art of God in Sion;
a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, he that believes
makes not haste; You have been tried and are found precious, and a corner
stone in which all our rights are laid, and so squared by God with that exact
justice, as to be a rule and square to the whole Kingdom, and a sure
foundation of an everlasting peace, such a foundation as has the whole
building in it; and this will make men stay upon you and believe in you, not
hastening after any other help or Savior.

You are, being formed by God, of that true and intrinsecall worth, that you
have the prise of the Nation in you, and that in spirit, and so in the purest
and best union, which is to us a ground and bottom of true peace: But you
neglect this true, substantial union, and are making another, an agreement of
the people, which shows a grossness and filthiness of spirit; not able to
discern the union of God in you in one heart and mind, and not only amongst
your selves, but of the whole Kingdom in their true and right sense, and
therefore are framing a carnal and fleshly one, according to the custom of
the Heathen; a work below the Lord, and a, descending into the earth to do
that which God has done already most excellently: You are a living Altar, and
a lifting up a tool unto it does polute it: The Lord is building a house which
is from heaven, and you know the pattern is in the Mount, and is thence
brought forth; the stone it made ready, and there must not be beard while it is
building, neither hammer, ax, or any tool of iron in the house; this sawing
and cutting to make an outward; literal agreement, vexes and wounds your
spirits, and tends to dis-unite you from the Lord, and from each other: The
Lord is with you in union, he is one, and gives you true unity one soul and
spirit: Therefore stand up and come forth in that entire form that the Lord
has cast you into, in that image that he stamps upon you; a living stone in
all parts, as polished so quickened by the spirit of God.

Lastly, Let me present you and bring you forth as the Lords host in the great
majesty of an Army; in this most excellent form in whom the Lord is as a
mighty man of war, clothed with zeal as with a garment; stripped out of
ordinary, common and cold forms of government, and making bare his arm in the
most terrible and masculine constitution of an Amy; Glorious in his apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength, red in his apparel, and his
garments like him that treads in the wine fat; for the day of vengeance is in
my heart, and the year of my redeemed is come: A DAY of vengeance, this work
must be cut short in Righteousness, quick and speedy, and that too in perfect
union with salvation or redemption, which must be long, A YEAR, it must last
for ever, The year of my redeemed it come.

1. In this respect you must appear most absolute in your comands, strong,
mighty and indisputable in your authority; such is the government of an Army,
and it is proper in the work you are in: Dan. 4.35. And he does according to his
will in the Army in heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? An Army in heaven, that is
your place, standing in God, and inspired by the Spirit of God; one with the
heavenly host, majesty or absoluteness, is but due here, and that without
danger, when the Wise God guides your resolves; for nothing must come forth but
that which has the face of God upon it, and that in which divine justice and
goodness does appear: Being the Lord does it, who can say, What d^st thou?
This excellency of God and all other glorious perfections are amongst us, and
must no longer be buried under humane weakness, and the staggering blindness
and uncertainty of the creature.

2. You must appear in greater terror to evil doers, then any power before
you; with your sword whetted, furbush'd, bathed in heaven, made bright and
glittering with the Spirit of God; That it may aw and dazzle the eyes of the
Nation into a fear of transgressing: Former swords have been too dull to cut
up iniquity; wickedness has slighted and scorned them, therefore must you
appear in greater severity, every act and word of justice piercing to the
heart; searching 'tweene the soul and spirit, 'tweene the bone and marrow; to
kill wickedness in the root of it; to destroy not only the outward acts of
injustice and oppression, as contrary to our sensible and outward peace, but
their inward strength, as contrary to the glory and goodness of God: Not only
strike at humane miscarriages, which are weak, but at those Diabolical
wickednesses that are strong, and the Father of these inferior oppressions;
which you are able to do, having a sword bathed in heaven, and executting the
divine justice; and by doing this you shall secure the things you do, and for
ever disable Satan to bring forth any more mischiefs upon us.

This is that you have harped at, the fulfilling of that promise, Psalm. 149.6,
amp;c. The high praise of God in their mouth; This is excellent to have God in
our mouth, and God in his praise, in his glory; yea, his high praise to speak
forth the highest honor of God, his highest, last and utmost holiness and
justice. And a two edged sword in their hand, one of flesh, another of spirit:
to cut up sinners with the one, and sin it self with the other: The first is
common to every Heathen; the second, the peculiar honor of Christ, who has
before used it in his mouth, but now in his hand, has declared, preached it,
will now act it in deeds, and so bring forth the inward sword of the Spirit,
and outward of the flesh to be administered together by one hand: And by this
shall you not only slay wicked men, but wicked works, or wicked things. To
destroy or cut off evil men only is Heathenish, to destroy wicked works only,
and not men, is Christian: to cut off both together is the last great and
perfect judgment of the world: by this you shall do that which has been
foretold, in Daniel 9.24. To finish transgression, and to make an end of
sins, and to bring in everlasting righteousness: so to break the staff of
oppression, that the rod of the wicked should no longer lie upon the lot of the
righteous: or to destroy the wickedness out of the earth root and branch, that
there may no more come out of their loins: that sin may be barren and
childelesse: this is the secure condition you aim at, and that which is
promised, and will be made good to you: To set up such true and bright laws, so
holy and incorruptible, in such power and efficacy, as no ungodliness shall be
able to pass through them, or stand in the sight of them: Such a majesty of the
face of God will bring forth it self, as will behold no iniquity: sin shall
not abide in men's actions, no nor hearts, nay not in the first father of it,
Satan, but in all it shall be utterly destroyed: This is not beyond the power of
the Lord of hoasts with us, but that which is our portion and prerogative: and
must be effected. To set up the new Jerusalem in such brightness and
everlasting purity, as no unclean thing shall come into it: nothing defile it.

As you shall come forth in flames of fire against all the workers of
iniquity, so that not one shall escape: so in walls of fire toward all that is
good, to defend and save it: We have that one lawgiver that can kill and make
alive, that can save as well as destroy: preserve gold as well as consume
dross: be a Savior of life unto life, as well as death unto death: to bring
all the good of the earth into the good of heaven, as well as to cast the evil
of the world into hell: to loose the holy One out of his bonds, as well as to
bind the wicked one in his: It Is a black and foul work to kill only, and not to
restore: but this is our chiefest excellency: to save what is good in all, and
to bring it forth in a holy and perfect way: to beget children that shall be
princes in all the earth. Or by the Spirit of God to beget Principalities and
powers, Kings, Lords, etc. of our own righteous and just nature, and of greater
vigor and power of righteousness and wisdom, then our selves in our own
persons: we are able in our God to stamp the divine image upon men, to form
them into the likeness of God, to convey our own spirits with our authority,
to empower with spirit as well as office, and if we cant do that we can do
nothing in truth, nothing in God, nothing different from the most common and
ordinary Heathens: and but that which will destroy us as soon as we have made
it. If we set up an earthly and fleshly form, it will corrupt and turn enemy to
us that exalt it, except we set up God, and set up in all the powder of God,
and all in the power of God, or all quickened with the Spirit of God: And being
the host of God, and having all fulness of the Spirit, or being attended with all the divine perfections, we can and shall spread forth in the fruits of
righteousness: And establish righteousness in persons and things, living
righteousness.

This is your true state, and the first and least of it: and less then this is
not your righteousness: I cant speak or think less of you: and he that thinks
or speaks less then this or contrary to this, be it Satan in you or others,
blasphemes the tabernacle of God, and them that dwell in heaven: This is your
own life, and all below it are fancies, dreams and lies: Babylon and confusion
keeping and holding Zion from her glory.

It Is a blessed face of God, and the light of his countenance shining upon you;
and I know there is another face which is the same in you that answers to this,
and though it has bin vaild awhile, the brightness and power of this will
scatter that mist and call forth its own self and likeness in you to embrace
this: Righteousness looks down from heaven here upon you: we might question
whether it would be received, or no, whether it would not be judged a fancy, a
conceit, but that we know also, Truth springs out of the earth, the same spirit
has been acting a long while in you, though under and in the earth buried
under flesh, but now will come forth and answer to this, or say, it is ^r^th, and
make it truth in the performance: You will not say this is righteous in God, he
may do all this it is proper for him, but not for us: No, righteousness and peace
have kissed each other: you are r^conciled to this righteousness, the partition
wall is broken down, of two made one new man: and so you cannot but receive and
rejoice in it: mercy here meets with truth in your breasts: The heavens power
down righteousness, and the earth opens, and salvation springs forth together.
The Lord is come down, yea the heavens, all the host of them, all the stars of
righteousness, and the same truth arises out of you and these together, are
salvation. God out of you works but in weakness, in trouble: so do you out of
God; both together bring forth salvation.

I shall I know meet with this objection from your selves and others, that this
will be true, but not yet; and that it is far otherwise with you for the
present; it is that you expect, but it is not yet manifested.

To this I answer, That this truth is eternal, and there is no moment wherein
you can say it is not, it is he that was, is and is to come: That therefore it is
darkness that denies it; or that is a deep pit that says it is not here: do not
abide in such darkness of hell where eternal truth will not be admitted: That
as it always has been so it now is brought forth borne into the world: the
child is born I have been long traveling for him, and now lay him amongst
you: it is true it is in the Stable amongst beasts, Swadled and lying in a
Manger, in a very mean and contemptible condition, but I shall own him and
nurse him, and so will you I hope, it is your own God and Savior, though
wrapped up in flesh, and in the midst of a beastly crew, yet smiling in your
face, offered to you, yea arising up in you; And he whom you have sought for is
now come into his Temple; you have long conceived him, and traveled too to
bring him forth; and now Behold thy King comes riding upon an ass; receive
him and say, This is the Lord, we have waited for him.

If you can yet say, these things are brought forth in you, but not in us, we
cannot own them in power, you may, we are yet in the flesh; it is your light,
not ours; we live not in this glory, nor can act in it, we must go our way.

No, it is yours as well as mine, and not mine as distinct from you, but mine in
you and with you; for we have but one life, one spirit, and if it break forth
first in me, it is for your sakes: It Is not a personal or private spirit, but the
Spirit of God and of all the Saints; it is the life and soul of the Army, and
therefore you cannot be strangers to it; sure so soon as you see it you will
say, this is our portion, our rock, our strength.

But if you are in the flesh, and this glory be not suffered to act in you,
What Is the reason of it? Who lets? Is it not the man of sin? If it be so, then
you confess your selves guilty of what I have formerly written; for this man
of sin is not a limb or member, but a complete man, and so has all sin in
him: where flesh is it is a body of sin, having all iniquity weaved together
into one vail; pride, hypocrisy, self-seeking, enmity against God, and all in
the highest way of sin, whose coming it after the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness: It Is no less then Satan, though with all power and signs of
praying, seeking God, justice; and lying wonders, wonderful great things, but
lying, because separated from the eternal truth: with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, I know none righteous but God, and all ways beside are to
deceive: And if this spirit be in you, it is not idle, it comes forth; this
blood runs in the veins of al your actions; the Lord said it of you long ago,
Ezech. 21.24. Ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your
transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear
-- And thou profane, wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come when iniquity
shall have an end: This filth lies not still, but comes forth in all your
actions, and fills them with darkness, weakness, confusion, instability: but
an end it come of sin, and that wicked Prince is cast out; I am pacified
toward you, fury is not in me, I have no more to accuse you of.

If you now object, as I doubt you will, your being in the flesh, your
weakness, inability to manage these high and great ways, the sense of your
unworthiness and sinfulness obscuring this glory: Observe this.

1. You now are the accusers; I have done, I have nothing to say against you; I
appeared in fury and jealousy against you, and by that fire have purified you,
and burnt up that dross that was in you; its all cast into the bottom of the
sea, I remember it no more; its under my feet, I am above it; and now I am
justifying, and you are accusing your selves, and this shall be our controversy
hereafter, I shall offend you by declaring a Righteousness in you which you
you may say is too high, too great, and you be your own condemners; or being
reconciled, and establishing a Covenant of peace, you will then be ashamed of
all the evil that you have done.

2. Know your sins lie upon the Lord, they are his, he bears them all; there
is none now under iniquity but Christ; you are Righteous, the Lord is your
Righteousness; there is a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness to
wash in; That fire of jealousy in which the Lord appeared in my last, has
judged and destroyed the wicked one, and now appears your righteousness. That
was an arraignment of the filthy Prince, this is a clearing of the holy One,
and both in the power and truth of God.

3. The consideration of your unworthiness, unfitness may be to you sad and
troublesome, it is to me glorious; It being the great design of God to visit
his people in a low condition, in prison, in Babylon, and to glorify himself
and the riches of his power and mercy, to love freely, to cover and take away
iniquity, to blot them out as a thick Cloud; God now has taken your filthy
garments from you, and clothed you with beautiful garments, and put a crown
upon your heads; He gives you beauty for ashes: You were burnt to ashes by the
wrath of God, here is now beauty for you: You are brought forth in your full
proportion your original, your feet, your first standing and your head, the
glory of the Lord in eternal praise.

The holy God takes pleasure to raise the highest buildings out of the lowest
and poorest beginnings; the more glorious the end, the viler and deeper the
foundation; God that raised the first creation out of a Ch^os, and established
it upon the waters, will raise the new heavens and new earth out of a weak and
confused heap of waters, a poor and despised people; And there where men
looked not for him will he appear: Out of Nazareth from whence no good comes;
from Egypt, a place of thraldom and captivity; And thou Bethlehem, little
among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me to be
Ruler in Israel: This man shall be our peace when the Assyrian is in the land;
And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, in the midst of many
people, as a Lion among the beasts, Mic. 5. All which shows, that the Lord
chooses to manifest himself first in those that are beastly, gentle, ignorant,
mean, despised people, and even then when the Assyrian, the man of sin is in
the land, in them and upon them.

The Lord has been with you informer mercies, and in late sufferings; he
appeared amongst you in a spring of blessings, since has lain down in
disgrace; made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, he
has been numbered with transgressors: Your sins have slain your Lord, your
glory, and your Lord by death has borne and slain your sins; you have lien
dead, because Christ your life has been killed your sins; but Christ has died
with you, in you, into you, and Sampson-like, by his death has killed all his
enemies; your transgressions have made his grave, and there buried themselves,
and loose their destroying nature in him, hanging upon him; he how offers up
his soul a sacrifice for sin, which is an acceptable and pleasant thing to
God, who is pleased to see our sins fall by Christ's death; and smells a sweet
savor in that death that takes away the misery and grief of his people, and
out of which he rises with them to glory and righteousness: Now shall he see
of the travail of his soul and be satisfied, and by his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many; he had not been righteous if he had not died;
but dying under our sins, he and we rising together are both righteous: It
satisfies the Lord to travail with you, to travail out of your grave, to be in
death with you, and thence to ascend to glory; and it matters not if men be
unsatisfied.

Be you unrighteous in your selves, the Lord coming forth out of this
obscurity, and shining upon you, you will say, Surely in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, even to him shall men come, and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed; In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory: Confess the Lord amongst you, 'twil justify
you and strengthen you; and then they that are incensed against you are
incensed against him; uncover his face clearly, and all will be ashamed to
oppose their Lord, and so you may go on in righteousness and strength,
glorying.

Your way has been dark and obscure to your selves and others; here is light
for you, showing you whence you come, and whither you go, Mentioning you from
the womb, declaring your generation which has been cut off, and showing your
end, or that Canaan that you are going too; The Lord is here a Sun and shield,
no good thing will he withold; a plain path of justice, mercy and goodness
trodden out to you, showing what you must do, whith^r you must go, and what
guide you have to direct you: That you are now the mother and womb of the
Kingdom into which all is cast; and the Father of mercies says you are the
Father too, and must bring it forth in perfect and eternal righteousness.

I have no more to say; or rather I will ever say, and say more strongly and
plainly what I have here spoken weakly and darkly; Behold the Lord has
proclaimed unto the end of the world; Say you to the Daughter of Sion, Behold
thy salvation comes; behold his reward is with him, and his work is before
him; And they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord! And thou
shall be called, sought out a City not forsaken; It Is your salvation that is
come, you shall see evil no more; let all the world know it, let the news of
it fill the dark and troubled earth, proclaim it openly, he gives you a reward
of all your pains and sufferings, he brings al good with him; you will need no
supplies but what he will daily bring forth to you: And his work is before
him; It Is now clear what he will do, reign over the Nations in
righteousness; set up an everlasting Kingdom for the Saints that shall never
be destroyed: And all must own you and confess you to be the holy people;
holiness that has been the worlds scorn, will now be their savior; that
which they have derided shall they now trust in, your justice and
faithfulness; you are holy with the holiness of God, or holy as your heavenly
Father is holy, to rain down blessings upon the just and unjust, and to let
the Sun of favor and salvation to shine generally upon all, upon the evil and
the good: God has sought you out wandering in a wilderness, and not knowing
whether to go; and manifested but are not forsaken, not left to your own
ways, wills or councels, but taken into nearest union with the power, wisdom
and glory of God; though for a little moment he left you, with everlasting
kindness has he gathered you, and will not forsake you any more.

FINIS.
The Postscript.
GOD has divided the judgments of men in these times, and concerning the
Army, at this time very much: giving to several men particular principles, and
these with a perverse spirit engaged in enmity one against another: some so
fierce against them as they can hear no good of them: some so blinded with
selse-love to their party, foolish flatterers can see no ill in them* to these
halfe-headed men, poor shreds of Christians, I shall seem to contradict my
self in these two pieces I have writ; and it may be offend both: I confess it
has been my portion to have all men offended at me, and can bear it; but I am
willing now, if a little reason will satisfy to remove the offense, if not, I
must wait.

When this little book man comes to be opened and interpreted by the large
Spirit of God; we shall find its a womb that has two Nations in it, that it
contains in it all the depths of Satan, and all the treasures of wisdom: When
God comes to search and judge men, there are Goats and Sheep cursed and blessed
in every one; and they are pitifully blinded and narrow spirits that see not
all evil, all evil in particular as well as in general, all in highest and
intense degrees in themselves: and you must see this or else you cant see the
highest and chiefest good in your selves. The Lord says to Peter, Math. 16.17.
Blessed art thou Bariona, and ver. 23. Get thee behind me Satan: And amongst
the Prophets it was very common, as in Ezekiel. to declare against the wickedness
of Israel, as worse then Samaria or Sodom, and immediately to declare them the
Lords People, his own flock, in covenant with him, etc. Hosea in the same place
says, ye are not my People, and again, ye are the People of the living God:
now adulteresses, then married; yet no contradiction: no more then the evening
and the morning to be one day; or flesh and spirit to be in one heart, or the
man of sin to be in the Temple of God, and to be exalted there above him; or
Gods own people in Babylon: This is not strange to me. Nor to declare the evil
of the Army, as in the flesh, and much good in the same Army, as they are in
God.

Nor do I count it instability to condemn the wicked one in men, and justify
the righteous: When I see Israel in their blood to turn my face from them, and
seeing them Israel to turn my face toward them: or to separate the precious
from the vile; to handle a two edged sword, to kill and save, or to save with
vengeance: let it be counted lightness, I choose to be a fan to separate the
chafe from the wheat, and be fire to burn up the dross, and purify the Gold.

To you that are against the Army, this is no wrong to you, to manifest God
here, and in him salvation to all his own and to all that is good: we are
broken in pieces miserably, and if the Lord will heal us, let us not stand upon
circumstances, whether it be by friend or foe, higher or lower, if it be peace
and righteousness. If God appear in a Jew, though we are ten men of several
languages, lets all take hold of his skirt, saying, we will go with you, for
we have heard God with you. This be assured it is God that is here set up a
general and universal good, and Savior, and be not afraid of him, though he
comes to you in the appearance of men below or against you.

To the Army and your party, I say, The love here showed you is true charity:
which vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, seeks not her own, but bears
all things, etc. This love bumbles you to be under all, and to bear the
burdens of all: inlarges you to embrace and comprehend all, strengthens you to
save and deliver all: It does not cover your evil, but remove it that it might
be no hinderance to your doing good.

It Is in my eye and heart to advance the true and public good, THE LORD, and
not any party of men. And in this I shall not fail, for God will be, must be
exalted: And therefore I rest,

W. S.


