THE SENTENCE OF THE COUNCIL OF WAR, PRONOVNCED AGAINST THE LORD
MOVNTNORRIS, IN JRELAND THE Twelfth of December, 1635. With the Lord
Mountnorris Petition to the Parliament concerning his Injuries and wrongs
sustained by the Lord DEPVTY deceased.

Printed in the year, 1641.

BY THE LORD DEPVTIE WENTWORTH and General of the Army and Council of War.
Whereas the Kings most excellent majesty by his highness letters of the one
and thirtieth of July last directed to us the Lord deputy, has been
graciously pleased to signify that as he shall ever expect that all due
reverence shall be given by his subjects to the person whom he appoints to
be his deputy, and general of his Army within this his Kingdom of Jreland;
So on the contrary, he shall hold them blame-worthie, especially being persons
who have received their dignities from him, or hold their places of honor and
trust under his government. And yet shall forget there duties that way in
their words, or actions, to the ill example of others: And taking notice of the
carriage of the Lord Mountnorris his Majesty's Vice-treasurer, and Treasurer at
Wars here (who holds a Captains place in his Majesty's Army) by uttering
some speeches, inciting a revenge upon us the Lord deputy and general, from,
a Liuetenant of this Army, for performing the duties of our place, with
modesty and good reason, in the time of excercising our troop, which his
Majesty in his said letters declares to be an offense, much unbeseeming the
gravity of a privy Counceller to us the Lord deputy, and the duty of a
Captain to his general, and not to be suffered in any well governed Army
where good discipline must be the rule and square of every man's actions.

And therefore being very sensible of the honor of Us, his deputy, and
general of his Army; which may suffer herein, and be of ill consequence in
the future, he has by his said letters willed and commanded Us the Lord
deputy and general upon receipt of those his letters to call a council of
war, and after a due examination, and proof of those speeches by the Lord
Mountnorris, his Majesty's express will and pleasure is, that he should under
go and be liable to such censure as the said council should impose upon him,
for the full reparation of Us his deputy and general in that point, and that
there be no failing in putting the same in due and speedy execution.

In obedience to which his Majesty's command, We the Lord deputy called a
council of war, who being this day assembled, We the Lord deputy in the
presence of the said Lord Mountnorris did charge him with this offense, that
within 3. or 4. days or thereabouts, after the end of the Parliament, it being
mentioned at the Lord Chancellors Table, that after We the Lord deputy had
dissolved the Parliament, being sitting down in the presence Chamber, one of
Our servants in mooving a stool happend to hurt our foot, then indisposed
through an accession of the gout, that one then present at the Lord Chancellors
table, then said to the Lord Mountnorris being there likewise, that it was
Ansley his Lordships kinsman, and one of our Lord deputy and generals
gentlemen-ushers that had done it, whereupon the Lord Mountnorris then
publicly, and in a scornful contemptuous manner, answered perhapps it was
done in revenge of that public affront which my Lord deputy had done him
formerly, But he has a brother that would not take such a revenge, which
Charge being so laid, the Lord Mountnorris was required by this council of
war, to make answer thereunto, who going about to answer it, and yet neither
confessing nor denying them; This council (after some time spent therein)
required him to answer the said charge, either negatively or affermatively, yet
would not confess or deny them. Whereupon the witnesses vouched for proof
thereof, were called, namely persons who though they were not the orginall
relators of his Lordships, said discourse to Us the Lord deputy, yet being
present when the words were so spoken, were conceive to be able to give
testimony therein: And therefore were called to be interrogated with all,
thereupon, who being examined before this council upon oath, ministered unto
them by the Clarke of the council before Us by commandment of Us the Lord
deputy and their depositions then reduced to writing, and subscribed by them
in our presence and in the presence also of the said L. Mountnorris, who heard
them affirm the same. It thereby appears that the said Lord Mountnorris
uttered and spoke the said words, in manner and form, and at the time and
place aforesaid; The charge laid against him standing then fully proved, the
said Lord Mountnorris at last submitted himself to the Judgment of this
council, protesting that what interpretation soever his words might have put
upon them, he intended noe prejudice or hurt to the person of Us the deputy
and general, affirming that by these words, but he has a brother that would
not take such a revenge his Lordship meant only that he the said brother would
dye, before he would give Us the deputy and general occasion to give him such
a rebuke.

We fell in the next place to consider as of the nature of the offense, so of
the punishment due thereunto. And first for the nature of the offense, We
conceive it to contain first a calumny against the person of Us the deputy
and general of the Army, insinuating by these words the public affront or
the disgrace which my Lord deputy had done him formerly, that indeed there
had been such an affront, or disgrace put upon him, by Us the Lord deputy;
whereas in truth it was nothing so, but that which was pretended by the Lord
Mountnorris to have been the said disgrace or affront to his kinsman was this,
that his said kinsman being one of the horse-troope commanded by Us the L.
deputy in the time of exercising the said troop, was out of order on horse
back to the disturbance of the rest then in exercising, for which the L.
deputy in a mild manner reproving him, as soon as We returned a side from
him, We observed him to laugh and geere Us for Our just reproof of him, which
We disliking returned to him, and laying a small Caine (which We then
carried) on his shoulders (yet without any blow or stroke then given him
therewith) told him, that if he did serve Us so any more, We would lay him
over the pate, the truth of which fact appeared unto Us by the relation of his
Majesty's said deputy and our general, avowed and confirmed by two of us the
Captains, namely the Lord Kirkudbright, and Sir Frederick Hamilton knight who
then saw the manner of it, and now sat as members of this council, which said
act was by this whole council adjudged to have been a far milder proceeding
with the said Ansley, then such an insolence and disobedience to any Commander,
much more to his gennerall merited.

And therefore it was a speech savouring doubtless of malice, to in sinuate that
as an affront or disgrace which was indeed a justly merrited, but a mild and
modest reprehention and admonition.

Secondly We conceive the offense to contain an incitement to a revenge in
these words but he has a brother that would not take such a Revenge, which
incitement might have given encouragement to the brother being then and now in
this kingdom, and Liuetenant of the said L. Mountnorris his foot company to
the said Ansley himself being continually so near the person of Us the
deputy and general, or to some other to have taken up resolutions of
dangerous consequence, and the manner of speaking the words do so far
aggravate them, as there is no place left for any indulgent construction to be
made of them, nor indeed any construction, but such as renders the speaker a
delinquent in a high and a transendent manner against the person of his
general, and his Majesty's authority whence we derive Our power; This
council also took it into consideration, that if the like words had been
spoken of the sacred person of our dread Sovereign Lord the King, they had a
mounted to little less then high treason, which by some rule of relation apply
themselves even to his Majesty, being directed to the person of his deputy
and the revenge thus insolently voted to have been taken upon him: being done,
when We the deputy, and general had that great and high honor which We
always esteem our Self in our self far unworthy of, as to be apparralled
and robed with his Majesty's own robe of majesty, and Soveraingnity: We
considered likewise the time when these words were spoken when part of the
Army was in motion, and when there were diverse companies of foot and troops
of horse in the town, and daily in exercising, and training whereat for the
most part, We the deputy were present and the town full of people from all
parts of the kingdom as then vnreturned back to their own dwellings, from
their sitting in Parliament.

In the next place for the punishment due to his offense, We judge it to be an
apparent breach and contempt of the 41. Article of the printed laws and orders
of war established for the good conduct of the service of Ireland, dated the
13. of March 1633. and published in print by Us the Lord deputy soon after
our access to this government in these words of the said article, No man
shall give any disgraceful words or commit any act to the disgrace of any
person in his Army, or garrison, or any part thereof upon pain of
imprisonment, public disarming and banishement from the Army, as men for
ever disabled to carry Arms. And which is more in like breach and contempt of
the 13. Article of the said printed laws and orders of War, the words of
which Article are these, No man shall offer any violence or contemptuously
disobey his Commander, or do any Act, or speak any words which are like to
breed any mutiny in the Army or Garrison, or impeach the obeying of the
general or principal officers directions upon pain of death; which Articles
are no other then very same Articles, this Army had allwaies been the governed
by in the time of the late Lord Faulkland, Lord Willm^tt, and other the
generals before them. And therefore this Council of War in conformity to
his Majesty's gra^ious pleasure as aforesaid, and as well to vindicate the
honor of his Majesty's deputy, and general of his Army, from the wrong and
contempt, under which we now suffer, to the scandal of this Govenement, and to
ill example of others: As also to deliver one to all, which bear office, or
are listed as members of the Army under the rule and govenment of us his
general; An example of Justice for them to take warning by, how they presume
to offend against the Authority entrusted us by his Majesty do hereby
Adjudge, Order, and Decree, that the said Lord Mountnorris stands justly and
deservedly liable to undergo the censures, paires and punishments by the said
41. Article and 15. Articles proved against the breakers of all good
discipline, and the transgressors against those orders which are by the said
41. Articles imprisonment, public disarming and banishment from the Army, as
a man for ^ver disable to carry Arms: And by the said 13. Article death, And
therefore according to the said Articles, this Council do unamimously with
one joint consent, not one of us being of other opinion) adjudged the said Lord
Mountnorris for his said high and great offenses to be imprisoned to stand
from henceforth deprived of all the places, with the entertainments due
thereunto, which he holds now in the Army, to be disarmed, to be banished the
Army, and dis-inabled for ever bearing office therein hereafter: And lastly, to
be shot to death, or to loose his head, at the pleasure of the General: Given
at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 12. day of December, 1635.

Valentia. Tho. Cromwell R. Ranelagh. R. Dillon. Law. Esmond. Kirkudbright.
John Barlasse. Charles Coot. Tho. Wenman. Arthur Terringham. Arthur Blundell.
Faith: Fortescue. To. Farrar. Io. Borlase. Tho. Roper.


TO THE HONORABLE ASsembly the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons
house of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Sir Francis Annsley, Knight and Baron. Mountnorris in
the Kingdom of the Realm of Ireland.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas your Petitioner for diverse years has been employed by his
Majesty and his late Royal Father in diverse Offices and employments of great
trust and eminence within the Realm of Ireland, wherein to the uttermost of
his power he has Faithfully discharged the trust in him reposed with the
public approbation, and satisfaction both of this, and that State and Realm;
in Testimony whereof, his Majesty was pleased to dignifie your Petitioner with
the style he now bears, yet the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Strafford,
Lord Livetenant of the said Realm of Ireland having conceived a causeless
distrust against your Petitioner, and thereupon indeavoring the revenge of some
personal neglects, and the undue advancement of his own ends and instruments,
by the dishonor and ruin of your Petitioner, his Lordship without any just
cause at all, not only stripped and deprived your Petitoner of those honorable
employments with contumely and reproach, but also of his own private fortunes,
and the birthright and liberty of a subject, a short view of part, of which
your Petitioners sufferings, he humbly presents in these ensuing particulars.

1.
First, whereas his late Majesty King James by his Highness Letters bearing
date the first day of October in he 14. year of his Majesty's Reign, did
appoint your Petitioner to be one of the principal Secretaries, and of the
Council of State for that Realm; whereupon your Petitioner was sworn and
admitted accordingly: and whereas after viz. the eighth day of June in the 16.
year of the said Majesty's Reign, his said late Majesty by his Letters
Patents under the great Seal of Ireland, did grant unto your Petitioner as well
a Pension of 200. pound per Annum, for the evercise of the said office,
together with the Fees thereunto belonging, as also the office of the Privy
Signet, with the incidents thereunto, to be held by your Petitioner during his
life, immediately after the death surrender or forfeiture of Sir Dudley Norton,
who had the same office and pension during his life, by force of which
premises as your Petitioner faithfully executed the said office of a
Secretary, without fee during the life of the said Sir Dudley Norton, who was
then for many years infirm and unable to exercise the same, so he ought to
hold the said office and pention since his decease or surrender, according to
the office of his Majesty's said Patent; Yet upon pretense of a discour^esie
supposed to be done by your Petitioner to his Lordships brother Sir George
Wentworth, his Lordship obtained a surrender to be made by the said Sir Dudley
Norton in or about the 12. day of July in the 10. year of his now Majesty's
Reign, and contrary to all right and justice procured the said office and Fees
to be conferred upon Sir Phillip Manwareing, who notwithstanding your
Petitioners often request and Petitions to his Lordship for releife, still
holds the same under protection of the power and greatness of his Lordship.

2.
Whereas his Majesty by his Highness Letters Patents bearing date the 30. day
of May in the first year of his Highness Reign, did appoint your Petitioner
to be his Uice Treasurer and general Receiver of his Revenewes within the said
Realm of Jreland, during his Majesty's pleasure, with the Fees and profits
thereunto belonging, and appointed your Petitioner to be Treasurer of wars
in the said Kingdom by his Majesty's Letters of the 13. of June 1632. And
whereas your Petitioner did refuse at his solicitation to make a dishonorable
sale of the said offices, the said Earl being therewith enraged, and thereupon
indeavoring to captivate not only your Petitioners said offices, but also his
honor and life to his Lordships power and pleasure; his Lordship in a time of
public peace and serenity within that Realm the 12. day of December 1635.
did call a Council of war, and did accuse your Petitioner of some words
supposed to be spoken by your Petioner many months before, tending in his
Lordships strayned constructions to the disturbance of govenment, and without
allowing your Petitioner liberty of clearing his innocence in a legal manner,
or so much as an hours time, to make his just defense, proceeded to sentence
at the same time, and although the said supposed words were no ways criminal,
yet his Lordship contrary to all justice, did cause the sentence of death to be
procured against your Petitioner being a Peer of that Realm, as by the Copy
of the said sentence hereunto annexed may appear.

3.
Though his Lordship for the further advancing of his own ends, did partly
forbear the execution of the said sentence, yet by color thereof his Lordship
forthwith disposed of your Petitioners foot company, and committed your
Petitioner prisoner to the Castle of Dublin, where he was continued from the
said 12. of December 1635. until the 16 day of April 1637. and within that
time your Petitioners papers, Cabinets, Trunkes, and other places of his house
were strictly searched by some of his greatest Adversaries by his Lordships
direction, and your Petitioner for the space of 20. days was kept close
prisoner, to the extreme hazard of his life, until at last he was forced to
purchase his liberty by submission to the said unjust and illegal sentence,
and by the accepting of a pardon for the same.

4*
His Lordship taking Advantage of your Petitioners condition and endeavoring
not only to justify his former proceedings, but also to convict your
Petitioner, and render him a delinquent without a defense, did issue a
Commission to Commissioners of his own choice and nomination, who during your
Petitioners imprisonment examined diverse witnesses touching some misdemeanors
falsely charged upon your Petitioner in his office of Vice-treasurer, which
being returned, and the effects thereof transmitted into this Kingdom, his
Lordship by this and other undue practices brought your Petitioner into
disgrace with his Majesty, and thereupon procured the said Offices of
Vice-treasurer, General Receiver, and Treasurer of Wars to be conferred upon
Sir Adam Loftus Knight, who had been formerly one of your Petitioners accusers.

5.
Whilst thus your Petitioner had his office taken from him, his honor and
integrity injuriously calumniated, his liberty restrained, his life not only
subject to the mercy of the said Earl, but extremely endangered by a
continual sickness caused by his imprisonment by his Lordship; not therewith
content, caused an Information to be preferred against your Petitioner in the
Castle Chamber, touching the several supposed misdemeanors enquired of the
said Commissioners, wherein though your Petitioner no way conscious of any
guilt, yet finding his counsel awed by his Lordships power, his Judges to be
such as were formerly his Inquisitors, the witnesses pre-engaged by an
extrajudiciall examination, could expect no less than a sentence against him
notwithstanding his innocence, your Petitioner was put to this miserable
choice, either to suffer continuance and addition to his miseries, or otherwise
to make such submission as his Lordship pleased, whereupon your Petitioner was
enforced in an ignominious manner to make submission, hoping thereby to
purchase his Liberty and go into England according to his Majesty's
directions, though by so doing he could not effect the same, but his
imprisonment was continued notwithstanding.

6.
Whereas also by the fundamental laws of that Realm, as also by his
Majesty's Declaration published in print upon the return of a Commission and
by the advice of many grave and wise Commissiners sent from hence into Ireland
for the examination of the greivances of his Majesty's subjects in that Realm,
the Lord Deputy and Council are not to meddle upon Titles of inheritance
between party and party, or in business belonging to the Cognizance of other
Courts or to alter possession, yet his Lordship upon a paper petition to him
preferred by Richard Rollston against your Petitioner touching the manner of
^eemore in the said said Realm after 18. years quiet possession thereof by
your petitioner, has Decreed the said lands to the said Rollston, and by his
own warrant removed your Petitioner out of possession thereof.

7.
Whereas also by the laws of that Kingdom, and by the said declaration,
proceedings before the Lord Deputy, and Council for things remediable in other
Courts by paper Petitio^s, and the abuses of Habeascorpus within that Realm
are prohibited, yet upon a paper Petition preferred to his Lordship and the
Council by, one Walter Peperd touching land of Inheritance in the Petitioners
possession, his Lordship has retained the said cause for his hearing,
notwithstanding your Petitioners legal exception thereunto: and upon the like
paper Petition preferred to his Lordshop, by Arthur Manwaring, his Lordship
has for diverse years delayed and frustratethed benefit of an execution which
your Petitioner had against him for a debt by bond, and yet there is no end of
the said Manwarings vexatious suites before his Lordship, and such other
Referrees as his Lordship appoints.

(8)
His Lordship rated your Petitioner for the payment of his Majesty's Subsidies
in one 1000 pound in the Kings books, whereas men of far greater visible and
known estates are not Charged with half that proportion, your Petitioners
estate being very mean to supply the condition and honors graciously
conferred upon him by his Majesty and his Royal Father in acceptance of his
Faithful services, and his wife and eleven-children.

Now for as much as your Petitioner is no ways guilty of the crimes, under
which he has suffered, and yet it has been the height of his Lordships
endeavor, not only to bereave your Petitioner of his honor and fortunes, but
also (as much as in him lay) of his innocence, by the said extorted
submission, and obtruded pardon, he here relinquisheth all advantage by the
said pardon, and freely submits the crimes to him imputed to the scrutine and
determination of this honorable and impartial assembly, and for as much as the
oppressions sustained by your Petitioner, do not only in the highest degree
concern your Petitioner in his innocence, liberty and fortunes, but also tend
to the public abuse and scandal of the laws, liberties and justice of both
Realms, and to the introducing an Arbitrary form of government, your
Petitioner humbly offers the premises to the consideration of this honorable
assembly; and humbly prays such reperation therein, as to this honorable
assembly shall seem to stand wiih right and Justice.

And your Petitioner shall daily pray, etc.
FINIS.

