The several Humble PETITIONS OF D. BASTWICKE. M. BURTON. M. PRYNNE.
And of NATH. VVICKINS, Servant to the said Mr PRYNNE.
To the Honorable house of PARLIAMENT.

Whereto is added the humble petitions of several Friends of the said Mr
PRYNNE, and the acknowledgment prescribed to be made by Calvin Bruen, and the
rest, in the Cathedral Church of Chester, and Town Hall thereof, for visiting
the said Mr. PRYNNE.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

portrait in oval frame of William Prynne All flesh is Grass, the best men
vanity;
This, but a shadow, here before thine eye,
Of him, whose wondrous changes clearly show,
That GOD, not men, swayes all things here below.


TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons house
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of William Prynne, late exile, and close Prisoner, in the
I Will of Jersey.
In all humbleness shows,
THat your Petitioner, though not conscientious to himself of any voluntary or
apparent offense against the Laws of the Realm (to which he ever studied to
conform himself) through the malicious practices and persecutions of some
Prelates and Churchmen, (especially the now Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Peter Heylin, Doctor in Divinity) whose errors and Innovations, contrary to the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and extravagancies, in the
high Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts, your Petitioner for his own
relief, being there unjustly profecuted (had to his weak power oppugned) has
within eight years last past, undergone two heavy Censures in the
Star Chamber Court.

The first upon an Information there exhibited against your Petitioner, by M.
No^, deceased, then Attorney General, for some misconstrued passages,
inoffensive in themselves, and in your Petitioners true intention, being for
the most part the words of other approved Authors, comprised in a Book, styled
Histriomastix, written by the petitioner, against common Interludes, and
licensed for the press by M. Thomas Buckner, household Chaplain to the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, authorized by the State to license Books, and by
him exactly perused, and approved both in the written and printed Copy, before
its publication, and so confessed in the information; for which authorized
Book and passages, your Petitioner before the hearing of the cause, was not
only imprisoned in the Tower of London without Bail of Manuprise, for a whole
years space, denied access to his Counsel, convenient time to examine
witnesses, and make Breviats to instruct his Counsel (the information being
General, and reciting no particular Clauses of the Book excepted against)
this exhibits, the only means of his defense, Illegally suppressed: some of
his Counsel Tampered with to make no justification, contrary to your
Petitioners instructions, and desire, whereby his cause was miscarried: But
also at the hearing, by reason of those malicions and perverse glosses on the
said passages, which the said Heylin had collected and presented to his
Majesty's learned Counsel, who repeated his Instructions only; your
Petitioner was fined 3000 l. to his Majesty, expelled the University of Oxford,
and Lyncolnes inn, degraded from his profession of the Law, wherein he never
offended, Set in the Pillory in the Pallace-yard at Westminster, where he lost
one of his Ears. And two days after on the Pillory in Cheape-side, where he
lost the other ear, and had his said Lycensed Books there publicly burnt
before his face, by the Hangman, in a most disgraceful manner; and adjudged
after to remain a prisoner during his life.

That after the said censure to defame and injure your Petitioner the more, he
was charged wrongfully in the Decree, as censured for Perjury, (though not
taxed for it by the Court) and between his sufferings in the Pillory, the
Books of his Study (twice surveyed, and restored to him by order from the
Lords) before any (fine estreated) by a warrant out of the High Commission
signed by the said Archbishop and others, were seized by on Cross a
messenger, who carried them to his house, with which your Petitioner charging
the said Archbishop upon occasion, in the open Court of Star Chamber; he there
publicly disavowed the same (though your Petitioner can yet produce it under
his own hand) promising withal, that the Books should be restored forthwith;
which notwithstanding were all still detained by his means, till they were
extended and sold for your Petitioners Fine: Who shortly after by an Order out
of the said Court, sent to the Tower to be executed, was there shut up close
Prisoner, and Doctor Reeves sent thither to search his Chamber for the
Pamphlet, which the said Archbishop would wrongfully have Fathered upon your
Petitioner, whose friends have been unjustly prosecuted in the Exchequer, and
elsewhere sundry years, for his Fine aforesaid.

And your Petitioner further says, that about Easter was three years, during
his imprisonment in the Tower, by means of the said Archbishop, a new
information was exhibited in the said Court against your Petitioner, and
others, with certain Books thereto annexed; Denying the Prelates Jurisdiction
over other Ministers, to be Iure-divino. Charging them with many errors and
Innovations in Religion, Usurpation upon his Majesty's Prerogative, and
Subjects liberty, abuses, and extortions, in the high Commission, And other
Ecclesiastical Courts, suppressing Preaching, And painful Ministers without
a cause; Lycensing Popish, Arminian, and other Erroneous Books Against the
Sabbath, setting up Altars, Images, And Crucifixes, Removing, and Railing in
Communion Tables, and Bowing down to them, Altering the Book of Common Prayer,
the Books for the Gunpowder Treason, and late Fast in some Material passages
in favor of Popery and Papists. Which thing, (though very notorious, and often
complained against by this Honorable house, in former and late Parliaments)
were yet reputed Scandalous. And though neither of the said Books was
particularly charged on your Petitioner, in the said information, nor any
witness produced to prove him either Author, or disperser of any of them; yet
by denying your Petitioner liberty to draw up his own Answer, (though once a
Barister at Law) when as his Assigned Counsel refused to do it, by close
Imprisoning your Petitioner, and his Servant, by debarring him, Pen, Ink, and
Paper, whereby to Answer, or Instruct his Counsel, searching his chamber, and
taking away part of his Answer there found, denying him Access to his
Counsel, and conference with his Co-defendants, even at Counsel, though
jointly charged with him, Rejecting the Cross Bill exhibited by him for his
defense; threatening Master Holt, one of your Petitioners Assigned Counsel,
sent by the then Lord Keeper to the Tower, to draw up your Petitioners Answer,
and commanding him not to sign it, after it was engrossed: Whereupon he
refused to subscribe it, contrary to his promise to your Petitioner, and by
refusing to accept your Petitioners Answers to the said Information, signed
with his own, and Master Tomlins, the other of his Counsels hands, though
tendered by your Petitioner, both at the Star chamber Office, and in the open
Court at the hearing the said Information, for default of Answer, (though two
Answers were thereto tendered by your Petitioner) was taken Pro confesso against
your Petitioner, and he thereupon Fyn'd five thousand pounds to his Majesty,
Pillored, Stigmatized on both cheeks, Mutilated and dismembered, in a most
Barbarous manner, and the small remainder of his Ears, left after his first
execution, cut off, to the hazard of his hearing, and life, Adjudged to
perpetual close imprisonment in the Goal of Carnarvan castle in North Wales,
a Nasty Dog-hole, far remote from your Petitioners Friends. Which sentence
was undu'ly drawn up and executed upon your Petitioner, as his Attourneys
Clearke informed him, before it was entered into the Book, or your Petitioner
could get any Copy of it, to except against the same, as he had just cause.

That immediately after the Execution of the same sentence, your Petitioner
sent to the said Archbishop to desire him to release, or Bail his servant
(who was detained close prisoner for ten weeks space in the messengers hands,
and often examined and solicited by fair promises, and threatenings causlessely
to accuse your Petitioner, against whom they wanted evidence) that so he might
attend him during his soars, which the said ArchBishop out of his Grace and
Charity, utterly refused: saying that he intended to proceed against his said
servant in the High Commission, where he has ever since vexed, censured, and
banded him from Prison to Prison, only for refusing to accuse and betray your
Petitioner.

That after the said heavy sentence, your Petitioner by an order in the said
Court, (by way of addition to the said Censure,) was inhibited the use of Pen,
ink and Paper, and all Books; except the Bible, and the Book of
Common Prayer, and some few Books for private Devotion, and before his wounds
were perfectly cured, he was by order removed from the Tower to Carnarvan; and
some of his friends in Chester, who visited him there in his passage, in the
presence of his Conductors, who had no order to restrain any person from
resorting to him, were for this very cause sent for by a Messenger, to appear
before the Lords of the Privy Counsel, and likewise cited into the High
Commission at York, where they were imprisoned, and fined, to the ruin of
their estates, enjoined to make a public Recantation in the Cathedral Church,
and in the Towne-Hall of Chester. The said Commissioners further decreeing that
three pictures of your petitioners found in Chester, should be publicly burnt
at the high Cross there, which was done accordingly.

That your Petitioner since his said sentence, has bin publicly reviled at,
and libelled against, both by the high Commissioners at York, and in sundry
Churches, both at Chester, and else where, and in diverse licensed printed
books compiled by the said Heylin, and published by the Archbishops privity or
command, and that sundry of his friends houses, studies, Books, and writings
have bin violently broken up, ransacked and taken away, and themselves
prosecuted in the high Commission, out of malice, for the relation they had to
your Petitioner.

That after your Petitioner had continued some ten weeks space close prisoner
in Carnarvan, he was about three years since, by a warrant from the Lords of
the Counsel, made in the summer vacation (to which the said Archbishops hand
was first subscribed) ordered by way of Exile, to be imbarqued and transported
with all privacy into one of the Castles in the I Will of Iersey, and his
conductors thereby charged not to admit any person whatsoever, but themselves
only, to speak with your Petitioner in his passage: Whereupon after some
injuries there received by M. Griffith, the Kings Attorney in those parts (who
endeavored to sieze upon the furniture of his chamber for his own use) your
Petitioner was imbarqued among Papists, in a bruised ship-wrackt vessel, full
of leakes, and after fourteen weeks voyage in the Winter season, through
dangerous storms and seas, which spoiled most of his stuff, and bedding, and
threatening often shipwreck to him, he arrived at the said I Will, and was
conveyed close prisoner into Mount Orgatile castle, there where the Lieutenant
Governor by an other extrajudiciall Order, to which the said Archbishops name
was first ordered, to keep your Petitioner close prisoner in a chamber, fuffer
none but his keepers to speak with him, to intercept all letters to him; to
permit him neither pen, Ink, nor paper, either to write to his friends for
necessaries, or to petition for relief, and to permit him no Book but the
Bible, and those aforenamed books, without giving any order for his diet
there, so that being deprived of his calling, and estate, exiled and shut up
close prisoner among strangers, remote from all his friends, denied all
address to him by person or letters, he had certainly perished in his almost
three years close imprisonment there, had not the extraordinary providence and
goodness of God (which he shall ever adore) and the noble charity of those,
under whose custody he did remain, furnished him with such diet and
necessaries, as preserved him both in health and life, in this his close
imprisonment and exile.

May it therefore please this Honorable House, to take these your petitioners
almost eight years tragical grievances, of new and dangerous example, into
your most sad and just considerations, that so they may not become presidents
to the prejudice of posterity; to grant him liberty to send for, and examine
all necessary witnesses: to order all Clerks, Registers, and other officers of
the Star Chamber, or elsewhere, speedily and freely to grant him the copies of
such orders, decrees, and writings, as his cause shall require, to release him
upon Bale, (being now but a prisoner only upon an extrajudiciall order of the
Lords, and not by Virtue of any sentence or decree in Court) To grant him
liberty to plead and prosecute his own cause, since counsel has so often
failed him, and to give him such satisfaction and relief as the Justice and
equity of his cause shall merit.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray for your safeties, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

portrait in oval frame of John Bastwick Man's days are vain, and as a flower
they fade,
Here Is one proclames, whereon man's life is stayed;
His sufferings, Changes, Comforts, in strict thrall,
Shows GOD alone preserues, and Gouernes all.


TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons house
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of John Bastwicke, Doctor in Physic, lately retained
close Prisoner and exile, in the Island of Sylly.
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner having about six years since set out a Book in Latin,
called Elenchus Religionis Papisticae, with an Addition thereunto called
Elagellum Pontificis, and Episcoporum Latialium, being thereunto provoked by
one Richard Short, a Papist that maintained the Popes supremacy, the Mass, and
Papal Religion; In which Book your Petitioner, (for preventing all
misinterpretations, of his pious, and good intentions therein) in his Epistle
to the Reader, fully declared himself, that your Petitioner meant nothing
against such Bishops, as acknowledged their Authority from Kings and Emperors,
yet because your Petitioner (the better ever to show the Papal usurpation of
other Princes) therein, only maintained by way of Argument (as other Orthodox
writers of that Subject usually have done) a parity of the said Bishop of Rome,
or all other Bishops or Presbitters, by the word of God, denying his and their
supremacy over other Ministers to be by the Divine institution.

Thereupon a Pursevant by Authority from the high Commission Court, came into
your Petitioners house, at Colchester in Essex, in his absence; And the said
Pursevant assisted with the then Bayliffes and Constables of Colchester
aforesaid, Ransaked his said house, together with his Chests and Truncks, and
with great violence broke open your Petitioners Study, which was in his
Apothecaries house, and took and carried away diverse of your Petitioners
Books, Writings, Letters, and what else the Pursevant pleased, without making
of restitution of them to your Petitioner.

And then your Petitioner was prosecuted in the said high Commission Court
principally, for his said Book, where after a long and charitable prosecution,
he was the 12. of February 1634, fined 1000 li. to the King, excommunicated,
debarred to practice Physic, the chiefest means of his livelihood, his said
Book ordered to be burnt; That he should pay cost of suit, and be imprisoned
till he should make a recantation; the which heavy censure was only for the
said Book, wherein your Petitioner maintained the prerogative of a King
against the Papacy. Whereas one Thomas Chawney of Essex, lately wrote a Book
in maintenance of the Papal Religion, and in defense of the Church of Rome,
and averres it to be a true Church, the which Book is dedicated to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and was and is patronized and defended by the said
Archbishop, and the said Chawney never troubled for it. After which censure
declared as aforesaid; all the Bishops that were then present denied openly
that they held their jurisdiction from his Majesty, and affirmed, that they had
it from God only; and the Archbishop of Canterbury among many other Erroneous
sayings uttered by him; maintained the said Chawneys Book, and maintained that
the Church of Rome was a true Church, and that it erred not in fundamentals:
and he, and other the said Bishops, there defamed the holy Scriptures, and
abused reverend Master Calvin. In regard whereof, and for the vindicating of
your Petitioners innocence in the matters for which he was most unjustly
censured, as aforesaid, your Petitioner, published in Print another Book in
Latin Entitled, Apologeticus ad Presules Anglicanos, expressing the truth of
his proceedings and speeces of his said censure. For which last mentioned
Book, and his Book called the Lettany (not then in Print) an information was
exhibited against him and others in the Starrechamber, to which your
Petitioners answer being drawn and engrossed, was only subscribed by himself,
because he could get no counsel to set their hands to it; your Petitioner
tendered the said answer first at the Star Chamber Office, and after in open
Court at the Star Chamber Bar, but it would not be accepted, for want of
counselors hands to it, contrary to former Presidents. But the Court of
Star Chamber took the said information Pro confesso, and censured Your
Petitioner 5000 li. fine to the King, to stand in the Pillory, and to loose
both his ears, and to be close prisoner in Lancaster castle in Cornwall: all
which has been executed upon him with great extremity, to the peril of his
life. After all which extremity, your Petitioner (by what order he knows it
not, it being no part of his censure in Star Chamber) was transported from the
said castle, To the Island of Sylly, a place so barren, that it affords not
ordinary necessaries, where he has been in close duration for three years or
more, and not suffered to have any of his friends come at him, his (very Wife
being prohibited by the Lords of the counsels order) under pain of
imprisonment, not to set her foot upon any part of the said Island, to enquire
of his welfare. So that your Petitioner has been exiled from his wife and
diverse small children 3. years and more, besides the great straights and
miseries which he has sustained, during the said time. All which is contrary
to the law of God and man, and the Liberties of a free Subject, and to the
utter undoing of your Petitioner, his Wife, and children.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly, to take these pressing
grievances of your Petitioner into your considerations, and to afford him such
relief therein, as in your grave Wisdoms shall seem Consonant to Justice and
equity, and to assign him for Counsel, Master Atkins, Master Ludbore, Master
Tomlins, Master Curdon, and Master Randall, to assist him in this his
complaint, and to order that your Petitioner may take out Gratis, such Copies
of the said Censures, Warrants and Orders, and other the proceedings, in the
said several Courts as shall or may any way concern this his sad, yet most
just complaint, with warrant from this Honorable house, to bring in his
witness.

And your Petitioner as in duty bound, shall ever pray for your prosperities,
JOHN BASTWICKE.

TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons house
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Henry Burton, late exile, and close Prisoner in Castle
Cornet, in the I Will of Garnsey.
In all humbleness shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner, on the 5 of November. 1636, did preach two Sermons
in his own Parish Church, in S. Matthew Friday street, London, for the which
he was in December then next following, summoned to appear before D. Ducke,
one of the Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, at Cheswicke, in the
County of Middlesex: where (with the Register of the High Commission Coutt) the
said D. Ducke tendered to the Petitioner, the Oath Ex Officio, to answer to
certain Articles there presented: which Oath the Petitioner refusing, to take,
did then and there appeal from the said Court, unto the Kings Majesty: which
appeal the said D. Ducke did admit, and the said Register by D. Ducks
direction, did then, and there enter in writing.

portrait in oval frame of Henry Burton Lo here the shadow of a man set free
From death, from grave, do ask how this could be
Doubt not; The virtue of CHRIST'S death has done it
And powerful prayers of his Redeemed ones won it.


Notwithstanding which said appeal, a special High Commission Court, was
shortly after called at London, consisting of 4, or 5 Doctors, where the said
Commissioners proceeded illegally, to suspend the Petitioner in his absence, by
means whereof, as of the threatenings of the said Commissioners, he was
enforced to keep his house, until a Sergeant at Arms, with diverse
Pursevants, and other armed Officers, assisted by Alderman Abell, then Sheriff
of London, beset the Petitioners House, at 11 of the Clock at night, and
violently broke open his doors, with Iron Crows, and the like, and surprised
him in his house, he making no resistance at all: where having first searched
his study, and taking away such books as they pleased, they carried your
Petitioner to prison, whence, the next day being the second of Febr. by a
pretended order from the Lords of the Counsel, he was conveyed to the Fleet,
and there kept close prisoner.

During which imprisonment, an information was exhibited against the
petitioner, and others, in his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber, whereby he was
charged (inter alia) with the publishing of a certain Book, containing, an
Apology for an Appeal, with his said two Sermons, entitled, For God and the
King, wherein he taught Subjects to yield all manner of due obedience to their
lawful King, and reproved all lawless Innovations in Religion etc. Which
Information, the petitioner upon his Oath under the hand of M. Holt, being then
of his counsel, assigned by special order from the said Court, did put in his
answer, wherein he alleged such things only, as his said Counsel conceived
to be material, and pertinent for his just defense in publishing the said
book, but denied all other matters in the said Information contained, which
said Answer, being admitted and received in Court, the petitioner (being then a
close prisoner) not only attended the exhibiting of Interrogatories, according
to the custom of that Court, but withal, after some universal delay, did
write unto the Kings Attorney to hasten them: but before the examiner came,
the petitioner heard that his said Answer was referred to S. John Bramston,
Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench: Sir John Finch, then chief
Justice of the Commonpleas, and was by them wholly expunged as impertinent and
Scandalous (save only the not guilty) And the Petitioner understanding the
answer he was to make to the Interrogatories was to be reckned as a part of his
answer, admitted in court, but afterward expunged as impertinent and
scandalous (as aforesaid): so as if he should then have answered the
Interrogatories, he should thereby have assented to the said act of the said
Judges, and so to the condemnation of his cause before the hearing, whereby he
should have contracted his former Oath, that his said Answer was a true Answer,
and so should justly have brought himself under the guilt of wilful perjury,
and his cause under just censure. For that very reason he held himself not
bound, (as he conceived) to answer the Interrogatories, for that his said
answer was so expunged, and the (Not Guilty) as the foot so tied to the head
without the maine body (and that in the Judges own words) as the Petitioner
could not in any sort take or acknowledge it now for other then the Judges own
answer, as may appear upon Record in the same Court.

Nevertheless, the Court taking the same information Pro confesso, and
refusing to admit a copy of the Petitioners own true answer, as also of his
reasons of not answering the Interrogatories, both which at his Censure he
tendered to the Court, desiring they might be then and there publicly read the
14. of June, 13. Caroli Regis, proceeded to censure, whereby your Petitioner
was Censured in a Fine of 5000. li. to his Majesty, To be deprived of his
Ecclesiastical Benefice, degraded from his Ministerial function and degrees
in the University, and ordered to be set on the Pillory, where both his ears
were to be cut off, confined to perpetual close imprisonment in Lancaster
Castle, debarred the access of his wife or any other, to come to him, but
only his Keeper, and denied the use of pen, ink, and paper. All which
(except the Fine) was executed accordingly. And after his close imprisonment
for twelve weeks in the common Jail in the said Castle, he was (by what
extrajudiciall order he knows not) transported by the conduct of one Brian
Burton appointed by the High Sheriff of Lancaster, (who used your Petitioner
very basely and deceitfully, (in that his transportation) which was in the
Winter season through dangerous seas; to the apparent hazard both of his
health and life) to he said Castle of Garnsey, where he has remained a close
prisoner and exile almost three whole years, his wife utterly prohibited upon
pain of imprisonment to set her foot upon any part of the Island, where she
might but enquire how her husband did, contrary to the Laws of God and the
liberties of this Kingdom.

May it therefore please this Honorable House, to take the Petitioners sad
cause into consideration, and for the better manifestation of his grievance in
this cause, to assign him for Counsel Master Sergeant Atkins, Master Tomlins,
and Master Gurdon, to assist him in his cause, and to command that he may take
out such copies Gratis out of the said several Courts as do or may concern
his said cause.

And your Petitioner as in duty bound, shall daily pray for your prosperities.
HENRY BURTON.

The humble Petition of Nathanael Wickings servant to Master Prinne, and late
prisoner in the White-Lion in Southwarke.
Most humbly shows,
THat more then 3 years and a half since, your Petitioner, being servatn to
Master William Prinne then prisoner in the Tower, pending the last Information
against his said Master in the Star Chamber, was apprehended in the Tower by a
Messenger, by a warrant from the Archbishop of Canterbury and other Lords, and
by him determined close prisoner by the space of ten weeks, that none could
speak with him but his Majesty's Attorney General, and his Majesty's then
Solicitor, who examined him three several times, upon secrets of his said
Masters, to extort some matter of accusation against his said Master by Dures.

That after ten weeks end, your Petitioner was from that close custody by
warrant from the Counsel Board delivered over into the hands of John Ragge, a
Messenger attendant upon the High Commission Court, to be by him delivered to
the Keeper of the Gate House: But the said Ragge carried your Petitioner home
to his own house, and there detained him two days and a night, till some of
the High-Commissioners had signed a warrant for your Petitioners commitment to
the Counter in Woodstreet, whereto he was carried by the said Ragge, and
charged with 26 shillings as his Fees due to him for the two days and nights
he kept your Petitioner without order.

That your Petitioner was after called before the High Commissioners at
Lambeth, and there tendered the oath Ex officio, to wit, to answer all such
Articles as should be objected against him without ever being permitted, either
to see or hear them, though he desired the same. And for his refusing the
said Oath, the Court declared him pro Confesso, and by their unanimous censure
imposed a Fine of 1000 lib. on him, good round costs of suite, excommunicated
and committed him back to remain Sub salva and arcta custodia, and not at any
terms to walk abroad with his Keeper, until other order should be taken by
the Court. One of the said Articles, (to which he could give no answer)
running in these words.

Item, we object to you Nath. Wickins, that you know or believe that the
letter, which you carried to the Printer, to be set the first Letter upon the
Book, was a very complete Letter, and so Artificially cut, as that to look on
it the usual way, it seemed a complete and perfect C, but turned one side of
it, and it appeared a Popes head, and then turned another way, and there
appeared an Army of men or Soldiers. And we require you to declare by virtue
of your Oath to your best knowledge and belief, who or what was meant by the
Popes head in the said Letter or seal; and who or what by the Army of men or
Soldiers? And who by the C? And whether by the C was meant the Lords Grace of
Canterbury? and by the Popes head that his Grace was meant? And that by the
Army of men or Soldiers was meant, that his Grace would be the cause of Wars
in this Kingdom about Religion, or some other like meaning or device,) which
is likewise recited in his Censure in like terms.

That your Petitioners Father was ordered to satisfy 22 pound 13 shillings 4
pence, for Fees due to the Messenger, who first seized him at 6 sh. 8 d. the
day, for the 10. weeks he detained him Close Prisoner, when his Father had
nothing to do with him, he being another man's Servant.

That after your Petitioner had lain almost two years in the Counter, he was
by the High Commissioners ordered to be sent to Wisbich Castie in the I Will of
Elie there to remain a close Prisoner. But by a General Warrant from the
Archbishop and some other Lords he was removed to the Gate House, and thence
after a short abode there, removed to the White Lion in Southwarke, where he
lay almost a year, and was then from thence forced out by the disordered Rout
that brake open that Prison, which tumult being appeased, he there voluntarily
rendered himself again, and thence by a Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice
Bramston he was transmitted to Newgate, where he lay above 23 weeks, and had
lain there longer, had not he by his Counsel moved his Majesty's Judges of the
Kings Bench for a Habeas Corpus to be Bailed, upon which he was without any
Warrant remanded to the White Lion instead of being Bailed; whereupon he moved
the second time for a Habeas Corpus, on which when he was brought to the Bar
he could not be Bailed till after 4 Motions, and 2 Rules made in the Cause.

That your Petitioner during his said Imprisonments has had his Chambers
diverse times searched, his Trunks and Boxes broken open; his licenced Books and
lawful papers taken away, and never yet could have them returned.

That your Petitioner has made several humble addresses by petition to the
Counsel Table, the High Commission Court, and Archbishop for Relief in his
enlargement, or support, with maintenance, but could not obtain their Gracious
Answers, especially the Archbishop, in regard he had vowed (as his own
Household Servants reported) that your Petitioner should never be released as
long as he breathed, without he would either submit to confess such things as
should be required of him; as, what his Mr. did, and what he bade him to do;
or to take the Oath Ex Officio.

Alwhich Illegal Imprisonments of purpose to enforce him to betray and accuse
his Innocent Mr. against the Laws of God, and the Realm, he humbly submits to
the grave Consideration of this Honorable House, desiring such Recompense for
his said false Imprisonments and Injuries as to your wisdoms shall seem most
meet.

And he as in duty bound shall ever pray. etc. NATHANAEL WICKINS.

TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Peter Juice, of the City of Chester, Stationer.
Shows,
THAt your Petitioner (though every way conformable to the Laws of this Realm,
and Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and of a peaceable
disposition) about 3 years since, for visiting Mr. Prynne in his passage
through Chester to the Castle of Carnarvan, by the consent of his Keeper, was
by the means and direction of the Bishop of Chester Arested by the Servant of
Roger Blanchard Pursuivant for the High-Commissioners at York, to appear
before them upon Chester Chair Evening, who forced him to enter into Bond,
with Sureties to appear at the Court at Bishops-Thorpe on that day, which he
did accordingly: And on the same day your Petitioners Wife was Arrested, and
carried out of his House by night, by a Warrant from the said Commissioners to
appear at Bishop-Thorpe the next day, being 80. miles from Chester, for which
two Arests he was enforced to pay six pound to Blanchard.

That your Petitioner upon his Appearance was enforced to take an Oath to
Answer sundry originals, and three papers of Additionall Articles, to his
great vexation and expense, being kept at York in the said Pursulvants house,
for the space of eight weeks, during which time, he was constrained to send
down several Commissions for the Examination of his Wife, being unable to
Travel, and dangerously sick, by means of the fright she took by the
Pursuivants Arresting her, and carrying her away in the night, Your Petitioners
House, Shop, and Study being three times searched in the mean time, by a
Warrant from the Lords. And though nothing offensive was then found, or proved
against him, but only his visiting Mr. Prynne in his passage through Chester,
and that with the leave of his Conductours, Yet your Petitioner was by the said
Commissioners fined 300. pound to his Majesty, Imprisoned in the Pursuivants
House, to whom he paid 6. sh. 8. d. a day, besides his diet, until such time
as he should enter into Bond, with Sureties, to make such a public
acknowledgement of his pretended offense, in visiting Mr. Prynne, both in the
Cathedral, and Common Hall of Chester, as the said Commissioners should
prescribe; your Petitioner being enforced to pay diverse great and unwarrantable
Fees, both to the Pursuivants, Registers, Proctors, and other Officers of the
said Court, to the value of 50. pound at the least; And though nothing was
proved against his Wife, yet they forced him to pay the Charges of the Court,
and Costs of Suit for her.

That your Petitioner by reason of his said great Oppressions and Expenses, and
through the persuasion of the said Bishop of Chester, and his Chancellor, was
most against his Judgment and Conscience induced to make an unjust
Acknowledgement in the said Cathedral before a great Assembly, where the said
Bishop being then present, and his Chapleyn Mr. Thomas Cordell preaching a
Sermon for that purpose, wherein he bitterly inveighed against Mr. Prynne and
his Fellow Sufferers, comparing them to Corah, Dathan and Abiram. And because
your Petitioner changed one word of the Acknowledgement, saying ignorantly for
wickedly, he was enjoined by the Bishop the same day at Evening to make a new
Acknowledgement in the said Church before another Great Assembly; and after
that, to make the first Acknowledgement in the Common Hall of Chester, before
the Mayor and Aldermen, and all comers in; And enforced him to pay 4 pound to
Blanchard for being present to see his Acknowledgement made.

After which your Petitioner was constrained to pay 30. pound to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sugar-loaves to his Servant Mr. Holford, for
Composition of his said Fine of 30. pound; so that by reason of all the
premises, your Petitioner has expended at least the sum of 100. pound, and
suffered damages to the value of 200. pound in his Trade and Reputation.

May it please this Honorable House to take these your Petitioners Grievances,
together with the jurisdiction of the said High Commission Court into your just
and Honorable Considerations, and to afford your Petitioner such Relief for
his losses and damages, as the Justice and Equity of this Cause shall require.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. PETER JUICE.

TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons house
of Parliament.
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF PETER LEIGH of the City of CHESTER, Grocer, and RICHARD
GOLBORNE of CHESTER aforesaid Gentleman.
Shows,
THAT your Petitioners (though peaceable, and conformable to the Laws of the
Realm, and Doctrine, and Discipline, by Law established in the Church of
England) were about three years since (with William Trafford Deceased)
Arrested by Roger Blanckhard, chief Pursuivant for the High Commission at
York, (for Visiting Mr. William Prynne in his Journey to Carnarvan Castle,
which they conceived they might Lawfully do, being his friends, and there
being no order to the contrary) who upon their said Arrest, took of each of
your Petitioners, 3 pound a piece, for his sees, and several Bonds of your
Petitioners, for the appearance at the said High Commission at York, within a
short time after; which they did accordingly, and were committed to the said
Blanchards custody, until such time as they entered into Bonds, to stand to the
Order of the same Court: And upon your Petitioners appearance, diverse Articles
were exhibited against them, in the said Court; and the visiting of the said
William Prynne, they confessed, but denied all miscariages, or misdemeanors,
charged against them, and averred that they accompanied him only in the
presence of his Keepers. And your Petitioners, and the said Deceased, were to
their great charge forced to attend at York, one of them, above a Month, and
the other 3 weeks after they had Answers to the same Articles, before
Sentence; and at last they were constrained to pay great sums of money, for
Fees, and costs of Suit, on both sides, Doctor Matershed the Kings Advocate,
and the Proctors against them, receiving great sums of money of them, which
with the Pursuivants Fees, amounted to above sixty pound. And your Petitioner,
Peter Leigh, was fined 200 li. to the Kings Majesty: and your other Petitioner
300 li. and the said William Trafford, 150 li. and for the same cause, and not
any witness examined against any of them, were enjoined to make an
acknowledgement, which before they would not do, in regard the same was against
their consciences, and the Laws of this Realm as they believed; They were
forced to flee into other Countries, and leave their Wives, and Children,
Trades, and Professions; And in their absence the Pursuivants of the said Court
came to their Houses, with Warrants, or intimations, which they caused to be
published in your Petitioners Parish Churches in Chester aforesaid, and did so
affright their Wives, that they being with Child, did soon after miscarry.

And your Petitioners, and William Trafford, using all means for their
freedom, could not prevail, but their fines were Estreated, and their Bonds
returned into the Exchequer as forfeited; whereupon at last, that they might
have some access, and favor, to and with the Archbishop of Canturbury, who,
as they were informed, had only power to relieve them; They paid Doctor
Merricke, one of the Advocates of the High Commission Court at Canterbury, that
they might have access to his Lordship, 35 li. at several times: They
presented his Lordship also with two Butts of the best Sack, and gave one Mr.
Holford, one of his Attendants 12 li. and other Gratuities, to other of his
Servants, to the value of 20 li. more. All which were bestowed on the said
Archbishop, and his Servants, by the advice and direction of the said Doctor
Merricke: and after the acceptance thereof, the said Arch Bishop was content to
take, and did take for your Petitioners and the said Traffords fines 240 li.
more which they paid accordingly, and were forced to pay 40 li. more for fees
in London, and at York concerning the said business; by which said expense,
troubles, and neglect of their own Occasions, your Petitioners for their
parts, have been damnified above 1000 li. and their estates almost thereby
wholly mined: They being enforced to flee and wander into strange Countries for
about four months together: your Petitioner Peter Leigh, then being a
Tradesman, who dealt for above 4000 li. per annum, and then much indebted, had
his Shop shut up, for above 3 months together, for fear of having his goods
seized, for his forfited Bond, and fine aforesaid. And your Petitioner Golborne
thereby was so ruined in his Estate, that he for a long time after, with his
Wife, and Children, lived upon the Benevolence of his Friends, and now is
constrained to live in Service, being disabled for want of moneys to go on in
that course wherein formerly he was employed.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to take your Petitioners
distressed estate into your grave Considerations, and to weigh their pretended
Offenses, and their severe and heavy punishments together, and to afford them
such Relief for the great wrongs done unto them, and their Estates and
Families by the Commissioners and Officers of the said High Commission, who
have so rent and torn them in their Estates, as aforesaid; and by those who
are the Authors of their Grievances and Oppressions, who have made a prey of
them, by taking such Gratuities and sums of money of them, as aforesaid; when
they or some of them were the Incendiaries of their Troubles and Vexations, and
the Authors and procurers of their so heavy punishments, as in your grave
Wisdoms shall seem convenient; That so other his Majesty's Subjects for the
time future, may not be so grievously oppressed at man's pleasure.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. PETER LEIGH. RICHARD GOLBORNE.


TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Calvin Bruen of the City of Chester.
Shows,
THAT your Petitioner (though every way conformable to the Laws of this Realm,
and Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and of a peaceable
disposition) about 3 years since, was Arrested by Robert Blanchard Pursuivant
for the High-Commissioners at York, who took of him for his Arrest 3 pounds,
and a Bond for his appearance at York the 28. of September 1637. (being the
Fair time at Chester) on which day your Petitioner received a Copy of a
Warrant from the Lords of his Majesty's privy Counsel for his appearance
before them with speed. The which Copy your Petitioner showed to the
Archbishop of York, and others the said High-Commissioners there. Yet they
the said High-Commissioners would not let him go, till he had taken the Oath
Ex Officio, and paid Pursuivants Fees. And the same day in the evening one
Gouldsborrough, a Messenger from the Lords came for your Petitioner Bruen, and
made him pay him 10 li. for Fees. And your Petitioner afterward appearing
before the Lords of the Counsel was charged with accompanying Mr. William
Prynne at his being in Chester, in his passage to the Castle of Carnarvan. But
upon his offer to take his oath that he enquired of his Keepers if they had any
Command from the Lords to restrain any one from coming to see him, and that
the Keepers made your Petitioner this Answer, that there was no Command to the
contrary. And the Lords asking him if he would take his Oath of that? he
Answered yes. Whereupon they were satisfied, and gave him as he conceived, a
discharge, and sent him away home. But immediately after your Petitioners
return home, he was again summoned to appear at the High Commission at
York, who appeared accordingly, and was again sworn, and several Articles
exhibited against him for the aforesaid pretended offense; and for ex tempore
Prayers, and Repetitions with Mr. Pryn: as also for procuring the Picture of
the said Mr. Prynne to be drawn by a Limner in Chester.

All which last particulars, your Petitioner denied, they being but false
surmises, but confessed the visiting of the said Mr. Prynne, with the consent
of his Keepers, which your Petitioner thought he might lawfully do; there
being no Law or Order to the contrary. Yet for such supposed offenses only
without any Testimony or Witnesses, your Petitioner was Fined 500. pound, and
ordered to pay all Costs and charges to Proctors, Messengers and Advocates,
which came to 13. pound, or thereabouts for your Petitioner for one week only,
which said 13. pound your Petitioner Bruen paid accordingly: whereof one Dr.
Moctershed had 5. pound, being Advocate against him. And your Petitioner was
enjoined to make this submission hereunto annexed.

After which Sentence your Petitioner was Committed to the Pursuivants, till he
put in Bond with two sufficient Sureties of 520. pound to stand to the Order of
the Court, and then went home. But shortly after, refusing to make the
acknowledgement aforesaid, was again by the said Pursuivant Imprisoned until
he should make the said Acknowledgement, which he was much pressed unto by the
Bishop and Chancellor of Chester, which said Bishop did assure him (as he the
said Bishop should Answer before God) your Petitioner might safely do it.

Your Petitioner being in Prison, and having left his means of living, he
being kept from his Trade eight months, and his Wife and Children thereby
brought to great distress, was forced by terrors and fears, and by the
persuasion of the said Bishop and Chancellor, (on whose judgments your
Petitioner much relied) to procure his enlargement from Imprisonment, by making
the said Acknowledgement in the Cathedral Church of Chester, and the Common
Hall thereof, and was forced to pay to the aforesaid Pursuivant Blanchard, (who
came to see him do it) 5. pounds for Fees.

After all which your Petitioner was forced twice more to go to York, being
fourscore miles from his house, to take off his said Fine, if he could: But
the Fine was certified into the Exchequer, and no help was to be had but by
suite to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom the said Fines were granted:
who after your Petitioner and his Wife suing to him by the space of a whole
month together, accepted of thirty pounds for your Petitioner.

May it please this Honorable House to take this your Petitioners grievances
into your grave Considerations, together with the jurisdiction of the Court of
High Commission at York, where your Petitioner (besides sundry others) has
suffered so much vexation and oppression, only for visiting the said Mr.
Prynne, to the damage of 500. pound at least: And to consider whether this
pretended offense be such, as by the Law the said Court has power to meddle
with. And to award your Petitioner such speedy recompense for his said wrongs
against the said Commissioners and their Instruments, as to your grave wisdom
shall seem meet and convenient.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. CALVIN BRUEN.

Here follows a Copy of the Declaration or acknowledgement appointed by his
Majesty's Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical within the Diocese and
Province of York, to be done and performed by Calvin Bruen of the City of
Chester, in the Cathedral Church of Chester, and Common Hall thereof.
He is to be present in the Cathedral Church of Chester aforesaid at morning
prayer, upon Sunday next coming, being the tenth of December instant, being in
his accustomed apparel, where and when, immediately before the beginning of
the Sermon, he shall stand upon some seat or stool before the Pulpit, and
say, and receite after the Minister, as follows; Whereas I have been of late
convented before his Majesty's Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiastical, for
the Diocese and Province of York. For that I countenanced, comforted, and
abbetted one William Prynne, heretofore twice censured in his Majesty's Court
of Star Chamber, for publishing seditious and scandalous books and libells.
Namely, in that I waited upon him, to bring him into this City, and attended
upon him at his going out of the City. By all which my carriage and
misdemeanors, I have audaciously and wickedly (as much as in me lay)
countenanced the said Prynne, and offereed an affront to his Majesty and the
State, in their just proceedings against him. And thereby also have brought a
scandal and reproach upon the City; for all which my offenses, upon my
personal Avowers made to the Articles in that behalf objected aganst me, I
stand legally and justly convicted by his Majesty's said Commissioners and by
them enjoined to make this declaration, and acknowledgement for the same.

I do here in the presence of God and this Congregation confess my said
Offenses, and declare my hearty sorrow for the same. And do ask forgivenesle
of God, the Church, the Kings Majesty, and the State. As also of the whole
Government both Ecclesiastical and Temporal of this place: against all whom I
have so grievously offended. And in token that this my Confession for the
present is hearty, and that I may obtain Grace hereafter to perform what I
now rromise, and find mercy for what is past: I desire you all to say with me
the Lords Prayer, Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

