Flagellum Flagelli: OR Doctor BASTWICKS Quarters Beaten up in two or three
POMERIDIAN EXERCISES, by way of ANIMADVERSION upon his first Book, entitled,
Independency not Gods Ordinance.

By J. S. M. A.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, dwelling in Aldersgate-streete. 1645.

To Doctor Bastwick.
SIR;
WHen I first took your book in hand, it was to read, not to write, but
finding it easy, and advantage enough, I fell on: I had thought to have scand
the particulars as I began, but the course I was in at the Wells for my health
forbad me, and I presume I should have been no otherwise advised by your self,
whose judgment in such matters might be worthy of more account. I therefore
quarterd your Book, and took hold of the pillars of your discourse, which if I
have shaken, how can your building stand? If some few hands more would do but
as much as this, to what parts (or passages rather) are omitted, you might
perhaps come to know all the faults of your book in time, which is the worst
wish of

The truths friend and yours, J. S.

Flagellum Flagelli: OR, Dr. Bastwicks quarters beaten up, etc.
PAge 1. It has ever been observed, that diversity of judgment and opinion
bath made a difference in affection. Answ. But you prove not that to be other
then the fruit of Corruption; therefore throw the stone at Corruption, Solomon
says, only through pride (therefore Prove. 14. 10.
not through difference) comes Contention. There is an Antipathy between the
Hound and the Hare, but was it so from the beginning? Or, must one of them be
destroyed?

2. We see many a husband and wife, neighbor and neighbor, friend and friend
of several judgments, that yet live very amicably and friendly together,
therefore the observation is not universally true: And if a few do, and may do
so, all might, had they the same grace, and were there the like mortification
of pride. And as for your instance, of the Disciples animosity against the
Samaritans, Luke 9.
whereby this grave Sentence is exemplyfied: Does not Christ reprove his
Disciples instead of contriving the ruin or removal of the Samaritans, though
it was not difference in Religion, but incivility and inhumanity against the
very person of Christ himself, that Verse. 53.
so stird the Disciples choler? but whatsoever it was for, will you humor,
justify and make provision for such a passion, which Verse. 55.
Christ so sharply condemns in his Disciples?

Page 2. Therefore should all care and diligence among brethren be used to get
a right understanding of one another.

Answ. 1. If by a right understanding one of another, you mean properly, viz. a
calling of every thing by its right name, aggravating nothing, nor looking
through multiplying glasses upon the inconveniences of each others opposite
opinion I am for you, and shall call you a man of peace: Or, if you speak
Metonymically, using the Cause for the Effect, and by right understanding, mean
an incorporation into one opinion; yet if you carry this impartially, and beg
not the Question, but put them into an equal balance, resolving your self, as
well as desiring others to embrace whatsoever shall appear to be the truth,
you do well: But if you will anticipate and forestall the judgment of your
Reader, and nothing will please you but a coming over to your opinion, what
singular thing, or what new Invention toward an agreement do you offer more
then the rigidest Presbyterian confident of his own Way, and abounding in his
own sense, has done before you? Certainly, if we could turn Presbyterians,
we question not but the strife were ended: But here were a part worthy of a
man of parts, in case we cannot be of one mind, to find out a Way of peace and
love, and to move brethren to bear with one another, as you say, contiguously
with the former, but have little endeavored it yet, and not a little the
contrary.

Page 3. The honor of the Church, for which you profess you contend, is an
unsavory expression, too much symbolizing with the style of the Papists, as
does the practice of some men with theirs also. And whereas you say [the honor
of that Church] you speak very ambiguously, and improperly, not determining
where, or who that Church is, whether in England or Scotland, or elsewhere, or
every where, whether Catholic or National, tell us, that we may honor it
with you.

Page ead. Some few lines below, where you undertake to reckon all the
undeceiveable marks of the true Church, saying expressly, these are all those
undeceiveable marks, etc. Yet having named only three, you eeke them out with
an [ all other requisites] not naming the rest, like the Bishops Et caetera;
who juggles now?

And whereas you say contiguously, From such a Church as has the Gospel purely
preached and believed, the Sacraments rightly administered, and in the which
there is the true invocation of God and all other requisites, etc. there is no
just separation.

I answer, There is a whole Category of Amphibolies in your speech; For neither
by all the Requisites, do you say whether you mean Essentialls or Integralls:
Nor by separation, whether you mean absolute and total separation, or
partial; from Communion ordinary or from all communion; from internal or
external; therefore I might justly take no notice of this, till you speak
plainer; yet to undeceive the world, we give this account and answer: An
internal communion there is, and ought to be acknowledged between all the
members of the body mystical, whether they be in bodies ministerial or no: an
external communion in all the common duties of Religion; as praying, hearing,
conference, admonition, may not be denied with all Christians, and with all men
occasionally to edification: An external communion in Church-ordinances, as
sacraments and censures, may not be subtracted or withdrawn from a Church
right for the essentialls, as if it were no Church, or under such a notion, but
as from an imperfect Church, if it want integralls; or a corrupt, if it be
redundant with superstitions, etc. so it may: Lastly, an occasional communion
even in the Lords Supper, may be admitted with a Church that walks up to their
light, with whom yet, perhaps, we cannot with comfort sit down ordinarily.

As for your Apology for the non-dedication of your Book, in regard of your
sufferings for your former, I say only this upon it: It was far better with you
when you suffered for Presbytery in opposition to Prelaticall tyranny, then
now, if you would make others suffer by Presbytery, in opposition to the
Congregationall government; only I doubt, in the sequel of your Discourse you
will not be found to entitle the Lord Jesus to your book, (as in terms you
profess.) If so, I hope there will be no quarrel between us; for all we
contend for, is that the Government may be left where it is laid by the Father
Isai. 9. 6.
even upon his shoulders.

As for God and Faith, which you join together, page 5. saying, You have
learned to believe God and Faith upon their word and bond: I know not what that
Faith should mean; we ordinarily take faith for that whereby we believe, and
not that which we believe: or if you take it so ( metonymically objectively)
what is it other then God, or the will of God, which I suppose you mean the
Word of God? For God, or his will in its Essence is not immediately objected to
us, but he reveals his will in his Word; but to the substance of this boast,
and that that follows (if there be any substance in it) if you will believe
God and the sufficiency of his institutions, without the sureties of humane
reason and authority, as you do here equivalently profess, you will not be
offended at the Congregationall Way for that inconsistency and deficiency that
is carnally objected against it.

As for that you say, page 6. That this is no new opinion of yours, it is no
more then the Papists may say for their Mystery of Iniquity.

And as for your sufferings for it, which you boast of; alas, sufferings are
subject to the same vanity and bondage of corruption as doings; yea, and the
whole creation are ( i.) to be applied to ill things, and graffed with an ill
cause, though I say not it was ill as opposing Prelacie, or as it was a
graduall recidivation from that tyranny.

And as for the acceptance of your endeavors and sufferings, in that cause,
and your inference thereupon, That therefore you see no good Page eadem.
reason why a truth then should not be counted a truth now; You beg the
Question: Prove first it was a truth, otherwise it is no wonder if that which
seemed to be a truth six or seven years ago, find not the same acknowledgement
now, as might be instanced in many particulars.

Next you come to state the Question, page 7. and immediately you give that
which you call a simile of it, but if it be, it is 1. a carnal one, and I had
rather hear, and it would better become a spiritual man to compare spiritual
things with spiritual: for Christ's institutions 1 Cor. 2. 13.
must not be exacted by the Last and Rule of humane ordinances. God gave Moses
the pattern of the Tabernacle in the Mount, he does not send him to take a
pattern for it from any Exodus 25. 40. 26. 30.
earthly frame or fabric, though there were far more costly and curious, but
the Tabernacle was to have, and had a fashion by it self that differed from
all: When we know the true nature of spiritual things, of the devices of God,
as I may call them, we may find a resemblance of them in things here below,
which are made after them, but we cannot fetch the knowledge of heavenly
composures from these earthly things.

2. Yet neither is this bed of your simile large enough for the tall Isai. 28.
20.
and proper limbs of your Presbytery to stretch themselves upon: For though the
several Companies in each city, as you say, (though we have not many such
cities in England, except you have more of them in Scotland, wherein there are
such several Companies that have all their several halls, (e. g.) Merchant
Tailors, Grossers, etc. for to yield the matter of this simile) are not
independent, but associate and combined in a common council, etc. yet there
are Corporations as small as these Companies in the Kingdom, that are
Independent, and do not act in association or coordination. So that if the
Churches in the City must, to hold correspondence with the form of Civil
Government, be in association and act in a Presbytery, yet this Simile will not
carry any such thing to an ordinary understanding, that in the Country (where
they live three or four, or more miles asunder, and act their Civil affairs
independently) they must do so. Nay then, we will argue from the Simile: If
the Towns in the Country be independent in their Civil Government, that is,
act singly and independently (in respect of any other Towns intermedling)
their own businesses and concernments, as they do, why should not the Churches
in those Towns do so too? then at least the Churches in the Country must be
exampted from Presbytery.

But 3. I answer to your simile, That as it is shorter then that Presbytery, as
you would be willing to extend it in the praxis, may stretch it self upon, so
it is abs re, far from illustrating the sense you intend. For your simile in
the true resolution of it proposes no other then whether Inferiors may act
independent of their Superiors. For all those appeals, whereof you speak, are
still resolved into a higher notion, power, and authority, ( e. g.) The Lord
Major, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, are superior to any Company or
Companies of the City, in degree as their rulers, or amount to a superiority
in value and sum, as the representative of the City, the whole, which is
better then any part: therefore your simile is not fit for this purpose. But
now if you would propose a proper simile, it should be thus; Whether Companies
or Corporations, equal and coordinate, may not and do not act their own
proper affairs and concernments independently in respect of one another? (i.)
Whether if a Citizen of Merchant-taylors Company, be aggrieved by the carriage
of any thing in that Company, he can so appeal to the Company of the
Stationers, and the Company of the Vintners, and two or three more, or the
Heads of these, as to subject the Company of Merchant-taylors to the
jurisdiction and arbitrament of those Companies? for this is the case here.

As suppose there be no imparity (i.) superiority or inferioritie in the
Churches, but all are coordinate, all are one Spouse to Jesus Christ, and he
intrusts one Congregation as well and as much as another, and gives them as
large a share of common interest in spiritual government, or managing the
matters of his Kingdom, one Church as another, and has made no Common
Council, no Court of Aldermen, no Lord Major in his Church, nor no Officers or
distinctions answering to these. And suppose further, that as neither male nor
female, bond nor free, so such a distinction of whole and part, have no place
in this matter, but Christ Jesus the quickening Spirit be, as in all, so all in
all, and each of these particular bodies; and as a whole Christ went for the
ransom of each particular Believer, and a whole Christ is in every believer,
(as the soul tota in toto) so the whole and entire glory of Jesus Christ be
entrusted with every particular Congregation, ( i.) an entire and perfect
administration of all government be committed to them, and the entire Rev. 1. 4.
spirit of government be in each such Congregation. Suppose, I say, it be thus
(as I conceive it will be found to be,) that each part be to Christ as the
whole; Christ being indivisible, and recollecting his whole self in himself,
and in every part of himself (which the spirit of humane power, order, and
authority cannot do) and so we cannot weigh Christ against 1 Cor. 1. 13.
Christ, Christ's power against Christ's power, nor many Congregations against
one. I say, Suppose these things be so, then is it any Question, whether such
Congregations may act independently? When as we know that Companies do act
independent of their fellow-Companies, and Corporations in the Countries do
act independent of other neighbour-Corporations: indeed they act not
independently incontroulably of the higher names above them; but a Company is
not indicted by a Company, a Corporation by a Corporation. Until therefore you
shall prove that Churches are not coordinate, or that there are higher names
then Churches and Church- Presbyters, or that the same persons are in higher
place and office in a Classis, then in their own particular spheres and
Congregations, (which if it were so, then why should they not have suitable
names, that might import the superiority of the Relation (even as the
Common-Councell-Men, though they be Masters and Members of the several
Companies, yet when joined in a Common Council, they are not called the
Masters of the Companies of the City, but by a distinct name of interest and
honor, the Court of Aldermen, and Common Council) until, I say, you prove
these, your simile will lie in the dirt. I know we have such names, as Classes
and Synods, adapted and adopted to this Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, but they
being only jure humano, will not pass with us for grounds of Authority or
superiority in the things that are called by them.

Next after your Simile you come to your Question, and to divide your position
into four Branches, which yet you fall off from again by a digression of
sixteen or seventeen pages long, to prove, viz. That all the Churches we read
of in the New Testament, were pregnant Churches, or accumulated of many,
governed by a Common Presbytery: Which labor you might have saved, if you had
hopes to make good the four Branches propounded, (two of which are, That the
Mother Church was such a Church, and so governed; and secondly, That all other
Churches are to be governed as that was:) at least you might have kept this for
a reserve, if they had failed. But besides that, you prove neither part of your
Assertion, viz. Either that they were aggregated Churches, or that the
Presbytery to which they were committed, was a joint Presbytery, and not each
Church to its particular, (for those many Scriptures you quote, do neither of
themselves sound so, nor for ought I see, do you put such a twang into them:)
you commit these errors by the way.

1. You impose upon your Reader, without any authority or reason, that
Diotrephes was an Independent, and that was the quarrel 3 Epist. Joh.
John had against him; and that his Church was in the faction with him, when as
we have no mention of his Church at all, nor of his prating against the
Presbytery. And for the crime objected, of seeking the pre-eminence, if the
Lord keep us that the world be never able to charge us with a likelier fault,
we shall not be afraid to make our Accusers our Judges; Alas, our offense is,
that we are against pre-eminence.

2. You confidently exclude the people from having any hand in the Government,
(in which you account the solving of difficulties in doctrine, as well as other
matters to be a part) when yet in the places quoted, especially and most
expressly, Act. 15. 22. the interest of the Brethren and the whole Church is
spoken of, not in actu signato only, but in actu exercito.

3. Page 18. You make the names of Pastors and Shepherds, when applied to
Church Officers, to import that Authority, power, and government, as they do
when applied to Magistrates: at least you make the symbolizing of
Church Officers with Civil Magistrates in those Names an Argument of
communicating with them in such a kind of power as they have, though not the
same degree; but how weakly, let all men judge.

4. Page 19. You exact the ways of God by the line and rule of humane reason,
and will give no more to an Institution, then it will go for in that Market.

5. In the same page you put such an Objection upon the Independents about
requiring Miracles, as the condition and qualification of Elders now adays,
else not to be acknowledged Elders, as I am confident the Congregationall
judgment will not, nor ever did they own, what ever some other Independents
(for it is a genericall name, appliable to whomsoever the inventers of it
please, and more properly to some others, then they that are commonly called by
it) may do; but that it might be a scandal to all of the Name, you do very
wisely, and take the right course, not to name the book or Author, where you
find that Objection.

Page 29. You lure after your reader (who might very well be turning his back
upon your discourse) that now you come in order to prove the four
propositions, but you keep not this order long. The first proposition is; That
there were many Congregations and several Assemblies in the Church of
Jerusalem, etc. For the proof whereof you bring the multitudes of Converts to
John's Baptism; The people of Jerusalem, all of them, and all Judea, etc.
Whereby (say you,) they all became Christians, or Members of the Christian
Church: For (say you,) John's Baptism was into Jesus Christ, and the very same
with that of the Apostles.

We answer to your Reason;

1. John's Baptism was into Christ, but it was in Christum moriturum, not in
Christum mortuum.

2. To say it was the same with Christ's and the Apostles, is flat Mat. 21. 25.
Act. 18. 25.
contrary to the Assertion of John himself, and the Apostles; I baptize you
with water (says he) but there comes one after me, who shall baptize with the
Holy Ghost, and with fire.

3. Therefore now by John's Baptism they were not all made Christians, no more
then the body of the Jews before John were turned Christians by being baptized
in the red Sea, etc. for they were baptized into Christ by their Baptismes. I
deny not but this baptism 1 Cor. 10. 3.
of John was to prepare men for Christ, and did bear a more immediate relation
to such a work, then any Ordinance before, but it did not make them absolute
Christians; It did not absolve and perfect the new Church, I mean not so far
as that Ordinance of Baptism was to do afterward.

4. The learned and judicious know, that John was but the Messenger before
Christ's face, and his Baptism was but as the Mal. 3. 1.
streamings of light in the Heavens before the day, and he did only bring and
restore all things to their legal perfection by water, the Element of the Law;
but Christ Jesus he comes and baptizes with fire, Consummates all things with
this transforming powerful Element, even his Spirit.

5. So far was it that all that were baptized by John, were made Christians,
that even John's own Disciples (who had the best and frequentest instruction,)
not only hesitated, but were downright Joh. 3. 26.
scandalized at the true Messiah; and others did under that form of John's
baptism, fight against the true Baptism and baptizer the Lord Jesus: so that
I conceive this Argument (were it granted that all the people received John's
Baptism) will stand in little stead to prove the Conclusion, viz. That they
were made Christians, much less cast into a Church-mould, according to the New
Testament form, and least of all that they were all members of one Christian
Church at Jerusalem.

But note an absurdity in the sequel of the discourse, where the Doctor having
got a multiplying glass in his hand, goes on to make strange discoveries of
the increase of Christian Believers, Page 36. he tells us, That Christ made
many more Disciples and believers then John, and added daily to the Church that
was then in Jerusalem, such as should be saved. Here Is two Paradoxes. First,
That Christ made more Disciples then John: Out of whom should he make them,
when as John had swept all along with him, as you affirm before, page 32. med.
not taking it synecdochically, (whatever you determine of it here.) Secondly,
That Christ should add daily to the Church that was then in Jerusalem, is not
this a marvailous anticipation and mistake, to apply that which was done by the
Disciples after Christ's ascension, Act. 2. last, unto the Ministry of Christ
himself, and yet in the sequel you reckon this to the Apostles also expressly,
page 56. Judge if here be not false Musters. And let me tell you, you give us
occasion shrewdly to suspect your ignorance (to say no worse) to talk of a
Church in Jerusalem, besides the National Church of the Jews in the lifetime
of our Savior.

And thus far I have taken notice of most of the Material Excipienda in your
Book: I had thought to have bestowed as much time on the rest, but that other
Considerations forbad me, therefore I shall only briefly examine the maine
Propositions that follow, omitting the Amplifications and Collateral Notions
that fall in the handling thereof. And so I shall leave this Proposition,
without taking any further Exceptions to it, or any more passages in the
asserting of it, and the rather, because there are, and those so able, already
engaged in the dispute thereof; and come to the second Proposition, viz. That
all these Congregations and several Assemblies To the second Proposition.
made up but one Church: Which Proposition, except the former stand good, is to
little purpose, as the Doctor foreseeing is therefore very brief in the
manifestation of it, I shall not therefore be long in the Examination of it,
though in that little compass of lines he gives cause of manifold Exceptions.
For first whereas you say, The Brethren themselves acknowledge, that all the
Believers in Jerusalem were all members of that Church: If you mean the Church
spoken of Act. 15. 4. I deny, and say, it is a gross presumption, and begging
of the Question, to say, that we acknowledge all the Believers in Jerusalem to
be Members of that one ministering Church, especially if you reckon all John's
Disciples and Converts to these Believers: For as there was a good space of
time after there were multitudes of Believers, ere there was such a Church, so
for any thing has yet been brought to the contrary, it is probable enough that
the true Believers, (which were not so many after you have cut off John's
Converts, I mean those that did stick in John's Baptism, which were
multitudes, and temporary Believers, which ceased to walk with Christ, which
were not a few, and strangers, which did afterward disperse themselves into
several Countries) those that did remain at Jerusalem, did gradually grow up
unto Church Fellowship. And it amounts to no less then the former begging and
presumption, that which follows, viz. That this Proposition is manifest out of
the Scripture, viz. that they that were convented, are said to be added to the
Church. For what if that be to be understood of the Church Catholic, and not a
particular Church? It may not be denied, that the word Church, is often so used
in the New Testament, and it is suspicious that the three thousand converted at
once, were not so soon instructed in Church-followship as converted. As for
that which follows, that they continued in the Churches Communion, and the
Apostles doctrine: The Doctor has molded the Text for his own advantage, and
indeed has falsified it; for 'twas in the Apostles Act. 2. 42.
doctrine and fellowship, not in the Churches fellowship, except you are
content it should be understood in the communion of the Church Catholic,
which is no more then in Christian Communion in general: and for ought I know,
that is all that is meant there: And tell me any act wherein the multitude of
believers did communicate, that can bespeake it necessarily to be any more then
a Christian Communion in general, or what Christians may have together, though
not of the same Church; and the Doctor himself says before, The chief
public Ordinance they communicated in was preaching.

To the third Assertion or Branch, Page 82. which is, That the Apostles and
Presbyters, governed, ordered, and ruled this Church of Jerusalem, consisting
of many Congregations and Assemblies, by a Common Council and Presbytery.

I answer; First, I am not satisfied by any thing has been alleged, that that
Church consisted of many Congregations and Assemblies, and that upon the
scruples before instanced.

Secondly, In asserting that the Presbyters did rule that Church, and
ordinarily other Churches, whom do you hit? Sure not the Independents, as you
call them; We grant, it is their part to rule: but we distinguish between
Authority and jurisdiction on the one hand, and power and interest on the
other: this latter belongs to the people; the other is proper to the Officers,
which yet they exercise in the name of the Church: So they, ( i.) the Officers
ordain, they excommunicate, ( i.) pronounce Excommunication, they lead and
direct in all Government and disputes, they have the executive power, as you
demand page 93. But the people have a power and interest too, as those places
alleged by your self show expressly, Act. 15. For tho ver. 2. Paul and
Barnabas are said to be sent to the Apostles and Elders only, yet ver. 4. they
are said to be received of the Church, and Apostles, and Elders, therefore they
were sent to the Church also; and that word (...) with one accord, ver. 25.
imports a multitude met together; and this to be the result of that multitude,
else it were no great commendation of the resolution that it was convened about
and issued forth (...). And though only the Apostles and Elders are mentioned,
as coming together to consider of the Question, ver. 6. yet it is said, ver.
22. that it pleased (not only the Apostles and Elders) but the whole Church
also, therefore the Church also came together to consult; or the Apostles and
Elders* as a Committee, first prepared the dispute, as not counting it so safe
perhaps to admit the weak to the same, while it was intricate, and then
reported it, and had their assistance and concurrence; and the Letters of
resolution run in the name of the Brethren (i.) the Church as well as the
Apostles and Elders, ver. 23. And so in Ordination (...), ( i.) Election by
lifting up of the hand, belongs to the Brethren, Act. 6. 5, 6.
though (...), ( i.) Imposition of hands, be proper to the Officers, where
there are Officers, as in a Church constituted and complete.

3. That where the whole Church is written to and exhorted to a part of
discipline, that the Officers only should be intended, as in confirmation of
your Assertion you afterward affirm by the instance of the Church of Corinth,
we can no way admit. Rather on the other hand, Christ many times writes and
directs his Commands to the Officers, when they appertain to the whole Church,
and are so to be understood, only written and sent to them, as being
principal parts of the Churches, by and from whom they are ex Officio, to be
communicated to the whole. And for your Simile of Kings directing their Mandats
to a City or Corporations, which are to be executed by the Majors, Sheriffs,
etc. I conceive it does ire in contrarium, it is contrariously framed to the
manner, which is rather to direct to the Sheriff or Major, what does concern
the Corporation, and is required of the whole: and so we find Christ to do in
the Epistles to the seven Churches.

For that anticipating assertion, That the Apostles ruled this Church*
aggregate, not by virtue of their Apostleship, but by virtue of its union. I
shall refer it to the next head, viz. That the Church of Jerusalem, and the
government of the same, is to be a pattern for all Congregations and Assemblies
in any city or vicinity to unite into one Church, and for the Officers and
Presbyters of those Congregations to govern that Church jointly in a College
or Presbytery, which is your fourth and last branch of your first Question,
page 97.

Answ. 1. They are not an example of uniting or aggregation, except it be found
that there were many churches aggregated, which a very facile and swasible
reader may well doubt of, for any thing that has yet been said to make it good.

2. If this were granted that many Churches did aggregate and unite in the
beginning, yet would not this example be bindingly presidentiall: For as many
things were done out of that ordinary course that was after settled, in the
creation, and in a singular way by themselves, as the enlightening of the world
without a Sun, the watering of the earth with a mist before it rained, the
producing of fruits ex tempore; which things afterward ceased, being digested
into orderly rules and courses; so might it be in the first plantation of
churches: Many things might pro tempore be taken up, which might not afterward
be continued. (e. g.) The Apostles did Act. 6. 2.
serve Tables at first, but afterward an office was instituted for that on
purpose: So suppose there were in the Church of Jerusalem a greater multitude
then could meet in one place, and yet all one church, and ruled jointly by the
Apostles and Elders thereof, (which yet we do not admit) yet could not this
from hence be drawn into president, because, that howsoever the Acts of
government which the Apostles exercised, together with the Elders, in and over
this Church, were common and ordinary and done after the ordinary manner (as
the Doctor contends) yet I shall make bold to remember him again of that which
it seems he remembers very well to have been answered in this case formerly
(though he make not so good an use of it) viz. That the extent of their power
in the exercising of these Acts there and elsewhere was extraordinary as was
their persons and calling to Apostleship. And we do not so (...) by this
distinction, that he should not know where to have us, for it is easily
apprehended what we say is imitable, and what not imitable in these Apostles.

And now for that cavil; That the Apostles did not this by virtue of their
Apostleship, but by virtue of the union of those assemblies.

I answer, that in asserting it thus exclusively of their Apostleship, you
suppose the Apostles to have been the officers ordinary, or at leastwise
extraordinary of this Church of Jerusalem only, and so that they could not
elsewhere exercise the like power, or not otherwise then by virtue of an union
of churches, which is no greater prerogative then you will grant to ordinary
officers now; and so the Apostles shall have no greater a Commission then we,
which is as to say, their persons were no more extraordinary, nor their office,
then common Presbyters now adays.

But thirdly, to abound in the answer of this same matter, if that many
churches in Jerusalem did unite and transact their affairs, or some of them
jointly, and that therefore we may do so, yet it follows not that we must,
whether we will or no, for this is to urge us beyond the pattern. The churches
in Jerusalem (admit) voluntarily, spontaneously through the opportunity and
advantage of the Apostles help, and through the strength of the spirit of love
and confidence which they had one to, and toward another, and for other good
causes and considerations, did act many things (that concerned the churches) in
an associated way, therefore all churches, will they nill they, have they the
same grounds, reasons and encouragements, yea or no, must do so: Is this good
Logic? And that you may not think here is prevarication or juggling in this
business, I for mine own part must ingenuously grant and confess, that I am
not very solicitous concerning the answer of this matter; for whether it were
so, or it were not so then, that they did, or did not associate, I think it
might be so now; I mean, some kind of aggregation and union might be, though
we might tread more confidently, having the steps of the Primitive Churches
before us, that is, to speak more plainly, The Churches of Christ now, though
possessed of an entire independent Church Power in each body; yet may, when,
and where, and with whom, and in what cases or things God shall persuade them,
transact such affairs as they shall think fit jointly and sociously; provided,
that hereby they divest not themselves of, nor prejudice themselves in any
privilege of an entire, sole, and and single administration, or the like,
which Christ has given them, but retain that power of resuming and
recollecting themselves to themselves, when they shall see o^casion. And if the
churches in Jerusalem did so, we have cause to think this was all they did;
and if the Brethren of Antioch did appeal ( Asts 15.) we have cause to judge
it was a free and voluntary appeal, and they were not called and compelled
thereto. And that they, and we in imitation of them, might do this, is no wave
of the sea, but stands upon this bottom and foundation, viz. That no
privilege is a hinderance in that thing wherein it is ordained for a
privilege: and so the entireness of a Congregation whereby it is able to
recollect it self, as having the whole spirit of government in it, is not to be
made a bar to a church or churches, that shall find it convenient, and for
edification to join with other churches (where God shall knit their hearts
reciprocally) in the common transaction of such affairs as they shall think
fit and consent unto: But this cannot be prescribed and enjoined upon them by
man, but is to be done electively by them, as flowing indeed, from a special
love and pleasure, which those churches take in one another, and bear to one
another.

This we say in their ordinary affairs they may do, we speak not of cases
extraordinary for difficulty and moment; wherein, if their own means suffice
not, they are bound to seek the help of other Churches.

Briefly, to shut up all, Had we a Collegde of Apostles, or Apostolical men,
we should make as much use of them, and reference to them as they did; and
were there more churches of such a temper and quality as they ought, (that
might be the foundation of such a mutual dearnesse, pleasure and confidence)
we might do more in this Way of associating then we do; but we hold it our
right, liberty, and privilege, to do what we do in this kind freely, and not
to be compelled thereto; nor indeed would it be any other then a mere formal
association did it arise otherwise. Win us therefore to an association by the
beauty of your fellowships, and you shall not need to compel us.

THe second Question which takes up full one third part of his Book, is of the
manner of gathering Churches, and of admitting Members and Officers proposed by
him: 1. In the Chaos it seems: 2. Orderly, (as he supposes) drawn forth into
six Queries, though I dare not say there is not interfering tautologie and
great confusion. The nature in which the things are, viz. of Quere, incourages
me the rather to do something in them, for that I hope the Doctor will not be
great of his own sense, but take an answer of these things from those that know
the way better then himself, who it seems, is but a Caetechumenos therein. I
shall here therefore endeavor to instruct him in stead of refuting him, for as
much as to me it seems unmeet, that a man should be polemically exercised
before he be positively principled.

The first Quere which must go but for one, though it be Legion, I must answer
to, part by part, as follows: Whether for the gathering of Churches, there be
either precept or president in the Word of God? A. Yes; Is not the word a
gathering ordinance? are not the people thereby invited, yea, compelled to come
in, and called to Luke 14. 23. 1 Ep. Joh. 1.
fellowship with the Saints as well as with the Father and the Son? is not man
a sociable creature? does not nature teach us for politic advantages to fall
into societies? is there not heat where two lie together? Eccles. 4. 11.
and is it not foreprophesied they shall serve the Lord with one Zeph. 3. 9.
Mat. 18.
shoulder? And lastly, Does not Christ say, Where two or three are gathered
together in my name, etc. But all this hitherto you would be as sorry it should
once come into question as I: for who or what should be saddled for the
Presbytery, but such a like thing as they call a church at least? (only by this
I perceive what churches you would have (...), not (...)* ( i.) All together,
tag and rag, no selection, this is the way indeed to imbase the kind and make
them carry gentle.) I demand therefore further: ought not Church-societies to
be particular, certain, and definite, for as much as that which is every ones
work, is done by no body; and to profess to owe equal and immediate duty to
all, is both the way to perform it to none, and a sign that a man intends so?

But if that that follows must be taken for the meaning of this Quere, viz.
Whether Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel did ever leave their own ordinary
charges (to which they are called, and whereto they are fixed with a command
not to leave them) and under pretense of a new way, etc. did run about, and
alienate the minds of the people well-affected formerly to their several
Ministers, etc. I answer, by no means is this warrantable: But I count a vast
difference between a Minister or Ministers, going abroad of their own heads,
and merely under pretenses in a secret clandestine way to get the hearts of men
from their sound and orthodox Teachers, for this was the practice of the false
Gal. 17.
Apostles; and on the other hand, a Minister or Ministers going forth with the
consent and approbation of a Church or churches, when, or where Christ shall
make an opportunity, and open a door for the peaceable, comely and orderly
doing thereof, either to vindicate some Truths under reproach and disgrace
through a cloud of ignorance and prejudice hanging over the eyes of men; or to
discover and lay open certain errors or usurpations wherein Christ is injured,
and the Saints liberties infringed; and this in a free ingenuous way of
preaching and dispute, offering and commending their Doctrine and Way to the
impartial search and examination of all, both Pastors and people, (that hear
or will hear them) by the Word, and all this not to such an end to breed any
disaffection or alienation between people and their Ministers, but to make them
both free by the truth, that they may both of them know and practice their
several duties, and Christ may reap the fruit of it in the honoring of his
Name, and themselves in the comfort of their own souls, through obedience and
faith. The former is dishonest and abominable, but this is honorable, and a
duty for which we have Paul's example, not only by a public Epistle,
undeceiving the Galatians of that error they had sucked in from men, perhaps,
of a worse quality, but even withstanding Peter (an Apostle) to his face, for
haking in the matter of circumcision.

For the third and last division of this Quere, Whether it was ever heard of in
the Apostles and Primitive times, that any believing Christians were in great
numbers congregated from among other believing Christians? I answer;

1. That it is well known there has been, and may be, great defects, even in
believers themselves; and such, as that they may need even to be cast into a
new mould, as witness the Galatians, of whom the Apostle did travel in birth
again, till Christ were formed Gal. 4. 19.
in them.

2. It will be granted, that believing Christians should desire and endeavor
to be instructed in the whole will of God, that they may touch no unclean
thing; and as they know, to be still true to their 2 Cor. 6. 17.
Principles; and if in any thing their Principles exceed or go beyond others,
they must not come down to them, although they carry the Odium and prejudice of
a separation for it, but it is the duty of the others to come to them, which if
they will not, liking rather to correspond with the world, how can it be helped,
or whose fault is it?

The second Question is, Whether for the making any man or woman a member of
the Church, it be requisite and necessary (to their believing and being
baptized) that they should walk some days, weeks, months, perhaps years with
them, etc.

Answ. Who holds it so? but only that they appear to the Church that receives
them to be believers, let the means of the churches knowledge, or discovery, be
what it will, (as it is various) so that it be not extraordinary and
miraculous, we dare not trust Enthusiasmes nor blind charity. And to the other
part of this Quere, Whether confession are required, etc.

I answer, confessions are good, and may be to edification, but are not
absolutely necessary, therefore not insisted upon as the condition of admission.

These things being of fact and practice, let a brief account suffice.

For the third Question, Whether to the admission of any to membership or
office-bearing in a church, the consent of the congregation or the major part
thereof, as well as officers, be requisite.

We hold it yea, and that as well in regard every one takes a charge upon him,
as in respect of interest.

For the fourth Quere of an Explicit Covenant, whether necessary to admission.

Ans. I know not why it should be more inconvenient then a public National
Covenant, which the Doctor by Nation is bred to approve highly of. But
necessary we hold it not, therefore not as the condition of admission, so that
we see cause to judge it not to be scrupled in a way of provision for an
arbitrary liberty of a roving and unsettled mind to slip the knot, when they
dislike and dispense from duty and obligation when they please, but that it be
merely a conscientious scruple, because they see not sufficient ground for it
out of the Word to make it necessary, yet will own a particular tie and
relation for spiritual edification, in such case who will deny these admission?

For the fifth Question, Of women's votes whether they are admitted in
Elections, etc. I remember a Question once in the Schools, An Doctoris uxor
eodem gaudeat privilegio quo Maritus; but as for this, of Women's voting in the
Church, we have no such custom, nor any of the Churches of God that I know of.

For the last Question or Quarrelsome captious Quere rather, Whether the
practice and preaching of all these things, etc. be to set up Christ as King
upon his throne?

I answer, No Question but the purging and purifying of Church-Ordinances and
fellowship, which some contend for, is to set Christ upon a higher throne
visible to the world, then by some other ways he is; though we deny not he
may have a throne in many Congregations not of this mould, and may be very
highly advanced in the hearts of many of our Brethren, who never yet gave their
names to the Congregationall way. In relation to whom my prayer is, That if
they be in the right, the Lord would make them joyful instruments of
instructing us with meekness; Or if we, that the Lord would by us show them
his will, who would do it, and have already received hearts from him to submit
to truth, from whomsoever ministered to them.

FINIS.
The Postscript.
AS for your Postscript, I find it so foul, that I have adjudged it to lie in
the STONE-BASON at Tunbridge wells, there to be washed till it be clean and fit
to finger, and then I doubt it will be washed all away.

Only, lest the frenzy thereof should have prevented me, and ere this have
derived it self up and down, it may be needful to add, That whereas Page 61.
of your Postscript.
you wonder at the lenity and humanity of this Nation, toward those men, whom
you nickname Independents, we conceive there will rather be cause to wonder at
the clemency of the Parliament if they shall take no notice of this and other
your seditious instigations, (though I had rather see you repent then suffer.)
In the mean time, it suffices us, that you never wrote, nor could write such
lines by those NEW LIGHTS you jeare, with such unchristian, yea, unmanly
levity: for a man may safely say, such stuff was written in the dark, not by
any light, either Old or New.


