A Searious Warning FOR ALL Separated Churches AND CHURCH MEMBERS, Against
Back-sliders. AND A Seasonable CAVEAT to all their FOLLOWERS.

JEREM. 15.19. If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as
my mouth: Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.

LONDON. Printed for ROBERT IBBITSON dwelling in Smithfield, near Hosier Lane.
1653.

A Searious Warning for all Separated Churches and Church Members, Against
Back-sliders.
Six Warnings for Conversation.

I. NOt to refuse that Christ you profess, nor any word of the Lord; Remember
what the Apostle says of them, Heb. 12.22. to 26. Ye are come unto Mount
Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels. To the general Assembly, and Church of the
first borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that
of Abel. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven.

II. Not to oppose and seek to throw down the Authority of the Pastors,
Teachers or Elders that are set over you, by free election, nor fly above
Ordinances, nor wilfully refuse to be taught; for the Apostle says, Heb.
13.7.8. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

III. Not to refuse to hear reproof for sin, nor upon pretense of a
profession of God, heap up wickedness in your conversation; of such the Lord
complains, Amos 2.11, 12, 13. I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of
your young men for Nazarites: Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel! But
ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and commanded the Prophets, saying,
Prophecy not, behold I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full
of sheaves.

IV. Not to seem to be holy with the Saints, and comply with wicked-men in
their ungodliness, when you are in their company. As it is said of Jehoash,
whilst he was with Jehoiada, 2 King. 12.2. Jehoash did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord all his days, wherein Jehoiada the Priest instructed
him. But afterward when Jehoiada was dead, and he fell into other company; It
is said 2 Chronicles. 24.17. to 23. Now after the death of Jehoiada, came the
Princes of Judah and made obeisance to the King; then the King hearkened unto
them. And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served
Groves and Idols; and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their
trespass. Yet he sent Prophets to them, to bring them again unto the Lord,
and they testified against them; but they would not give ear. And the Spirit
of God came upon Zecheriah the son of Jehoiada the Priest, which stood above
the people, and said unto them; Thus says God, Why transgress ye the
Commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken
the Lord, he has also forsaken you. And they conspired against him, and stoned
him with stones, at the Commandment of the King in the Court of the house of
the Lord. Thus Joash the King remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his
father had done to him, but slew his son; and when he dyed, he said, The Lord
look upon it, and require it.

V. Not to pin your faith and Religion upon the sense of Magistrates and
Rulers, and rely more upon their choice then the Scriptures, as the Pharisees
who when some of their Officers said of Christ, Joh. 7.46. Never man spoke like
this man. It is said, verse 47. Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also
deceived?

VI. Not to forsake Christ and his ways to avoid crosses and sufferings
contrary to what the Apostle Paul teaches Philip. 1.28, 29. And in nothing
terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition;
but to you of salvation, and that of God. For unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.

Six Warnings against Backslidings.
I. NOt to trouble those that fear God, by defiling many holy people, out of a
bitterness of spirit, by raising false, and scandalous aspersions against
them; of such the Apostle gives us warning to take heed of, Heb. 12.15. Looking
diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness, springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.

II. Not for profit, favor, or any worldly thing, or sinist errespect, to
forsake your interest in the Saints fellowship; Therefore the Apostle bids us
also to look diligently, Heb. 12.16, 17. Lest there be any fornicator or
profane person as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright, etc.

III. Not privately to seduce foolish women, of evil reviling spirits, to
oppose Church Officers, and Church Order, and to back, and encourage them in
evil practices which the Apostle warns of, saying, 2 Timothy 3.5. verse, to 10.
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, Ever learning and never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses; so do these also resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall
be manifest unto all men as theirs also was.

Yet when such Seducers are reproved for this evil they commonly wax worse and
worse. ver. 13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived.

4 Not to revile your Teachers, and abuse them when they admonish you for your
sins, 2 Timothy 4.14. to 19. Alexander the Coppersmith did me much evil, the
Lord reward him according to his works. Of whom be thou aware also, for he
has greatly withstood our words. At my first answer no man stood with me, but
all men forsook me: I pray God, that it may not be laid to their charge.
Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, that by me the
preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen. Compared with 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck. Of
whom is Himeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may
learn not to blaspheme.

5 Not wilfully to forsake your assemblings with your fellow members, where
you have given up your names to walk in fellowship, concerning which the
Apostle gives a notable warning, Heb. 10. from 25. to 30. Not forsaking the
assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is: but exhorting one
another and so much the more as ye see the day approaching. For if we sin
wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that
despised Moses law dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much
sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he
was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done dispite unto the spirit of grace.

6 Not to take part with wicked people in their pernicious ways, against God
and his people, and if you have failed herein, not to persist, but to repent,
Rev. 2.20, 21, 22. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because
thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls her self a prophetess, to
teach and to seduce my servants, to commit fornication and to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and
she repented not. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit
adultery with her, into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Finally brethren, pray for us, that the word of
the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: And
that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not
faith. But the Lord is faithful who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will
do the things which we command you. And the Lord direct your hearts into the
love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ. Now we command you,
brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves
from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which
ye received of us.

FINIS.

