The several ACCOUNTS OF SIR JOHN GELL, Baronet and Colonel, AND OF His
Brother THOMAS GELL, Esquire; Lieutenant Colonel.

Published to clear their Innocence from false Imputations.

LONDON, Printed for R. L. 1644.

The several Accounts of Sir JOHN GELL Baronet and Colonel; and of his
Brother THOMAS GELL Esquire, Lieutenant Colonel, published to clear their
Innocence from false Imputations.
THat whereas we two Brothers have faithfully served the Parliament at our own
charge, since the beginning of these unhappy Differences between the King and
Parliament, having hitherto received no more then by the ensuing Accounts
appears.

When the Enemies of this Commonwealth had settled themselves in Darby Shire our
native Country, diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen then resiant there, yet they
suffered the County to be oppressed by Papists and Strangers; we then took up
Arms, drove away those plunderers, and after many conflicts with potent
adversaries, by the blessing of God upon our endeavors, with some assistance
from the Right Honorable Earl of Manchester, and some Nottingham Forces only
at the siege of Wingfield Manor, we have cleared that County of all enemy
Garrisons, and often been assistant to several other Countries. Yet such is
the malice of some Malignants and others that fled their Country in time of
danger, that that they have falsely and scandalously raised a report, that Sir
John Gell has cozened his Country of twenty thousand pounds, which false
report they have maliciously spread both in London and diverse other Counties:
They have also procured some of themselves, and other professed enemies of Sir
John Gell, such as he had formerly committed for malignancy, to be Auditors to
take these Accounts, which accordingly were given in upon Oath at Darby upon
the seventeenth day of February one thousand six hundred forty four; by which
it appears, how false that scandalous report was. Yet such is the continued
malice of some of these men, that though they be fully satisfied of the truth
themselves, as they professed at the taking of these Accounts; yet they
endeavor to conceal these Accounts, that other men may still believe that
false report, whereof themselves were Authors. To the end therefore that our
Innocence may appear, notwithstanding these men's malice, we have here
published our several Accounts, which as they were at first given in upon our
several Oaths, so we still justify the same to be true, and do severally and
respectively profess before God and the world, upon the faith of Christians,
the credit and reputation of Gentlemen and Soldiers, that our said Accounts
are true, and that we do not know, or are conscious of any error or untruth
in either of them.

The Account of Sir JOHN GELL.
AFter the King had set up his Standard at Nottingham, and came with his new
Army from thence to Darby, many of our country Gentlemen with our Trained
Bands met his Majesty in the confines of this County, and joined with him; some
went then into the Kings service, and the rest delivered up their Arms to the
Kings party, by which means his Army was increased both with men and arms.
After the King went out of this County, two mean popish Strangers Dennis and
Ballard, joining with some papists and others ill affected, settled themselves
at Wirksworth, about the middle of the County, and there under color of
raising men for the King, they robbed and abused honest men without control,
although at the same time there were four Earls, one Baron, and diverse
Kinghts and Gentlemen then resiant in this County; whereupon I being sensible
of my Countries misery, and willing to maintain the Ordinances of Parliament,
I went to Hull to procure some Forces according to his Excellencies the Earl
of Essex his Commission to me; and whilst I was there, Sir Francis Wortley
with about an hundred folfowers fit for such a leader, came and joined himself
with the said Dennis and Ballard; whereupon many honest men were forced to
fly, some of which came to me, and earnestly desired me to make have to
redeem my then miserable afflicted Country, I hasted homeward and came to
Chesterfeild, endeavoring to increase my strength all I could: at my first
coming thither, some Lords and diverse Gentlemen met together about Tutbury,
and sent me a threatening letter, although in the mean time they never molested
neither Wortley nor any of that party; I presently advanced and drove out
Wortley with all his Company, and then settled my self at Derby, which by Gods
blessing I have ever since maintained against all the power of Prince Rupert,
the Earl of Newcastle, and General Hastings; and at this present the Enemy
has not one Garrison within this County: When I went first to Hull with my
brother, I went at my own charge, and raised my men without any penny of
advance money, since that time and in this service, I have sold my Stock, laid
out my whole Revenew, which at that time was fifteen hundred pounds a year,
borrowed money of my brother and others, married my only Son, received part
of his Portion, all which I have spent in maintenance of the Parliaments
Cause; besides, I had my House plundered, and nothing left but the bare walls,
and the malice of the Enemy extended so far, as to ruin and deface the Tombs
and Monuments of my deceased Ancestors. In recompense toward all my losses and
expenses, I have received from Mr Hallowes Treasurer for the County, to my best
knowledge about two hundred fifty six pounds, and no more, but for certainty
therein I refer my self to his Account: And he had from me one hundred
eighty pounds, or thereabouts, for which also I refer my self to his
account: For Jewels and Plate, I never received any pennyworth, nor of any
other kind of goods, except only a few Horses, all which were employed in the
public service. The truth of all which I justify upon my Oath

Derby Feb. 17. 1644. JOHN GELL.

The Account of Lieutenant Colonel GELL.
I Have to my power faithfully served the Parliament; I never received one
penny pay for my self, nor pennyworth of any Plate, Jewels, or other Goods
toward the same: I have laid out many hundred pounds of my own estate, in the
raising, arming, and paying of Soldiers, and other necessary expenses for
maintenance of that service, for which I have not yet received satisfaction, as
by my Account upon Oath fully appears.

THO. GELL.


