Seven years expired, the third of November, 1647,
SEven years the troublous time away did slip,
And King and Parliaments Apprenticeship
Are come t'an end, let both sides be made Free,
They Have bin at strife too long, it is time t'agree.
Seven is a number of most strange Predictions,
Seven years King Charles has under-gon Afflictions,
Seven years the Parliament the Rule did hold,
Seven years (twice more) they would do, if they could.
Seven years Egypts lean Kine did gourmandise,
Seven years (thrice more) their Mawes will not suffice.
Seven years all good men have endured slaverie,
Seven years base villains have grown rich by knaverie,
Seven years the King served to a troublous Trade,
Seven years expired, pray let him Free be made;
Seven years are gone, the Apprenticeship is past,
Pray let him have his Freedom now at last;
He Is past a Prentice, do the best you can
To set him Up, make him no Journey-man:
Of all men, he deserves most to be Free;
To be set Up, no man's so fit as he.
His Freedom is, to have but what is his own;
His Liberty, his Kingdoms, Crown, and Throne,
His Wife, his Children; and that Laws and Right
May not be over-sway'd by Power and Might;
That Gods true Service may set forth his Glory,
And not a babbling Nonsense Directorie;
That King and Parliament may so agree,
That one may Sovereign, the other Subjects be:
And such as wish not King and Kingdoms freedom,
The Devil to the Gallows quickly speed 'em.
A direful Anathema against PEACE-HATERS,
written by Franc. Quarles.
PEace Vipers, Peace, let crying blood never cease
To haunt your guilty Souls, that love not Peace:
And cursed be that Religion, that must buy
A Reformation with Phlebotomie.
Infernal Firebrarnds, whom the very Tears
Of groaning England, swallowed up with Fears,
Cannot allay, nor yet the bleeding Veins
Of desperate Ireland, which even now remains
A very Golgotha, cannot assuage;
Whose Babes, the Earnest of another Age,
Taste of your savage Piety, and lie
The Lambe-like Martyrs of your Cruelty:
VVhilest you lie safely embr'd, to increase
The flames of Christendom, and cry, No Peace.
Let Samsons coupl'd Messengers convay
These Firebrarnds hence, and let them make their way
To their own Houses, there consume, devast,
Burn down their Houses, lay their Gran'ries wast:
Let all their Sons run mad into the Street,
And seeking Refuge there, there let them meet
Th'encountring Sword; and whom that spares to kill,
Let them be Slaves, and labor at the Mill:
Let all their Wives and Daughters beg in vain,
Let them be ravished first, and after slain.
Let all their Kindred wander up and down
Like Vagabonds, be lasht from Town to Town:
Let Baseness be en tayl'd upon their Name
Too firm for all Recoveries; let Shame,
Reproach, and lasting Infamy remain.
In deeper Characters then that of Rain,
Let Catesby, Piercy, and that bloody Knot
Be Sainted now, or else at least forgot:
And let these Vipers vindicate their Crimes
In every Almanac for Aftertimes;
Where, let their baseness live among the Sinces,
More firm the^ reigns of Kings, or births of Princes:
Thus let these Firebrarnds thrive, and if this Curse
Succeed not, may it yield unto a worse
For them; let them still live, till (He) think good
To quench them in their Generations blood:
That all the world may hiss, and hear them cry,
Who loved not Peace, in Peace shall never die.
The Commons Exultation, Anagrammaticall to the PARLIAMENT, Anagram PRAI LAMENT.
PRay ye that awe the Land, in Moses Chair,
And you (the Church) in Aarons, against that Prayer,
An Ancient Parliament made Common; more
Hate Common Prayer then a common Whore;
Especially reject the Pater Noster
And Churches Liturgy: for if you foster
Such Heavenly Charms, take heed you will pray for Kings,
Queens, Princes, Prelates, such are deadly things:
So you your Christian Faith might re-admit,
Turn honest men regaine your long-lost Wit,
And so your feared black Consciences would vex ye,
Which are benumbed now, and not yet perplex ye.
As God commands, to obey the Higher Powers,
You will be highest, and all Power is yours,
And you know, if the King should have his due,
And you have yours, what would become of you?
'Twould make all good men glad, and bad men grieve,
And Gregory's gains would make him fine for Shrieve;
His Foot-cloth, Saddle, and his golden Chain,
The Knave would be a fine proud Knave in Grain.
For just power will o're-top your Lording state,
And curb (your Pride Superlative) your hate.
Pray for the Spirit of Stupid Ignorance,
Which may to sacred Pulpits fools advance;
For Academicks see, (with Argos Eyes)
They Are for your Sects and doings, too quick Spies:
There Is two ways left you, do as, you began,
Love nor regard, or fear nor God or Man,
Sit in your Thrones, never to your Homes go back,
To see your handy-worke, your Countries wrack,
You Are safe and whole, here gain the golden Fleeces,
But in the Country you would be torn in pieces;
Though Home be Homely, yet it is full of fear,
If you go home you will find the Devil is there.
Therefore (as yet) pray break not up your Schools,
Clubs, Flailes, Pitchforkes, are but churlish Tools,
And where you think the fresh Air will refresh ye,
The oppressed Country Corridons will thresh ye.
The wronged Yeomanrie are stout and tough,
And they are not yet pol'd half bare enough,
They still have left some Horses, Sheep and Swine,
Some little store of Money, Calves, and Kine;
You have but taken part from them as yet,
You must take all, or leave them never a whit:
The only way their courages to quail,
Is, strip 'em all, as naked as my Nail,
Take from them all, whereby they may subsist,
And then they will not be able to resist:
Thus may you Rule and Reign, and sit secure,
You and your Heirs, for ever to endure.
Sit still, Return not to your Habitations,
They Will call you to account for Sequestrations,
For plunderings, for free-quarterings, and oppressions,
And all your Tyraunies, (beyond expressions)
You Will be examined what good you have done?
And you (most humbly) must say, truly none;
They Will ask you then, what evils ye have committed?
You Will answer, We no Mischief have omitted;
Then they will demand, How fares the King, I pray?
You Will say, he bears the Name, and we the sway.
They Will ask, of true Religion what is become?
And you must answer, you have struck her dumb:
Then they will require, What did you with the Church?
And you will Reply, ye'ave left her in the lurch:
Ye'ave brought Confusion to our Albion.
And made King Charles a King of Babylon:
Nothing of Englands left, but foul defame,
And Babell-Building of old Amsterdam:
Famous for this, that sin, or any thing
May be endured, but one Church, one King.
The Arc once Landed at our happy Haven.
We have refused the Dove, and took the Raven,
Whose greedy Appetite, and dismal croaking,
Has bin Laws, Churches, and Religions choking:
Of all these crimes the Country will accuse you,
And find you Guilty, and most kindly use you.
These questions will be asked, and more then these,
Therefore sit still if you love Wealth and Ease.
The cries and curses of the poor are fierce,
And to Gods terrible Tribunal pierce:
Therefore (good) Parliament (l) Prai Lament,
Lament, repent, just Vengeance to prevent:
Pray till your lasting Lungs and Breath is spent
The rest of time melt into tears, lament.
But can you weep your selves into a stood,
That could not weep to see us weep in blood?
Your hearts were rather tickled at the p^ey,
When as you traffiqu'd over our Red Sea:
If ere you weep, perhaps your cheeks you will wet,
As Ahab did, who did but counterfeit;
Or like the weeping of the Crocodile,
That murders people as they pass by Nyle;
Or if your tears are real, you must borrow
From Esau tardy tears of needless sorrow:
For why (like him) you do repent too late,
To move our wornged Souls you have filled with hate.
But if (like Peter) you could weep most bitter
True tears of Penitence, they would be sweeter
T'your selves, the widows and the fatherless,
(Your late petitioners without redress.)
I would you knew how Country, Court, and City,
Laugh at your dangers, slight you without pity,
Curses fly up, that you may be confounded
To that black pit, whose bottom never was sounded.
But yet (though not to Man) to God still weep,
For in his Bottle he true tears does keep:
Pay true repentance up, for your Excise,
To God for Sin, He Will wipe tears from your eyes,
FINIS.

