The Judgment and Practice OF THE Old BOHEMIANS Concerning Bowing at the Name
of JESUS.
Ad mentionem nominis Jesus animos non genua flectunt; corda sua, non capita
aperiunt: ne crebro corporis motu tam docentis, quam discentium animi
perturbentur: ne Jesus ut fit vulgo, tantum ad solam nominis ipsius vocem coli
videatur,

Johannes Lasitius, DeEcclesiastica Disciplina moribusque and institutis
Fratrum Bohemorum, Cap. 13. Sect. 3. At the mention of the name JESUS they bow
their minds, not their knees; and uncover (or open) their hearts, not their
heads: lest by the frequent motion of the body the minds both of the Teacher
and of the Hearers should be disturbed, and lest Jesus (as commonly it comes to
pass) should seem to be worshipped only at the mention of his Name.

SEVERAL ARGUMENTS AGAINST BOWING AT THE Name of JESUS.

By a Learned Author.

Printed in the Year 1660.

ARGUMENTS Against Bowing at the Name of JESUS.
Arg. I.
ALL Worship of God that is taught by the Commandment of men, and not
prescribed by God himself, is Will Worship, and simply unlawful: But such is
this bowing at the Name of Jesus; Ergo, Will Worship, and simply unlawful.

The Major Proposition is from Heaven; and therefore greater than to be denied,
Esa. 29.13. Col. 2.22. and alibi.

The Minor likewise I conceive to be evident; because there is no such worship
to Christ taught by God or Christ himself, as the bowing of the Body to him
upon the mention, or sounding of the Name JESUS. As for that place, Phil. 2.10.
Which some look upon as countenancing this worship, I conceive it does not so
much as look toward it: For,

1. It is here said, not that at the Name of Jesus, but (...), in the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow; the Preposition (...) in, never (to my remembrance)
noting the time when (except it be in construction, with words signifying time:
as Mark 1.9. It came to pass in those days, and such like) but very frequently
the cause for, or through which, as Mark 11.28, (...)? In what power, i. e. by
or through what power do thou these things? So Romans 7.23. (...), carrying or
leading me captive in, i. e. by the law of sin: Beside, many other like
Instance: So that the Name of Jesus here mean, must not be by any name made of
Letters and Syllables, but of power, majesty and terror; because there must be
found in this name that which must be the efficient cause of the subjection
here spoken of, that which must command this bowing the knee from all creatures
what soever; which of all literal names or titles that are given to Christ in
the Scriptures; is least of all implied or intimated in that sweet and gracious
Name of JESUS, a Savior: What is there in this Name to compel or force the
Devils to bow the knee to him?

2. Neither is it here said, that (...), but, (...), not that at, or in the
name JESUS, but in the name (of) Jesus every knee should bow, and as all
Translators read it. Now any other Name or Title given to our Savior in the
Scripture, as Christ, Emmanuel, etc. may in betrer propriety of speech be
called the names of Jesus, than JESUS it self: To urge and say, that Jesus is
the Name of Jesus, savours not the Dialect of the Holy Ghost.

3. That Name of Jesus here spoken of, wherein it is said that every knee shall
bow, is such a Name as was not given to Christ till after his sufferings, and
at the time of his exaltation and sitting down at the right hand of Majesty:
for it is expressly said to have been given unto him by God (his Father) by way
of reward or recompense for the great service he did unto him, in that great
abasement and humiliation of himself unto death: Wherefore (says the Text) God
has exalted him and given him a Name, v. 9. Namely, for that odedience and
humiliation of himself, mentioned, v. 6, 7, 8. But the Name JESUS we know was
given unto him long before, at the time of his Circumcision. Therefore this is
not the Name that every knee shall bow at.

4. If this worship of bowing at the Name Jesus were commanded in this
Scripture, then were it a sin, and simply unlawful to omit it any time
whenever it sounds; which no man ever yet affirmed that I have heard of.

5. If bowing the body at the Name Jesus be enjoined in this, Text, by the same
interpretation, the confessing with the Tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord,
must be enjoined also, and as altogether necessary as the other: For those
things which God has joined together, can no man put asunder.

6. If this worship of Christ (of bowing to him) mentioned in this place, be
due unto him, in relation to his name JESUS, or as he is a Savior; how come
the things under the earth. (by which all the Interpreters that I know,
understand the Devils, except some Popish (...) for Purgatory in the words. How
come the Devils, I say, to be charged with men touching the exhibiting of this
reverence or adoration to Christ, who (we know) have neither part nor
fellowship with them, in that great and gracious business of salvation?

7. I do not know any Orthodox or Ancient Interpreter so to interpret the place.



name of his shall be presented unto us, which makes indeed a representation of
him to us, as an Image does, but has nothing more in it to further such an act
of adoration, than an Image has, and has in like manner been abused, as
Images have, and is apt to cause the like offense, as bowing to God before an
Image does, is an unlawful Election for the time of such worship.





1. Though there be some difference between the Name Jesus, and an Image of
Christ, in respect of the Institution, yet in respect of representation made by
either, there is none: For the Image represents unto the mind that very same
Person (and no other) which the Name does. So that if the worship be lawful in
respect of the representation simply, which is made by the Name Jesus, it will
be as lawful before the Image; because (as I say) there is a representation
also of the same Person.

2. Though the Name Jesus be of Divine Institution for the representation of
the person, wherein the Image fails; yet in respect of any outward adoration
to be given unto this representation by that name, there is no more to be found
of any Divine Institution for the name, than for the Image. So that to express
an outward act of adoration upon the bare sound or hearing of the name, having
no more warrant from God, than doing the like before an Image has, it
apparently follows, that they are both worships of the same nature, and one to
have as much in it of the will of man, as the other.

3. The Name Jesus being of Divine Institution, (which the Image is not) it is
the greater sin in any ways to misuse it, either by obscuring or perverting
the intentions of God in it, or by multiplying our own upon it, than it is to
abuse an Image, which is but the device of men's heads, and the work of their
hands.

4. However in respect of institution, the name may seem more capable of
adoration, than the Image: Yet since the name is not so appropriated to the
Person of Christ by Divine Institution (in respect of the Letters and Sound of
it) but that it is common to other persons with him, and represents others to
the mind, as well as him, whereas the Image is wholly appropriated unto him,
and represents no other to the mind but him alone; in this respect the Image
seems to be the safer and better call to exhibit worship unto Christ, than the
bare sound of the Name; because it does not give that certain and distinct
representation of the person to be worshipped, which the Image does. As Paul
speaks of the Trumper, 1 Cor. 14.8. If it give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself unto the Battle? So this Name JESUS giving only an uncertain
sound or representation, representing as well other persons to the mind, that
are not to be worshipped, as him to whom that worship is due, it seems a very
unfit signal for worship to be given unto it: yea in this respect (which is
most intrinsecal and essential to the Point in hand) to come short of the Image.

5. Lastly, Whereas it is said in the Objection, that there is in the Name an
intimation given of that Salvation which comes to the world by him, which is
not in the Image.

To this I Answer three things.

1. That there is in a Crucifix more than an intimation given of that Salvation
that comes by him; there is a representation of that death, or of those
sufferings by which that Salvation was purchased and wrought.

2. If that an intimation of the Salvation that comes by Christ, be a proper
and sufficient ground to found an act of adoration upon; then is the Name or
Title of SAVIOR the fittest summons for men of this Nation who (generally)
understand not the intimations or significations of Names in other Languages,
but only in their own.

3. Lastly, If an intimation of Salvation coming by Christ, were proper to
build an act of outward worship or adoration upon, then this worship is rather
to be given, when any such sentence is read or spoken, which perspicuously and
fully informs the mind and soul hereof, than at the mention of the Name
Jesus. As for example, Upon the hearing of this or the like Sentences in
Scripture; The Son of man came to seek and save that which is lost: Or that,
Romans 5.8. Whilst we were yet Sinners Christ died for us: Or that, John 3. So
God loved the world, etc. In these, and many the like Sayings, there is a full
intimation or signification of that great Salvation, that comes by Christ, more
than in the bare mention of the Name JESUS.

By all which it evidently appears, that in respect of any lawful or
warrantable ground for an outward act of Adoration, there is no more in the
Sound or Name Jesus than in an Image.

Arg. II.
NO Command or Invention of men, that super-induceth any other use or device
upon any the Sacred Names or Titles of God, beyond what himself has declared
in his Word, is to be received: But this Command of Bowing, etc. does this, it
makes the Name or Title JESUS to serve for another purpose, than God has any
where declared: Ergo;

The Major (I conceive) will not be denied: Because for men to meddle with any
the great and fearful Names of God, and to dispose of them as they please,
without express authority from him self, it is presumption of the first
Magnitude.

The Minor likewise has evidence enough to be believed: Because there is not
the least intimation in the Scripture, that God ever intended, that any such
should ever be made of the Name JESUS, as to summon men to bow their Bodies at
the Name or Sound of it.

Arg. III.
THat Practice which directly tends to revive any ancient heresy, or
dangerous Opinion in the Church (especially having nothing in it to
counterpoyse such a danger) is not to be introducted or assented unto: But this
practice of Bowing to the Name of Jesus, directly tends hereunto, and has
nothing at all in it to countervail such a danger: Therefore it is not to be
introducted or assented unto.

The Major carries its own Light with it.

The Minor is thus clearly proved:

That which directly tends to induce men to think or believe that Jesus and
Christ are two different persons, and that Jesus is more excellent than Christ,
directly tends to revive an old and dangerous Heresy ( viz. that of
Cerinthus and some others, who held that Jesus and Christ were two Persons, and
the one greater than the other.) But this bowing at the Name Jesus, other names
being passed over without the like reverence done at the mention of them,
directly tends to induce men to think, etc. Ergo,

The reason of the Minor here is: Because reverence argues excellency upon
whomsoever it is cast or conferred, and where either it is denied, or not
exhibited, it implies a person or condition of less excellency.

Arg. IV.
ALL Worship of God, that is grounded upon the Moral Law, is adulterous
Worship, and not to be tendered or exhibited: But this Bowing at the name Jesus
is a Worship not founded upon the Moral Law. Ergo,

The Major I conceive unquestionable: Because the Worship of God being a Moral
duty (and that of chiefest and highest rank) it can have no other rule or
foundation but the Moral Law: And the same Author that has power to exact a
new Worship, must have power also to make a new Law (or further it,) because
there is no act (especially religious) justifiable, but by some rule whereby
the rectitude or goodness of it must be tried and demonstrated.





2. If bowing the knee to Christ be no worshipping of him, it must needs be a
mocking of him: as it is said of the Roman Soldiers ( Mat. 27.29.) they bowed
their-knees before him and mocked him, etc. He that boweth the knee to the Lord
Christ, and does not intend to honor and worship him in it, doubtless mocketh
him thereby.

3. There is nothing more apparent from the Scripture then that bowing the knee
is Worship (properly so called;) Yet, the Worship of God is often signified by
bowing the knee before him, Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by my self that every knee
shall bow unto me.

The Minor is thus declared; that worship which is built upon an Ecclesiastical
constitution, is not founded upon the Moral Law: But this Worship of bowing is
built upon an Ecclesiastical constitution. Ergo,

The Major I explicate, and demonstrate thus:

Two Laws which are not subordinate, (I mean with a Logical subordination) but
contradistinguished, one against the other, cannot be together the ground of
the same duty: But the Law Moral and Law Ecclesiastical are Laws of a differing
kind, not subordinate but contradistinguished; Ergo. The reason of the Minor
is, because the Law or constitutions Ecclesiastical respect matter of
circumstance, and things indifferent; the Moral Law only treats of, and
obliges to things of absolute necessity.







receiving the Sacrament there is a concurrence of sundry spiritual and inward
acts or duties of the soul, whereunto the outward gesture of kneeling is
natural and suitable, and sufficiently licenced and warranted in the Scripture
(though it be no where indeed determined to be of absolute necessity in the
performance of them.) As for example, there is an act of thanksgiving in the
duty of receiving: which being a branch of Prayer (largely taken) there can be
no outward gesture more natural and suitable to it than kneeling is; beside^,
there is an act of Prayer (strictly taken) etc. But there is no such special
duty in hand, or in performance when the Name Jesus is mentioned, upon which
this gesture of Bowing should be founded, but only the duties of hearing and
attending to the Word of God: Whereunto all other Gestures of standing or
sitting are much more convenient, and have approbation from the Scriptures; the
former of standing, Nehem. 8.5. Mat. 13.2. and elsewhere; The latter of
sitting, Ezech. 20.1. and 33.31. Mark 3.32, etc. So that to enjoin Bowing still
upon the prolation of the Name Jesus, in the midst of that Service, whether it
be in the hearing of a Chapter or Gospel read, wherein those other Gestures of
standing or sitting are by the same Authority allowed; Besides, that it wants a
special foundation to build it upon; it dissolves (for the time) those other
Gesture; which the Scriptures allow, substituting another in their stead
unknown to them, it further condemns that which it allows, by censuring men
for sitting or standing then, when they have allowed both as lawful.

Arg. V.
THat which (at the best) is a compound Worship to the framing and making up
whereof, there is a concurrence partly of the Will of God, partly of the will
and wisdom of men; is an unlawful Worship, especially when that which is from
man, is the form, life, and spirit of the Worship, and that which is from God,
is but the material and less principal part of it. But such is this worship of
bowing at, etc. Ergo,

The Major I conceive needs no relief from any truth clearer than it self.

The Minor is thus proved: if only the outward Act, the bowing of the body be
from God, but the bowing of it at such a time, and upon such an occasion be
from man, then it is a compound worship, yea, and that which is formal and
principal in it, is from man, and only that which is weak and less regarded, is
from God. But the Antecedent is true; namely, that the bowing of the body only
is from God, but the bowing at such a time and upon such an occasion, is from
man; therefore the Consequent or Conclusion is true also, viz. that that
worship is a mixed and compound worship, and that which is principal and most
esteemed is from man, and only the neglected and less principal part of it is
from God. The Consequence is evident in both the Parts and Members of it.

1. That which has a plurality and diversity of ingredients in it, must needs
be a thing compounded. And,

2. For the latter part of it, that, That which is from God in this worship (if
any thing at all be in it from him) viz. the bowing of the Body, is but the
material and less principal part of it; but that which is from man, namely, to
do it at such a time, and upon such an occasion, is the formal and principal
part of it, appears thus; because let the body be bowed never so diligently and
frequently upon the mention of all other names of Christ, as, LORD, SAVIOR,
etc. Yet this is not regarded (no more than a dead Carcass when the life is
departed from it) nor taken for the worship here commanded; therefore that
which gives the life and essence to it, is not that that makes it an act of
adoration. neither is it the exhibiting of it to the person for whom it is
claimed (as pretense is made) but it is the exhibition of it sub tali signo,
upon such a sound; this is that which gives it the specifical nature, and makes
it to be accepted and acknowledged for the worship commanded: Therefore this is
the life and soul, an all in all, of this worship. Now for the minor
Proposition that this circumstance or point in it, that it should and must be
given, precise at such a time, is purely from man, and not from God, has
sufficiently been demonstrated already, and the argument that evinceth it
beyond all contradiction is soon repeated: There is not the least intimation of
God at all in the Scripture, that any thing more should be done in this kind to
or upon the Name JESUS, than to any other Name or Title, whether of God or of
Christ: Therefore to found an act of worship upon the mention or sound of the
Name JESUS, is purely and absolutely from men, and not from God.

Arg. VI.
IF it be a thing unlawful to lay a stumbling block in the way of the weak or
blind, then it is unlawful to require such worship at the mention or sound of
the Name Jesus, or to prescribe or countenance any such Command: But this is
simply unlawful; Deuteronomy. 19.14. Ergo:

The Consequence will be reduced to a lightsom truth by reasoning thus:

To enjoin any worship of God in such a way, or upon such terms, whereby the
weak and simple (yea and wiser too) may easily be ensnared, drawn and provoked
to commit Idolatry, at least to commit absurdity, and give divine worship to
that which is not, such is an unlawful injunction; and it is sinful to
countenance it: But this Injunction to bow at the Name JESUS, is such an
injunction: Ergo;

The Major I conceive is rich in evidence of clear Truth.

The Minor is not likewise of any difficult proof, viz. That the injunction and
practice of Bowing, is in the nature of it apt to mislead the simple either
into Idolatry or absurdity. That which directly occasions men to bow unto those
who were but mere men, or to bow upon the mention of their names, directly and
in the nature of it leads men either to commit Idolatry, or (in the best
interpretation) and gross absurdity in the Service of God: But this command and
practice of bowing at the Name of Jesus, directly tends to one or both of
these; Ergo. The Minor is clear; because the Name JESUS is a Name common to
others besides the Lord Jesus; as to Josua, who is called Jesus, Heb. 4.8. And
Jesus the son of Sirach, and Bar-Jesus a Conjurer, Acts 13.6. Now how easy is
it to mistake one person for another, that goes in the same name with him,
without any distinction or note of difference, in the sound none can be.

Arg. VII.
NO outward Ceremony or Act of Worship, that tend to the prejudice and
interruption of that Worship and Service of God, which is more inward and
spiritual, is to be received and yielded unto; But such is the practice of
bowing at the Name of Jesus; Ergo.

The Major Proposition is evident; Because Duties of inferior nature and
consequence, when greater are in place, and cannot be performed in their due
manner, when these are thrust upon them, are no duties in such a case, but all
their obligatory virtue and power is suspended for that time.

And for the other Proposition; That bowing at the Name of Jesus is such a
worship or outward act that cannot stand with the due performance of that which
is greater and more spiritual; it is clearly demonstrable from hence, because
attentive hearing and minding the Word of God, either read or preached, is such
a duty; and cannot but be interrupted, and suffer distraction and diversion of
mind, if the other duty of bowing be attended also. The mind of man finds a
mavelous difficulty and insufficiency in it self to give that diligent and
deep attention to the Word of God, which belongs to it, when it has its full
strength entire and unbroken with any other collateral occasions, when it is in
the greatest freedom that may be from all other thoughts, Ergo, if it shall be
burdened in the time of hearing, with the care and purpose of bowing, when such
a word or sound comes forth, this cannot but much break and weaken the
intention of it.





Arg. VIII.
THat worship which intends to exalt one Name of God or of Christ before
others, and to bring all the rest into contempt, is at no hand to be
condescended unto: But such is this bowing-worship at the Name of Jesus; it
tends to magnify one Name of Christ, with the disparagement of all; Ergo.

The Major I take for clear and granted; because whatever reflects prejudice
upon any the great and sacred Names and Titles of God upon any pretense
whatsoever, is not to be endured.

The Minor is thus confirmed, because this name only being judged a fit medium
of conveying a special honor or service to Christ, others not thought worthy
of fuch an Office or Employment, this must needs turn to a reproach unto them,
that they shall all be defective this way in comparison of this one.



To this I Answer;



2. If this Knee-Service were done upon the mention of every name or Title of
Christ besides, sometimes it might so fall out, viz. when such names come many
or very often together, that it may make the body of the Service ridiculous, and
a good part of a little better than a mere distraction: Ergo, The liberty that
is left to men in this case does not ease the business at all, because if it be
taken in the way by which it is intended, the other names of Christ shall be
brought to an equality of honor with that of JESUS: The truth is, that it will
be so far from doing this, that it will bring them altogether one and other
without exception into contempt.

Arg. IX.
THat worship of Christ which reflects disparagement upon the other two
Persons, as if they were inferior to him, and worthy less honor, is at no
hand to be allowed: But this worship is such a worship enjoined only to the
Second Person.

It is true, God has given all the Honor and Dignity unto Christ, whereof he
now stands possessed as Mediator, to this end, that all men should honor the
Son as they honor the Father, John 7.22, 23. But that men should honor him
above the Father, or with any such kind of worship wherewith the Father is not
honored, there is no Scripture will bear it, nor the Analogy of Faith endure
it.







of the other, as having any right to communicate in the same worship with him.

2. A man directing his Prayer at one time to one of the Persons (in
particular) may at another time direct it to another, and a third time to the
Third: and so the equality of the Three Persons is fully acknowledged: But in
the command and tender of this knee-worship, a man is only sent with it to the
Son: neither will it serve or be accepted to tender this honor to the Son in
the Father or in the Holy Ghost (as in Prayer it is accepted with God) but it
will suffice if the Father and Holy Ghost be worshipped in the Son, yea, if
they be not worshipped it will serve also: by which it appears evidently, that
there is a wide difference between the one and the other.

3. If the Scripture had limited or restrained the duty or worship of Prayer
to one of the Persons only, limited I mean in such a sense, that it had
mentioned only this one Person as capable of this worship, and had given no
intimation of a like capacity in the other two (though it had not expressly
excepted against them in this behalf) it is evident, that it had established,
at least strongly intimated, an inequality between the Persons, and given a
pre-eminence to the one above the other two: This is the very case of this
Precept for bowing at the Name JESUS: There is a full establishment of a
capacity of this worship in the Second Person, but there is not the least
intimation given of the like capacity in either of the other: Ergo, it directly
tends to set up a conceit of an inequality between the persons in the minds of
men, and therefore is not to be assented unto.

Arg. X.
NO outward Worship or Service of God, that can have no other reasonable end,
but only to entrap and ensnare the faithful Servants of God, is not to be
endured: But such is this bowing-worship; Ergo.



To this I Answer:



2. If it be the proper end and intent of this Ceremonial Worship to testify
the inward reverence of the soul to Christ, then should it rather be commanded
to be done at such times indefinitely when a man finds the impression of such a
reverence upon his Spirit; and not determinately, whenever he hears the sound
of the Name JESUS. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and so
it is fittest for all the body to speak, and not when the body is empty.

3. If a definite time be fit to be appointed when men should bow their bodies
to Christ, in token of their inward reverence, it should rather be when some of
those great things he has done for us were mentioned, than when only his bare
name is recited; because there is not so much in the bare name which is
scarcely heard, to affect the heart toward him, as when that Goodness and
Mercy which is seen in that great salvation he has purchased for us, is
displayed before our eyes.

4. Lastly, It seems a thing altogether unreasonable, when things that are
stronger and more spiritual are in place, especially when that which is a more
full and more genuine exercise must give place for a time to make way for that
which is inferior to it: But reverence in attention to the Word of Christ, is
doubtless a greater and fuller exercise and testimony of greater inward
reverence of the heart, than bowing at the name of Jesus is. The Soldiers that
put him to death, bowed the knee to him in derision: But for outward reverence
in hearing the Scriptures, it may be taken up by those who have no true love to
God or his Word: Yet God himself gives testimony of it as a seeming behavior
well becoming his people, Ezekiel. 32. (Ergo) For a man to break off and interrupt
a more solemn exercise to Christ, which reverence men exhibit in a reverent
attention to his Word, whether it be with sitting or standing only to introduce
a hetrogenite and less pertinent exercise in bowing, I conceive is not that
reasonable service of God which the Scriptures call for, and require at every
man's hands.

Arg. XI.
THat Worship which neither the Law of God, nor the Law of man, nor the Church
whereof we are Members, imposes, ought not to be assented unto or entertained:
But such is this bowing, it is neither commanded in this case by the Law of
God, neither is there any Canon or a constitution of the Church: Ergo.

The Major is without exception.

As for the Minor: That this worship is not commanded by any Law of God, it
has been sufficiently declared already: For the latter Member, That it is not
commanded by any Canon or Constitution of the Church, it may thus appear; If
not by the 18th. Canon, then not by any other; because there is no appearance
for it out of any other: That it is not enjoined in the 18th. Canon, these
Considerations make it every whit as much, if not more than probable.

I. That worship or reverence here advised or called for, is only such a
worship or reverence as is due: For that is the first and principal
qualification of it, by which the other two (us) and (all) must be interpreted.
Now the Rule in Law is, that is due which is required by the Law of God: But
such reverence or worship to Christ which the Law of God does not require, is
not that worship which the Canon advises unto: But now as concerning this
bowing worship or reverence, in this case it haah been often proved to have
been no where required by the Law of God. If it be objected, that the word due
may have reference to some former Law or Constitution of the Church, as well as
to the Law of God, in respect whereof it may be called due. I Answer:

1. That this being left doubtful and undetermined in the Canon, whether it be
such a worship as is due by the Law of God or by the Law of the Church, then
the interpretation of the Canon is not to be left to, or made by any one man or
more, but by a Convocation of the Clergy under the Broad Seal, as is expressly
enjoined by his Majesty's Declaration prefixed before the last Impression of
the Book, 39 Articles of Religion, Ergo. As yet till the Canon be made to speak
more plain by this authority, there is no authority sufficient peremptorily to
impose any such worship by virtue of the Canon. But, 2. Suppose it be granted
that the word due has or may have reference to some former Constitution of the
Church, yet till such a Canon be reduced, which hitherto has not been, neither
ever will or can be; where this reverence of bowing the Body or Knee is
precisely or determinately enjoined, till then there is nothing to be had out
of the Canon for bowing.
II. That reverence to Christ the Canon advises unto, is only such a reverence
as has been accustomed. Now to what custom this word refers, there is
nothing determined of it. It is not in any probability that it is either to the
Church of God in general, or to the custom of the Church of God in England: As
for what has been accustomed to the Church malignant of Popery, I presume the
Canon looks not after it. Now that either it has been the custom of the Church
Catholic, or the custom of the Church of England to bow still at the name of
Jesus, I know no authentic Author that can testify. As for the practice of
some particular, either Place or Person, it will not amount to make that which
is properly called a custom.

III. But if the words of the Canon ( due, lowly, and accustomed) be understood
of any humble deportment and reverent composure of the outward man in hearing
of the word of Christ, then will the sense be more expedient and clear, than
will be found in any other interpretation, For such reverence is,

1. Both apparently due from the Word of God and his Law, and the Law of the
Church. And, 2. It is Lowly, the Body every way framed to the humblest
deporture of the Soul. 3. Such a reverence has been still accustomed, and is
still the custom of all the true Servants of God, both in England, and
elsewhere: These three qualifications of ( due, lowly and reverence) will never
be made so really and generally into that reverence of bowing, as they do to
that reverent and humble attention of hearing the Word of God; and this is most
pliable to the meaning of the Canon.
IV. Nothing is enjoined in this Canon that is not prescribed nor mentioned in
the Book of Common Prayer, and it is evident from hence, because in that Act of
conformity prefixed before the Book, That if any other Ceremony be in the
Service of God, it is prohibited under the penalty; but for the Ceremony of
bowing at the name of Jesus, the Book of Common Prayer no where mentions, Ergo,
it is not likely to be enjoined by the Canon; Or if it be granted, then the
Book of Common Prayer will fall heavy upon him that shall observe the Canon, or
on the other side, the Canon will condemn him that shall observe the Book of
Common Prayer.

5. His Majesty's special command and pleasure is in the former Declaration,
that the litteral and grammatical sense shall still be taken and no other. But
now if the Canon have no other Midwife but the literal and the grammatical
sense, it will never be delivered of this bowing worship at the name of Jesus.
If the Canon were exactly translated by all Languages, and suit made to the
best Grammarians of all Nations to give the literal sense of it; it is not to
be conceived that any one of them would ever find, that bowing the Body at the
sound of the name Jesus, ever to be meant by it.

FINIS.

