Chemistry Made Easy and Useful. Or, The Agreement and Disagreement Of the
Chemists and Galenists.

Daniel Sennertus, Nich. Culpeper, And Abdiah Cole. DOCTORS OF PHYSIC.

The two next Pages show what is chiefly Treated of in this Book.

LONDON. Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1662.

THE CONTENTS. Of the BOOK Of the Chemists and Galenists Physic.
CHap. 1. Of the Nature of Chemistry Page 1 Chap. 2 Of the Truth and Dignity of
Chemistry. Page 5 Chap. 3 Of the Inventors and Users of Chemistry Page 9 Chap.
4 Concerning Paracelsus. Page 14 Chap. 5 Of the new Names and Principles by
which Paracelsians are to be known Page 21 Chap. 6 Of the Analogy of the great
and little World Page 25 Chap. 7 Of the first Matter Page 28 Chap. 8 Of the
Elements Page 30 Chap. 9 Of the Forms, Seeds, or Stars of Things. And Page 36
Of the Original of Forms Page 38 Chap 10 Of the Spirit and inbred Heat Page 44
Chap. 11 Of the Principles of the Chemists Page 50 Chap. 12 Of Generation and
Mixture Page 64 Chap. 13 Of the Foundation of Medicine Page 76 Chap. 14 Of the
strength of Imagination Page 83 Chap. 15 Of the Physiological part of Physic
Page 92 Chap. 16 Of Pathologie, or Diseases Page 99 Chap. 17 Of that part of
Physic which is called Semiotick, or of Signs Page 119 Chap. 18 Of Medicines,
and the Method of Curing Page 125 An Apendix Page 151 Chap. 19 Of the
Constitution of Chemistry ibid.
FINIS.
^^oks Printed by Peter Cole at the Exchange in London.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer, and Abdiah
Cole Doctor of Physic, commonly called, The Physitian's Library, containing
all the Works in English of Riverius, Sennertus, Platerus, Riolanus,
Bartholinus. Viz.

1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physic; plainly discovering the Kinds, with the
several Causes of every Disease And their most proper Cures, in respect to the
Causes from whence they come: after a new, easy and plain Method of Knowing,
Foretelling, Preventing, and Curing all Diseases Incident to the Body of Man.
Full of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern
Physicians. Being the Fruit of One and Thirty years Travel, and fifty years
Practice of Physic. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich-Culpeper.

2. Sennertus Practical Physic; the first Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head.
2. Of the Hurt of the internal senses 3. Of the external Senses, in five
Sections.

3. Sennertus Practical Physic; the second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Jaws
and Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart.

4. Sennertus Third Book of Practical Physic in fourteen Parts, treating, 1.
Of the Stomach and Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of the Mesentery, Sweetbread and
Omentum. 4. Of the Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of the Scurvey. 7 and 8. Of the
Liver. 9 Of the Ureters. 10. Of the Kidneys. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13.
and 14. Of the Privities and Generation in men.

5. Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physic in three Parts. Part 1. Of the
Diseases in the Privities of women. The first Section. Of Diseases of the
Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second Section. Of the Diseases of
the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the Womb. The second
Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other Fluxes of the Womb. The third
Section. Of the Symptoms that befall al Virgins and Women in their Wombs, after
they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of the Symptoms which are in
Conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of Women with Child, and
preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth Section. Of Symptoms
that happen in Childbearing The seventh Section. Of the Government of Women in
Childbed, and of the Diseases that come after Travel

The first Section. Of Diseases of the Breasts. The second Section. Of the
Symptoms of the Breasts.

To which is added a Tractate of the Cure of Infants. Part 1. Of the Diet and
Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases and Symptoms in Children.

6. Sennertus fifth Book of Practical Physic, Or the Art of Chyrurgery in six
Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. O Ulcers. 3. Of the Skin, Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds,
with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of
Luxations.

7. Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical Physic in nine Parts. 1. Of
Diseases from occult Qualities in general. 2. Of occult, malignant, and
venomous Diseases arising from the internal fault of the humors. 3. Or occult
Diseases from water, air, and infections, and of infectious diseases. 4. Of the
Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poisons in general. 6. Of Poisons from Minerals and
Metals. 7. Of Poisons from Plants. 8. Of Poisons that come from Living
Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charms.

8. Sennertus Treatise of Chemistry, showing the Agreement and Disagreement of
Chemists and Galenists.

9. Sennertus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout.

10. Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy: Or the Nature of all
things in the world.

11. Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that
Learned and Renowned Doctor Lazarus Riverius. Physician and Counselor to the
late King, etc.

12. Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books.

13. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very many larger Brass Figures, than any other
Anatomy in English.

14. Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man.

15. Riolanus Anatomy.

16. A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians
of London, in Folio and in Octavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's
Method of Physic.

17. A Directory for Midwives, or a guide for women The First and Second Part.

18. Galens Art of Physic.

19. A new Method both of studying and practicing Physic.

20. A Treatise of the Rickets.

21. Medicaments for the Poor: Or, Physic for the Common People.

22. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic

23. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo.

24. A Treatise of Pulses and Urins.

25. A Treatise of Blood-letting, and Cures performed thereby.

26. A Treatise of Scarification, and Cures performed thereby.

27. The English Physician enlarged.

The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Caracter in Latin.

28. The London Dispensatory in Latin, a small Book in Twelves.

29. Chemistry made easy and useful: Or the Agreement and Disagreement of the
Chemists and Galenists. By Dr. Cole, etc.

30. A New Art of Physic by Weight, or five hundred Aphorisms of Insensible
Transpiration, Breathing or Vapor coming forth of the Body. By Dr. Cole, etc.

To the Physical Reader.
THe greatest Reason that I could ever observe, why the Medicines prescribed in
the Physic Books before mentioned, do not (sometimes) perform the Cures
promised, is, the unskilfulness of those that make up the Medicines. I
therefore advise all those that have occasion to use any Medicines, to go or
send to Mr. Ralph Clarke Apothecary, at the sign of the three Crowns on
Ludgate Hill, in London; where they shall be sure to have such as are skilfully
and honestly made.

Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, etc.
Eighteen Several Books of Mr. Burroughs's viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's Call to all those that are weary and heavy laden, to come to him for
rest.

2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to him.

3 Christ the Humble Teacher of those that come to him.

4 The only easy way to Heaven.

5 The Excellency of Holy Courage in Evil times.

6 Gospel Reconciliation.

7 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment.

8 Gospel Worship.

9 Gospel-Conversation.

10 A Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking
with God.

11 An Exposition of the Prophecy of Hoseah.

12 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin.

13 Of Precious Faith.

14 Of Hope.

15 Of Walking by Faith, and not by Sight.

16 The Christians living to Christ upon 2 Cor. 5.15.

17 A Catechism.

18 Moses Choice.

Dr. Hills WORKS. VIZ.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation Budding.

2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of Christ.

3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus.

4 The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength,

5 The best and worst of Paul.

6 Gods Eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumes,
Viz.
1 Scripture light, the most sure Light.

2 Christ in Travel.

3 A lifting up for the cast down.

4 Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

5 Of Sins of Infirmity.

6 The false Apostle tried and discovered.

7 The good and means of Establishment.

8 The great things Faith can do.

9 The great things Faith can suffer.

10 The great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

11 Satan's power to tempt and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptation.

12 Thankfulness requiin every Condition.

13 Grace for Grace.

14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.

15 Evangelical Repentance

16 The Spiritual Life, and In being of Christ in all Believers.

17 The Woman of Canaan.

18 The Saints Hiding place, etc.

19 Christ coming, etc.

20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances.

21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.

Four New Books of Mr. Sydrach Sympson, VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief, or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ.

2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation, is an exceeding great sin, yet
pardonable.

3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; and receiving Christ, is
believing.

4 Of Coveteousness.

Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker made in New England, are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin and Mr. Philip Nigh, to be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volume being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer, in the seventeenth of John.

Wherein is showed,
1 That the end why the Saints receive all Glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one.

2 That God the Father loves the Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ.

3 That our Savior desires to have the Faithful in Heaven with himself.

4 That the Happiness of our being in Heaven, is to see Christ's Glory.

5 That there is much wanting in the Knowledge of Gods Love, in the most able
Saints.

6 That the Lord Christ lends daily Direction, according to the daily need of
his Servants.

7 That it is the desire and endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods
Love, which was bestowed on himself, should be given to his faithful Servants.

8 That our Union and Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness
in Heaven.

Ten Books of the Application of Redemption by the effectual Work of the Word,
and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God By Thomas
Hooker of New England. In which (besides many other seasonable, and
Soul-searching truths) there is also largely showed.

1 Christ has purchafed all spiritual good for HIS, and puts them in
possession thereof.

2 The soul must be fitted for Christ before it can receive him: and a powerful
Ministry is the ordinary means to prepare the heart for Christ.

3 The heart of a Natural man is wholly unwilling to submit to the Word that
would sever him from his sins.

4 God the Father by a holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their
corruptions, and draws them to believe in Christ.

5 Stubborn and bloody sinners may be made broken hearted.

6 There must be true sight of sin, before the heart can be broken for it.

7 Application of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to
sight of, and sorrow for them.

8 Meditation of sin a special means to break the heart.

9 The Lord sometimes makes the word prevail most when it is most opposed.

10 Sins unrepented of, make way for piercing Terrors.

11 Gross and scandalous sinners, God usually exercises with heavy breakings
of Heart, before they be brought to Christ.

12 They whose hearts are pierced by the Word, are carried with love and
respect to the Ministers of it: And are busy to enquire, and ready to submit
to the mind of God.

13 There is a secret hope wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite
Sinners.

14 True contrition is accompanied with confenion of sin, when God calis
thereunto.

15 The Soul that is pierced for sin is carried with a restless dislike against
it.

The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justice.

The wise Virgin: Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, of New England.

Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian his Disease and Cure discovering the Leprosy
of Sin and Self love, with the Gure, viz. Self-denial and Faith.

A Godly and fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter: By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.

Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew: By Mr. Ward.

A BOOK Concerning the Agreement and Disagreement Of the CHEMISTS, With
Aristotle's and Galens Followers.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature of Chemistry.
WE shall not stand much upon the Interpretation of the word Chemistry,
because it is disputable whether it be derived from the Greeks, or from the
Arabians or Egyptians.

Paracelsus and other modern Physicians called it Spagery from the Greek words
that signifies to pull in pieces or divide, and also to unite or join together,
as being an Art to dissolve and Unite again any natural bodies.

Some proudly call this Art Philosophy, and they who study the
Philosophers-stone, are called the only true Philosophers, and Philosophers
Sons; of which see the Book called Turba Philosophorum.

It is called from Hermes or Mercury the Hermetick Art, and thence come the
Hermetical vessels and seals, of which hereafter.

It is also called the Separating and Distilling Art.

But the distinction of Disciplines is from the end, and that of Chemistry is
not only to melt Metals, and separate one Mettle from another, but a hope to
turn inferior Metals into Gold. And by use and operation, they still discovered
new things, and so came to distill and separate Vegetables. So the whole Art of
Chemistry consists in working of Metals, and preparing of Medicines. But they
are by custom called only the true Chemists, that labor to turn the cheap
Metals into Gold and Silver, or that make good Medicines of Minerals or
Vegetables, or Animals; and the inferior Metal-workers are not honored with
this Name of a Chemist.

Nor does a Chemist only exercise in Natural bodies, as an Apothecary, but he
dissolves compounded bodies into their first principles, and separates them,
the good from the bad, cleanses all, alters, perfects, and exalts them, and
makes them efficacious; and if need be, he again joins them together, as when
the strength of the whole compounded body is required.

Hence there are two ends in Chemistry, the internal and external. The internal
end is that, whose work being perfect the operation cease: and to dissolve
bodies into their first principles, to cleanse, alter, exalt, and purify them
in particular together, and make them fit for use, is very necessary. In
respect of this end, Chemistry of it self is an Art separate from Physic,
because it does not only serve the Physician, but other Artists.

This end has two parts, for the Chemist either only labors in transmuting of
Metals, or studies Physic. If the later, the Apothecary and the Chemist are
little different; now the Physician uses the Apotehcary as a Servant therefore
he ought to be skilled in Chemical operations, to direct his Apothecary: and
when the Physician himself prepares Chemical medicines, he is a Chemist, as
when he cures wounds and dislocations, he is a Surgeon.

The external end of Chemistry is twofold, it is either exercised in
transmutation of Metals, or to cure man's body. In respect of the first end, it
is a distinct Art from all others, and therefore it is called by way of
eminency Alchymy, or the Art of the great Magistral, the Magistery of wisdom,
the Art of Hermes. In respect of the latter end, Chemistry is not a peculiar
Art, but belongs to Physic, and is the perfection of it, for it is the part
only of the Physician to use and apply Chemical medicines for cure, and may be
called then a Chemical Physician, and the Medicines Chemical, which are the
perfection of Physic.

Some will have no difference between common Medicine or Physic and Chemistry,
and say that the old Physicians and Apothecaries knew all the Chemical
preparations, as Digestion, Sublimation, Distillation, Calcination,
Reverberation, Extraction, and the like. We confess they knew some of them, 7.
De comp. med. sec. ge. c. 11.
for Galen teaches to make medicines by long steeping. And Treacle is not good
till it be sermented long, but they knew it not so well as it is now known; and
what they had was from the Refiners, Lib. de simp. med. facul.
as Galen shows, and Chemistry was not then brought into the Apothecaries shops
and Physicians house from the Refiners furnace and Chemical workhouses.

Some enlarge Chemistry, and dispute principles and labor to bring in new
operations into all the parts of Philosophy and Physic, but it is not for
Chemists, as such, to dispute of principles, but for Physicians and
Philosophers And Chemistry does but only bring some observations and
experiments by working, from which the Physician and Philosopher makes
conclusions.

Therefore a Chemist is exercised about all natural bodies, to dissolve,
purify, and work them as to his internal end. But as to his external end, he
is conversant only about Metals, to transmute them. In respect of the latter
end, he is conversant, not only in Metals, but all natural bodies that may be
medicinable, whether Vegetables or Animals.

Moreover, Chemistry is an art, that is not only conversant about natural
things to know them only, but to make something out of them. And though it has
its principles and conclusions, yet is it not a science, but an Art or factive
habit according to reason. Therefore Chemistry is neither a part of Physic,
nor subordinate unto it, though it be conversant about the natural body, as
Physic is, because the manner of ordering is diverse from Physic, for skill
only in operation or working, neither makes a Philosopher nor a Physician, but
every fool may attain to operation, if he have but a good purse.

From hence we give this Definition of Chemistry. It is an Art to resolve
Natural compound bodies into their Principles of which they are made, and to
make them pure and strong for Medicines, or to perfect or change Metals.

Therefore the Sophistical operations to make base Metals like gold or silver
in color, are not worthy of the honest name of Chemistry, though the Chemist
may for trial, do something therein to obtain a higher end.

Chap. 2. Of the Truth and Dignity of Chemistry.
IT is commendable; first from the transmutation of Metals: secondly from the
good Medicines that are found out by it. That Metals are transmuted, it is
proved by experience. In Hungary by the Town called Smolnitium, in the Mountain
Carpath, there are Fountains into which if iron be cast, it is turned into the
best copper. The same is done at Gossaria; and the same may be done by Art, for
if Iron be cast into Vitriol-water, there is a red powder that sticks to it,
which being mleted, turns to copper. Also Quicksilver is turned to Lead, as
John Rhenan shows in his Definition for the truth of Chemistry: although
Nicolas Guibert Physician of Lotharing thinks otherwise.

But the chief question is concerning turning of other Metals into gold, which
though it seems impossible to many, yet experience is again, them not to speak
of the Ancients Arnold de villa nova and Raymund, Lully, and others. Such
things have been done in the memory of our Fathers, and of our selves, and it
is impudency to deny such a certain Experiment.

The chief objection is, that Metals are distinct in specie, and cannot be
transmuted one into another, unless you can make a Pig of a Dog. But I answer,
That the form of Iron, and the form of Lead cannot be turned into the forms of
copper or gold, but the form of iron departing, the form of copper may be
brought in, and the form of Lead departing, the form of gold may be brought in;
and this is easier in Metals, because they have one common matter: the Elements
are transinuted; Wheat and other Plants are perfect species in their forms, yet
they are turned into chyle, and blood is turned into flesh, bones, and membranes

Nor let it seem absurd, that Metals in so short a time can be turned into
gold, except you are ignorant of the power of Spirits, and of Chemical
operations; what force has thunder upon Metals? What force has Aqua fortis
and other Spirits?

Nor let any say that Chemical gold is not true gold, but apparent, for the
forms of things being hid from us, we know them by their proper accidents and
proprieties; but Chemical gold has all the proprieties of gold: therefore it
must be acknowledged to be true gold. The proprieties of gold are, that it be
yellow, not ringing, malleable, so that one ounce beaten, may cover ten acres
of ground; and the third part of a grain may be drawn into wire of 134. foot
long, as Cardan writes: Lib. de varietate rerum. De vanit. scient.
to be incorruptible in air and water, and to endure all tests by the assay-men.

Some, with Agrippa, say that the Chemists draw a tincture of gold, which they
give to other Metals, and make them gold, but only so much as that was from
which the tincture was drawn, and so there is no profit. But experience shows
the contrary, for Edward Kelley an Englishman at Prague, in the house of
Thaddaeus Haggecius, turned a pound of Quicksilver into gold with one drop of a
very red liquor; and it is still to be seen, and the sign of the liquor sticks
like a Rubie upon the Quicksilver so turned to gold, and as much more gold may
be made of the same: let this one experiment serve turn: Yet though this art be
true, it is very difficult, as appears by the lost labors of many; and none can
easily attain to it by reading or practice.

There are many cheaters. But let none trust him that promises this art for
money. First let them make gold for themselves, which they commonly want. I
shall recite some of their cheats. First they carry gold or silver in a stick,
with which they stir their Metals. Others dissolve gold or silver in Aqua
fortis, and mix with Ink, and write upon paper, in which they put the Metal
they pretend to turn. Or they use the powder of gold or silver, as sand upon a
letter. Others mix gold or silver dissolved, within charcole. Others have false
bottoms to their crucibles, into which they put gold. Others have filled great
coals with gold, and laid them upon the crucible. But the greatest cheat is,
when they have gotten some of the true tincture, and done wonders till they
have gotten money, but can go no further being ignorant.

The other end of Chemistry is for Physicians, for first the medicines Nature
afford us, have often parts of diverse strength and force; but by Chemistry they
are ingeniously separated. The Chemists imitate the industry of the Ancients in
preparing of meats, by boiling, and other preparations to make them pleasant
and wholesome. And the Ancients, when the patient wanted much nourishment, and
could not well concoct, found out consummate broth or cullesses, in which the
unprofitable parts for nourishment were cast away, and that which nourished
best was preserved.

Thus are Chemical medicines made powerful, pleasant and safe, and the
Physician may cure by them safely quickly and pleasantly. For when the thick
earth, and unprofitable parts are separated from the profitable and spirital,
the thinner parts sooner pierce into the whole body, and exercise their force.

And being given in a small dose, and freed from unpleasant qualities, they are
taken without loathing, and so work the better. And some medicines that are
rank poison, are prepared by the Chemist, and made safe. Nature is the Chemists
leader, which makes us wholesome, Spawwaters from Minerals and Metals, by which
desperate diseases are cured.

But observe, that we here only commend the true Chemistry, but hate the false
Chemists, who when they can prepare a medicine or two, promise golden
mountains, and scorn all the Galenists, when they themselves are ignorant in
all good Arts, chiefly in Physic and Philosophy. And will be called by no
other name then Hermecial Physicians; when they may be more truly called
Haeretical Physicians.

Chap. 3. Of the Inventors and and Users of Chemistry.
Chemistry had been no worse, if it had been found out later; for that is old
enough that is good enough, and there is nothing which was not new at the first.

Some suppose that all the Chemical Books were written but three or four ages
since: but they are out, for we have Greek Authors that treat of it. Some show
that Chemistry may be proved ancient, say that Adam invented it, Genesis 4.
but this they cannot prove.

But the Rudiments of Chemistry were more probably invented by Tubalcain the
Master of Iron and Brass. And if he showed how to fashion Metals, he must needs
know how to find them out, melt and separate them, and purify them. The
Scriptures commend him for an excellent Metal-man, and his Successors were
iudustrious in the same. And if they knew how to work on Iron and Brass, they
questionless knew how to order Metals

After the flood, the invention or propagation of Chemistry was by many imputed
to Hermes Trismegistus, and from him it is at this day called the Hermetical
Art, the vessels and seals of Hermes are so called from him. And he was called
Tresmegistus or thrice great, because he was the chief Priest, Philosopher, and
King, or (as others say) the chief King, Priest, and Prophet. He lived in
ancient time, about the 2000d year of the World heard Noah preach, and was (as
the Learned say) the Master of Chamephis or Chusus. The Grecians as well as the
Egyptians, honored him for antiquity and learning, and imputed the invention
of all Arts and Sciences to him. They say he wrote 25000. Books all set forth
in his Name.

Mesue mentions another, Hermes that succeeded him, and mentions a Hiera of
Hermes, and Pills of Alhandal of Hermes, and so do other Physicians; but these
vulgar medicines were not worth of the Name of Hermes Trismegistus.

There is also a Smaragd Table esteemed by all Chemists, which was found in the
Valley of Ebron after the flood, but the Author of it is unknown. Some say it
was found in the Sepulcher of Trismegistus, by a woman called Sarah; it is the
foundation of all Chemistry: and I shall here mention it.

The Smaragd Table.
To speak plain truth without lying, it is most true and certain, that, what is
below, is as that is which is above: and that which is above, is like that
which is below, to perpetuate the miracles of one thing. And as all things were
from one, by the meditation and invention of one, so all things are from this
one thing, by adaptation or proportion. The Father of it, is the Sun, the
mother the Moon, the wind carried it in its belly. The Earth is its Nurse. This
is the Father of all Talism in the world. The virtue of it is complete; if it
be turned into earth, you shall separate the earth from the fire gently with
much ingenuity, and that which is subtle, from that which is gross. It ascends
from earth to heaven, and descends again to the earth, and takes the power of
things above and beneath. Thus you may have the glory of the whole world, and
so all obscurity shall fly from thee. This is the great force of all
fortitude, because it will overcome every subtle thing, and pierce through all
solid bodies. Thus was the world made. And from hence you may make wonderful
adaptations. Therefore I am called Hermes Trismegistus, because I have three
parts of Philosophy of the whole world. What I have said of the work of the
Sun, is complete.

They deny this to be the Table of Trismegistus, because it is not in his
Works: De metallis lib. 4. c. 6.
all Chemists have hitherto thought the contrary, and Albertus Magnus writes
that Hermes is the Root that holds up all Philosophers.

Moses was next to Trismegistus, who was skilled in all the Knowledge of the
Egyptians; but it can scarce be proved clearly, that he understood Chemistry:
Exodus I. 32.
though they burnt the Calf that Aaron made, and made it into powder, and cast
it into the water. Some say that Mary the Prophetess Sister of Moses, was a
Chemist, because her Name is mentioned in some Books that teach the making of
gold; but it is an usual thing in Chemists to make their Books famous by
setting the Names of great persons to them.

Some mention the Expedition of the Argonants, for the antiquity of Chemistry.
Suidas reports that the Golden Fleece which Jason and the Argonants brought
together Medea the Daughter of King Aaetes from Cholchis, when they went into
the Pontick Sea; was not such a Fleece as the Poets seign, but a Book written
in Parchement for the making of gold. But whatsoever others imagine, there is
no cause to reject the opinion of Suidas, for all things agree unto it. The
watching Dragon is Mercury, which is hard to be laid a sleep, to this the gold
which Phasis kept in Colchis was committed This matter is put into the Temper
of Mars, that is the Philosophers furnace. The keepers thereof, are the Bulls
that breath out fire, that is, heat that increases by degrees. The teeth of
the Dragon that go to war, and wound each other, is the fighting of the matter
in the vessel, till it be brought to unity. At length by Medeas art, the Jason
brings the Dragon to sleep, That is, fixes that which would fly away, and
makes a good Medicine of that which was poison. Now this is probable, because
that exposition of a fable is best which agrees to truth, either in Natural or
Politic things. Especially because the Names of Jason and Medea signify a
Physician.

Also the fable of the Apples of Hesperides is spoken of Chemistry. Metamorph.
10. fab. 14.
And that fable of Atalanta and Hippomenes in Ovid And the other fable of the
Dragon that Cadmus killed.

Solomon the wisest of all men, wrote beyond all the Greeks and Arabians, if
his Books of natural things were extant, and we may affirm without absurdity,
though not clearly prove that he was a Chemist. It is ridiculous with some, to
fetch Chemistry out of the Canticles, and to interpret the King which is the
Bridgroom, to be gold, and the Queen to be silver, because they embrace each
other in Chemistry. And when it is said, I am black, but comely, to understand
the Crows head, which is black outwardly, and inwardly very rich. These are
trifles, and the Art of Chemistry is so plainly ancient, that we need not bring
these uncertainties and lies to defend it.

I like not that of Esdras, Esdras c. 1
to prove the antiquity of it, as if those golden Cups to be made of precious
Brass, better then common gold by the Art of Chemistry.

Since Christ, Chemistry flourished in Egypt, so that they report all their
treasure that they maintained themselves by against their enemies, was
artificial Hence Dioclesian commanded all the Chemical Books for making gold in
Egypt, to be burnt, lest they should grow rich thereby, and rebel again. Thus
Suidas.

Julius Firmicus in the time of Constantine the Great, in the year of Christ
320. mentions Chemists, from the Astrologers Predictions.

Heliodore wrote in Greek of making of gold An. Dom. 383. and there is a
notable argument for Chemistry in the History of Maximus Olibius concerning his
Monument in Padua, Pet. Appian. in antiquitatibus.
in which a candle was found burning in the year 1500.

In late ages Chemistry was famous among the Arabians, as you may see in Mesue,
and others, and Geber, Avicen, Rhasis, Arnold de villa nova, Raymund Lully,
John de Rupescissa, Bonus Ferrariensis, Hortulanus, Isaac Holand, Roger
Bacchus, Augurellus, In exam. sent Paris scholeo.
and others mentioned by Andreas Libavius have written much of it.

From whence it appears false, which Nicolas Guibert wrote, and others namely
that the Chemical Books now extant, were made lately by Impostors and Sophists.
He that will know more of this, Super lib. 12. de re metalli.
may read the Preface of George Agricola to Mauritius and Augustus Dukes of
Saxony and Brothers; and Andreas Libavius in his Defense of Alchymy against
Nicolas Guibert.

Chap. 4. Concerning Paracelsus.
PHilip Theophrastus Paracelsus was born in Helvetia Ann. Domi. 1593. he had
excellent Masters for Chemistry, and began to raise a new Sect, with a desire
to throw down that of Hippocrates and Galen. His chief Tutor was Peter
Severinus, from whom there is a new Sect at this day called Severians.

Therefore this Paracelsus, when Chemistry was not vulgarly known in the
Schools, observing that Medicines might better be prepared that way, began to
reform Physic, but he almost overthrew it, together with all the Sciences. He
railed at Galen and Avicen, and all the Academicks; called the Doctors of
Paris, Padua, and Monpelior, and all the Professors of Physic, Professors of
Lies, and said they were Liars, and not Doctors in his Writings. He burnt the
Canonical Volume of Avicen, to show his hatred to old Physic, and to incense
his Disciples with hatred against other Physicians. Sometimes he seems to
avoid, being a Novelist, and would be accounted a Galenist, better then all the
rest, and to persuade the world that the Works of Galen and Avicen were not
right, but counterfeit.

Nor did he only brag himself, Page 7. suae praefationis.
but his Disciples cried him up, and Crollius wrote that none was like
Paracelsus, and made Hermes Trismegistus and Solomon inferiors to him in
Natural Philosophy and Metaphysics. And his Disciples wrote high commendations
on his Picture and Epitaph.

Hence it was, Epist. 137.
that he was by many called the Prince of Chemists, and none was counted a true
Chemist, that was not a Paracelsian: but they are deceived, as Crato shows
learnedly. And there is a difference between Chemistry and Paracelsian Physic,
for Chemistry was used before the time of Paracelsus. And though he used it,
yet it is not necessary that all Chemists should be Paracelsians, and embrace
his opinions. But let us examine whether those arrogant Titles that he and his
Disciples attribute to themselves, be due, or not.

He brags that he was born of an ancient and Noble family in the Wilderness of
Helvetia. But Erastus says that he heard that there were no such there, that
acknowledged themselves of his kindred, not so much as an ignoble family; and
that there was a strange Schoolmaster that lived there, who was born at a
place called the High-nest, and that he was called Paracelsus from thence.

Operine a Citizen of credit in Basil, followed him two years, of whom there
are Writings by Jociscus in his Life of Operine, where it is said, That
Paracelsus was drunk night and day, and could not be found one hour sober,
especially after he left Basil, and went to Alsatia, and was adored as
Aesculapius by the Nobles and Rusticks. Operine adds further, That he never
heard him pray, nor did he care for the Church, but slighted the Gospel, which
was then begun to be preached. Nor did Operine only write so, but told it to
others, as Dr. Henry Bullinger that knew Paracelsus at Tigur, witnesses whose
Letters Erastus cites. I could (says he) find no Religion in his speeches,
Disp. contra Paracel. par. 1.
but much Magic of his own making. If you had seen him, you would have taken
him for a Carter, rather then a Physician, and loved the company of Carters,
with whom he eat and carroused, so drunk sometimes, that he would sleep upon any
bench. For conclusion, he was a sordid, nasty Fellow, seldom went to Church,
and slighted Religion.

Erastus also says that George Vetter a godly man learned, 2. part disp.
contra Para.
that loved Paracelsus, and followed him two years and three months in Austria
and elsewhere to learn Surgery, which he only perfected, and honored Paracelsus
for teaching him, affirmed, That Paracelsus studied Magic, and made him study
it, and he called his evil Spirit his Companion. But I shall pass over this,
having showed Paracelsus was a wicked Liver.

He learned no Physic in the Schools, but had his knowledge from Chemical Books
and operations. For about that time, and a little before, Isaac Holland and
Basilius Valentine wrote, and practiced Chemistry, and others; and it was well
known in Germany, as Books written before Paracelsus, do declare. And he
himself writes that he studied Negromancy in the end of his Books of occult
Philosophy, where it is thus written. A Physician cannot learn what he ought in
the universities, but must sometimes ask old Women, Conjurers, and Negromancers,
and old Mountebanks, and the like, and learn of them; and speaking of Diseases
from Witchcraft, In praefatione paragrani.
he says, They have more knowledge of such things, then all the Universities.
And let any men judge if he wrote wisely, when he said that he had Letters sent
out of Hell from Galen, and disputed with Avicen at Hellgates concerning his
Potable Gold, the Tincture of Physic, Quintessences, and the Philosophers
Stone.

If any observe his Travels, of which he writes in his Praeface to his great
Surgery, he may judge how ill they hang together, and how unlike to be true.
Therefore it is more probable that he had no skill in Languages or Philosophy,
and therefore he traveled and consulted with Mountebanks and Negromancers.

In praefat. admonit.
These being so, I cannot consent to Crollius that none was above or equal to
Paracelsus, who had the absolute knowledge of all divine and humane Sciences; Re
3.
for we must believe the Scriptures that say of Solomon, Behold I have granted
thy request and given thee a wise and understanding heart, that none before
thee had, nor after shall have the like. Moreover, if Paracelsus were so wise,
why led he no better life? In labirinth. M^d^crrant.
He writes from the Apostle, That he which lacks wisdom must ask it of God, and
that the beginning of his Physic is to seek first the Kingdom of Heaven. But
what I said shows whether he did or not.

That he had not an absolute knowledge of all divine and humane things appears
by his absurd and wicked opinions: In lib. meteor. c. 3.
for he writes that the Night is not the absence of the Sun, but is from the
arising of the nocturnal Stars, which cause darkness. And that some Stars are
like Gourds and Glasses that hold Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, from whence by the
operation of the airy fire, the winds were sent, as wind bred in man's body is
sent out by the lower throat. Many absurd things are in the same Book that show
his ignorance, but his followers admire them, not searching into the truth of
them, but admiring Paracelsus that wrote them and taking every absurdity for a
Mystery. Lib. 1. de generat. rerum.


He wrote not only absurd but wicked things, showing how a little man may be
made by Chemistry without a Father or Mother, and says it is not a great
secret; Lib. 1. de Saga Philoso.
and that in the new Islands men are not from the true Adam, parent of all, but
from another Adam; in his Book Azoth, or of the wood and line of life Chap. 2.
He writes, That Adam and Eve before the Fall had no Stones, Reins, or Womb, but
received them after the Fall. From which and many other impieties you may see
that Crollius wrote falsely that Paracelsus was the most knowing man in divine
and humane things. Querc. in resp. ad Aubertum
Quercetan writes better, saying I never intended to maintain Paracelsus his
divinity, Disp. 1. contra Paracel. p 244. and aliquot seq.
nor to believe him in all things. He that will know more of this, let him read
Erastus who condemns Paracelsus for seven horrible blasphemies.

Let us see what he did in Chemistry and Curing where his chief worth lay,
which so renowned him. As for the transmutation of metals, In Epist. Citata.
I deny not but he did something therein, for Operine writes thus. He spent
money prodigally, and was sometimes so poor that he had not a halfpenny to my
knowledge, yet he would show the next day a purse full, and I wondered whence he
had it. And Michael Neander says he made Gold of Lead and Quicksilver, In sua
geogra.
and Franciscus in his Epistle which Andrew Labavius brings against Guibert in
his defense for transmutation by Alchymy. But how he did it, and whether he
made the medicine or had it from another it is not known. Evaldus Vagelius a
Dutchman in his Preface to his Book of the Philosopher-stone writes thus of
Paracelsus. I dare affirm that Paracelsus never knew the Philolosopher-stone,
and that he understood neither Raymond, Lully, nor other Authors in that Art,
and besides certain reasons, I was persuaded to this belief by an Epistle from
a noble man, whose Father knew Paracelsus very well, for he had had the
Philosophers-stone, and could make it when he pleased, he had not so railed at
Philip Marquess of Banden for ingratitude, in not paying his bargain.

As for Chemical Medicines, he brought many to light, but not without envy, and
he communicated not faithful such as he found out: for contemning all the
ancient Chemists besides himself, he is to be suspected. I will not here accuse
him, least I seem partial. But Bernard Penot learned in Chemistry, writes thus
of him. In fine lib, de denario med.
If the Works of John Isaac Holland were extant, the Works of Paracelsus would
be of no worth. This is he of whom Paracelsus prophesied, saying, Elias the
Artist shall come after me, who shall reveal hidden things. Penot has much
more, which though I believe not, yet are not contemptible. And John Crato
writes to Erastus, That the Remedies he used were not his own, for I saw a Book
written 200. years since by a Monk at Ulme, in which are the same Medicines
which Paracelus has here and there in his Works. Tom. 2. page 651.
Andernachus the great Chemist writes, That there was one Paracelsus a famous
Master in Chemistry, but he wrote many vain and false things, and so dark, that
few can benefit by reading him.

His Epitaph shows what diseases he cured, as the Leprosy, the Gout, and other
incurable maladies in the body by a wonderful art. And Oporine says that he
had an excellent activity and success in composing of remedies against all
diseases, and that he wrought miracles in curing of all sorts of desparate
ulcers, without any prescribed or observed course of diet, but he drank nights
and days with his patients, and cured them upon a full stomach and diet.

He mentions the Medicines he used, Lib. de trinit. Philos. c. 2.
as the Philosophical Tincture, for curing the French pox, Leprosy, Dropsy,
Colic, Apoplexy, Estiomene, Cancer, Fistulaes, and all inward Maladies, but
let them believe it that please. Oporine witnesses that he used Praecipitate,
Treacle, or Mithridate, or juice of Cherries in pills in all kind of diseases
for a purge. He often bragged he raised the dead to life by his Laudanum only.
A certain learned Chemical Physician, to distinguish the truth of this matter;
and after he had read the Chyrurgery of Paracelsus, he concluded that he cured
all diseases only with Mercury, sublimated and calcined, and give it diverse
names that it might not be discovered.

Many consess that he cured the most stubborn ulcers, but say that he did not
perform what the Vulgar say he did in the cure of the Dropsy, Gout, Leprosy,
Epilepsie, and the like, and prove by plain arguments, that he did not cure all
diseases. And some doubt it, because he used such diversity of remedies against
the Epilepsie. Sometimes he says it is to be cured only by black Hellebore,
sometimes by Antimony, sometimes by the liquor of Gold, sometimes by the Tincture
of Coral, sometimes by Vitriol, or by Man's blood prepared, or by Man's skull. And
they think that he wrote down certain Medicines promiscuosly for his memory,
that in time when occasion was offered, he might make trial of them all, and
knew not which was best. And the diet of Paracelsus himself seems to confirm
this, which was such that he could not have such knowledge in the cure of so
many desparate diseases. Nor could he cure himself, who was not only long before
his death in a convulsion, but lived not above 47. years when he had promised
long life unto others: when the Universal medicine, if he had had it, would
have preserved, and freed him from all contagion.

Hence any may judge that Paracelsus had a good wit, and if he had been endowed
accordingly with the knowledge of Languages and solid Hippocratical and
Galenical Philosophy, and could have used it in Chemistry, he had advanced
Physic, and had been famous among Physicians and Philosophers For the want of
which, he divulged so many absurdities in Divinity, Philosophy, and Physic
without any reason, but sat like a Dictator or Emperor in Learning, and wrote
many things so soolish and confused, that his Writings are not methodical, so
that he is blind with the love of Paracelsus that shall approve of his mad
Doctrine. His dissolute life showed that he was not a fit Reformer of Physic,
much less a man absolute in the knowledge of Divine and Humane things.

Chap. 5. Of the new Names and Principles by which Paracelsians are to be known.
IT is proper to this Sect to deceive by Names and Titles, and to get the
opinion of being wise thereby, witness the Titles of Paracelsus his Books, as
Paragranum, Paramirum: and these words, Ens, Pagoicum, Castagricum, Iliastrum,
Achaeus, Relloleum, Cherionium, Ylech. Trarames, Turban, Leffas, and six
hundred other words never heard in any age: and none of the followers of
Paracelsus has showed their original, or to what language they belong, and
when they use other, they give another sense, and use parables.

But the goodness of every thing consists in that for whose cause it was made.
Speech is a great gift of God given to men, that one might declare their
meaning to another, and that which does not so, is not worthy the name of a
speech; for the knowledge of things follows the knowledge of their Names.

Peter Severinus is to be blamed for this, whom the Paracelsians follow at this
day, as Paracelsus himself, he uses the word Anatomy often according to nature
and constitution of things; and sometimes he uses the same word for the
resolution and dissolving of things. Sometimes for the place, as when he says,
The seed is anatomized to the stones, that is flows to them. Also he uses the
word Tincture, to signify the propriety from whence the force of acting
proceeds, and repeats improperly almost in every leaf, the Tincture of the
Pleurisy, meaning the cause of the plourisie; and the invalid Tincture of
diseases, that is, the beginning of diseases.

So Paracelsus from whom Severinus had this trick, calls ancient things by new
Names, but improperly. For the Hippocratical (...), and Cheirionia of
Paracelsus are the same. (Rorollaceum) is the same with that which is weak, and
without power. Archaeus is the same with the natural spirit among Physicians
and Philosophers, as if Paracelsus and Severinus were such, as they ought to
leave the usual words, and use new unheard of expressions. Nor is Chemistry a
new thing, or first found out by Paracelsus, so that he was bound to give new
names unto things when he might well have used the language and words of the
old Chemists very properly. There is darkness sufficient in Nature, so that he
needed not to have increased it with monstrous words. It may be they spoke so
that they might not be understood, and to get the Name of being wise among the
ignorant, and that they might not easily be confuted by any.

The conclusion is as Galen says, That Speech is the Character of the mind,
and a monstrous speech is the sign of a monstrous mind. And therefore it is
intolerable to insinuate words into an ancient Discipline, and to change the
custom of an art, and to desire to bind up the art to such terms: rather let
the words be retained, which use has approved, which is to judge of the force
and form of speaking.

Let us come to the new way of teaching and knowing which they propound.
Hitherto reason and experience were the original of all knowledge, and
whatsoever agreed with them, was accounted true, and what differed from them,
was rejected. And therefore the Works of Hippocrates, Aristotle and Galen are
highly esteemed. But Paracelsus and his followers, propound all their opinions
without foundation, and begin a new way of knowing, In Praef. admonit. p. 3.
of which Crollius speaks at large. A Physician (says he) must have the light
of Nature and grace, from the internal and visible Man, an internal Angel, and
light of Nature And if you ask what this light of Nature is, he says, It is
the Firmament that gives man all things naturally. If it be asked again, Why
they who teach in the Universities, have not the light of Nature alike? He
answers nothing clearly, but flies to the light of grace, and speaks of
Paracelsus, That he was undoubtedly by the favor of Heaven made the Prince and
Monarch of all Physic, but shows not how.

Therefore false Chemistry has its peculiar Religion, for because they think
they have reformed or perfected all Philosophy and Physic, they stay not
there, but proceed to Divinity, and mix profane and holy things together: and
so, they bring in any absurdity, and dispute wonderfully of the Kingdom of the
Blessed, the Angels Miracles, Faith, and the Resurrection.

But to come to our purpose, natural all knowledge is so far true, as it agrees
with things, for things measure our knowledge, but not on the contrary, nor are
things so, because we think the so; but because they are so, we think them to
be so, when we know rightly: and this being not naturally in us, must come from
without. Before the Fall, Adam had that knowledge, but none has it since.
Therefore whatsoever men know, is either immediately revealed from God by
revelation, or learned another way. Since therefore the words of Paracelsus
cannot challeng to themselves a peculiar illumination, nor can we grant it;
they must needs learn as other men did, and do, and learn knowledge from things.

There is a twofold faculty of knowing in man, sense and understanding. Things
are presented by the external senses to the fancy, and by that to the
understanding. And the soul while it is in the body, understands not without a
phantasm, and the beginning of knowledge is from the senses; and we make
principles from those things that senses have comprehended without error. From
principles we go to things unknown, which may be concluded from them. This is
the ordinary way of knowing and learning, by which the unlearned learn from the
wise, and are instructed either by speech or books. Thus were all the
Paracelsians taught: for this cause Paracelsus took such long journies.
Crollius writes that he got his Chemistry by long travel, pains, and watchings,
and observations. This may be spoken of others of that gang.

Chap. 6. Of the Analogy of the great and little World.
THe whole Philosophy of Paracelsus is built upon the Analogy of the great and
little World which they extend largely. And they of Marpurg write the opinion
of the Chemists thus. The Chemists call Man a little World, Disp. 8.
not from a superficial likeness, but because he comprehends indeed, and
according to the species (though invisibly) all things in himself that are
contained in a visible form, in the three Kingdoms, Vegetal, Animal, and
Mineral, and in the whole World. This is gathered from diverse places in
Paracelsus his Works. Crollius in his Preface writes thus. A man is a circle
that contains in it all creatures. Man carries all things about him, the whole
Firmament, and all the Stars, and Planets. Man has the parts of all the world,
and there is nothing in it that is not really in him. He communicates with God
in his mind, with Angels in his reasonable soul, and his invisible starlike
body, and with the Stars with the same invisible body, and with the Elements by
his visible earthly body.

They say there are two bodies in every man, the one physical, elementary,
visible, and to be touched, made of earth, which the first man had from the
earth. Another invisible, insensible from the Stars. Crollius page 36. calls
this the Genius, Household God, shadow of Man, the little Man that the wise
knew, Evester, and I know not what. Severinus speaks warier of this, and
dissents not from it.

On the contrary the Aristotelians and the Galenists use the same words with a
diverse meaning. Disp. 3. contra Paracel.
And though man be called often a Microcosm, yet they render another reason,
why he is so called, as says Erastus. He has a visible Elementary body, a
Heavenly soul, that has power to grow and nourish as in Plants, sensible as in
Brutes, and the mind is Angelical. Also he is like the World in the position of
his members, and rise of them. For there are three parts of the great World,
The Elementary, Celestial, and Supercaelestial To these three, man answers by
the head, breast, and belly; the last, Religion answers the Elementary, in
which there is perpetual generation and corruption. By the breast in which the
fountain of vital heat, he answers to the Heavens, in which is the Sun, the
original of heat to the world. In his head, where the mind abides, and from
which all senses come; he is not only like the Celestial and Angelical world,
but in that particular the image of God.

Hence we may gather that the Analogy of the great and little World, In
labyrin. med errant.
is extended too large by the Chemists, because they make not an Analogy, but
an identity, or the same thing. For Paracelsus requires in a true Physician,
that he say this is a Sapphire in man, this is Quicksilver, this Cypress, this a
Walflower, but no Paracelsian ever showed this.

In this great world, not only are the Heavens and Elements, Metals and
Minerals, but Plants and Beasts. Therefore Paracelsus and Severinus are out,
saying, There is no phlegm, choler, or melancholy in the great World, therefore
not in Man, for humors are found in Beasts as in Men. Also I grant there are
many hidden properties in man, that agree with many natural things, not only in
general, but with their species or kinds, and also with their individuals, and
dissent also from them wonderfully. Hence comes the Sympathy and Antipathy of
many things with man's body. The Astrologers affirm that peculiar Stars have
agreement with the peculiar parts of our bodies. But the sublunary things are
better known, Piony hung about the neck, cures the Epilepsie, Cantharides hurt
the bladder, and no other part, the Sapphire agrees with the heart, also Bezoar
and Pearl, but the causes of this consent and dissent, and whence these hidden
qualities arise, are hard to be found. And it is more hard to find out
individuals in man, as Balm and Walflowers. If Paracelsus could have done it,
he had done well for profit; for as cold and heat, moisture and dryness are in
man, because the Elements are in him: and as the vital heat in the heart like
that in the Heavens, is sent to the whole body; therefore because they say the
properties of Balm and other plants are in man, let them show in what subject
they are, and where they lie.

They are also, because the knowledge of man is only from outward things; for
there is more in the species then in the genus, or general, and there is more
in man who is the end of Natural things, then in other Naturals, and what man
has in him, he has as a man.

Therefore the soul that loves truth, is not satisfied with similitudes only,
but desires solid demonstrations; and volves things from their own, not from
the principles of another. And as they who think they have demonstrative
arguments, are often deceived, much more may they who use only comparisons.
There is nothing so like, but in some part it is unlike. Moreover, the Chemists
know not the great World all over, how then can they bring us to the knowledge
of the little World thereby? If they know it perfectly, let them examine
themselves, if they can arrogate that unto themselves truly.

Chap. 7. Of the first Matter.
THe Modern Chemists call Aristotle's first matter a changing Protous, a lustful
Thais, and a deformed Monster.

Paracelsus calls the first Matter of all things a great Mystery, and says thus
of it. As a Child is born of its Mother, In Philosophia, ad Atheniens.
so are all things from the great Mystery; and this is the Mother of all
corruptible and mortal things. But these are but trifles being without reason,
and to be rejected: or they are taken from the Greeks, and involved with hard
Names.

That some Paracelsians are forgers, appears in that Paracelsus speaks
otherwise of the first Ma^ter then his followers, and both without reason. For
Paracelsus and Dornaeus say all created things are from the first Matter and
great Mystery stery. But the late Chemists say the first Matter was put into
rude mass which was before it.

By Mystery, Paracelsus means nothing but the Matter which invisibly contains
something in it self, or that out of which something comes that was not observed
to be in it. So Dung is the Mystery of Beetles, Milk of Cheese, and Butter and
Whey, Cheese of Worms or Mites. And to explain him. It is an Idea or Platonic
Soul of the World, or the Chaos which many Philosophers mentioned. For
Paracelsus his great Mystery is like the Idea of Plato, for Plato writes thus.
If this World be beautiful, In Timaeo.
and the Maker good, it is plain that it was made by an eternal and permanent
Pattern. Lib. de anima mundi.
And Paracelsus calls this Idea, The great uncreated Mystery, and says all
things came from it, and as it is uncreated, it agrees with Plato's Idea. Lib.
Philoso ad Athen.
In others it is the Chaos that ancient Philosophers mentioned. Therefore
Paracelsus told us no news, but to make us think he did, he gives strange
names. And he is out, when he calls the great Mystery uncreated; for it is
against Scripture and reason, that any thing should be uncreated besides God.

Therefore the Chemists ought not to inveigh against the first Matter of
Aristotle so much: let them take heed, lest they speak against the Creator of
all things, and dispraise that which he saw to be good. For in regard there is
a difference between the Matter and the form, and the generation, and
corruption, and transmutation of natural things cannot be denied, we cannot
deny the first Matter. The form only in the Elements is not the whole Essence;
nor is it from the form that a thing is of such a quantity: therefore there is
something in material things, that with the form makes up the whole, and
sustains the form, and in the Elements it is nothing but the first Matter. And
because all natural bodies are material, they must needs partake of the common
matter. Let them that deny the first Matter, consider that it is one thing to
be begotten, another to be created, another to be corrupted, another to be
reduced to nothing. Those are from something to something; these from nothing to
nothing. And because one thing is made of another, and the form is abolished
there must something remain, that is the subject of the change. This Plato and
Aristotle call the first Matter.

And though its Essence distinct from its form, cannot be comprehended by
sense, but only by reason, yet it is not a being only of reason, or a mere
figment, but a real being, and a substance or being distinct from an accident.
But it has of it self properly no existence, which is proper only to compound
bodies. But it is wholly a power not as to its being, which it has by its
Essence, but as to its being thus or thus: nor was it created of God as a
definite and distinct species of a natural thing, but it is rather created
together with natural things, and is as it were a Rudiment and Principle: nor
does it remain extant any time without a form, but lies under it.

Chap. 8. Of the Elements.
Such is the confusion of the Chemists in explaining of the Elements, that we
need an Oedipus to interpret. And which is worst, they go contrary to the old
Philosophers, that is, from known things to unknown, by showing of reasons. And
seem to command all men to believe what they say, as if they were Gods, and so
wise that they might determine what they please.

Paracelsus denies not the Elements, nor his Disciples, but they speak of them
otherwise then the old Philosophers do. They say the Elements are visible and
invisible. The visible are the fire, air, water, and earth, which they scarce
think worthy of the names of Elements, but call them dead bodies without
secrets, In Praefat. lib. meteor. and philosoph. Sag. lib. 1. Idea medi. c. 5.
and that they are but shells of the Nuc-kernel contained in them, having none
but relolling qualities.

But they say their Elements are invisible, and they are the essence, life and
act of all beings. Paracelsus calls them the Matrices that bear and nourish
fruit. Nor, say they, can generations be made from these Elements, but there
are seeds in them all, which at certain times do generate. So his Element is
whatsoever produces and nourishes fruit, or any created species. Severinus
divides the Elements into two Globes, to each he allows two Elements; to the
upper, the Firmament, Heaven, Fire and Air: to the lower, the Earth, Water. And
he says each Element produces its fruit. The fruits of the Firmament are
Manna, and Dew-waters, Minerals, Metals, Stones, and these Elements are not
mixed.

The modern Chemists follow Severinus, and Crollius says they are lighter, but
they are more dark. Thus he writes: In praefat. admonit.
Our visible Elements are only the bodies and houses of others and keep off
their force. The Earth is twofold, the outward visible, the inward invisible.
The outward is not an Element, but the body of the Element, and is Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury: but the Element of the Earth is Life and Spirit, in which
the Stars of the Earth lie, which by the body of the Earth produce all growing
things: and so of the rest. In which he follows the Doctrine of Paracelsus, but
differs from Severinus and other Chemists.

But many things here cannot be proved. First they abuse the word Element
contrary to the custom of all ages: for it properly signifies the least part of
that, from which the thing is made as from its matter. But their Elements are
only places, matrices, receptacles. And the place differs much from the matter.

The wiser Chemists have three principles that come from the Elements, or are
joined in the composing of natural bodies. But Paracelsus puts his principles
before the Elements, and from one mixture of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, and
makes Fire; In labyr. med. err.
from another Air, another Water and Earth, which no Philosophy can allow.

Others make the Elements vile and servile Bodies, in disgrace of God and
Nature, who made all very good. They serve God and man, and all sublunary
creatures, and so are to be commended; nor are they by that of no value, or
relolling as they say. For the Chemists know their actions, who can do nothing
with heat and cold.

They err also in making the Elements gross Bodies, though the Earth be. Also
they err in calling them visible, they may see Earth and Water, but when they
will see air or fire, I know not. They foolishly say they are dead, because
they never were alive. And it is worse that they say, The Earth is cursed.

As for their invisible Elements, Inexam, philoso.
we shall believe it when they prove any such hidden under these: for their
affirmations only cannot creat new beings. Libavius writes well of Severinus:
The good man says he speaks well, as if he came from the treasure of Nature,
and saw all open, but he proves nothing.

Severinus his Eloments being without bodies and dimensions, are not to be
allowed; for all learned men say the principles of bodies are corporeal. He
says they are not infinite, therefore they have dimensions and bounds. Nor
does it hang together, when he calls these incorporeal Elements, empty and
void, and allows to them contrariety and resistance, and explains their
invisible Nature. It may be that Paracelsus put one Element within another, for
the form and beginning of action, and original of all qualities: for when the
external visible Elements, which are inferior to their internal, have noble
qualities, their Elements must have more noble qualities and actions; but they
never showed us any yet. They say in general, only that they are vital and
strong to nourish the seed of generation.

Nor do they prove that seeds are without their species in the Elements as they
say. Nor did God put seeds in the Elements in the Creation, but into the
species of natural things in the Elements. Nor are seeds seen out of the
individuals in the Elements, but only in the individuals of their species. Nor
did God say in the Creation, Let the seeds of Plants be in the Elements, the
same reason is in Animals. All things have their seed in themselves, and
multiply by force of the Divine Word, and so the species are preserved.

And to that they say from Orpheus and Hippocrates, We know they spoke often
from the opinion of the Vulgar and themselves, and many things are attributed
to Hippocrates which were not his. And many absurdities are among the Ancients,
most from ignorance of the Creation. Erastus examines their Doctrine at large.

As for the first qualities which they value not but call relolling and dead.
It is foolish to fight against the experience of fense, by which it is plain,
that the first qualities have great force for generation and corruption of
natural things, and are as considerable as scent, savor and color.

While we desend the Elements, we must not adhere to them alone, as some,
Aristotle knew above the Elements, as in his Books of the Soul. And when he
says; 2. de generat. anim. c. 3.
The virtue and power of every soul partakes of another body, which is more
Divine then the Elements; and as the souls are more or less noble, so is the
Nature of that body. For there is in all seeds which makes them fruitful, which
is heat, not a fire, but a Spirit which is contained in the seed or froathy
body. And the Nature in that Spirit is like the Element of the Stars, etc.

Alexander Aphrodisaeus says many things are in Nature that are known only by
experience, In proemio probl.
and are called by Physicians secret proprieties, and accuses them that say
the causes of such effects come from the Elements or their qualities. Galen
accuses Pelops his Master, Lib. 11. de simpl. facult. Exercit. 101. sect. 14.
because he would bring all things to manifest qualities, and Scaliger says it
is great impudency to Cardan, thus. What evil genius has lead thee to say that
iron may draw the Loadstone only by mixture of Elements? Hence we see that
Galenists and Aristotelians are not drowned in the qualities of the Elements.

Also they knew the Sympathy and Antipathy of things, and we defend not them
that know nothing but the first qualities. For alteration or hurt from manifest
qualities, cannot kill a man so soon as poison. Secondly, the first qualities
have not very great force in a small quantity, but poison has: and a little
spittle of a mad Dog lies sometimes above six months in the body and then
offends grievously, 3. delo. art c. 7.
which elementary qualities cannot do; and so of other things, as the
Loadstone, and Purgers, and Antidotes. Nor do occult qualities arise from a
singular temper of things mixed unknown to us, Lib. 1. de plantis.
called Idiosynorasia, for occult qualities cannot arise from the first
qualities. For as Scaliger says: There is no savor or taste in any Element, as
it is an Element, nor can it be in a compound from the Elements. And if occult
qualities are from a singular mixture of Elements, may not life, laughter,
sense, and voluntary motion, and the soul come from the same? And to what they
say, the strange actions come from the form; though the qualities are the
instruments of forms, and are directed by them, yet they never loose their
strength or Nature, but only exercise them. If any more noble action be done,
it is from other faculties and qualities meeting. And while they are directed
by their forms, they act not beyond the strength of their species. As things
differ in essence, so they differ in operations and instruments. For heat, the
instrument of a vegetative soul, 2. de gene. ann. c. 1.
only heats; but chyle is made in the stomach, not from heat, but the
chyle-making faculty. So heat in the liver makes blood by sanguification: but
the soul never uses heat to cool, or moisture to heat and dry, or any thing to
act beyond its strength. And the first qualities by what unspeakable way soever
mixed, are not poison in venomous beasts, but the Nature of poison is from
another principle. And as diverse actions are from diverse forms, so Nature has
given diverse instruments to diverse forms, for diverse actions. Therefore we must
confess that the virtues in Natural things transcend the condition of the
Elements, and are to be ascribed, not to the Elements or matter of things, but
to the forms and their qualities.

Chap. 9. Of the Forms, Seeds, or Stars of Things.
THey say the Seeds or Stars of all things that are Natural, to be generated or
corrupted, are in the empty Elements, Abyss, Hippocrates Hells, Night of
Orpheus, Ilias, or Iliastrum, of Paracelsus; hence all things are bred, and all
actions of life and qualities came from them. And these seeds lie invisibly in
the Elements pure, and are defiled by the mixture of bodies; they call them
Seeds, Severinus c. 8.
because they perpetually produce fruit in their season.

And Stars, because they keep the laws of motion in all natural actions. And
Roots, because in them all the fruitfulness of the Tree of the World is
contained. And they say every Element has its seeds.

And though the inserior Elements have not such perfect individuals, yet they
have bodies to last for ever in their treasury, by which the perpertuity of the
seeds and species, is kept from destruction.

They say the Starrie Bodies of the lower Elements are twofold; some are purer,
like those celestial, and are not seen but by the industry of Artists: and as
the seeds differ in their offices and proprieties, so do the bodies.

All these are not new, but contain the vulgar Doctrine of forms, therefore
they only put new names to things known.

All famous Philosophers thought that the sorms of Natural things were a Divine
and unchangeable principle, Ideal Philos. cap. 6. and 8.
and an instrument or hand of God the Creator. Galen calls the wonderful works
of generation, a great Art or Wisdom, and the Christian Philosophers say they
have not their power from themselves, but their Creator at first when he said,
Let Earth bring forth the herbs bearing seed, and the tree in its kind bearing
fruit which has its seed. The form or soul of things, Star or Root, is the act
of a thing, and the cause why the matter is actually what it is, the
perfection, quiddity, and the cause of all motion in a body, and the image of a
Divine essence. Therefore the modern Chemists call the Souls (Stars) for as
Stars end their motions at certain times, so do the souls observe laws of
motion. Black Hellebore flourishes in Winter, the Daffodil in the beginning of
the Spring, Violets in March, Roses in May, the Elder in June, the Vine and
Hops in July, then they are ripe at a set time, and their motion ended, they
rest till the next year. And if we knew more of the Soul, we would declare it.
Though Severinus braggs he knows more, saying; I have laid the Rudiments of
this Nature, and it is not fit to deolare all. But he was ignorant without
doubt, as all men are.

Moreover Severinus says that qualities, numbers, conformation, and other
signatures come from these forms or seeds, and right, for while the inward form
makes her body, she makes also forms which Libavius needs not admire, for they
do not by their own force, but as they are instruments in the hand of the
Creator, who gives them this force, not immediately, but from his first
blessing.

Therefore Severinus was not the first that taught this, but Sealiger before
him, says, That qualities, quantities, number, and order, and situation are
from the Soul, and she made the body for her Temple. But for truth sake, let us
consider this opinion farther, and speak of the Original of Forms.

Of the Original of Forms.
THe Philosopers did not only admire generation, but labored to find out the
forming cause, which made the matter so perfect, and and greatness, number,
figure, and order, and other things in bodies that live.

Lib. de form. foetus.
Some despaired, Galen asks all the Philosophers, that if they have found any
truth, they should communicate it, for nothing was yet known that could
satisfy a learning Soul. The inquirers have diverse opinions. For though
neither the form, nor the matter is generated properly asunder, but the
copound; yet because generation cannot be without the form, it is demanded
whence that is.

Fernel says the form is sent from without and shows that strength is sent to
the seed with heat and spirit, 1. de abditis ter. causis.
which by force of the womb, and a gentle heat, prepare the matter, that the
form may be received; which done perfectly, the form comes from without by a
natural mevitable necessity, and from whence forms come: he says, That Heaven
brings forth many creatures and plants from no seed, Cap. 10.
and all the forms are contained in the form of Heaven in power, and Heaven
being as it were great with child of many forms, begets al things. But he
brings no probability to establish this his opinion. The Heavens help the
producing of things, and nourish them, as a remote cause external: but give not
the species to things, and if all forms should flow from Heaven, there would be
no univocal generation in inferior things, and the Trees and Beasts were only
the progeny of Heaven.

Secondly, it is a common opinion of the Peripateticks, that forms are raised
from the power of the matter, but if the matter should contain forms in it
self, and they came from it, the matter would be the most noble being, and a
more noble principle then the form, and forms would be scarce worthy of the
name of a principle.

Some say the matter does not actually contain the form, but there is in it a
disposition to a form, which being completed, then it is actual, what it was
before in power. And the Nature of seed is, that when there is an adequate or
fit efficient cause, it comes from power to be in act or form; and so this
power is only a certain determination, that this, and not that, should be made
of this matter. As for Example, a Chicken comes of an egg, not a Horse. But
whence is this act or form or substance? does that power and disposition, which
is a quality, turn into a substance? or is the form made of nothing, so that
the agent gives nothing of its essence unto it, Lib. de facult. ann. c. 11.
besides action? But both these are absurd and contrary to truth; namely,
either that the form is made of nothing or the act is produced from the matter,
and the substance brought forth from an accident. Therefore Zabarella writes
better. saying, Thae when living Creatures beget their like, they communicate
some of their own matter, and some of their own form; as they send forth
animated seed, having the same vital faculty which is in the begetter.

From this opinion, it follows that a Living creature begets not its like, and
forms do not multiply, which all the old Philophers affirm. For to a true
generation and production of the like essence, a matter is not sufficient with
a propensity to receive the form, for then the agent and the accident of heat
would confer more to generation then the begetter, because it makes the form
be in act, which by the begetter was only in power. And so it is not explained,
whence the substantial form of a thing, or the more Divine and chief part
comes.

And if we grant that every form will multiply, we need not fly to the
production of forms, from the power of the matter, for the species is preserved
by the multiplication.

So we must determine, that forms were made at the first Creation by a divine
benediction, when God said. Let the Earth bring forth fruit and herbs bearing
seed, etc. and increase and multiply by the begetter, by the help of the seed
as one light is from another kindled, and manifests it self, when it has a fit
matter and instruments fit for operations. But of this we have spoken at large
in Hypomn. 4. Cap. 6.

To return to our purpose. The modern Chemists call that the Star, Seed, and
Root of things, which the Philosophers and Physicians call forms and Souls; but
let me tell them, they make things more dark then plain, and bring Roots and
Seeds into Heaven without a cause. Yet they teach right, that these forms of
themselves are neither great, nor have distance of parts, nor bound to the
dimensions of the living creature, only they have quantity and dimensions from
the matter which they inform: as all turns of generation, and live it self,
force of action and power come from the forms.

Hence what they say of the progression of seeds into a clean Scene, may be
taken in a good sense. For they say that every seed takes a body and fit
qualities for its nature and use; as one to go upon a stage, takes a fit
garment to act in: it is right, so that mean seeds coming from the Individuals
of their species, not from Hell or the invisible Elements, nor can any
Peripatetick deny it, for a plant when it first grows from the seed has only
two small leaves, and not a perfect structure, but daily increases to
perfection, and so the soul of the plant makes it self a body agreeable to its
Nature.

Nor do we differ from them, when they say that hitherto many Philosophers have
ascribed all actions almost to the firmament only, and the change in the
Elements, is not from the stars born in them, but from the Stars in Heaven: and
that seminal virtues and fruitfulness come from heaven. Many Philosophers have
erred in this; first because they saw inferior things to be cherished with the
benign heat of Heaven, and raised up, therefore they thought to bring the
forms of things from Heaven, when indeed every thing has its form in it self
that can be multiplied. Secondly, because they observed the motions of the
Heavens to be most orderly; when they saw any thing orderly, and to return, and
certain periods beneath, they said the cause of this orderly motion was from
Heaven, when indeed that constancy and orderly change comes from the force of
things within.

But we differ from the Chemists in this, because they say that the Seeds and
Stars are in their invisible Elements, and dwell there as in a pure Country,
and rest blessedly, and then are sent into bodies. For the forms of Natural
things are no where, but in the individuals of their species, by which alone
they are preserved and propagated. Nor does Severinus speak right of this,
saying, That the Seeds in the Celestial Element produced the Individuals, that
were to endure for an age, as the Sun, Moon and Stars, for the most perfect
bodies have their Seeds. For we know from the Scripture that God created the
Lights and the Stars, as and placed them in Heaven, which cannot grow Plants do
out of the Earth.

And observe the modern Chemists abuse the Name of life, and extend it too
large, when they give life to the stars, and say they have vital seed, when
indeed nothing can truly be said to live, in which there appears no operation
of any soul, at lest of a vegetative or growing soul. They say, Metals,
Minerals, Gemms and Stones do live, but life in them is nothing but an Energy
or operation, which is in all things, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, Vitriol,
Arsenick, Metals, Gemms and Stones do live, because they have a scent, are to
be tasted, and have other powers. For they say, that which has no force or
efficacy is dead: but they are out, for to act, is more general then to live,
and none will say that a withered dead plant is alive, but that which has power
to act; otherwise by the opinion of Paracelsians, dead plants might be said to
be alive, and the same thing might be at the same time dead and alive.

Aristotle and his Followers are more sound, who say that Natural things are
either animated or vital, and not vital, and the principle of life is only the
soul, and where there is no soul, there is no life, and therefore the parts of
Plants and Animals being dead, though they have some force to act, yet can live
longer.

Concerning the life of Metals, Gemms, In lib. de subtilit. and apud Scalig.
exercit. 102.
and Stones, not only Chemists, but Cardan and others attribute life to Metals.
I say that they err commonly in that they take Metals, Minerals, and Gemms,
and Stones for mixed bodies, only and simply, and teach that they have nothing
in them besides the Elements mixed, and the form by which one Metal differs
from another, is only the form of mixture. For the effects of Minerals and
Metals show otherwise, especially the more noble, that they cannot be ascribed
only to the Elements. Moreover their peculiar colors, properties and shapes
show the same, for Crystal is of one figure, the Diamond of another; some
Jewels grow, and are congealed, which cannot be from only heat or cold, but
from an internal form, which makes its habitation as in Plants and Animals.

Therefore I shall not say that Metal, Gemms, and Stones live and are
nourished, for in their increase, parts only grow to parts, but they increase
not in all dimensions, yet every one has its specific form, besides the form
of mixture, out of which as in Vegetables and Animals the figure and qualities
arise. And I think it not absurd, to say that every form has its force to
multiply it self. For it is most certain, that the Veins of Alum, Vitriol and
Metals, being exhausted, after some time have been filled again; In ex trac.
quaest. Chymi. de la. Philo.
of which see John Conradus Gerhard Doctor of Physic.

Nor is it absurd in Minerals, to say that the Spirit that makes gold or
silver, will grow with a sit matter, and being gold or silver, and this gold and
silver before it grow solid, and be boiled out can send from it self gold and
silver-making spirits, which may turn a fit matter into gold or silver, and so
the Mines are kept still full.

But the doubt is, Lib. 1. de plantis.
whether they grow properly. Scaliger denies Stones to grow: yet some allow a
seed to Metals and Minerals, if not univocal or proper, yet Analogical or like.
This I take to be certain, that these forms or seeds were first created of God,
to be the principles of their kinds. And this seminal principle or spirit that
forms, Lib. de lapid. and genesis c. 1.
is in an hidden manner in Metals and Stones: see Anselme Boethius concerning
this.

Chap. 10. Of the Spirit and inbred Heat.
SEverinus and other modern Chemists mention a Natural Balsom, a vital Sulphur,
a vital Mummy, and they mean nothing but the inbred Spirit, and natural heat,
mentioned by Galen and the Peripateticks.

For this natural heat, the question is not concerning the bare heat or
quality, but the body; for Aristotle calls it a Body, others a Spirit. And
Galen says that the natural heat is the active Spirit: 3. de sympt. med. fac.
c. 9.
and it is better with Aristotle to call this substance a Spirit, then with the
Physicians (a Natural Heat) although it signifies not only a naked quality, but
a substance. Yet this appellation came from the perfectest animals, which are
hot when touched, and act by a heat that may be felt: for in plants there is
the same spirit, but it is not to be felt, though it is in the coldest weather
in them.

The word Spirit is used diversely, but here for a substance thin and subtle
that belongs to the constitution of animals, vegetables, and other things,
which the form or soul uses as a principle instrument to act by.

But whether is this Spirit of Aristoles of an elementary Nature? We deny not
that it is joined with elementary heat, so that it can scarce be found without
it, as the animal faculty is not found without the natural. But if you ask if
that Spirit have nothing in it but what is elementary, we answer with Fernel,
Variola, Schenkius, and others, that there is something spiritual in natural
things besides the Elements.

To prove this, take Scaligers arguments, Exercit. 307.
saying, Every form of a perfect mixture, though it be not a soul as in a
Diamond, has a fifth Nature distinct far from the four Elements. From whence
there is a strong argument against Alexander that made the soul to be composed
of the four Elements. There is in the powers of the soul which never was in the
powers of any Elements. But there is nothing contained in any thing that was
not actual in its principles: for the principles are the acts of those things
of which they are principles. But in the soul there is faculty to move forward,
backward, to the right or left, which is not in any Element; also there are
many powers in the soul which are not in the Elements.

This strong argument we apply thus to our purpose: There is that in the powers
of this Spirit or heat, which never was in the powers of any Elements, and the
powers are more excellent. Therefore this Spirit is not only from the Elements.
Another is from Aristotle, though he only applies it to Seeds. 2. De genesis any.
c. 3.
That which partakes of a Spirit, in which there is a Nature that answers in a
certain proportion to the heavenly heat, has a body better then the Elements.
But every soul has such a Spirit, therefore it partakes of a body better then
the Elements. For certainly there is a more divine virtue then the Elements, in
a body that is better then the Elements. For the virtue and the subject must
answer each other; hence it is that according to the noblenss and ignobleness
of the soul, the begetter of those virtues, and the subject body, are
different. And because this Spirit makes fruitful seeds, like the celestial
heat in proportion, I thus argue. A heat like the caelestial, is more divine
then an elementary heat, but the heat of the seed is such, therefore it is more
divine. I prove the major from the efficacy of both heats: That heat is more
like celestial heat, whose operation comes nearer to the efficacy of a
coeleitial heat: but the heat of the seed comes nearer the acting to the
celestial heat then the heat of the Elements; and therefore is more like the
celestial heat: Alchy. triumph. c. 9.
for the heat of the fire is not so sweet and benign, as that of the Heavens.
Therefore Libavius writes that neither the common Elements, nor the virtue of
them all, nor any conjunction of them, can effect that Rhubarb should purge, or
that a fly should not be bred. The heat of Animals is from the Elements, as it
is heat, but as it is fruitful, it is from a nobler cause. As for examples the
hammer makes a pot, not as it is iron, but as it has a power from the
Artificer.

If they say this heat is elementary, but it acts more powerfully in a mixed
body then when it is simple, we say that it cannot act beyond its strength in a
mixed body, and nothing can do what is not in its own nor in the Elements power
with which it is mixed. And if these noble actions may be from the mixture of
Elements and temper of the first qualities, why may not life, voluntary motion
sight, and all animal actions, and the Soul it self as Alexander says be
fetched from the same mixture?

We grant that heat does much as it is the instrument of the Soul, which alone
it cannot do, as it has diverse effects, as to make chyle in the Stomach, blood
in the Liver, but these actions are not to be attributed to heat alone, but to
the Soul that uses the heat. Yet it follows not hence that all actions which
are nobler then those of the Elements come from the Soul, for the dead parts of
beasts have some operations and force which cannot be reduced to the Elements,
Why then may there not be actions in living creatures and accidents which come
not from the Soul? what is common to the Soul with Scents, Savors, Colors?
Therefore do they that deny this heat to be like that of the Element of the
Stars, in vain fly to the Soul: For the diverse distinct qualities, affections
and actions in natural things are to be referred to the distinct principles from
whence they flow, for every species has its proper qualities and powers as
reason is in a man, heat, cold, moisture, dryness, come from the Elements, and
diverse temperaments that arise from them, also lightness and heaviness, and
what cannot be referred to these, comes from another principle.

To this belong the intentional qualities, as the visible species known to all,
and others like: hence are many hidden consents and dissents of things which
have their subjects, in which they are and from whence they come, as for
example, many cannot abide the presence of a Cat though she be in a Cupboard,
and they neither see nor hear her. So there are many hidden influences of
heavenly bodies, which affect a man, and yet they are not perceived either by
sight, hearing or scent, or any other sense, but only by the affect: we confess
that something does fly out of the Lodestone to the Iron by which it comes to
it, but sense cannot comprehend it.

And this is the chief foundation of natural magic (if there be any) some say
it is the perfection of Natural Philosophy which does wonders by the fit
application of Agents and Patients, others deny it. First, because Physic is a
Science, but this Magic is an operation, therefore it cannot be the end and
perfection of Natural Philosophy. Secondly, what is delivered by Baptista Porta
concerning Natural Magic are not above and besides the condition of Nature.
Prius Merand. de rer. praeuol. lib. 7. c. 2.
They think best of this, that say some Magic is from the Devil by an open and
express league; another which is honored of many as being Natural, which comes
from a silent bargain with the Devil, and to this belongs that which Plato
writes of in his Alcibiades: thus the Magic of Zoraster is in the worship of
Gods which were Devils. It was famous among the Egyptians and Chaldaeans, and
the Paracelsians at this day commend it highly. We deny not that Magic
Natural, which goes beyond the bounds of Nature, and which consists in a
Sympathy of Natural things.

But to the business. The conditions of Natural heat are different from those
of the Elementary: for in cold Animals and Plants cold in respect of their
elementary temper, the inbred Heat is the cause of all attraction, excretion,
increase, generation and life, this is not in the Elementary, and the heat
there is not contrary to the cold, for Plants and their seeds and roots in
winter and frost keep their strength, and often they grow under the Snow, and
if that heat were Elementary, it would be easily overcome of the cold.

Moreover, that Spirit and body like the Air is swifter and lighter then any
Element, and has fit heat to perform all actions agreeable to its kind, from
whence it has its denomination in Animals: v. 4. de mundo.
Also this body has great piercing force, and Aristotle calls it a Spirit.

Nor is it absurd for Spirits to pierce each other, for the Animal, Vital, and
Natural pass through each other without confusion; as may be observed in the
Eye, which lives, feels and fees, which actions are performed by diverse motions.

It is not hard to answer Zabarells argument concerning the heat like the Airy
Element. He thinks there are not two heats in a living creature, one Elementary
the other Vital, because two accidents cannot be in one subject, of the same
species distinct in number. First I deny that they are of the same species.
Secondly, that they are in the same subject, the Elementary heat has fire for
its subject, the vital or celestial has the spirit or body like the Element
of Stars. and if the subjects be mixed, there is nothing hinders that these two
heats should be united.

To conclude, In defensio Contra ano. renum. c. 23. Syntag. arca. Chymi. lib.
1. c. 22.
To know the nature of Spirits, read Quercetans History, where he shows that a
Rose or Marigold in a Glass sealed up by Hermas his Seal, may revive by their
Spirit, like the Resurrection. Libavius says the same which the haters of
Chemistry have not observed.

Chap. 11. Of the Principles of the Chemists.
ISaac Holland, Basil Valentine, and after them Paracelsus and Severinus make
three Principles of Chemistry, and also Quercetan, they are Salt, Sulphur and
Mercury, they give the names of the Species in which the faculties are most
flourishing, liquors of Mercury, oils of Sulphur, thicker bodies are called
Salt, not that they are the principles of things, but because the differences
of three substances of which all bodies are made, with the properties and
conditions are not explained more in any species of Nature. And being there are
three orders of the bodies of the lower world, Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals. Ideae Phil. c. 8.
Severinus shows that these three principles are to be found in every
individual of them. And they say a Physician must resolve all bodies into these
principles, and all the properties of all bodies are found either in the Salt,
Sulphur, or Mercury: nor do they plainly declare their offices in the
constitution of things. Severine says Salt gives the consistence of solidity
and coagulation, Sulphur with his oil tempers the congelation of the Salt. And
Mercury by dewing it with a fluid substance, makes the mixture more easy.

Quercetan says the diverse taste is from Salts, Lib. de intervis rerum li
quaturis.
sent from Sulphur, and color from both, especially from Mercury. And Hermes
called these three, the Spirit, Soul, and Body; Mercury the Spirit, Sulphur the
Soul, Salt the Body.

Begwin says, Tyroci. Chym. lib. 1. c. 2.
falt is the bond of the other bodies, that Mercury and Sulphur fly not away.
Sulphur is like the Sun, digests, concocts, nourishes, generateth, pleases
the scent, consumes superfluities in the body, attracts. That Mercury is the
Spirit of the World from the great Mystery: so they are not fixed in delivering
their principle, and explain not what they are, nor distinguish them, for they
say they are in each other, as Sulphur and Mercury in Salt, in Mercury Salt and
Sulphur, in Sulphur Salt, Mercury.

They call these Vital Principles, because they give strength, faculty and
power to things, and are the causes of actions. They call them also formal
Principles, because they give power of action to things, and open the hidden
ways of action, and supply the explication of occult qualities.

Now are there such principles; How, and of what things are they principles? In
labyrin. med. errant.
I reject their opinion, because they say they were before the Elements and
Heaven is made of them. For they have not proved them to be the principles of
things subject to generation and resolution.

The Learned modern Chemists dare not defend this, but say the Elements were
before these principles in order of natural bodies. Therefore let us see
whether there are other principles besides the Elements, of natural sublunary
bodies, Metals, Minerals, Gemms, Stones, Flants, and Animals? I say Chemical
principles were not before the Elements as simple bodies, but either mixed or
peculiar natures made at the first Creation, with other kinds of natural
things, as the principles of their kind, which among themselves and mixed with
the Elements, give convenient matter to other natural things subject to
generation and corruption, as Metals, Minerals, Gems, Stones, Plants and
Animals.

When I say they were mixed, I deny not the concurrence of other Elements to
their constitution: as resolving of them does prove to the Chemists. Moreover,
I suppose that they have their peculiar forms from God in the first Creation,
as was given to other kinds of natural things as Scaliger says: Exercit. 138.
s. 20.
The form of every perfectly mixed body, though it be not a Soul, as in a
Diamond, is of a fifth Nature, and far differing from the four Elements. And I
suppose that from these diversely mixed, by concurrence of the Elements, the
diverse bodies of natural things are made, and that the diverse qualities and
accidents come immediately from the same, as from their first and proper
subjects, which others in vain bring from the Elements only: for there is no
force in the Elements to produce scents, savors and colors. And if there be
any, it is that Spirit which Aristotle says is like the Element of the Stars.

And let none think that there is a matter required for mixture from the
regions of the four Elements: for when God created the Elements, he mixed them
by his Word, and gave them their peculiar forms, and seminal, and essential
reasons, like those of Heaven, and so he keeps on still the course of Nature by
propagation of the species in the Individuals. And now since the Creation those
principles are to be seen in the Water and the Earth from diverse corruptions.

For as the order in Nature is that inferior things should serve the superior,
so it is in bodies the Elements are first: thence Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, or
the first mixture by what Name soever termed; which though made of Elements,
yet have they forms by which they differ, that arise not from the forms of the
Elements mixed together, but from the first Creation. Then from these being
diversely mixed, by concurrence of the Elements, Minerals, Metals, Stones, and
Gemms, Plants, and Animals receive their matter and bodies; in which by the
form of every species, they are diversely bounded: as we see Salt drawn from the
Earth, may be taken out of the Plants that drew it, and Creatures feeding upon
plants, are changed, but never plainly change their Nature.

And this is not against the Ancients, though these names are not mentioned, it
is sufficient that the thing is still extant, and we may put new names to things
newly known, because words are at men's disposing.

Hippocrates says, Lib. de nathuma.
That Plants drew not only heat and cold, moisture and dryness, or that which
was mixed of them, but whatsoever was in the Earth agreeable to their Nature,
whether four or bitter, sweet or salt. And man is nourished of them, and every
living creature also, and therefore they are in man and them, and natural
bodies are made of them being mixed; and when they are well tempered together,
they cannot be seen, nor be troublesome to man. But when they are not well
tempered, they offend: he writes thus. Heat alone is not the cause of a
disease, Hippocr. lib de veceri medici.
but heat and bitterness, or heat and sharpness, or heat and saltness, and many
more are the causes of diseases. Hence the cure of pestilent, malignant and
venomous diseases is diverse, and hence are the diverse Symptoms in malignant
and pestilent Fevers and constitutions which cannot be from only putrefaction
or distemper.

And though Hippocrates names not plainly Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, yet the
Chemists call them four, bitter and salt.

But by what arguments we may prove there are such Principles? First,
wheresoever the same affects and qualities are in many, they must be in them by
some common principle, as all things are heavy by reason of the earth, and hot
by reason of the fire: but colors, scents savors and the like, are in
Minerals, Metals Stones, Jewels and Plants Therefore they are in them by some
common principle and subject but the Elements are not such a principle because
they have no power to produce such qualities. Therefore we must search for some
other principles. And they are deceived who think to prove colors, scents and
savors to come from the Elements.

The next is the argument of Galen and Aristotle. Arist. 3. de coel. c. 3. Gal.
lib. 2. de ele. c 3.
Natural bodies are made of such things as they are resolved into, but they are
resolved into those three principles, therefore they are made of them. It is
evident that Salt is in all things, and may be drawn from them, as from Plants
and Animals. And though Chemists say that Metals are made only of Sulphur and
Mercury, yet they speak of the next principles, as Physicians when they say
that seed and blood are the principles of man's body, deny not the four
Elements. And he that knows Metals right, and can make Crystals of the^, may
easily find Salt in them. And though all mixed bodies taste not Salt, yet it
does not thence follow that there is no salt in them: nor can we deny fire to
be in all mixtures, though all things are not felt to be hot: nor is this Salt
to be accounted earth, because Salt is hot and dry and clensing, but earth is
cold and dry.

What I have said of Salt, may be said of Sulphur, it is plain to be found not
only in Plants, In praesat. in Georg. Agricolam
but Metals and Minerals, and as Cornelius Martin writes, Sulphur is in all
Metals except gold, I mean combustible Sulphur that will flame and smell as the
ordinary Brimstone. Nor are they bound to show the pure principles, it is
enough to show the bodies in which they excel.

The forms of Chemical Elements or Principles do not their duty then, Zabarel.
de generat. and interm. c. 2.
but since forms are made for a more active composition, the superiors are made
subject, and are instead of matter, and are called hot or dry, as they are
mixed by the predominate Element. So from these principles are four, salt,
combustible and scented things, and when a mixed body is corrupted, some parts
turn to fire, earth and air, others into Salt, others into Sulphur, and to be
plain and short, the Chemical principles are in other mixtures, as the Elements
are in them, and are so brought forth: now in the next Chapter we shall show how
Elements are in mixed bodies: but for the matter in hand, I am of their side
that hold the Elements are whole in mixed bodies according to their forms; and
when a mixed body is resolved again into the Elements, the Elements return not
again in specie or kind, but in number, I shall stand to this, till I am
convinced by solid reason.

Nor is the same quantity of Salt or Sulphur drawn by the same fire out of any
body, for much Salt is drawn from Wormwood, Fennel, Vine-branches, but very
little from the Gourd or Cowcumber.

But they object that the resolution is artificial not natural, and the axiom
that all things are made of such things as they are resolved into, is meant of
natural, not artificial resolution. But we deny that Chemical resolutions are
not natural, if we consider the immediate agent though the Artificer be joined,
for they are from heat and fire, which are natural causes; as for example: When
a plant is burnt to make Salt, the action is plainly natural, not in respect of
the plant which is destroyed, but in respect of the agent. When the spirit of
Wine is raised by heat, the action is as natural as when the same spirit is
sent to the brain by the heat of the stomach and liver, or when a thing is
evaporated by the heat of the Sun. Therefore we say, the thing made by the
Chemists is natural in its being, the action of heat by which it is made is
natural, and the motion of the thing is natural. But it is artificial in
respect of the Chemists putting it into a vessel, and applying fire to it: nor
is it any otherwise artificial then health, which is recovered by the help of a
Physician.

The use of Chemical principles is, that the proprieties which are in mixed
bodies, and cannot be immediately showed from the Elements, may be showed from
them, as the next and proper principles; as it is plain in the searching out of
the faculties of Medicines. For though Erastus thinks that all these may be
fetched from the Elements, he proves it not; let them tell me why, when Opiats
are distilled, the vapors cause sleep, so that the servants are many times
sound asleep, other vapors do not the same? Why does the fume of Lead and
Quicksilver corrode gold, not the fume of Vitriol and other things? Why does
only a phlegm distill from spirit of Vitriol and sealed Earth? These questions
cannot be answered without the Principles of the Chemists, only from the
Doctrine of the Elements and Meteors.

Nor do I think all the proprieties of bodies are to be reduced to the Chemical
principles, for some come from nobler forms, as I showed. Nor am I of opinion
in all things, and I dispute not here whether the force of purging be from
Salt; only in general I say some properties are from Salt, others from Sulphur,
and in what mixture soever such a property is found, there you must seek for
the principle, hence arise the profitable separations of Chemists.

But note, these common Principles as such, are not proper and next principles
of particular affects; nor is force of purging from Salt, nor is a narcotick
force from Sulphur as Sulphur, for then all Salts would purge, and all Sulphur
would be narcotick. But these principles as they are common, are only the
principles of common affects, but the special affects come from determinate
principles.

So we have showed in general, that besides the Elements, there are other
principles of mixed things, nor is the generation made immediately from the
Elements, but there are other bodies which as the first subjects, some
qualities do flow, which cannot come from the Elements, which Hippocrates
acknowledged, and the Chemists have given them names: and I care not what the
names are, so the thing be true.

But as for the species, number and nature of particulars, it is not clear, I
will pin my self upon no man's sleeve, but give my judgment, not to dissent, but
consent with the Aristotelians and Galenists, if it may be.

The three Principles are, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, I Will give my judgment of
every one. First for Salt, Lib. 31. hist. not. c. 7.
it is so plainly in every natural body, that Pliny says, Salt is a necessary
Element, only consider the growth of Plants, what makes them fruitful and
flourish: the chief cause is piss which has much Salt, and consider that there
is no art used.

As for the properties of Salt. It is first a thing to be tasted, and all
things to be tasted are so from Salt; nor is Kitchin-salt the only Salt, but
that in Mustard, Rhadish, Garlic, Vinegar, Choler, Alum, Vitriol, and the
like. And because taste and feeling are senses united, and have objects alike,
acrimony is ascribed also to Salt, and that which twitcheth the feeling is
Salt. Hence there is in smoke, Radishes, Watercresses, Onions, and the like
force to twitch the eyes from the volatile Salt in them, Secondly, Salt will
melt in moisture, and be hard in a dry place which earth will not, and though
earth dissolve in water, yet it melts not in it as Salt, much less will earth
melt in a moist air as Salt will. Thirdly, from Salt is the coagulation of all
things, the Crystal and Diamond are hard from Salt, the Metals are strong, also
Bones, Herbs, and Trees consist by it.

Also the stone in the bladder and kidneys grow together from Salt. The
Chemists prove this by many things in the Sea that grow, as Coral and Waters
that make stones, the growing of Vitriol and Alum, and other Salts in the
water. Moreover they who have the stone, piss like snot or the white of an egg,
which taken into a clout, turns to a stone, and it has much Salt, because it
is sharp and corroding, and causes pain in pissing, the cause of these cannot
be heat, cold, or dryness. For stones bred in the bladder in cold and
membranous parts, and in infants in whom there is no excess of heat, but
manifest signs of crudity. And how can a stone-making juice be caused of heat
in a cold Well that turns, sticks into stones? Nor can cold be the cause,
because stones are found in the arteries of the heart, and in the heart and
lungs. Nor are these causes by accident, or by drying up the moisture; for in
some waters things turn to stone, of which Anshelme Boethius speaks. Lib. 2. de
gemmis c. 300.
Also stones breed in the kidneys and bladder, where moisture is never wanting,
and there can be no such drying.

Hence they think it in vain to seek for the cause of concretion in external
causes, but to consider the internal matter and disposition, by which stones
are made hard: nor are they against Philosophy.

I shall deliver my opinion in short. First there are many equivocations by
which they are bafled in the causes of coagulation and concretion, for
concretion and coagulation are not the same, for juyces and gums, and water,
and many other things may be concreted, as ice by cold, and clay by the Sun.
There is Crystal and glass, and solid Metal, but they are not concreted from
the same cause; nor is water or Crystal hard or concreted from the same cause.
To speak distinctly, the question is not here of things which are coagulated,
and made hard only by dryness, after the moisture is consumed, by which they
were soft before, or by nature were concreted, and made fluid by heat, and then
concreted again by cold. But in regard many things congeal in moisture, and
grow together hard, whose cause is neither heat nor cold nor dryness, we must
think of another internal cause.

Two kinds of concretion are to be here considered, which are when no part of
the matter is taken away, or any other added, but the whole taking its
consistence and concrescence from moisture, which we want fit words to
distinguish. The Chemists call one of these by the Highdutch word Schiessen:
this coagulation is properly of Salts, as Vitriol, Alum, Niter; Salts of
Herbs, come from a moisture to a consistence. This is of Salt properly, and
they by nature tend to this by their form. But being there is one form by
nature of Niter, another of Vitriol, another of Alum, another of common Salt.
Every Salt according to its form and proper spirit, coagulateth and grows
together in this or that figure, so do Gemms concrete in certain figures, Lib.
2. demasc. prima. v. 9.
for every form makes bounds to the bigness and quantity and sigure, as Zabarel
shows.

Another sort of concretion is called Lapidescentia or turning to stone, the
next and adequate cause of this, is not the Elements, nor the principles of
Chemistry only, but a stone making juice or spirit, which is not without Salt,
and contains more then Salt, as the order of nature is, to go from simples to
things more compound. This is in all Jewels and Stones, but according to their
special forms. We said it was a spirit and a juice, but the chief force is in
the spirit, and the juice has it from the spirit, because that stone-makeing
force is found in the spirit without the juice.

As for the differences of Salts, they are altered in diverse Plants and
Animals, as in corruption of humors there are diverse differences. There is Salt
in Vitriol, Alum, Sal Armoniack, Iron. There is a volatile Salt in a Nettle,
Arsmart, Cokow-pints, small Celandine, Mustard. There is a salt in humors that
causes the Itch, Scab, Cancer, and other corroding Ulcers. There are made
Salts, as Borax, Sal Armoniack, and the like.

Sulphur is another Principle of the Chemists, which is properly to burn, and
nothing burns without it. The Elements of themselves are not inflamed, and if
they seem to burn, it is from the sulphurous vapors in them. Therefore Sulphur
is the first scented thing, and other things are smelt by their Sulphur, many
things that are very sweet, being whole, scent not, but when they are burnt or
bruised. Hence it is that Sulphur and Fats scent not much but when they are
burnt or smoke.

Some join scents and savors in a subject, and say the scent is of the savory
part, but experience shows otherwise; for there are many most savory, and sharp
things which have little or no scent as Arsenick, Sublimate, Mercury, and other
corroding Minerals that have little or no scent.

Some impute colors to Sulphur, and more probably then to Salt, but in colors
the matter is more difficult. Aristotle's Interpreters that bring colors from
the mixture of the Elements, proye nothing. Therefore let the principle of
colors be Sulphur, or as Anshelme Boethius says, God himself who gives colors
as well as shape to Jewels, and the like, for they come from the proper
seminary of every thing.

Common Sulphur, Petroleum or Naphtha, Amber and Sea-coal have much Sulphur.
Gums and Rosins of fat Trees, as Pine, Fir tree, Pitch, Oil, and the like. Fats
of Beasts, of which see Libavius. Part. 3. singular.
He uses the word Bitumen generally, as the Chemists use Sulphur.

The third Principle is Mercury sometimes taken for Quicksilver, I Would. Philos. c.
8.
sometimes for a Principle Salt and Sulphur. Severinus says it is added to the
other Principles, that by daily moistning of them, to nourish them from decay
by often action. In defens. contra an^o. c. 14. In Tyrocin Chymico.
Quercetan says it is a liquor sharp and penetrable, pure and aetherial, and
so says Beguin. But they agree not, therefore Libavius writes that the modern
Chemists describe Salt. Sulphur and Mercury by Notes, but when we ask what it
is, they consound all, and say that Salt is in Sulphur and Mercury, In exami.
Philoso. vit.
and Sulphur and Mercury in Salt, and Mercury and Salt in Sulphur, and then he
gives this definition. Mercury is an essential Liquor drawn by the Chemists
from a mixed body after the elementary impurities are separated, opposite to
the Sulphur and Salt of the same mixed body.

To speak my mind, if there be any such Mercury, it is a spiriful Liquor or
Spirit, which can scarce be separated from subtle Sulphur and volatile Salt to
be seen by it self: and though it be not seen, it is no matter, for pure fire
is not seen, nor air, nor the spirit in Animals, which are true parts of the
Nature of things, and the best. Such things (says Scaliger) deceive the vulgar
eyes, but wise men see them. But I appeal to the Learned, whether I be absurd
in making these principles mixed with the Elements, the common matter for the
habitation of forms of the Natural bodies.

To conclude Metals, Minerals, Stones, and Gemms, and Plants are not simply
mixed, and have not only their forms from the forms of the Elements, much less
from a double exhalation which makes the next matter of Meteors, because they
have better actions, then are from Elementary qualities and a double
exhalation. But the Elements give them matter with the chemical. Principles,
and may hence be better by the causes of many things, then from the doctrine of
Meteors. We can clearly show Salt and Sulphur from a Chemical separation,
though they are not manifest before.

We desire to know more of Mercury, not of the Metal, but of the Principle.
Aristotle attributes all to a Spirit, which the Chemists do to Mercury, for
Quercetan and Beguin call it a substance, or body to be passed through
penetrated, ethereal, pure, subtle, quickening, and the next instrument of the
form, and call it the Spirit of ancient Hermes.

The Chemists call that vital Sulphur, which Aristotle calls the Natural heat,
and describe their Mercury as that it is in the Natural heat. And this Sulphur
and Mercury are so united in Nature, that they cannot well be separated, but
when the Sulphur is on fire, Mercury flies away. Also the actions from the
whole substance, and the hidden qualities are attributed to this Spirit, as to
the proper subject; this in poisons is a venomous spirit, in purges a purging
spirit.

As for the original of these Principles, some think them to be the first
mixtures: others to be peculiar natures in the first Creation concreted with
other species of natural things, to be of the Nature of the Elements. He that
will embrace the first opinion, must hold that these bodies have nobler forms,
by which they are more noble then the Elements, and from which other qualities
flow that are not in the Elements: Exercit. 307. sect. 20.
so that is true of Scaliger. Every form of any perfect mixture, though it be
not a soul, is of a fifth Nature far different from the four Elements. For God
created forms and substances like that of Heaven, and put them into natutal
bodies. These opinions whether they be mine, or other learned men, do no whit
diminish the splendour of Aristotelean Philosophy, and Galenical Physic, for he
that supplies a defect, overthrows not the former.

Chap. 12. Of Generation and Mixture.
THe former Principles being granted, the modern Chemists lay down Generation
and Mixture, thus. They place the ground of generation in seeds, and define
generation thus. It is the progression of seeds from their fountains and
abyss, and vital Principles, into this scene of the world, by which from
invisible things they become visible, and produce all the ornaments of all
bodies; and by this renovation of individuals, they preserve the perpetuity of
all species or kinds. Ideae Philos. cap. 8.
And they add many things out of Severinus; as that seeds have this power, that
they acquire to themselves things consentaneous or agreeable, and that they are
not in every subject, but in such a hot, cold, moist, or dry body, or this or
that Salt, Sulphur or Mercury. For the confirmation of which they quote
Hippocrates, Lib. 1. de diaetta.
saying: That nothing wholly perishes, nor does any thing arise that was not
before, etc. And after he says thus, Light goes, and is transmuted into
Jupiter, darkness into hell, and light into hell, and darkness into Jupiter,
etc.

For say they, bodies being adorned with the signatures of seeds, and clothed
with comeliness, represent the image of light; but when they wither and loose
the vigor of their seeds, they are covered with darkness, and therefore are
called dark. And Severinus says, That Operations are by mechanic Spirits,
which being not armed with knowledge, are dispersed into naked vapors and smoke.

They assign three kinds of generation to the inferior globe, namely of
Animals, Vegetables and Minerals. They say that in Animals there is a seminal
matter, in the animal Balsom, the vital Sulphur, in the vital Spirit and Mummy,
which is always in man. Perfect creatures beget, and are begotten only of
their own proper seeds. Others from seed and putrefaction, as Mice. But Plants
have a thicker body, more slimy, in respect of the seed of Animals, and in them
some parts resemble the testicles or stones, by which the seed is prepared more
perfect, and more safely kept, and such parts by that do propagate the seminal
matter. Hence it is that some plants propagate by their seed, others by their
roots, others by other ways.

They make the generation of Minerals much different from the former. Their
seeds and speciesflourish in the seminal reasons of the matter, and are kept in
the Night of Orpheus, and the Hell of Hippocrates, or the Iliastrum of
Paracelsus, and there they expect their fate which is destinated, and at times
appointed, they enter into the world with vital Principles and mechanic
Spirits. They deny not life to be in Minerals, but prove it to be from the
times of maturity, from the fixed Periods of Paroxisms, by orderly running of
the veins from the agreeable compositions of their bodies, from their taste and
color. Also they acknowledge no greater art in living forms, then what is in
the variety of their color, scent and taste, and that the color of a Sapphire,
and hardness of a Diamond are as wonderful as the organs of a Bat.

As for the upper Globe, there are in it certain distinct generations. For in
the Celestial Elements (they say) there are perfect Individuals that last with
admirable vigor. And that they flourish with abundance of vital spirit, which
being fermented to a due exaltation and maturity, go into the air with a
spiritual invisible, but abundant fertility; and having acquired bodies as fit
garments, they produce their fruits.

They say some Stars are made to produce winds, some Eastern, some Western,
some Southern, some Northern. And these Stars have not only the first
qualities, but other virtues and properties. And that there are Stars for rain,
hail, snow, lightning, fair weather, and for other Meteors. That every month
the Moon by a new generation produces fruits, and that there are vital
principles of generation in the air, that at appointed times are hot with the
dispensation of their fruits.

They deny that the change of times are from the lower or higher position of
the Sun, or from the obliquity of its beams, or from the direct influence of
them: but they say some Stars are for Summer, others for Winter. The Sun is the
chief Summer star, but if it should be without the rest, there would be a
perpetual Winter. That the Moon is the chief Winter-star, and that the
Summer-stars do spring up as plants in the Spring, and die again. And that as
Trees are not every year alike fruitful, In lib. Meteo.
so those Stars are sometimes barren, sometimes fertile. Paracelsus makes the
like generation of Winds, Rain, Snow, Lightning, Thunder, the Rainbow, and the
Morning, etc.

This is their opinion of generation, and they make a mixture accordingly: they
say the mover of mixture is a vital Principle, adorned with Knowledge by the
power of which, the Divine offices of mixture are performed. Severinus.


They say that Transplantation is an accident of generation, as the faculty of
the seed is strong or weak, and as the spirits of seeds are subject. That
transplantations are seldom in perfect creatures, and not in any but such as
are alike in seed and Nature; as Wolves and Dogs may mingle. Horses and Asses:
but in such as the difference of Sexes is not apparent, there are usual
Transplantations. They say that in Vegetables and Minerals, Transplantations
are companions of generation; so Calamints turns into Mints, because the seed
is equivocal: so there is the form of Darnel in Wheat, but as a servant or
companion, which if it get outward, aid will turn Master, and bring in its own
signatures. See Severinus for more of this.

Of all these we thus think. When they say that generation is the progression
of seeds from their fountain and abyss into the stage of the World, they tell
us no news, for it is the opinion of the most ancient Greeks, not only of
Hippocrates but of Hermes Tresmegistus, Dionysius, Aropagita, Apollonius,
Thyaneus. And this error came from their ignorance of the Worlds Creation, from
which every thing has its Nature and Being. Therefore they supposed that all
things came forth into light from night, hell, and an invisible abyss, and
returned thither again. But the Scripture teaches otherwise, Genesis 1.
for God said, Let the Earth bring forth fruit. The herb that brings seed, and
the Tree fruit after their kind, and it was so. Let the Water bring forth
living creeping things, and let the Birds fly over the Earth in the air. Let
the Earth produce Creatures after their kinds, beasts and creeping things, and
it was so. And that God blessed the Creation, saying: Increase and multiply.
Hence it appears that God by his power created the kinds of all natural things,
and gave them their forms and bodies. He that made the Elements, mixed them
according to his Wisdom, and joined them with those close Principles. Thus all
things are multiplied by the divine blessing, and preserved to this time, so
that the species of Plants and all living Creatures are only in their
Individuals. God at the Creation gave forms to all things, and made them not of
the Elements, as some modern Writers say, that know nothing but the Elements.

Therefore the forms of things come not from an abyss, and take fit bodies by
their Mechanic spirits, but God in the Creation gave every thing its form, In
examine Philo. vit. part. 2. contra Paracel.
which multiply by his blessing. The other opinions are bawbles, like the gate
by which Aeneas came from Hell. Libavius and Erastus have written at large
against them.

What they say of the superior Globe, and its fruits, and generations, is
absurd and ridiculous, against both reason and experience, the Stories of
Lucian are more probable; and Erastus says right of Paracelsus. The Principle
upon which all his Doctrine of Meteors stands, besides its profaneness against
Scriptures, is so foolish and simple, absurd and ridiculous, and false, that a
man cannot without fear of disgrace, rehearse them, or speak of the confutation
of them among wise men.

What they say of the generation of Plants and Animals, may agree with
Aristotle, if they would allow that the species came not from an abyss or
Hippocrates his Hell, but the propagation came from seeds; as that corporal
things are made of incorporeal, and incorporeal of corporal. For they differ
rather in words then sense from Aristotle and Galen, because spirits sometimes
are condensed into bodies, and bodies are turned into spirits, when vital and
animal spirits are made of blood.

Their Doctrine of Transplantation, is not to be disallowed altogether, for it
is probable by many things in Nature, that the same form may be in a diverse
body, or many forms, may be in one seed, but subordinate, so that one be chief,
the other servants, as appears in the silkworm: but every worm does not breed
from every plant and the forms of such worms are subordinate to the forms of
the Plants and other Animals. Exercit. 59. sect. 2. and exer. 195.
Scaliger and others show what worms are from such and such Plants.

I spoke in my Hypomnema Chap. 5.8. of Scotch Geese, and also of the
degenerating of Plants into other; for it is certain that they are changed, but
not every one into any: if that be observed, there may be a cause given of many
generations.

Some fly to an equivocal generation and putrefaction, therefore it is
questionable whether there be any generation truly equivocal, without any seed?
Therefore consider that for the propagation of all Plants and Animals, there is
requisite an inbred matter rightly disposed, by which the form may propagate it
self, but this preparation of matter is greater in some then others. Most of
the perfect Animals are generated from the womb by the mixture of the male and
female seed. Others lay eggs from which by heat external, the chickens are
hatched. In ignobler Creatures and Plants, generation is not tied to such
straight conditions. Some Plants only by seeds sown in the earth do grow;
others by the roots only planted, others both ways, others by slips and
siences. In some the seminal humor is throughout the whole plant, so that any
branch or root being taken off, and set in the earth, they will grow as Willows
and Vines. I heard from a credible person that from the foam of a mad Dog
cleaving to a garment, there arose little creatures like Dogs. For this seminal
principle of ignoble things, lies long hidden in a tough clammy matter, and
resists external injuries and impressions, and at length gets up and acts.
Let this seed be called Analogical, if not Univocal, so long as the thing
generated be not from putrefaction only.

Moreover, it is not against reason and experience altogether that some seeds
are ambiguous, and have many forms, so that one be chief, the other
subservient, or that some seeds are disposed to diverse forms, as appears in
silkworms.

Therefore Averroes and his Disciples speak against reason, saying that Animals
from putrefaction, are different in species, from those that are from seed, for
they are not wholly destitute of seed, nor can putrefaction alone produce any
creature.

Since then no generation is without mixture, things do not arise from a
contention between the Elements, but in the first Creation every thing received
from God, not only its proper form, but also a body fitted thereunto, and they
keep this their Nature by the will and blessing of the Creator to the last.
Therefore in the propagation of things, a specific form is required, which the
concourse of Elements, and that rash mixture cannot make. Therefore the form
and soul is the architect, and the first mover of every thing in mixture is
that soul and form. The common operator and instrument of Nature to nourish the
virtues of things, is the innate and imbred heat and spirit: but the operator
of mixture is the Divine command which was given to the Elements in the
Creation, namely that they should agree exactly among themselves for the
generation of every particular, as Erastus says, but he had said better, if he
had said that convenient matter had been attracted (from the Divine command) by
the vegetative soul of every creature: for since natural things are not only
first produced in the Creation, but still mixed by the vicissitudes of
generation and corruption, he should have added that still in generation of
things, all things are directed by the form, not by the mixture of Elements
that agree for the constitution of every thing. For the forms are the Divine
and unchangeable Principle, that determines all the actions and passions of
natural things, and they are as the instrument or hand of the wise Creator that
gave them that efficacy at the first Creation, then which nothing can be more
wonderful.

The next thing to be considered, is whether always in the generation of
things, there be a resolution to the first Elements, so that nothing is mixed
but the Elements? And whether no sour, salt or bitter things be mixed? Lib. de
prisca medicina.
Hippocrates writes, That a salt and sharp humor is made thick by concoction
and mixture. And this is so certain, that even Vegetables partake of the Nature
of Minerals, as you may see in the Leaves of Oak and Bayberries, Pomegranate
peels green, which dye a black color from the Vitriol that is in them: so that
the Chemists offer to draw Vitriol from green Walnut-shells.

Lastly, it may be doubted whether the first qualities are immediately causes
of mixtures? For the force of hidden qualities is such, to alter a body, and of
the spirits, that they may not be excluded. The Works of the Chemists show
this, for when the spirit of Vitriol and Tartar are mixed, there is presently a
great change, and they that have written so much for the first qualities, dare
not bring all the qualities of mixture from the first qualities, to which
Erastus ascribes all, except position, number and figure, and the like.

Also we may doubt whether all other affections of mixture, besides
conformation, may be referred to cold and heat? But there are many affections
in mixture, which cannot be drawn from the first qualities; and lest any should
fly to the soul, the Loadstone draws iron; Rhubarb purges choler; but this
comes not in the Loadstone from the form or soul.

The Philosophers dispute much of the Nature of mixture, and how the Elements
remain in a mixture. Exercit. 10.
I confess I am of Scaligers judgment, who defines mixture to be the motion of
the least bodies to a mutual contraction to make an union. For to the Nature of
mixture it is requisite, that by it a body be made one, not only by
continuation, but by the form. But it is very hard in this darkness of man, to
see how the union of the smallest things is made, whether by breaking or
mixture, or whether they be quite abolished. I think it fit that in mixture,
that the things mixed, being united in small parts, should act, and suffer
together by contrary qualities, but not loose their forms wholly (which if they
be abolished, there would not be an union of things mixable, being changed, but
a corruption) but that one form is made of all, or rather all being mixed, and
made one, abide under the Dominion of one superior form, from which it is a
species. I leave it to others to dispute whether the forms remain whole, or are
broken: this is certain, that every mixed body may be changed into that of
which it was first made; and therefore the forms of the Elements are not
abolished, otherwise in resolution or putrefaction there would be a generation
of new Elements. Notwithstanding we must not think that the specifical form of
every thing that gives its name and being, comes from the Elements only: for
there is in every natural thing a more Divine Principle and Nature, by which
they are what they are, and belong to such a species. The Elements are only the
matter of bodies, and therefore cannot give the act or action. This is the old
opinion of the Ancients, and chiefly of Democritus that said all things were
made of atoms. In Epist. c. 1.
Nor can we think that this excellent Interpreter of the World (as Hippocrates
calls him) thought absurdly of atoms and the generation of things, as we
showed at large in our Hypomnema 3. For the ancient Philosophers gave their
opinions in dark sentences, and therefore their Adversaries thought they said
what they never thought, and disputed Logically against Democritus, who would
have been persuaded by natural reason as Aristotle says, 1. De genesis and cor.
c. 20.
for whatsoever is brought against the opinion of Atoms, is not Physical but
Mathematical, as that of continuities, of lines not to be cut, and the like.
For Domocritus says atoms are bodies, nor does he deny in the^ the
proprieties of Mathematical bodies, nor by them does he take off the Natural or
Physical proprieties: and when he says, That generation is by the concretion
of those little bodies he denies not mixture, but only will have either the
Elements not to penetrate themselves, or that we must not dispute mixture fly
always to the Elements and first matter; but that of small bodies mixed
before, and constituted in their essence, new mixtures may be made. Lib. de
prisc. demic.
Hippocrates taught this when he wrote, that not only Elements, but salt,
bitter, and four were mixed.

Now let us consider, if such be the Nature, either in respect of generation or
corruption. For when any thing putrefies or is burnt, a smoke arises, which
the sight at a distance takes to be a continued body, but it is many thousands
of atoms confused as judgment shows. Chemical operations show the same,
especially sublimation, where these atoms are gathered together in the
alembick. You may see the same in Spaws and sharp waters, where there are as it
were Ice-sickles, when the water that flows from the pipe is very clear; and
how can so thick a body be from so clear a water? In such Mineral waters the
stony matter was resolved into the smallest bodies, which by meeting together,
make a hard body. And truly digestions and concoctions in Plants and Animals is
only a resolution of bodies to be mixed, and a concretion of them again, for
the use of Nature of every one: but the superior form directs all by the
instrument of heat.

And here since we spoke of resolution and concretion, let us speak of fixation
and flying away usually in Chemistry, as it is said. Make that which is fixed,
volatile, and that which is volatile, fixed, and you have the whole matter;
this is chiefly good in Physic, when the same thing being volatile is poison,
and being fixed, does no hurt but is a safe medicine, as Antimony, Mercury,
Arsenick.

That is fixed which holds in the fire, that volatile which endures it not, but
flies up by heat, and fixation and flying differ from coagulation and
rarefaction, though they are sometimes confused. That is coagulated, which from
a spiritual thin body, becomes thick and touchable, which every fixed body is
not. A rarefied resolved body is, that which from a touchable thick body,
becomes spiritual and subtle: for Chemists can make bodies of spirits and
spirits of bodies.

There is also a difference of mixed bodies, some are simply fixed, as gold
that flies not with the fire, but grows finer by it and better. Others are
fixed respectively in comparison of spirits, such as in a gentle fire are
fixed, but fly in a strong, as iron. Of this we shall speak at large, when we
show how to fix.

Chap. 13. Of the Foundation of Medicine.
HItherto we have examined the Chemists Doctrine of the Nature of things: now
we that treat of their Philosophy which they endeavor to establish upon the
aforesaid principles. They call their Philosophy Vital, because it is not taken
from the Elementary, material, dead principles; but is conversant about the
explication of seeds and powers. And this kind of Physic they prefer before
Galens: for he calls Galenists Elementary Philosophers, and say they look
through Nature. Though there are many Peripateticks and Galenists that look not
above the Elements, yet all are not so, as Scaliger, Fernel, Shenkius, and
others: let them brag, we will examine how they agree with truth and experience.

For the foundations ^f Physic, they require many things in a Physician.
Paracelsus requires four things in him, Lib. Parrgran. 1.
Philosophy, A s;tronomy, Chemistry, and their properties.

First for his Chemistry, whence he would have his Physic called Paracelsian,
we say no more, but by this he cannot now be accounted a good Physician, that
is ignorant of Chemistry.

Paracelsus makes the second foundation of Physic to be Magic and its parts.
He shows, In labyr. med. err. c. 9.
That the Magic Art is the Anatomy of Physic, and the Teacher and Doctoress
to cure diseases. We shall not here say what Magic is Natural, and what is
Diabolical: read Picus Mirandula and Peucer.

We shall show what Paracelsas says of it, but speak all he has written of it
in his Labyrinth, C. 9.
in his Error of Physicians, he says: Magic is the Art of Arts, and the
Inventor of all hidden things, and we must learn from it, and not from Galen
and Avicen. And he says; De pestitit. tract. 2.
A Physician must learn Magic and Astronomy, Pyromancy, Chyromancy,
Hydromancy: and he says that St. John the Evangelist, and all the Prophets
were Magicians. And in the end of his Book of occult Philosophy, he says that
Magic is a hidden Art, and the chiefest knowledge of supernatural things. And
there was no Divine that without Magic ever cast out a Devil and the like
blasphemies.

And to conclude, 5 De morbis invsibil.
his whole foundation of Magic, he writes thus. It is the safety from our
enemies, and keeps us from the hands of them that hate us; and he concludes:
That the effects of Magic depend upon the Heavens, or from Spirits good or
evil. That Heaven or the Stars, and Spirits are subordinate to man, and the
force of the Heavens and Stars may be brought into Characters, that words, and
wax, and other things, and the Spirits themselves may be constrained to serve
man; so he thinks Magic to be very lawful, and to be as that of the Wisemen,
and that a true Magician does that by faith and imagination, that a Witch does
by conjuration. Read Paracelsus of wise Philosophy, Archidox, and of occult
Philosophy: and his Labyrinth of erring Physicians.

He makes six kinds of Magic. The first is, Lib 1. philos. sagac. c. 4.
the Interpretation of preternatural signs such was the Interpretation of the
Star that brought the Magician or Wisemen from the East to Judaea: and to this
belongs the Interpretation of the Prophets and the Revelation.

The second kind is, the Transformation of Living creatures, as was in the time
of Moses and Pharaoh.

By the third, are made words, which have all strength, and whatsoever a
Physician can do by Medicines, may be done by words. This kind of Magic he
calls Characteral.

By the fourth he shows how to make Hamachyes, that is, Images and Sculptures,
upon which the strength of the Heavens is impressed, and which do all things
which instruments made of Natural things can perform, as a key opens a lock, or
a sword wounds.

The fifth sort is, when images are made like the people for whom they are, and
whatsoever is done to them, they suffer whose pictures they are, and he says
that in an image of wax, any may be roasted, made blind, wounded, or have a
Palsy.

The last kind he says is Cabalistical, now the Cabal among the Ancients was a
kind of Mystical, Symbolical and Aenigmatical Divinity, and the Cabalists did
believe the Tradition of their Ancestors, and examined no opinions. This was
threefold. The first was that by which Adam delivered the Knowledge he had from
God to his Children. The second was that by which God explained the Law to
Moses in Mount Sinai, when he was with him forty days, and by which he again
taught Joshua. The third was invented by the Rabbis, who turned the letters
and syllables into numbers, and brought hidden meanings out of them.

But Paracelsus speaks not of this Cabal who calls the Jews stupid Asses. Ci^^.
libro Philos. saga^.
But the Cabal of Paracelsus shows the way how wonders are wrought by
Characters, Seals, Figures and Words. By this a voice may be heard from beyond
Sea, and one dwelling in the West may talk with him that dwells in the East.
And a Horse may do that in one day, which by Natural strength cannot be done in
a month: that the Wisemen of the East had such Horses, and they came to
Bethlehem by Magic, not Natural force. Lib. 1. de vit. longa c 9.
And Trithemus fetch his Supper out of France or Italy, saying this word,
Affer, that is, Bring to me.

Crollius consents with what is said, saying, In praefact page 36. and 38.
Whatsoever we see in the greater World, may be produced in the imaginary
World; so all herbs and things that grow, and Metals, may be produced by
imagination, and the true Cabal. Crollius calls this kind of Magic
Gabalistical, from the Gabal, or internal Heavenly or Starry Man, who by the
affinity of Magnetic virtues, can attract to himself all the strength of the
Stars, and apprehend by his Starlick spirit, the knowledge of all things.

He says this Cabalistical Magic stands upon three pillars; the first upon
the prayer in spirit and truth, when there is Union with God in the Holy of
Holies and the created Spirit: where God is worshipped by a sacred silence. The
second is Faith, not saving, but natural, as he calls it, which is that wisdom
which is equally given to all men at the first Creation, which is common to men
and Devils, Lib. de peste. and 1. de origin. morb. invis.
this he calls enchanting Faith. The third is the Imagination strongly lifted
up: of which Crollius speaks. Ernestus Burgravius says the same in his Book
called Achilles Revived. And he promises his lamp of life and death, in which
as in a fatal light, the fortune, diseases and death of every man may be seen.
See more of this in Burgrave and Roger Bacon his Book of the wonderful power of
Art and Nature, and Paracelsus in his Books of Archidox Magic, and others.

Now Andreas Libavius in short mentions whatsoever the Paracelsians promise by
Magic. Lib, contra Crollacus page 55.
And if they be well examined, they are almost all ungodly and blasphemous. And
though Paracelsus seems to condemn that infamous Magic which is from the
Devil, and to commend that which is natural and lawful, yet you may know by
what has been said alleged, and from his Writings what he followed. Lib.
principio seu. de myste.
Especially by his upholding that infamous Conjurer Judaeus Techel, and there
was scarce any Magician in any age but he commends him. He says the Magicians
of Pharaoh had their Art from God, and is offended that the Scripture gives
them such harsh language. From whence, and from many other arguments, it is
manifest that his Magic was from the Devil. And he makes only this difference
between lawful and unlawful Magic, that one does flatter the Devil by
Incantations and ceremonies. And the other by force commands his Arts, and
makes him serve by faith and strong imagination: yet it is never lawful to ask
any things of the Devil, or expect his help. Nor is there any Example in
Scripture that ever the Devil did any man good. Certainly Crollius is very
wicked in saying, That true prayers in spirit and truth, are the foundation of
Cabalistical Magic. For prayers are the worship of God, according to the 5. of
John, and they must be according to his promises and will, and this worship
ought not to be profaned with such wicked Speeches.

Now that natural says he speaks of, which is a power to do miracles, and
given equally to all men in the Creation, is a mere lie. For true miracles
only belong to the Church; and those done by Infidels and Conjurers, are from
the Devil, and are not true, but lying wonders.

What Crollius writes of Imagination, In Praefat. admonit.
are dreams of Enthusiasts: none deny but there is great force in imagination,
but that it can do what Crollius mentions, it is a mere fable; and if Crollius
could have cured diseases by imaginaon, why did he spend so much time in
preparation of Chemical medicines.

In a word, concerning Crollius his Magic, avoid it, there is knavery in the
Baker, and under the honey of Chemical medicines, there is a venomous gall.
Therefore beware least under the pretense of Natural Magic, and Divine
Philosophy, and light of Nature, you do not use Diabolical Magic which may be,
though you make no contract with the Devil: for it may be made not only
explicitly, but implicitly. An explicit contract is, when one makes a
Covenant with the Devil. An implicit is, when any uses such means with
another who has contracted with the Devil explicitly, and plainly has before
used.

For though there are examples in Scripture that the Apostles ruled over the
Devil, and cast him out, yet there is no example, that any Saint used the help
of the Devil for a good end to profit man. And though it may be objected for
Paracelsus, that it is no inconvenience for any to get better medicines then
are known from the Devil, to cure incurable diseases: yet I suppose it is
neither safe nor religious, and St. Chrysostom says well, That a man had
better die, then recover by such remedies. God that wounded can heal, therefore
seek help from him alone. There is a famous Example that it is not lawful to
seek help from the Devil, 2 Kings c. 1.
in Ahazia 2 Kings c. 1. by which we are taught to seek for cure from God
alone, not from the Devil: and we can expect no good from that great Deceiver.

Moreover, the means in Magic are not ordinary nor natural, as you may see in
Paracelsus, but are words, characters, waxed images, and superstitious
inventions of the Devil. And that we may not use such superstitions that are
suspected to have an occult contract from the Devil, observe what follows. For
where there is neither miracle nor force of Nature, nor Arts ingenuity, there
is a contract with the Devil, whosoever he was that made it. And when
characters and unknown words are used, that are obscure, and do not cohere or
agree, or are holy, but applied to another meaning, or when Ceremonies of no
force are used, or the like, there is a strong suspicion. Lib. de occul. Philos.
As when Paracelsus says a man may be freed from diseases from enchantment, if
he put on an old shirt with the wrong side outward.

He makes Astrology the third pillar of Physic, Lib. 1 de Philos. sagaci.
Lib. de aere lo. and aq.
but he extends it too large, comprehending all Magic under Astronomy, and
dividing it strangely. As for Astrology, if it be right, and upon Natural
principles, we hold it necessary for a Physician, as Hippocrates shows. And
there are many reasons why a Physician should not be ignorant of it. Therefore
I consent to the modern Physicians, that say the Stars work upon inferior
bodies, not only by heat and light, but by occult influences. But here we are
to seek, and the strength of the purest Stars is not known. And Paracelsus and
Crollius should engage us, if they would explain the consent between the upper
and lower World more plainly. But here they are at a loss with the
Aristotelians and Galenists, many whereof were good Astrologers, and studied
the force of Stars very much, but ingeniously confessed their imperfections of
whom Cardan says well, Astrolog. aphor. sect. 1. aph. 34.
That Astrology as it is most excellent, so it is most difficult. And the
motions of the Stars can never be known perfectly, nor the judgments from them,
etc.

Chap. 14. Of the strength of Imagination.
BEcause the effects of Natural Magic seem to the Paracelsians to depend upon
Imagination, not only to cause diseases, but to cure them, and they show
wonders done by imagination from Philosophers and Physicians: we shall here show
what the strength of it is.

But note first, that those effects which are attributed to imagination, do not
immediately depend upon it, nor does the soul produce such effects by
imagination. For imagination is only a knowing power, that has an immanent
action which goes not forth to other things, and imagination does nothing
effectually but know, but the other powers vegetative and moving, do act upon
others. And though the fancy concurs to local motion as knowing it, yet is it
not the immediate cause of motion, therefore it does not act upon any body, of
its own or another, nor does it by any sort of motion alter, move, or change
it. But appetite or desire follows knowledge and then there is a prosecution or
flight which is by a local motion. Whose cause is a place moving power distinct
from the imagination.

Therefore the humors are not moved of themselves, or immediately by the
imagination, but only by accident, stirring up the natural powers, whose office
is to move the humors and spirits to nourish the body. The imagination
directs the humors and spirits, to move toward this or that part, and it
determines the moving faculty, that it may move the spirits and humors to this
or that part: as when one is lasciviously minded, the spirits and humors go to
the privities, by which motion the body is altered, not by the fancy of it
self, nor can the species of the fancy produce a real quality, nor formality
make an alteration, because the formal and essential reason of it is only in
representation, and it cannot act beyond its force and perfection. Therefore
when some are loose bodied from the conceit of a purging medicine not taken; it
is not because the species of the purging medicine has a purging force, but
because the moving natural faculty is drawn to consent with the imagination,
and stirs the humors, which being stirred, do provoke the expulsie faculty to
stool, especially if humors abound.

First, it moves the desiring faculty or appetite, and by the passions of the
mind affects the body: for the passions follow knowledge, which causes gladness
at what is pleasant, and sorrow at what is unpleasant, these passions have
great power to alter the body. But fancy does not immediately alter the body
by the appetite, but as the appetite moves the natural moving faculties in the
members, and chiefly in the heart, these being moved, do move the humors and
spirits, and the spirits coming and going to the part, do change them.
Therefore the remote cause of alteration is the fancy, and so it affects its
own body, and causes diverse diseases in it: but of it self it causes none.
And if it should, the disease would be but imaginary, not real. So some
melancholic people have thought they had great noses or bodies, and yet were
not so.

And though some fall into diseases by imagination, yet the fancy does not of
it self, but by accident, by reason of fear which moves the malignant humors
lurking in the body, and these being moved, cause the plague. One Vincent
thought his body so big, that he could not pass through the door, and when the
Physician commanded him to be carried through, he complained that he was very
much bruised, and soon after died. But this is not, because the patient
imagines, but because he is diseased. And if imagination does any thing, it is
by accident, from sorrow or fear, and the like passions.

Many diseases come by accident, by means of the spirits and humors, as they
are different in nature and motion. And imagination being the cause of diverse
passions, as anger, sorrow, much joy, they have such force to corrupt and
change humors, that we need not prove it. Moreover, strong imagination draws
the spirits and humors strongly to the head, and the heat is taken from the
parts ordained for nourishment.

Thus imagination may cure diseases, namely, by accident, not of it self, for
confidence makes the patient obey orders, because imagination brings passions,
by which the humors and spirits are moved, by which motion they oppose the
disease. Therefore confidence begets cheerfulness, and this stirs up the
natural heat and spirits, and so there is better concoction, and the bad humors
are overcome, and the disease opposed. Hence it is that they who are always
sad, have many crudities and soul humors, from the constant loss of heat and
spirits. From the same cause if patients have some meats they longed for, they
recover, though they be not wholesome. And Hippocrates says that the best meats,
2. Aphoris. 38.
if not affected, cause loathing, and the stomach does not rightly embrace and
concoct them, hence come wind and crudities, and the disease increases, or the
patient is longer sick.

(...) ^^at taken in with pleasure, sometimes curethe because either by the joy,
the spirits which were dull by the disease, are raised and refreshed, which are
the fittest instrument to conquer soul humors and the disease: or because when
then the patient has his desire, cease from that imagination, and the
disease which was falsely supposed. There are many Histories of this in Thomas a
Vega and Alexander Trallian, Com. in art. med. Galeni. c. 48. Tralia. lib. 2.
c. 17.
who speaks of a Woman that thought she had swallowed a Serpent.

Therefore if imagination of it self cannot afflict its own body, it cannot
change, or hurt any other body. For the soul cannot act upon externals, but by
means of the body, because the fancy is an immanent action, not transient.

But by accident it may do somewhat, for what is said of Witchcraft, is not to
be wholly despised. They say the Baselisk kills a man by the poisonous beams
from his eyes. These come from spirits and vapors, by which the occult
Sympathies and contracts of things are. And the imagination may somewhat direct
these spirits, as we said by moving the natural faculties, or stirring up the
passions, so in envy, hatred, anger, venomous humors which are moved in the
body, are carried to the eyes, and flow from thence.

But a certain distance is required, and it is absurd to think that any can be
afflicted at many miles distance: and it is worse to ascribe to imagination
things beyond its force, and to which it no ways concurs, as when they say a
man may fall from a horse by imagination, or corn be carried from one field
into another.

Lastly, let us consider what imagination can do in childbearing? Hipp 1. de
supert. Gal dether. ad pis Avic. fen. 2. lib 1. doctr. 2. c. 14. genesis c. 30.
of which there are many Observations, so that it is simple to doubt them.
Hippocrates, Galen and Avicen. and many other Authors prove it, and that of the
Patriach Jacob is well known.

But it is hard to know how imagination could change a child. It is certain,
that the fancy being known, and an immanent power does not of it self change
the child, and the forming faculty is the immediate cause of quantity, figure,
number, position and heat, and not the imagination.

Nor is the child changed by a species of the fancy, because of it self it
cannot produce any real quality, nor has it any force but to move imagination,
and to represent to its object; and if this species had any force, there would
be more changes in children.

It is therefore more probable to reason, that the child is changed by the
fancy, either through the passions and motions of the spirits and humors, or
by directing the forming faculty.

The changes and hurts in children are of two sorts; common and determinate.
The common are abortion, death, inward sickness, and weakness, smalness or
greatness of some part, defect or abundance in number. The determinate are
changes and signatures which have a determinate similitude to some outward
thing, as for Example, when they long for Cherries, the impression of a Cherry
will be upon the child.

The first changes may be from fancy, by means of the passions and motion of
the humors and spirits, but the determinate signatures which answer to external
things that are offered to the imagination, cannot be by motion of the humors
and spirits by the imagination. For the passions stirs the spirits and humors,
which stirred, are carried with force or in plenty to the child which troubles
it, and cause abortion by stirring up of the expulsive faculty of the womb.
Sometimes the forming faculty is disturbed from the same cause in its operation,
or is overwhelmed, or the spirits and humors being sent another way, the parts
are not rightly formed, or they are greater or less. But these are not
determinate faults, nor have they any resemblance with external things, because
they are made by an accidental motion of the humors only stirred by the
passions: and they are not determinated by a peculiar manner, according to the
species received in the imagination. Therefore these errors are to be
attributed rather to the passions of the mind ^hen to imagination: nor does the
fancy truly and effectually conduce to them, nor otherwise then as it stirs
up the appetite.

But when these signatures are determinated and peculiar according to the
species received by the imagination, they are ascribed to the fancy: nor can
the passions of the mind of themselves produce them, as when Mulberries, Warts,
and the like come from the imagination upon the child. And it may fall out that
the same signature may be upon the child from diverse passions: and a woman may
bear a child somewhat like an Ape, if she either loved an Ape and played with it,
or was frighted by one, which is a sign that something else goes with
determinate signatures, namely the imagination which directs the conformation.
For the forming faculty alone immediately makes the whole child, whether well,
or ill fashioned. But the fancy sometimes seduceth the forming faculty, and
directs it, to make such a thing as is not conformable to the nature of the
seed but like that which is imagined. And so it is said to be the cause of
these marks concurring to determine them: but this is hard to be explained, and
some are of another mind. It is safest to conclude that the forming faculty is
directed by the imagination by the species exemplarily or objectively as they
say, by objecting the species conceived, to which as to an example or rule, the
forming faculty does her work. But if any wonder, that the forming faculty
which belongs to the vegetative, should know this exemplary species, let him
understand that all the faculties in a man, are powers of the same soul, and
have some communication among themselves, although the manner how is not known
plainly. Then let him know that the soul does not this by its own power, but a
power given by the Creator. And though the knowing faculty differs from the
forming, yet they are in some things agreeable, for so all parts know, and
attract the nourishment.

But how the species being conceived in the brain, should be carried to the
womb, is hard to be understood. We may say that while the child grows to the
mother, and partakes of her life, those things that move the powers of the soul
in the mother, may stir up the faculties in the seed also, and more affect the
child then the mother, because her body is so perfect, that it needs nothing
but nourishment, but the soul is still busy in forming the body of the insant,
therefore any external thing may easily be admitted to direct it or seduce it
to do this or that. Many arguments are for this, so as the passions of the soul
are not always necessary, but a fixed intention and imagination is sufficient
to mark the child. The Queen of Aethiopia conceived of a white child by only
viewing the picture of Andromeda. So Jacobs sheep marked their lambs by
beholding and imagining the party-colored rods, and we see the same in other
beasts.

These changes are in the time of conception and childbearing, but more
usually when they are gone some time, in which time the forming faculty is at
work, and busy to make the parts after conception. But all marks are not made
at all times, at the end of the colors may change, and the whole figure, the
foot may be like that of a Horse, the head like a Dog or Hog, in the last month
this cannot, because all parts are fashioned. For when Nature has once
fashioned the child she cannot alter the figure, divide or change the number of
parts.

Nor can the imagination make impression of any changes, but only such as the
matter of the body is disposed to, and the forming faculty is apt to make by
Natures order: she cannot produce true feathers, scales or horns; and the
reason why these are rather stamped upon the child then the womb, is because
the forming faculty is not busy about the womb, but the child.

Hence it appears, that the fancy cannot act upon a strange body, and
although the imagination of the mother affects the child, yet is it so joined
to her, that it seems as a part of her. Avicen. Alchirus. Crol^ius.
Therefore they all are out, that think the fancy can affect strange bodies,
and they that would show causes disagree among themselves: Paracelsus is of
their opinion, and heaps one absurdity upon another, and give reasons as weak
as the rest.

They should have showed that Phantasmes move another way then by
representation, nor does the fancy do any thing but receive the species of
things from the senses, to judge and bring them to the understanding. And how
can the species and representation that only are to represent the thing from
which they came, change or move any thing without a man? Especially seeing the
action of the fancy is immanent. And as for the imagination of women with
child, and the marks upon their children by the fancy, they only prove that the
soul any way moved by the imagination, may be the cause of peculiar motions in
its own body.

Therefore what Paracelsus and Crollius have written concerning the
imagination, is not worth the refuting, and to speak short, the foundation of
all Magical operations, and the great Wheel of all Crollius his Magic is
false; and it is this opinion of the strength of imagination, and sew modern
Writers follow them.

This Magic is old (nor is it better for that) because it came from Plato, Lib
3 de vit. caelitus comparanda.
and the Egyptians given to Idolatry; the foundation of this was laid by
Marcus Ficinus, when he writes, that by the application of our spirit, to the
spirit of the world, by the Art of Physic and affection that deeds are cast
upon the soul, and heavenly good upon our affection. But this union of the soul
of man with the Angels and Spirits which is by imagination, and the calling
upon Spirits to do man service, is the work and invention of Conjurers.

Chap. 15. of the Physiological part of Physic.
THough Severinus and the Chemists seem in many things to dissent from the
Galenists, yet they disser not much, but teach almost the same things, only
they deliver themselves in other language.

First, Contra Anonimum.
they make three Principles in man, and Quercetan places the^ in the three
principle parts of the body. He says that the natural faculty which is seated
in the liver, has its conservation and nourishment from salt, which is the
first radical Principle, and the foundation of the rest. That the vital faculty
in the heart is sustained by a sulphurous liquor. And the animal faculty is
preserved by Mercury, which is altogether aetherial and spiritual.

Then they make a twofold body in man; the one visible of the four Elements and
blood, the other invisible. This last is called by them, The Starlick Man,
within, incorporeal, a kind of Gabal man, a household God, a visible shadow of
the body, a familiar a shade, a little wise man, a Demon, or good genius. The
internal Adech of Paracelsus, A ghost the Euestrum or presaging light of Nature
which is a Prophet; also the imagination which contains all the Stars in it
self, and knows all Stars, and keeps the same course of Nature and power with
the Heavens.

Concerning the Creation of Man Severinus says, Man is a quintessence
extracted from the Firmament and Elements; or a subtle Essence of the whole
World extracted and concreted into one body. And so is the complete image of
the Universe; and he adds that God in creating the World, played the Spagyrist
or Chemist.

These things plainly taken, are not to be endured, because there are two parts
that constitute man, the soul and the body, neither of which being alone, can
be called man. There are also spirits in the body which are the principal
instruments of the soul, and the soul uses them immediately in the actions of
life.

These spirits are invisible, but corporeal: if the Chemists take these for the
invisible man, they tell us no news: only they speak improperly, when they
give the name of the whole to a part of man. If they mean any thing besides
spirits to be the invisible man, they multiply beings; or they must prove that
besides the body, soul and spirit, there is an other substance in man; and I
shall not yield to them till they do.

Then in describing the Creation of man, Crollius is very rash; for God by his
power created man of clay, and gave him strength as he pleased, nor had he need
of the Spagyrick Art to give him strength, and we read that man was made
according to Gods image, and we read not that that clay or dust of which he was
made, was the quintessence of the whole World: therefore the Paracelsians are
out.

What they say of generation, nourishment and rule of man's body, is according
to Hippocrates and Galen: only a little colored with other fictions, yet some
things are false. When they say that generation is from mechanical spirits, and
that after generation the body being complete, all natural actions are
administered, they say true, but it is no news. But they err in two points.
First for rejecting the temperament to be from the first qualities, as though
it availed not for actions for an animated part, having its temper and full of
natural heat, and spirits is the adequate or fit organ for every action:
therefore none of these must be wanting. Then they err, in that they give
knowledge to act, simply to the spirits, for they act not by their own strength,
but are directed by the soul, and this knowledge is belonging to the soul, which
is the first cause of all actions in a living body.

Fourthly, they think not right concerning blood, when they deny it to be the
nourishment of the body, and place it above the dignity of the parts: for
experience teaches that the chyle is turned into blood, as the meat into
chyle, for no other end, but that the whole body should be nourished with
blood. Therefore since Severinus has questioned so plainly a matter, and
brought no reasons against it, we may with as much ease deny what he says.

Fifthly, when he says the spirits are hungry and filled, it is absurd; for it
is the creatures properly, but the spirits are refreshed and restored: it is
one thing to indicate, and another to defire. Consumed spirits indicate
restoration, but the appetite desires to be preserved by its like, and to have
what is troublesome removed.

Sixthly, they make blood one of the parts, and and it may be allowed, but let
them understand parts as Hippocrates did when he divided the body into parts
co^taining contained, and such as do force: otherwise blood is no part but
nourishment. They do ill to give the government of the body to blood, because
it is only for nourishment, but the spirits govern the body under the soul.

Seventhly, they do ill to accuse the Galenists of idleness. Nor are they
ignorant of that of Hippocrates, of places in men, which Severinus quored, nor
are they ignorant that the diseases in the joints are worst, when humors flow
from other parts under them. This they call by a new name Synovia, and they
know not what to determine about it. But Hippocrates only attributes that humor
to the joints, that they may move better.

Paracelsus thought otherwise of Synovia, when he said, It is a nourishment of
its part. Lib. 7. paragr. par. 7
And they since say, it is an internal virtue and agility, or a sweet Milk
which nourishes the parts: all these hang not well together.

Eighthly, Severinus does undeservedly accuse Galen, because he reckoned not the
gall among the parts of the body; for it ought to be cast out as an excrement,
it is so far from being a part that constitutes a body.

Ninthly, when Severinus makes a stomach in the liver and other parts, it is
simple to quible so upon the word Stomach, as Paracelsus did when he said the
pleurisy was in the head. The 10. Chapter of Severinus is Galen in other
words. Lib. 3. de morb. tartareis c. 4.


The Paracelsians toss the humors strangely, and say they are but bare words,
and call the Galenists Humorists, because says Paracelsus, Neither Heaven nor
Earth knows phlegm, choler, or melancholy, therefore they are not in man. And
why should we prove the humors from the Analogy between the great and little
World? It is foolish without sense or experience, to fly to such Analogical
proofs. For as in other creatures, so in man there is blood which nourishes:
now sense teaches that blood is made of meats received, but not Salt, Sulphur
or Mercury, and when a vein is opened, blood is let out, not Salt, Sulphur or
Mercury; and in all bodies, in all times, ages, places and countries, blood is
found. But Paracelsus differs in this from himself, and mentions blood and
humors in many of his Books.

But they will answer that it is manifest to the senses, that blood is in the
veins, but they will show by an artificial dissolving of it, that it has three
Principles, as they show from what fountain actions proceed: but here they seem
wise, for while we speak of blood and humors, the question is not touching the
first Principles of things, but of the immediate in man's body, and perfect
animals. Suppose we grant that blood and humors are made of Salt, Sulphur and
Mercury, therefore must the ancient names of choler, blood, phlegm and
melancholy be rejected? by the same reason you may reject the appellations of
bones membranes, flesh, and of all parts: for by the principles of Chemists,
these are made of their three principles as well as blood.

Therefore it is fit that ancient should be kept, to which Galen, Hippocrates,
Aristotle, Avicen, Mefue and the rest have agreed, both Chemists and others:
For it is not for every one to give names to things, nor was Paracelsus so
great a man that he ought so to do. The names of the humors are not
insignificant without essence and properties. Seed, Flesh and Bone are made of
Blood as the rest, but because they have a new form, they take new names. And
that which was before called Bread may be called Chyle, then Blood, Choler or
Phlegm, etc.

Severinus is out when he says there is blood in Balsom, with spirit, flesh,
bones, ligaments and nerves, and that these are separated from it by help of
the mechanic spirits. There is in all sood something familiar to us that turns
nourishment, and may have diverse forms, as the parts are to which it comes;
call it Balsom or Mummy, I am indifferent; but I allow not that the things
mentioned should be contained in them, and be only made known and separated by
the mechanic spirits. Thus we should say with Anaxagoras that all things are
in all things, and there is no true generation. But when chyle is made of bread,
blood of chyle, bones, membranes, flesh of blood, in every change there is a
new form. And every part has force to turn its nourishment into its own
nature, which is the peculiar faculty of the vegetative soul: what we have
spoken of blood and humors is meant of alimentary humors that make blood. We
shall speak of excrementitious humors in the next Chapter, in the Causes of
Diseases.

Lastly, They make two Anatomies, the one local which they esteem little, as
the dissecting of bodies to see the shape, figure and position, and number of
parts, this they called a dead Anatomy for Butchers, by which the Carcass is
only seen, but not the secrets of the nature of man.

The other they call essential, vital, formal, by by which every body is
dissolved into its principles, Paracel. de orig. morb. ae tribus primis
substantiis c. 6. and alibi. Severin. c. 3. and alibi passim.
he that will try this must first know the nature of seeds and properties, the
offices of the elements, and of the principles, the roots of generation and
transplantation, the laws of Astronomy, and the disposition not of the dead but
of the whole living body. Therefore they say the heart is wheresoever there is
vital heat. The Stomach is every cavity or place of concoction. The womb is
every place where there is seed of any fruit, and they think the consideration
of the great world is chiefly to be had in this Anatomy. They say whatsoever is
in the great world is also in man, not according to a superficial likeness, but
indeed, and according to the species, and that man contains all things in
himself, though invisibly.

As to the local Anatomy, they speak of, they dishonor it, for Anatomy is much
beyond a Butchers work; for by it all parts are artificially found out, and
their constitution, and use. Thus did Galen in his Book of the use of parts,
and others, which if Paracelsus had read, he had not written so absurdly.

They arrogate to themselves only the vital Anatomy, but the Galenists had it
as you may see in Galens Books of the faculties of nature, of the Seed, of the
sorming of the Infant, of Breathing, temperaments, Elements, etc. in which he
speaks of the faculties of the soul which govern the body, and of the
instruments thereof in action. Yet if the Chemists by their Principles can give
it more light, we will accept of it thankfully. But they here rather quible with
words, and with new terms they sell the opinions of the Ancients as their own,
and do little discover them, or clear them up; as when they say the heart is
wheresoever there is vital heat. It is the part of a wise Philosopher to call
things by their own names, and not so to quible with names as to confound
things that are distinct.

Chap. 16. of Pathologie, or Diseases.
THe Chemists seem also to enlarge the Pathological part of Physic, Ideae
Philos. c. 13.
when they suppose that the antecedent cause, the Disease and the Symptom
differ not in kind, essence or specifical propreties, but only in power and
act. Thus Severinus, and that they differ no otherwise then a sleeping
Physician does, from the same being awake; brimstone not burning, from that
which burns; salt not dissolved, from that which is dissolved; therefore he
supposes names are to be given from the roots, as from the hidden roots of
diseases in intermitting fevers, when no heat is fired in the heart, while the
fever lies close in the body, and not from the antecedent cause. But Galen
does better divide all things that are besides nature in man's body into three,
Cap. 12.
that is, the disease, the cause, and the symptom, and there is no Discipline
that makes no difference between the causes and the effects; therefore it must
be in Physic, for the humors are the causes, the diseases the effects; and
again the symptoms are effects of them both, and all these differ in their
whole essence and nature. Therefore Severinus writes foolishly, saying, That
which is most remote from producing of an effect, is a genus, that which is
nearest to the individual, is the species, and the effect is the individual. He
makes the most general genus or kind to be the stony tartarous Mucilages in
fruits, and those in the stomach and guts to be the sudordinate genus. But when
they cause diseases and symptoms, they are species; and the last actions being
hurt or hindered, are the individuals. But every true Philosopher may perceive
this absurdity. He writes like a fool, when he says he saw a fever vomited
forth; for he saw the cause, but not the fever. And more simply, when he says
that matter so vomited up, shaked for a time like an ague. But either he read
not, or observed not what Galen and Galenists have written concerning the
shaking of fevers.

But these Severinians are offended, that the names of diseases are not given
from the causes. But they are unreasonable to think names must be given as they
please, and that fit names may be rejected. Therefore it is not bad to define a
fever from its essence, then let them enquire into the nature of the cause,
and whether the cause of a fever may be called Choler or Sulphur.

Nor do the Galenists allows eye the disease alone, but look often more at the
cause; much less do they only observe the symptoms, for many of them come often
from the same cause, and one sometimes from diverse causes, and if these be not
diligently disting dished, he plays the Emperick, and will be deceived; and if
the Chemists will help us in curing, we shall thank them.

As for the nature of a disease, Paracelsus errs exceedingly, when he says a
disease is a substance, and that the disease is a whole man, and has an
invisible body, and this he shows by the Jaundies. But every disease is nothing
else but a quality in the body besides Nature, Lib. 2. de morb. podag.
by which the body is so disposed, that it is unfit for its proper actions. Now
all error is from this, that as plants come from their seeds, so they think
diseases do also; and the true cure of a disease is nothing else but the taking
away of those seeds, and if they be not taken away by changing of cold and
heat, and there qualities, and evacuation of humors, no disease can be truly
cured. He illustrates this by an Example, as says he, he that labors to keep
fruit from growing in his garden, does not enough to pull off the fruit every
year, or lop off a branch or two from a Tree, much less if he die the leaves or
the fruit of another color, but he must take up the Tree by the roots. So to
take away heat or cold, and the like qualities by their contraries, is to take
away the fruits only and leave the root.

Concerning the original of the seeds of diseases, they say, That though in the
first Creation when by divine power, the seeds took their force to generate and
multiply, and all things else were without corruption: yet after the Fall,
there came new tinctures by the curse upon those pure seeds (as Severinus
says) by the mixture of which the beauty of the Creation was transplanted into
a calamitous condition, and these pure seeds were covered with unfortunate new
garments (and he adds) that man who uses all sublunary things, and lives upon
Plants and Animals, is defiled with universal impurity, and has many sorts of
diseases and deaths.

Severine brings the rise of hereditary diseases from hence: so that they may
be to the fourth Generation. And hence he says is the reason why people not
having the Gout or Falling Sickness beget children that have: For the inbred
impurities of the Parent not being ripe in the^, may be increased in the
children, and bring unexpected symptoms. He says on the contrary that they
which have the Gout may beget children that have not. Either because the seeds
of those diseases are not fixed in the root and Balsom of man, but cleave only
superficially, or because they are overcome in the womb by the power of its
natural Balsom, or because the seeds grew old and barren, For (say they) those
seeds which are not united in species, but individuals have their ages, and
when their root is exhausted they are barren and unfruitful.

They allow not the first qualities to be causes of Diseases; and when they are
convinced, they say they are so inconsiderable that they require not the help
of a Physitia^. They regard not compound Diseases, and say they are but a
certain hinderance to actions: For they affirm that the desect of Instruments
and Figures, and Cavities, and Solution of Continuity come not as Diseases from
Seeds, but they say the Diseases of the Similary parts have their seeds.

They say humors are but Phansies, In labyrinth. med. err. c. 8.
and though Paracelsus allow them, yet he denies that they are causes of
diseases, and says the humors come from diseases, not diseases from humors.
But many of these opinions are not to be believed, for in the generation of
diseases it is otherwise, for the good humors are altered, corrupted, and
infected from the bad, as from Leaven, and do hurt the parts, and bring
preternatural qualities. But we cannot find any forming force in the causes of
diseases, as in the seeds of Plants which may produce such a body. And they are
like the doting Manichaes when they say, Those seeds and evil matters of
diseases were made by God. First they make God the Author and Creator of evil
and diseases, as if he had made any substantial, which is wicked. For God saw
what he had made, and they were very good; for all substance as a substance is
good, and evil is not consubstantially but accidentally joined unto it.

Then they make a double creation, the first which was by the blessing of God
in six days, the other was by the curse of God upon the pure seeds and roots
of things, by which the evil roots of Diseases and Death were added. But God
rested from all his labor the seventh day, and the Curse of God only declared
punishment.

Severine does ill in bringing hereditary diseases from seeds. It is true, that
the diseases of Parents come to the children by the seed and mothers blood; but
an hereditary evil is a vicious disposition in some part by which in time,
humors of the same kind are gathered, and so produce the like diseases.

It is against experience to leave the first qualities out of diseases and
their causes, for all ages have allowed them: for as soon as any preternatural
distemper is in any part all acknowledge that its actions are hurt, nor can it
do its duty till the natural temper be restored; Hippo. 3. Aphor. 16. and in
Epid. Severin.
this is daily observed in the Stomach, and there are thousands of Examples of
this in Hippocrates and Galen.

Nor can we admit of the new interpretation of Hippocrates made by Severine,
saying that the South Wind makes not dull hearing nor other symptoms mentioned
by Hippocrates. First he should prove that absurd opinion, that wind, rain and
snow, are the fruits of the Stars, nor need they fly to occult qualities,
powers and tinctures, when a manifest cause may be showed as appears in
Hippocrates.

They are out also in Diseases of conformatio^, saying they are only
impediments of actions, as if all diseases were not such; they reject the
humors erroneously, because it is manifest to sense that diverse humors are
evacuated in diverse diseases by vomit and stool by Nature or Art; when they
cannot deny this, Severine thinks that excrementitious humors are to be called
by other names; and leaving the fantastic names of Vitelline, eruginous, salt
and crude phlegm, he flies to the kinds of Salts, nitrous, aluminous,
vitrlolate, and to the properties of salts in Plants, as in Cookowpints,
Nettles, Celandine, etc. That the names of Choler, Melancholy and Phlegm are to
be rejected: but there is no reason or cause why these ancient names should be
rejected, no more then the names of a Fever, Apoplexy, Dropsy. If they can
find out more proper names, we shall admit them, provided they expound the
intrinsical nature of the things: For to speak plainly, the difference and
nature of humors cannot only be explained by the first qualities, but they may
be more specially determined by their more proper qualities, which Hippocrates
teaches saying, Lib. de vet. medict.
It is heat, moisture, cold or dryness that has much force, but sourness,
sharpness and bitterness, etc. The Cancer is an example in which he that
acknowledges not a corrosive sait, is blind. And the same may be seen in the
itch, scab and ulcers that corrode and creep. Therefore I deny not but such
humors the causes of such diseases, may be so called from the Salt or other
Chemical principle; although I denied when I spoke of blood and natural humors,
that such humors in which such excess appear not, ought to receive denomination
from the Chemical principles. Nor do I think that the excrementitious humors in
which a manifest excess does not appear, should be denominated from the
Chemical principles, but keep their ancient names. Yet it is not unfit that the
differences of strong corroding humors, which are diverse, should be
distinguished with names taken from Sulphur or Salt, when there appears any
remarkable excess of any one humor. For Hippocrates calls a defluxion from the
head, 4. De rat. vic. in acu. sent. 31. Lib. de vee Medici.
hot and nitrous, and writes, That men are not only fevorish from heat alone,
nor can that alone cause a disease, but bitterness and heat, and sharpness or
saltness with heat, and the like.

Nor is it strange, that such things should be in the body, when a man is fed
with Plants, and Animals which are nourished with plants, and these have from
the earth their nourishment, which contains in it salt, bitter, and the like
juyces, and Mineral spirits, which are derived into man, whose altering force
changes them as much as it can, but they can never be overcome by our nature.
Nature indeed labors to void them being unfit for nourishment: and if they be
retained, and separated from the good blood, and abide alone, they hurt the
body diverse ways. Galen and other Physicians own this, who mention salt and
nitrous humors, and the effects of Salt are manifest in Catarrhs or Defluxions.
Some humors are called Aeruginous, not that they are like Verdigreece as
Erastus thinks, but because there is the taste and force of corroding, as in
Verdigreece and other qualities.

Nor is it unprofitable to observe these differences of humors, for they are of
concernment for cures; therefore there being great difference of humors, as to
their colors, taste, consistence, and essence, and they cannot be called at by
the same name. If the Chemists can here help us, there is no cause why we
should not observe them, yet we must not cast off the old names of the humors:
for Rhubarb does always purge choler, not Salt or Sulphur.

The Chemists speak diversely of the differences of diseases; In labyrinth.
medic. arr.
Paracelsus saich, that there are two kinds of seeds, the Iliastrum, Cagastrum.
The Iliastrum is when the feed of the disease is from the beginning, as of
Apples, Pears, Nuts. Cagastrum is that which is from corruption. The diseases
from the Iliastrum are the Dropsy, Jaundies, Gout, etc. Of the Cagastrum,
Plague, Fevers, Pleurisies, But as I said, diseases do not spring up from
seeds, but from preternatural causes in the body, either bred therein, or
gathered.

Paracelsus has another difference, by which he constituteth five Beings of
diseases. First, the Ens or Being of God, In paramiro.
for he says some diseases come from God. The second being is an Astral Ens,
under which he comprehends not only diseases from the Stars of Heaven, but such
as come from the stars in Man that depend upon the stars of Heaven. The third
is a Natural Being, when a disease by a fault in Nature, and they consider
Nature by their three Principles. The fourth is a Mental Ens, under which are
comprehended all diseases from imagination in our selves or others, and under
this they comprehend Incantations. The fifth kind is a Being of Poison natural
or artificial.

Here Paracelsus shows his ignorance in Logic and Philosophy, and he never
learned from the Metaphysics what Ens or a Being is. It is ungodly to say that
any disease is from a Being of God. And he speaks improperly in all the rest of
his differences. But we may bear with improper speeches, so good things be
under them. Ideae Philos. c. 14.
Nor can we suffer what Severine says in referring all diseases and cures to
four Monarchs, The Epilepsie, Dropsy, Gout and Leprosy, to every one of
these he reduced certain diseases; under the Epilepsie he places Catarrhs,
Palsies, Cramps, Megrims, Melancholies, Apoplexies, and Suffocations of the
Womb. Under the Dropsy, Aposthems, Jaundies, Cachexy. Under the Leprosy all
Ulcers. Under the Gout, the Cholick, Stone, Toothach and Headache. But it is
evil to refer diseases, that differ so in essence and causes to the same head.

Nor is this division to be admitted into coagulation and resolved diseases.
They say that some impurities come from the seeds, whose fruit does coagulate.
Others come from seeds whose fruit ends in flowing resolution, those they call
coagulated, these resolved diseases.

What Severine says of the disease and fruits of the superior Globe, has many
absurdities, except they are explained otherwise then the words sound. We grant
that the causes of Epidemick diseases depend in a great part upon the Stars and
their influence, and arise from the air and spirits that we attract and breath
in. But that there should be any Opiate, Arsenick, Orpiment, or the like, or
fruits of celestial bodies, or resolutions of celestial seeds, I cannot admit,
because matter of such corruptions which is in the air, and drawn in by the
breath to infect the body, comes not from Heaven, but is contained in the
inferior World, and the celestial bodies may diversely stir, dispose, and
mingle, and alter them. The modern Chemists dare not defend this Doctrine of
Severine. Quercetan searce mentions any seeds, but says, In defensione
contra Anoni.
That Mercury, Salt and Sulphur have all sorts of virtues, faculties and
properties: from whence come infinite varieties, colors, tastes and scents, and
the like, which produce diverse diseases from their distemper, and the company
of other things. If Sulphur abound, it brings diverse inflammations and fevers,
besides other narcotick effects, which the sleepy Sulphur produces by its
narcotick spirits, which do the same thing that wine or the like does, which
cause sleep, not by cold, but a narcotick Sulphur. From mercurial, sour and
sharp vapors, come Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Palsies, and all kinds of Catarrhs.
From Salts, he says come corrosions inwardly, Imposthumes, Ulcers,
Dysenteries, Bleeding, and from the dissolving of them come heat of Urin, and
Strangury. And from the variety of Salts, come diverse Ulcers, Imposthumes,
Corrosions, by their sharp and sour spirits, also diverse kinds of Colicks. From
Salts coagulated, he brings Nodes, Scirrhus Tumors, and swollen Joints, and
infinite sorts of Obstructions.

The best distinction of the Chemists, is that from the three principles and
causes of diseases, if they would be constant therein, or explain themselves,
for the matter is very intricate concerning Mercury. For if they say every
humor is not Mercury, but the first and substantial humor which gives sense and
motion to all parts, it cannot be the cause of diseases. But if Mercury be
taken for the cause of a disease, who will say that it is an excrement of
natural Mercury and phlegm. And I see not how they can distinguish it from
Tartar (from which Severine says Catarrhs do arise.)

The differences of Salt and Sulphur are manifest, because sour, bitter and
falt matter is gathered in the body, and vomited up. Sometimes the humor is so
sour in the stomach, that before it is vomited up, the teeth are set on edg by
it. The differences of Salts are plain in diverse Ulcers, as in the Scab,
Cancer, heat of Urin, and the like.

To this division belong tartarous Diseases, of which they speak often, and
many fly to that in time of ignorance; they say then the disease is from
Tartar, but few explain what Tartar is. Lib. de morb. tar. tar. c. 1.
Paracelsus rails against the Galenists, because they call tartarous diseases,
sand or the stone, because it is a Metaphorical appellation, but in Physic we
must speak properly, and things must de denominated from their Nature, which he
does not observe. He says the cause of this appellation, is because an oil,
and a water, and a tincture, are made of it, which burns the sick as the Tartar
of Hell; therefore if the name be from the likeness of Hell fire, it is taken
from a similitude, and is not proper.

Others extend the word Tartar larger then that it should be given only to the
stone, for they call a slimy humor by the same name, which causes the Colic,
corrosions, and diverse pains in the stomach. Thus they call diverse things by the
name of Tartar, to which it does not equally in reason belong, and so is not
proper.

But to the purpose (agreeing about names) let us see whether the Chemists and
Dogmatists may be reconciled in this. The Chemists have no clear definition of
Tartar. Lib. 2. de tar. tract. 1. c. 1.
Paracelsus defines it thus, It is stony disease, or a bole, or between a bole
and a stone, which hinders the effect and virtue of Nature. Other Chemists say,
Tartar is that impurity in the nourishment, under a resolved form that cannot
be discerned, but yet tends to coagulation and a stony Nature. Some from
Paracelsus say, It is an excrement coagulated by its spirit.

Some Chemists seem to agree with the Galenists, who say, Tartar is a
stone-making juice, or a matter by Nature apt to coagulate. And this juice is
drawn from Plants with the nourishment, and sent from Plants into Animals, and
then it hurts much when Nature is weak to concoct and void it. They make four
kinds of this Tartarous juice. Viscous, bolare, or like bole, sandy and stony:
and hence come diverse diseases in diverse parts of the body.

First, they bring most diseases of the stomach from Tartarous impurities, when
such a matter covers the sides of the stomach, the vital spirits are
obstructed, which are the Author of all natural actions: hence comes slow
concoction, compression, loathing, and the like, and as the tinctures of the
Tartarous spirits are stronger to wholly overcome the inbred spirits, there
follows want of concoction and nourishment. But if these impurities have
strange spirits with them, they turn the nourishment into a strange nature, and
there is belching and stink, and if they have vomiting properties, as of
Hellebore or Antimony, they cause loathing and vomiting. If they have the
tinctures of Salts, there is burning of the stomach, gnawing, and the like. If
of vitriolated Salt, there is a Dog-like appetite.

Let us grant all this, that we be not so unjust against the Chemists as
Erastus. Part 4. disp. con^a para.
Yet this tartarous matter is not the only cause of the hurt actions of the
stomach, for a hot or a cold distemper often hurts it. Moreover, from the
opinion of Severine diseases breed from those tartarous impurities mixed or
alone; from the mixed come sulphurous stinking diseases, thirst, heat,
bitterness of mouth, headache, with cold and shaking, called ordinary fevers.
But he thinks they come rather from their roots, which are Niter with Sulphur.
Because he says fevers have seeds and roots, in which slimy and salt spirits
with Niter, are mixed with impure, stinking, dissolved Sulphur. Therefore at
set times when the mineral or matter of the disease begins to spring, being
nitrous Sulphur, there is horror, chilness, panting, and the like, as the
nitrous Sulphur differs.

As we are not in this enemies to them, so let them be milder against the
opinions of Galenists for first we must distinguish the seaver from the cause.
The cause is that matter which they call Nitrous Sulphur, from the accession of
which there is a hot distemper in the whole body, by which all the parts are
unfit for their offices, and this preternatural disposition is called a fever.
Nor must the name of humors be rejected, for Niter or Sulphur are never vomited
up, or purged forth, or sweat out, but only humors. Though we grant that the
humors are set on fire by Sulphur, we will not therefore reject the name of
humors.

Scheunemamnus his opinion of the original of fevers is ridiculous, he says
that a globe or bal of many Sphaeres, like a Bezoar-stone, is bred in the
stomach or liver, and thence come seavers and fits; and when this ball is
struck from Heaven, it flames and smoaks, and infects the air, hence comes a
little cold and trembling, and then heat. But this globe and its circles of
which it is made, ought to be very great, because he writes that the patient
shall have so many fits as are circles in it.

Against Severine I say the Colic cannot breed from a slimy Tartar mixed with
stiptick, or binding, four spirits, because he made one cause only of the pain
of the Colic. I agree with him about the name, for the case is plain, that the
colic is from glass like phlegm as Galen taught. But if he make that the only
cause, he errs exceedingly, because there are great pains from wind that
extends the guts, nor does sharpness or wind cause pains but by stretching,
which being made to pass by a Clyster or two the pain cease better then by
the laborious Chemical medicines. Ideo Philos. 13.
It is false that he says, the sharpest pains are only from the sharpest
spirits of Salts: he calls the pains from cuts, burnings and strokes Relolls.
But all men living do witness by sense, that there is no greater pain then that
from cutting and burning, etc.

Severine proceeds, and says, and describes the generations and differences of
inflammations, saying, That the seeds of these diseases come to the matrixes,
not only in a liquid form dissolved, but in a spiritual vapor, and continual
nutrication, and digested fermentation, and except the time of neaturity and
separation, which coming, the spirits break forth and boil. And then the
signatures that lay hid before in the spirits are explained colors, tastes,
scents, heat and other qualities. And by nourishment daily attracted, they make
bodies agreeable to the principles, mattery, slimy, bloody, coagulated,
dissolved, stinking, red, black. He brings the kinds of inflammations from the
proprieties of the sulphurous spirits. And Arsenick spirits make plague sores.
Orpiment spirits make Pleurisies, not only in the breast, but in the brain,
lungs, heart, liver, spleen and stomach.

He accuses Galen and other Doctors for saying, That inflammations come from
much blood, violent exercise, falls, contusions. And denies that these effects
can come from these causes, except some Arsenical seed cause the Plague, or
other the Pleurisy lying in the blood, till it get an occasion to boil.

For the breeding of ulcers, he says thus. If from the inbred Balsom weakened
from error by immoderate diet in the mummy of the blood, the Synoviae of flesh
defect of separation come from impure matter: the impurity being left, which is
full of corrosive salts; if this happen often, and then tincture be strong of
the corrosive seeds, and the mummy of the blood be transplanted, they will
bring in the roots of the flesh or Synovia, and by constant nourishment, from
things of like impurity, at a digested time they will produce fruit agreeable to
the roots. He says that salts of iron breed the roots and fruits of a Cancer
in the flesh, veins and members, resembling the Anatomy of Mars, and they dwell
in the face, lips, papps, breast, and sometimes the womb. The Herpes and Wolf
have aeruginous roots, near of kin to the Cancer, and place themselves in the
musculous flesh in the joints and breast, etc. I shall not repeat more for
brevity sake.

But many of these are false and absurd. First, he denies the causes alleged
by the Galenists, but every one may see them daily, especially if they be in an
impure body. Moreover, inflammations rise not as plants out of seeds, but when
bad humors are heaped up in the body, if nature cannot expel them by usual
ways, she sends them to ignoble places, where, with blood gathered out of the
vessels, they are hot and putrefie: hence comes pain and inflammation, the skin
discolored according to the variety of the humor. And that which Nature does
every where, she does here also, that is, she makes diverse quittors according
to the humor: the same is to be thought of the breeding of ulcers. Nor are the
Chemists to be totally rejected for their explaining of the differences of
inflammations and ulcers, though it may be objected against them, there are
diverse effects of Arsenick, Orpiment, Vitriol, if they be applied outwardly, by
things that appear in inflammations; for animal Salt and Sulphur differ from
vegetable Salt and Sulphur, and things taken from the earth, have a kind of
alteration, and the greater in Animals, though they do never wholly change
their Nature, as you may see in Bubo'es, Carbuncles, Cancers, and the like.

2. De loc. at. c. 9.
Concerning the cause of pain, they say that the spirits of Salt dissolved,
causes pain, this we allow, but it is also from burning, cutting, stretching,
as I said. But I take it ill, that he should reprove Galen, because he denied
that the names of tastes should be applied to pains. Galen says right, That
every sense has its proper sensible, therefore as colors cannot be perceived
by the ears, so tastes cannot be apprehended by the touch, as they are such; yet
Galen denies not that things that are tastable, as they are salt and sharp, do
diversely afflict the touching, but this is not from a savor as it is tastable,
but as it is sharp, which may be tasted also: which Severine confessed,
therefore he unjustly accuses Galen.

Also it is evident, that differences of pain come from the nerves in the part,
being more or fewer. Severine says, Those parts are most pained in which are
the sharpest spirits of Salt, which go outwardly at the mouth of the stomach,
the guts. But he is out, for parts covered with nerves and membranes, have the
sharpest pains.

Scheuneman in his Book called Reformed Physic or his Hermetical Penny: lays
down ten chief Causes of diseases: as spiritual Mercury, burnt Mercury,
sublimate Mercury, praecipitate Mercury, Sulphur coagulated, Salt calcined,
Salt dissolved, and Salt reverberated. But he shows no cause of these
Principles; they are new beings, which he no ways proves, and therefore he
uses new words, nor plain Greek nor Latin, as Pneumosus, or spiritual Mercury,
Cremosus, which is we suppose from Cremare to burn.

At last he propounds an aetherial Spirit-like fire the governor of all
actions, the radical moisture that bedews the whole body, the spirit of the
radical humor, the quickening substance, and immediate instrument of actions,
the aetherial spirit author of concoction and digestion. But these being not
sufficient, he adds a fourth, the most pure, white, sweet pleasant, panting,
the cherisher of the heat of the whole body, etc. which he calls congealed
Sulphur, the first moisture or Virgins milk, that bedews the body, and
refreshes it, the first subject of generation, also a moist and soft
substance, a fifth spirit, which he calls Sulphur dissolved.

But here we admire. He propounds so many Spirits and Principles, and proves
not in the least whether they are in being, or be so many. He brings
inflammations from Sulphur congealed and burned; but in the fifth Chapter he
brings the Quinzy and Pleurisy from Mercury sublimated. Then he brings Fevers
from Sulphur fired. So Hippocrates and Galen call them by the name of Fire, but
he mixeth false things with them.

What he says of dissolved Sulphur, is not wholly to be rejected, for the
Galenists say that pleasant vapors sent to the brain, cause sleep: nor when he
says, That Narcoticks cause sleep, not from cold, but from Sulphur. But he
errs in saying all sleep is from a moist Nature and soft substance, that bedews
all the parts; for who will say that the venomous quality in the Plague which
produces deep sleep, is such? In that he brings Fluxes and Dysenteries from
congealed Sulphur and dissolved; he differs from other Paracelsians, that say
they come from Salt, which is more probable.

But he accuses the Galenists false, for saying excrements are diseases. For
the Paracelsians do so, and Severine that says he saw a Fever cast out by
vomit. Then he makes diseases of Salt threefold: calcined, dissolved and
reverberated Salt. He says the calcined Salt is the Balsom of life; and if it
melt in the body, it causes Dropsies, Oedema and Cachexy.

He says dissolved Salt is a liquid body, of a fat taste, that coagulateth and
astringeth, that nourishes all with its good relish, and preserves all, and is
therefore called the meat and drink of the Gods etc. and whatsoever wants this
Salt, is quite unsavory.

He says the reverberated Salt, is the Lixivium or Clenser of all Nature that
takes away filth. To this Salt he brings the Itch, Scurse, Morphew, Pox Scurvey.

Though we disown not the Salts of the Chemists, which the resolution of bodies
shows. Scheuneman did well in a few things, but adding some falsities, he made
the rest suspected. He gives no reason why so many Salts, nor is it needful
that what compounds the body, should cause diseases. Moreover, he is not
constant in describing the kinds of Salts, as appears when he derives all tastes
from calcined Salt, and that it is now bitter, then salt, now four, and then
sweet: yet in another place he brings the taste from dissolved Salt, and says
nothing is savory that wants dissolved Salt. Other Chemists are more right, as
we have showed in the Chapter of Salts.

Moreover, he errs much in showing the causes of Sweat, Cachexy, Dropsy, and
the like. That Sweat has Salt, is not to be denied, but is not only Salt: for
in us it stinks often, which the Chemists say is from Sulphur; nor is sweat a
dissolved Salt coming from the substance of the body: we sometimes allow it to
Diaphoretick sweats, but not to others. But the serous matter is the sweat, and
that sweat and urin have the same matter. And if sweat were thus made, fevers
would not be gone with sweating, which we see. It is as absurd when he brings
Cachexy and Dropsy from resolved Salt, for the Dropsy is otherwise caused, as
in Lib. 3. Pract. Cap. 1. you may see.

Nor had Paracelsus or Severine any cause to bring the Dropsy from the
resolution of parts or their Salts, for there is water and Salt enough in our
meats and drinks, which if it be not well separated, it breeds a Dropsy by
degrees. Nor does a Scirrhus of the liver or spleen always follow a Dropsy,
and never go before it, for experience shows the contrary.

To what he faies of Tartar, I grant that many difeases come from Tartar and
Salt, or being mixed with slimy humors But he errs, saying that such Salt is
the nourishment of the body, and the meat and drink of the Gods, and when it
does not its duty, it breeds cartarous diseases. This Tartar is rather an
excrement unfit to nourish the body, Lib. de veteri Medici.
as Hippocrates says, and wine which has little Tartar, is best.

As for his reverberated Salt, I commend him for bringing the Itch, Scab,
Scurse, and Teter, and Ulcers that creep, from Salt, and the Galenists say that
salt humors cause them; but I see not what he does more then others. For these
diseases differ in their causes, and cure very much, and the kind of Salt or
salt humor is different in a Cancer, and a Teter, or Scab, and if he had
explained them, he had sound favor from all Philosophers. For there is great
difference of diseases from salt humors and the French pox, the Scurvey, Cancer
and Carbuncle differ not only in respect of the part affected, and the greater
or lesser heat of the salt Spirits, or the kinds of Salts, which the best
Chemists confess, and therefore they apply diverse medicines to diverse diseases
that arise from Salts: nor do I believe that Scheuneman cured the Leprosy,
French pox, Cancer, Teter, Scurvey, and all corroding Ulcers with one only Salt.

What he speaks besides, is not considerable, and I should loose time to treat
concerning it.

Chap. 17. Of that part of Physic which is called Semiotick, or of Signs.
PAracelsus varied in his Doctrine of Signs, Part. 3. disp. contra Para.
as Eraslus shows, sometimes he allows them, sometimes he rejects them. But when
he says we must not regard Signs and Symptoms, he there erreth; for Signs and
Symptoms are considered of Physicians, not for themselves, but that they may
bring us to the knowledge of hidden diseases and causes. Nor can we commend the
Paracelsians for slighting them, for there is no curing of that disease which
is unknown.

He speaks nothing in general of Signs, let us consider what he says in
particular, and first of the Pulse. The modern Physicians think that he was
well skilled in pulses, as appears in his Book of the Plague Tract. 1. where he
says, The pulse is the measure of the temper of the body, according to the
propriety of the six places, which the Planets possess, etc. And wrote more of
pulses, Lib. 2. de urina. Iudi.
as you may see. And he says the pulse continues till death, and sometimes a
quarter of an hour after.

If he had no more to say of pulses, he had but little, and what could be more
simple, then to write that the gall, reins, liver have their peculiar pulses?
and the feet and other members, to attribute anger to the pulse? And that is
most simple when he says, A pulse may beat a quarter of an hour after death:
for how can there be vital actions when the soul is gone?

He was larger concerning urin, which he desines thus: It is a salt separated
from the nourishment, and some of the three first Principles neglected by
Nature, namely the stomach, liver and reins send forth the urin. He is not to
be despised for referring urin to salt, Institut. lib. 1. c. 9.
which is not in things by adustion only, for the volatile salt of urin is
without any adustion, and in that part which it first comes forth, of which we
spoke elsewhere.

He divides the urin into the external, internal, and mixed. The first he will
have to come from the Elements, and to show no more then what belongs to the
stomach, reins and liver. And says it is of Tartar, which shows that the
separation from the pure and the impure, is made in the three chief parts, the
stomach, liver and reins, and in this urin, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury may be
known.

The internal urin which is of blood, comes not from the nourishment, but from
the excrements of all parts, and the Minerals that are in Nature. He calls that
a mixed urin which is compounded of the internal and external. But Paracelsus
did not much regard this distinction, as appears in the Life of Oporinus, who
brought an urin to him, and desired the Doctors opinion, but he brake the glass
against the wall, and called him fool.

He errs in making the internal urin of blood, not from nourishment, but from
the excrements of parts and Minerals in man's Nature: for in a part constituted,
there are no Minerals that send forth a peculiar excrement. John Rhenavus
mentions other differences of urin from Paracelsus in his Vrocriterium
Chymiatricum, where you may see strange opinions of urin, but let every man
beware of them.

Some Chemists have spoken well of troubled urins, but not they alone, nor are
they the first, for in a troubled urin, many things may be known which are not
to be seen in a clear, chiefly in fevers; for in some something sticks so to
the glass, that it is hard to be scoured off. In others, though it stand long,
there is none. This is easily known when the urinal lies on one side: therefore
in such diseases I suppose from experience, that you may judge as well from
troubled as clear urin.

Some Chymasts in Epidemick diseases distinguish urins from Arsenick, Orpiment
and Mercury. They say Arsenick is like unslaked Lime, and cleaves to the
urinal, and corrodes it: that Orpiment is like Okar in color, and sticks fast
also, but does not corrode the glass so much; that Mercury is sky-colored, and
is first seen in the circle.

Others teach that you may judge of diseases by distilling the urin, but
Paracelsus tried it not, Gerhardus Doraeus de urin. dest.
I suppose, (but this is my opinion) in great diseases if any will distill it, I
am not against it, that they may know better what is in it, as you do in
Spaw-waters. Whatsoever he says more of the part affected, the disease and the
event, is foolish What does a furnace as high as a man concern the coustitution
of the urin? Why should the bigness of the vessels in a certain part answer to
the just stature of a man? All men are not of one stature, and therefore this
proportion will not fit all, and you must make other furnaces and glasses for
others: but these are trifles.

Moreover, Severine thought otherwise then Galen concerning the place affected,
and knowing the times of diseases: but Severine jesteth at the word, and
distinguishes not the disease from the cause, nor the place from the cause,
nor the part affected by it self from that by consent. And he unjustly accuses
Galen for making the brain the part affected in an Epilepsie, because the
beginning of sense and motion, is from the brain: Nor was Galen ignorant that
the cause which twitcheth the brain, and produces it, was not always in the
brain: but he willingly taught, and all other Physicians after him, that it
came often from the womb, stomach, and other remote parts, as in other diseases.

The Galenists knew, and taught that the root and fountain of the disease was
to be found out. And it is very hard to find out the part that affords matter
to the disease. Moreover, the way of finding out the seeds of diseases, is
uncertain, for the relation of the patient (which Paracelsus slights) shows us
sometimes best to know the disease, as for example, in the Epilepsie by consent
from the leg, may be known best by the relation of the patient, which cannot be
known by giving medicines; let them show it otherwise, not by promises, and
till then, let us retain the old way of finding out the parts affected. And let
us not imitate the rash Chemists, who write little of the part affected, and
not say, That medicines of themselves know how to find the center of a disease,
which is mere folly.

Severine says, the times and periods of diseases come not from numbers, or
the peculiar Nature of man, the motion of the Moon, the flux of excrements, and
certain motion of the expulsive faculty, but from the seeds and stars of the
members, and that in diseases, the offices of Nature cease, and all things are
governed by the seeds of diseases.

And though it be true, that concoctions and excretions are at certain times,
we must not deny that these inferior things are governed by superior causes,
which the very Countrey-swayns know from the motion of the Moon: for all men
are equally affected by the same celestial influence and motion.

It is false, that hereditary diseases, as Epilepsie, Gout, and the like, grow
like Plants from their seeds (as Severine writes) which have their time of
digestion, and bringing forth fruit, some in the seventh, tenth or fourteenth
year, etc. for there is another cause which is the vicious disposition of the
parts. And the reason why they seize not on all at one time, but upon some in
infancy, others in youth, is, because the cause that produces. diseases, is
not easily bred in all ages. The Epilepsie seizes upon infants, the Gout upon
old folk, but commonly the hereditary disease comes at thirty, because that age
uses to heap up the causes of that disease.

But it is against experience, when Severine brings the continuity of diseases
from Homogeneal roots, and the intermission of them from heterogeneal roots.
For the cause of continuity and intermission, is diverse, as we showed in
Fevers. But this cast him into many absurdities by supposing that diseases
arise only as fruit from Trees. He has many absurdities, but this is worst,
because in diseases he takes from Nature the government of the body: but he
speaks contrary to himself and to experience. Thus, It is the proper faculty of
all vital Elements, not to endure any strange thing in their Region, but they
expel all contraries by force. Right, for Nature does not only her duty in
health, but in sickness. Therefore Hippocrates says well, 6 Epid.
that Nature is the Physitianess which is not meant of the Nature of Medicines,
as Chemists interpret, but of the body. For while Nature opposes a disease as
an enemy, we must not despair of cure, and the Crisis comes by Natures benefit,
which to impute to Medicines, is foolish.

Nor is Paracelsus constant in Prognostics, Lib. 1. de orig morb. c. 8. Lib.
6. param. in sine and in scholijs.
for he says all diseases without exception are curable, though they be from
the birth, because if venom be in Nature, it is to be cured. Elsewhere he says
some diseases are uncurable, as the Leprosy.

Therefore this is the question, whether all diseases are curable? First, it is
a wonder that Paracelsians should die so soon, when they defend all diseases to
be curable, why do they not prove it in themselves? The vulgar is governed by
opinion and fair promises, but not the Learned. Moreover, they err in counting
the Leprosy, Epilepsie, Dropsy and Gout curable, which Galen says are
uncurable. For they are not always curable nor uncurable, but some are of
themselves so, others by accident. Of themselves they are uncurable, when their
Nature is such, that no art of man can help in any patient, and when there
never was an example of cure. They are uncurable by accident, when there are
remedies, and by Nature they are curable, and in some they are cured, though in
this or that patient they are not cured, because something happens which makes
it impossible. Therefore the Epilepsie, Dropsy and Gout, are not well referred
to discases of themselves uncurable. Galen mentions some Lepers that were cured
with Vipers and Treacle. Part 4. disp. contra Paracel.
And Galenists have cured the other, as Erastus shows, and daily experience
confirms, and only by Galenical Physic.

Yet I deny not that there is great power in Chemical Physic in such difficult
diseases, but it is as impossible for the Chemists as for the Galenists, to
cure all Leprosies, Epilepsies, and Dropsies, and it is as impossible, as to
raise the dead.

The reasons they bring for the cure of all diseases, are of no force. For
though there are in Nature all things necessary for pleasure and necessity, and
God could make Medicines against all diseases, as our Savior cured them that
were otherwise incurable, and raised the dead, yet it follows not that God is
envious for not making them. Nor does it follow that though God gave a remedy
against eternal death, that he also has given a remedy against all diseases:
diseases and death are the punishment of sin; therefore though God of his mercy
has given a remedy against eternal death, yet he is not enviious nor unjust,
that he has not given remedies against the first death and all diseases. Read
Bruno Seidelius of incurable Diseases.

Chap. 18. Of Medicines, and the Method of Curing.
PAracelsus valued not diet, as appears by his Practice; for he drank with his
patients nights and days, and said he cured them with a full belly. But here
he did ill, for all Physicians have acknowledged diet to be necessary to the
cure of all diseases, and he that neglects it, finds it by experience. In
fevers it is plain, for if the patient eat too freely, or that which is
improper he relapseth. And in many diseases good diet is half the cure.

As for Physic, let us consider the universal Medicine which the Chemists so
commend, by which a man may be preserved from diseases to the determinated time
of his life, as Robert Valensis writes. Lib. de verit. Chymiae.
This as Arnold de Vill a nova faith, Has virtue and force above all
Medicines, to cure all diseases both hot and cold, because it is of an occult
and subtle Nature, it keeps Nature in health, strengthens its virtues, and
makes the old young, and expels all infirmities, etc. But many Chemists think
there is no such universal Medicine that can cure all diseases in similary and
organical parts, in excess and defect and in conformation. They confess that
wounds, fractures, and luxations, Ruptures, and the like which require
Chyrurgery, are not meant here. They except also the stone, hereditary diseases,
hecticks, and diseases in number deficient, fixed Cancers and Gangrenes,
because God alone, not man, can cure all diseases: only they are only curable
with this universal Medicine that come from the inward fault of the humors, or
as they say, Which spring from an internal Root. And they call it a Medicine of
much use, as the Ancients called it a Panacea.

But the Chemists brag of this, but few or none have explained it. They say it
is enough to know the patient to be sick, and that next to the Word of God, by
which eternal life is promised, there is nothing more precious: but this
Medicine is rather to be wished then hoped for; nor was that yet found that
has done that which the Philosophers stone does in transmutation of Metals, it
is plain, and many of our age have had it, but it is not evident what it has
done in curing diseases, nor yet any thing proved by good witness.

If this Philosophers-stone can tra^smute ignoble Metals, yet it follows not
that it is an universal medicine, for they should first prove it upon
themselves, as Paracelsus and others that bragged of the Philosophers-stone,
and yet died all young.

But they which have this universal Medicine, and do hide it, have no mercy
like Christians, when they see so many men tormented, and will not help them.
Nor are good things to be concealed, because they are abused. I doubt whether a
Christian Physician can with a safe conscience conceal a Medicine that can cure
great diseases, and if he do, he does not like a Christian that must love his
neighbor as himself.

They agree not among themselves in determinating this Medicine, for many take
it for the Philosophers-stone, yet Scheunaman makes the leaves of black
Hellebore almost equal to the Philosophers-stone, and says that they being
brought into a Balsom, make a man live a second age, and do purge beyond all.

There are three opinions of the universal Medicine. The first is of them that
think that it cures all diseases, not primarily, but secondarily, by
strengthening Nature wonderfully, for according to Hippocrates, Nature is the
Physician, she concocts, separates, voideth, and takes away all faintness. And
here the Chemists extol their Quintessence and Balsom, and their incomparable
vital Sulphur, they call the secret flower the Sun and the Heaven. They say
their Quintessence and aetherial Spirit diffused through all natural things, is
the fountain of all vigor and actions. In Animals it gives soul, in Vegetables
it gives growth and vegetation, in Minerals and Metals it does according to
them. In men it makes concoction and Crisis, and then triumphs over his
conquered enemy.

They say this Spirit and Quincessence and Balsomick Medicine, comes from the
great World to the less, that the spirit in the body of man being helped by
external aid, that is by this strengthener, may oppose diseases more valiantly,
and either change what is foul in the body to a natural state, and expel it.
Some say this is to be done by Chemistry, so that it may easily agree, and be
united to our natural heat, and radical moisture, and spirit, and increase it,
and raise it to the height of purity. And though this quintessence be in all
things, yet it is more in some then in others. And the universal Medicine is to
be made of that in which this Quintessence does most abound, but what, and what
kind of matter it is, they do not explain.

Of this first opinion I think thus. First, I admit of what they say touching
the strength of inbred spirit. The Galenists teach this, only let us have the
soul to be the principle agent and this inbred spirit, Inst. l 5. p. 1. s. 1.
c. 3.
to be only an instrument of it. Nor do I wholly reject their Quintessence, but
admit it so as I showed in my Institutions; namely, to be something like to the
Element of the Heavens, a spirit such as is in wine, by which it so strengthens
the body, and refreshes the spirits: and by Chemical resolution you may show
it in all plants. And many Galenists confess that there is in Medicines, not
only that which works by the first qualities, Part. 2. disp. contra Paracels.
but by a nobler force. Therefore Erastus speaks too rash to call the
Quintessence a Dream of idle persons that desire to cheat.

But let us grant them this, and that there is Nature that which abounds with
this Quintessence and Spirit, which being artificially prepared, has great
power to strengthen, and therefore may be called an universal Medicine. Yet
they prove not that it can cure all diseases without purgers, alterers and
openers, and the like. And it cannot be that Nature should purge water in a
Dropsy, with Medicines that move the belly, or discuss the nodes in the Gout,
or the Stone without help of Medicines. And though all diseases should come
from the hurt of the vital spirit, yet the cause of that hurt may be manifold;
therefore to restore the spirits, diverse Medicines must be given according to
the variety of causes that hinder it. Therefore it is not sufficient that the
spirit which governs the whole body be strengthened, but the strength of every
private part must be preserved.

The second opinion is of those that allow not only force to the universal
Medicine to strengthen the inbred Balsom and Spirit, but to dissolve, consume
and dissipate the seminary tinctures and impurities, or diseases and causes
thereof. But let us consider if this may be to defend their opinion, they say
that fire burns all things, Antimony consumes all Metals mixed with gold, and
hurts not that, therefore the same may be by the universal Medicine, which like
a purging fire, consumes all the impurities of our bodies. Secondly, they say
as there are poisons as Arsenick, and that of a mad Dog which hurts all men, so
there may be Medicines that do all good, and cute all diseases. But these do
not evince. For fire does not consume all things, but only combustible things,
for it does no hurt to earth or gold. What they say of Antimony is not agreeable
here, nor does he prove that the same thing may be done by the universal
Medicine in man's body. Therefore they should prove that such a Medicine may be
as may resist all the distempers of the body, and consume all causes of
diseases, and hurts not the body as Antimony does all but gold which is safe.

To the similitude of poisons, I say that every poison has its own Nature, and
man has his; therefore it is the action of a determinate thing upon a
determinate; nor is every poison a poyso to every creature. And there are many
things which hurt men, and do no hurt to other creatures. But if all diseases are
to be cured by a medicine, there would be an universal action upon a
determinate, because there are diverse diseases and humors which have their
peculiar nature, all which an universal nature ought to resist.

They who think there is no such universal Medicine have sounder principles.
First, the cure of a disease is a changing of the body into a contrary to the
disease, But all change is between contraries, and from the contrary. There are
many differences of diseases and bad humors. Some diseases are from manifest
qualities, some from occult, and there is a great difference in these, as
appears by variety of poisons: and every disease and humor requires a peculiar
remedy, nor does one Medicine cure diseases from cold, heat, nor does it
moisten, and dry, and oppose all poisons. If they say this universal Medicine
is so tempered that it can resist all, how then being so tempered in the first
qualities, cannot amend the great excess of cold and heat at once. And to speak
Chymically, if Sulphur abound, and Salt be wanting, how can a temperate
Medicine, supply the defect of Salt, and take away the abundance of Sulphur.

God therefore alone cures all diseases, but the strength of natural things is
determinate and distinct, and the medicinal virtue is dispersed into many
things; nor is their strength given naturally to one Medicine to do all things:
hence is the great variety of Medicines, that every disease has its peculiar
remedy. And this variety had been in vain given by God, if all diseases could
be cured by one simple universal Medicine. And all Apothecaries would break,
and Physicians might burn their books, if that Medicine were sufficient.

Hence it sollows, that this soundation of Physic is unshaken. That which is
besides Nature, is to be taken away, and that which is according to Nature, is
to be preserved, like things are preserved by their like, and contraries are
cured by their contraries. The Chemists themselves admit of these general
Indications. And therefore they give a force of strengthening the natural
Balsom to their universal Medicine, and to comfort and consume diseases
breeding impurities, and so of curing all diseases: but they have not proved
that one Medicine should do both.

The Author of the Natural Physic of the round Vision and Cabalistical
Chemistry in his Book called, The open Chest of the most Artificial Secret,
has so many absurdities as words. And the learned Chemists approve it not,
whether he worte it in earnest or in jest. There is such another Book called,
The New Knowledge of the Universal Medicine, set out by a Professor of Physic
of Fribury in Brisgoy called Wolfang. And though he promises much concerning
this Medicine, no man yet can hear what he has done, though many enquire.
Therefore the Chemists do rather wish and hope for this universal Mendicine
then enjoy it.

In the matter of Physic they differ little from the Galenists; first in
finding out the faculties of Medicines, they go another way, which they call by
Signatures, and say that the Plants that represent Animals, or any parts of
them, or are like any way, are good to strengthen those parts or to expel
diseases. To these they add the Dominion of the Planets, and the Plants that
are subject to such a Dominion, are dedicated to those parts as are under those
Planets. Under Saturn they place Plants that are rough and unpleasant, black,
swarthy pale, and Lead-coloured, thin and dry slalks, binding, stinking,
moorish: these have an Antipathy with the Plants of the Sun, and are dedicated
to the Spleen.

Plants of Jupiter are oily, pleasant in scent and taste, with red and
skie-colour'd flowers, these belong to the Liver; as Balsom, Oil,
Clove-giliflowers, Bettony, Avens, Lillies, Centaury.

Plants of Mars are reddish, sharp, and rough, Corrosives, and such as grow in
dry places, as Nettles, Carduus.

Those under the Sun are sweet in scent and taste, yellow flowered, or
gold-Colour'd, that grow in the South Sun; to these they refer Wine, Saffron,
Citrons, Oranges, Balm, Rosemary.

Under Venus are Plants of a sweet taste, and an amurous scent, with a white
flower, as the Dog-stone; Plants, all Lillies, and Lilly Convals, Daffodils.

They say Mercury governs Plants of diverse colors that grow in sandy grounds,
bare Cods, have a subtle scent, as Pellitory, Chamomil, Columbines, Beans,
Dasies, three-leaved Grass, etc.

The Moon governs the Plants with soft leaves thick and full of juice, as
Gourds, Cowcumbers, Melons, Musk melons, Pompions, Lettice, Garlic, Onions,
Leeks, etc.

The modern Chemists from these made Medicine peculiar to every humor and part;
they thought that these have great relation to the blood, as Gilliflowers,
Roses, Piony, Bugloss, Borage, Violets, and therefore serve for Sanguification.
And that Bugloss and Borage purge the blood from melancholy, Fumitory from
choler, the Peach-leaves from phlegm, and all Plants that are like blood do stop
blood, as Tormentil, Snakeweed, Herb Robert, with the red Root, red Roses, the
Bloodstone, red Coral. They say that these sollowing are like to choler, and do
purge it, as Rhubarb, Agrimony, yellow Mirobalans. They are such as are black
or duskie, are like melancholy, and such as are bitter or astringent, as
Polypody, black Hellebore, Senna, Asarabacca. These are proper to evacuate
phlegm, as wild Cowcumbers, Mercury, Arage, all these are under the Moon, and
belong to the stomach and brain, and purge them, are good against phlegm, and
the moist scab, and the like.

As to the parts of the body: the brain, because it is governed by the Moon,
has relation to the Medicines under its Dominion, and against all diseases of
the brain, Moonwort, Silver, and Pearl are good. Finally, they ascribe proper
Medicines to every part of the body, either from the signature or color, or
from the Dominion of the Planet over the part.

They say the Herbs with pointed Leaves, as Carduus Mariae and Benedictus,
Eryngus, Juniper, etc. are good against pricking pains. That plants that have
knotty roots, are good against tumors and pustles. They which are persorated,
or are like an axe or saw, or any thing that will wound are good against wounds.
That plants that have slimy and glutinous juice, and have gums and rosin heal
wounds: those that are spotted and scaly leaved, cure the scab and all
defilements of the skin. Those like Serpents and other venomous beasts, are
good against their bitings and stings. Questot. lib. designat. externis. Crol.
lib. de signat. exter.
See Baptista Porta, Quercetan, and Crollius.

All these are not to be rejected, nor do I think with Libavius that it is by
chance that things answer to their external forms. For experience witnesses
the external figures are the signs of the internal virtue. And let Signature
have its place among the rest, for finding out the faculties of Medicines and
diseases. The Galenists have long approved that Medicines are proper to such
parts as they resemble, as Piony and Poppy are good for the head and brain, but
we must not trust only signature, though it is the chiefest, and let experience
be yielded unto.

Nor is it to be contemned, that every plant is under a peculiar Planet,
because Heaven (by experience) acts not upon things below only by heat and
light, but by an occult influence. But this was not the Chemists Invention, but
the Astrologers of old.

Here Is a question: Lib. 1. philos sagacis and lib. de occulta Philoso.
Whether there be any force in Words and Characters in Physic? Paracelsus
caused it, when he said Characters would cure diseases otherwise uncurable, and
he says it is lawful to fetch remedies from the Devil, if they will cure a
man. We answer as for words they signify from a compact and convention of men.
For thoughts are the same in all men, but the words or notes by which they are
expressed, are diverse, and the same words signify diverse things in diverse
Nations. Lib 1. philoso. saga. c 6.
Therefore words do only declare the sense of the mind, and work no further,
for all principle of operation by which bodies are changed, is a quality and a
natural power, and things have their efficacy by their qualities. Paracelsus
says that words have an hidden for^e and virtue as Roots and Plants, but
because he proves it not we ought not to believe it. The Devils in old time
showed their worshippers by what words, signs and images they would be
worshipped and called upon, and so from a Covenant they are of power. Hence it
happens that they which read such words and conjurations, though they
understand them not, yet do raise the Devil: Martin Delrio has an example of
this. Disquis. magic. lib. 2. q. 29. sect. 1.
There is great abuse in holy words, which the Devils and Conjurers use often
to delude the simple.

There is the same reason for Characters and Seals; nor did Paracelsus and the
Chemists first give power to them, Lib. 30. not. histo. c. 1. Lib. 9. de simpl.
me dic. facult. c. de lapidib.
but the Astrologers and Physicians, and the Magicians chiefly, as Pliny
writes. It is an ancient trick to grave a Dragon upon a Jasper-stone, and put
it in a ring. Paracelsus propounds many Characters out of Galen in his Book of
Archidox Magic, and in that of occult Philosophy, he prefers two before all
Sigus and Characters: the one in which the word Adonai is written in a figure,
the other in which the word Tetragrammaton is written (as if it were the Name
of God) he writes these are good against Devils and diseases from Incantation;
nor is the Name of God profaned so, because it is used for man's good, and
against diseases of incantation, but evil is not to be done that good may come
thereof

But neither Paracelsus nor others that allow Power to Characters and Seals
agree in giving a cause of the effects they produce. Some bring their strength
from Heaven, Differ. 101
as the Conciliator out of that of Ptolomy. The countenance of sublunary things
is subject to the heavenly countenances, so that the celestial Scorpion
governs the inferior; which being granted, what does it concern a Scorpion
graven upon a Jewel, nor are they under the same kind. Others say there is a
force instilled into them from Heaven, and the Stars. Others say that
Individuals beginning to be under a determinate constellation, receive an
admirable faculty to work or suffer, besides what they have from their species.
But a Jewel or Metal does not then begin to be when it is graven, but it was
before. Others think otherwise, but none could yet bring any probabilities for
the virtue of them, much less have any of them power to get favor to men, or
knowledge, wit, memory, or love of a King, or Victory in War and Law, or good
success in hunting, or merchandise, or make faithful friends, or raise a man to
honor, and the like.

Two things are in Seals, the Matter and the Character, to neither of which can
this force be ascribed: not to the Matter which is from nature, nor has it
that strength as they confess, and if it had, it would have it without a figure
or Character, as a Loadstone under what figure soever, has pover to draw iron
without a Character. The Characters are from the Artificer, and from the Idea
in his mind, which cannot work upon external things, therefore cannot have
force from themselves or from the Artificer; of themselves they are nothing but
figures, but a figure is not active being but a quality of the quantity: nor do
artificial things act upon natural, and change them, or affect them, as being
such, but they act upon them as they have natural matter, and on the contrary,
natural things do not alter nor affect articificial, as such, but as they are
of a natural matter. Therefore images or names graven upon Matter, can do
nothing of themselves.

Nor can they take their strength from Heaven, for if the matter of which they
are made, can receive any strength from Heaven, it may receive it as well
without Characters; nor have they yet proved the contrary: therefore if any
efficacy be found in these, it must be ascribed either to imagination, which is
of great force, or to the Devil, who by secret signs is invited by such
characters, by way of compact made of old with his worshippers. For these came
from the Gentiles that were subject to Superstition and Idolatry, and the Devils
gave these Characters from a bargain either explicit or implicit, by which
only they prevail from the Devil who made a covenant with him that first
learned them.

Nor is it sufficient what they say, that such things are without the
invocation of the Devil, or adjuration, or any unlawful way, but work
naturally. For first they must prove that there is such a peculiar virtue in
such Seals, which Metals and Gemms have not of themselves; for though it be not
an explicit bargain or conjuration, yet it may be implicit, and the Devil
knows the dice he gave his worshippers before. Therefore the Primitive Church
ordered the converted Gentiles to abstain from things consecrated to the Devil.
In Actis Apost.


But Paracelsus says therefore that the patient be forsaken and lie without
help, when remedies that work by nature cannot cure him being enchanted? We say
first that it is false, that diseases brought by Magic, cannot be cured by
natural means, of which we have many examples. For such diseases are often
produced by natural means, and when such things are removed as causes, they are
cured by natural means, by a strong faith in God. So Medicines that purge
melancholy have been given with good success to such as have been possessed of
the Devil. See in Rulands Centuries, for a melancholy humor is the Devils bath.
Also by purges, and vomits, hair, needles, wood, iron, and other strange things
have been voided, that have caused suspicion of Witchcraft: and the patients
have recovered. Therefore we must never fly to the help of the Devil, because
it is deceitful, he cures the body to get the soul, and any disease or death it
self, ought to be more desired, then health from the Devil.

To this is like the magnetic cure by amulets, for many things work naturally
by a vertual contract as Galen confesses, 6. Templ.
when he writes that Piony hung about the neck, cures the Epilepsie, and the
best Physicians confirm it. This force is called Magnetic, from the Lodestone
that draws iron, and turns to the Pole without a corporal contract. Part 1.
dis^^t. contra Para.
He that denies such things, is to be accounted very unskil'd in natural
things, or rash to deny what is proved by experience. Though Erastus thinks
otherwise.

Now if any cure be done by these occult consents and dissents of natural
things; I allow them such are given in the Plague and approved by experience,
as the great Dukes Oil, the Oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus. So Fevers are
sometimes cured by Amulets and Vesicatories.

Only take heed that no superstitions nor Magic by an explicit or implicit
bargain with the Devil be sold to you. for Seals and Characters cannot be
referred to Magnetic operations, nor what Paracelsus allows of Images, nor can
all effects in nature be palliated by the example of magnetic operations.

There is another question here. Part. 1. dsput. contra parac.
Whether ought Plants to be gathered at a certain time according to the aspects
of the Stars for Physic? Erastus and others deny it, and think the Scripture
forbids it, but where I know not. Trees to build with are hewn down rather at
the increase then decrease of the Moon. In praefat. In diosc.
Therefore I think with Mathiolus and many learned men, that the Aspects of
Stars are to be observed in gathering some Plants, for these inferior things
are governed by the superior, and consent with them, and many learned men
think, that Piony so famous against the Epilepsie does not please all men, for
no other reason then because it was not gathered at the due time; and it were
good in Physic to observe this.

The Chemists also differ from the Galenists, because the Chemists make nothing
of the first qualities against experience, by which it appears that the body is
distempered by the excess in the first qualities, and by the contrary is cured,
yet they do little good who are so intent on the first qualities, regard not
the occult; moreover many Chemists proclaim all Apothecaries medicines as
malignant and venomous, and willh ave none but such as have bin cleansed and
prepared by Chemistry, This they labor to prove in all Physic.

First for Purgers, Com. 2. de rat. vict. in accut.
nor Pills, nor Potions, nor Electuaries, but they tax as poison, from the
consent of Galen, the Greeks and Arabians, and Galen says, The Nature of
Purges ought to be contrary to the nature of our bodies. Lib. 6. c. 6.
They say our Alterers are as bad, so they say from Dioscorides that Saffron is
deadly, Also Poppy, Henbane, Hemlock, and many others.

Some are more moderate and say all our medicines are not poison, but have much
impurity that hinders their profitable force; and they who give whole medicines
do like them that boil the birds in their nests, and eat Oystershels and all.
But Alchymy is that only Instrument by which the malignant quality given by God
for sin is taken away; Let the impurities which hinder the force of the vital
spirit, and break it, be cast away. Here they inveigh against the vulgar way of
preparing of medicines, and first they argue that there are too many simples in
a medicine: because one disease has but one nature, and requires but one
proper remedy. And as simple diet is best for a man, and variety hurts, much
more does a compound medicine offend a sick person.

And to contract all in a word that they alleadg against Galenists, they
disallow the ordinary way of cure and making medicines, saying, that borh
Purgers and Altererers are poisonous, corrosives, impure, unpleasant,
unefficacious, confused and strange. Hence they cast off the ordinary
Dispensatory; they inveigh against foreign medicines and say they are Arabian
fooleries, and inventions of Apothecaries.

Then they carp at the Galenists, because they use not Stones, Metals or
Minerals, or very seldom, being as they say the best of medicines, and
vegetables are not sufficient to root out diseases; because they have a
fugitive spirit and make not a fixed Balsom, and preserve not from
putrefaction, as Metals do which last long; therefore the Galenists send
patients to the Spaw waters, which have all their power from the spirits of
minerals and metals. Therefore the Chemists having a better physical matter and
better prepared, they say they cure diseases by the Galenists uncurable.

These accusations are not a few, nor weak, and if they could clearly prove
them the medicines we use were to be totally rejected: But it is not hard to
vindicate the Galenists, for what they say of poison put into creatures by the
curse is without reason, and is refuted Chap 16. and the Chemists themselves
think otherwise as Rulandus observes. Progymnau. Alkin qu. 25.


Moreover it is foolish to say that all purges have the nature of poison, we
grant some that are vehement are adverse in nature to our bodies: But what is
that against the Galenists or for the Chemists? They have their Cauteries and
Sections, and Vomits that are adverse, and yet they are not always to be
rejected. So if the strong purgers molest in some way the patient, yet the
profit they bring by purging bad humors is greater. Albeit the hurt they bring
is from the want of right preparation and administration.

But no Chemical preparation or separation takes away the poison from a
venomous body, or can make it a good Medicine: nor do purgers, prepare them how
you please, lay aside their nature wholly. Nor have the Chemists given any
purge that has not some way disturbed the patient, therefore purging extracts
are to be given with as much caution as others.

What they bring against the vulgar composition of Medicines, is of little
weight; so that the way of composition used, is not to be abolished, and their
arguments are most from the Galenists that allow them not: and all Doctors
disallow the crowding in of diverse Simples without a cause, and they think it
rashness to use Compounds when Simples will do, and that it is bad to put many
Simples of the same faculty into one Compound.

But many may be mixed when diseases are complicate, both in the affects and
the causes, when Medicines are to be directed by many ends which cannot be done
by one simple Medicine, for one simple Medicine can scarce be found that has
so many faculties joined together, as the Doctor has ends propounded.

Therefore let Chemical preparations have their due praise and place, and the
Vulgar preparations theirs. But it is the part of an idle and too curious
person to prepare all things Chymically, and when a Conserve or a Powder will
serve to give an Oil or a Spirit. Nor is the commendation of a Chemical
medicine for its small dose sufficient, because it causes no disgust, for so
you may commend poisons. This is the error of many, who to please the palate
only, give the Extract of Scammony, Cambugia, or a little Powder, but great in
operation, but consider not whether it hit the disease, and evacuate the
peccant humor. To conclude, it is the part of a prudent Physician sometimes to
use Chemical, sometimes whole Medicines, according to the circumstances of the
diseases, place and time.

They also are not wise, who reject exotic or outlandish Medicines, for
neither wine nor spices that grow from home, being used every day, are enemies:
Every Land does not produce every thing. Therefore there is commerce that one
Nation should supply the other. It is true that the Galenists say if homebred
Physic, it were in vain to get foreign, but if not, there is no reason why
exotic Medicines may not be used.

We reject not wholly Physic made of Minerals and Metals, Dios. l. 1. c. 17.
Gal. de med. fac. parabilib. 2. c. 36.
being persuaded by the Spawwaters that cure desparate diseases. The ancient
Physicians gave them inwardly as well as outwardly, as Steel, Sulphur vive,
scales of Brass, burnt Brass, and the like. Therefore we may better use them
Chymically prepared. Niter prepared called Sal Prunellae, is used happily
against Quinzies and Fevers. Antimony and Mercury, if well given, do what
other Medicines cannot. A Girl of twelve years old used Antimony Diaphoretick
every day, who had many ulcers about the joints, when other remedies were of no
force, and was cured. But because these have often done hurt, you must be wary
in using them, least Mercury of life so called, become Mercury, or a messenger
of death.

It may be objected that Metals are enemies to Nature, but we must labor to
take away that enmity by Chemistry, you may see this in Arse^^^^ which being
present poison, lays aside all its venom by Chemical preparation. Yet we
commend not them that include all Medicines in a few Metals, as if God had made
Vegetables in vain. It is known to all how Medicines made of Vegetables and
Animals, refresh both the sound and the sick with their pleasant taste and
scent, and it is not yet proved that Minerals can do the same.

Hence the question is easily decided, whether Chemical or Galenical Medicines
are best? To speak my thoughts, they both have their places and praises, but if
you ask which is to be preferred, the one simply cannot be preferred before the
other. For though the Chemists have a certain prerogative, yet indeed they are
not better then Galenists, but the Medicines excel in respect of preparation,
nor are they simply to be preferred for this cause, for I said both have their
place, and it is the part of an unexperienced man never to desire to use
Chemical medicines, or not to use whole medicines, but all Extracts or Essences
For some medicines so disperse their virtue through the whole body, that if
their parts should be separated, they would partly or wholly loose it. Others
have their strength in other parts, where consider in what part it is.
Therefore use whole medicines, when the force desired is in the whole body, and
vanishes when it is dissolved: But use dissolved or separated medicines, when
the strength of them is diverse, and comes from diverse parts; or when the force
of the medicine may be brought into a small quantity by taking away what is
unprofitable.

Here observe, that which way soever Antimony and Mercury are prepared, they
never will be so good and safe, as Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Senna, Rhubarb, and
the like, and from one grain of them, more hurt may come, then from an ounce of
ordinary Physic. And which way soever they are prepared, they are always
accounted vehement medicines. Though some brag of secrets and singular
preparations, they have not yet discovered them. Therefore let the Chemists
prove that the volatile purging Spirit that passes through the whole body,
remains such in Antimony and Mercury after preparation, so that it may be so
benign and familiar to our Nature, as Cassia and Tamarinds, and the rest. This
they will scarce do, for that Spirit is easier to the fixed or thrown away,
then to be qualified as to loose its nature. Lib. 4. Epist. ad Andr. de Blauu.
Mathiolus says well on the other side: When the whole mass of blood is all
over corrupt, and filled with the seeds of diseases, these cannot be cured but
by Minerals.

Therefore a wise Physician must use sometimes this, and sometimes that, as the
nature of the diseases and circumstances requires, as Pouders, Decoctions,
Infusions or Extracts, Minerals, and domestic and foreign Medicines. As for
Example, when you will strengthen and bind, Conserve of Roses does that which a
Spirit, or Water, or Salt of the same cannot do: on the other side, the
strength of medicines is greater in Chemistry, as in Oils and Spirits. For the
Physical part is separated from what is unprofitable that hinders its
operation, and so it is given pure. Therefore we conclude, that Chemical
medicines considered simply, are nobler of themselves, because purer and more
active, but they are not always and every where to be preferred before
Galenical.

Nor is the objection against Chemical medicines of force, when they say, that
what arises from the solution of the mixture, is not specifical, and the
Chemists while they dissolve the mixture, Lib. 3. de simpt. med. fac. c. 14.
destroy the essence. For Galen shows that all medicines, though to sense
simple, yet are in nature compounds, and so have diverse faculties in the parts,
and afford diverse uses for diverse things. Moreover, the solution is not always
into the first Elements, as we showed, therefore when the Chemists dissolve such
bodies by art, and dissolve dissimilary bodies into similary parts, they are so
far from destroying the strength of the medicine, that they rather separate
them from all heterogeneal mixture. Nor does the Chemist transmute the thing,
but makes one thing of another by the power of nature. As that which is
extracted from Rhubarb in the Spirit of Wine or other liquor, is the same in
number and species with that in which the force of purging depends in Rhubarb
being whole And so we grant that as he that gives butter, does not give all the
milk, so he that gives the Extract of Rhubarb, gives it not all, but only that
part in which the force of purging lies. Therefore medicines made by solution,
are not of the same species with the whole, but are of the same kind with the
parts of the whole, from which they were made.

Let us conclude thus, he that will be a true Physician needs not only
medicines to cure as an Emperick, but he must follow method and his
indications, otherwise he will do more hurt then good, for the abuse of the
best thing is the worst. Therefore Erastus says well: He does least hurt in
most diseases, Part. 4. disput. contra Parac.
that uses vulgarly prepared Medicines, but he does much hurt, that gives
Chemical Physic where it is not needful, or gives them not aright. This is to
teach young Physicians that think themselves wiser then others, and neglect all
vulgar remedies approved by long experience, and use only Chemical medicines
lately invented, and not well approved, and so get a fame. And to teach some
Galenists that being ignorant of Chemistry, yet to seem inseriour to none, give
dangerous Chemical medicines, not knowing their strength and preparation. The
Chemists offend in this at this time, who being ignorant of all other parts of
Physic, yet having a little skill in Chemical operations, contemn other
Physicians, and proclaim their own perfection: and so with the Cobbler, they go
beyond their last.

Let us now discuss the Controversy, whether we must use contraries or things
like, for curing diseases? It is an old Axiom, Contraries are cured by
contraries: whence Hippocrates defines Physic to be addition and substraction,
that is, to add things defective by the like; and to substract or take away
what abounds, and happens to the body besides nature by the contrary. For
curing is a motion from a disease to health, Arist. 5. metaphys.
and motion is respect of a contrary.

The modern Chemists say that like cures like, and when there may be a twofold
similitude, with the disease and with nature, they understand both, because
Hippocrates says, Nature is the Physitianess of diseases, and remedies are in
vain when she resists. Hence Galen shows that the vital indication is to be
preferred before all, therefore things are to be given which are like and
familiar with nature. Then they think that things alike are to be given in
respect of the disease and its causes, for purges attract vicious humors by the
similitude of the whole substance, and Alterers must be like to the part to
which they are applied, and there are proper medicines for every part, some for
the heart, others for the brain and liver. Then they say that diseases arising
from Salt, are cured by Salts, and those from Sulphur by Sulphur. But this
Controversy is rather in words then things. First, they agree in this, that
always there is a care to be had of the strength, and it must be preserved by
its like: nor does the other Axiom oppose this, namely, That contraries are
cured by contraries. For here we must distinguish between a vital and a curing
indication in species. And when Hippocrates says, Contraries are cured by
contraries, he speaks not of a vital Indication, but of taking away what is
preternatural, and must be only meant so. Hence it is that the patient desires
contrary things to the disease, as when he thirsts, he desires drink which is
the cure of thirst; for it is not the disease that desires remedies, as the
thirst does not require drink, but the thirsty: and so by this general rule,
whatsoever is besides nature, is to be taken away.

Nor do the Galenists deny that medicines are to be chosen, which are familiar
and proper to the part affected, which familiarity is in similitude and an
occult Sympathy.

Thirdly, I suppose the Dispute is not of the contrariety of Alterers, nor is
there any Paracelsian so simple, that will give a hot remedy as hot against a
hot disease as so, or thinks that a dried body as such, is to be more dried.
For experience is against them, and sense, not only in men but beasts, who in
great heat require to be cooled, and in cold to be warmed. Therefore the Axiom
of Hippocrates remains unshaken, which Galen confirms, Lib. 9. meth. c. 15.
That the Remedies of contraries are contrary.

And though the Galenists contend among themselves about this, and some would
overthrow it, yet hitherto they have not.

Therefore the Controversy remains about the causes, whether remedies must be
like or contrary unto them? If by contrary, we understand whatsoever is
effectively so, or that can produce an effect contrary to the preternatural
affect; I suppose the Chemists will not be against us, for they give their
medicines for that end, namely, that the cause and the disease may be taken
away, and not increased. Nor do any of them deny that of Hippocrates, 3. Aphor.
22.
That diseases from fullness must be cured by evacuation. The question then is,
How ought medicines to be against the causes of diseases, according to internal
strength, and nature, and substance? Here lies the great wheel of the
Controversy, for the Paracelsian Chemists refer diseases or the causes of them
to their Principles, and call some Sulphurous, some Salt, and some Mercurial,
the Sulphurous they say are to be cured by Sulphur, the Salt by Salt, and the
Mercurial by Mercury; if Sulphur be on fire, it must be quenched, and in this
they admit of contrarieties, but only by sulphurous medicines, and so they
think of salt and tartarous diseases, as the stone which is to be cured by
Tartar. Hence the stones in Cattle and other Creatures, are good to break it,
and the Jew-stone in the stone of the kidneys and bladder, and roots of
Butchers-broom, Smallage, Marshmallows, and so they say that the disease
always denotes the remedy.

In this the Galenists and Paracelsians seem to differ, let us labor to
reconcile them. And first most Galenists to allow that Purges do attract foul
humors by a familiarity of substance, which does not overthrow that old Axiom,
that contraries are cured by contraries. For they are always effectively
contrary, for the disease is alwales taken away by contraries mediately or
immediately, by it self or by accident; and though Rhubarb attract choler by
the likeness of its substance, yet it causes choler to be purged, therefore
Aristotle writes well, 1. De genesis ercor. c. 7.
the patient and the agent are the same in general and alike, but unlike in
species, and such are contrary.

Nor do the Chemists deny contrariety, when ^hey say Salt cures Salt, for some
Salts have power to dissolve, others to coagulate, therefore they say that
humors coagulated by Salt, are to be cured by Salt dissolveth. And they say
that a fever from burning Sulphur is not cured by burning Sulphur, but by
sharp Sulphur that may coagulate these Spirits that are on fire, and allay
them, De prisc. mat. med. c. 3. and 3.
and keep them burning. Quercetan proves this by gunpowder, for though
Salt-peeter and Sulphur are easily set on fire, yet both have a sharp Spirit,
with which if you touch the powder, it will flame no more. Therefore in one
respect the like cures the like, and in another the contrary the contrary; for
between humors and things that dissolve humors, there is a familiarity. But in
respect of the taking away of the disease and the causes, contraries are
required.

And thus much of the consent and dissent between the Chemists and the
Galenists. He that considers this wisely, Lib. 4. Epist. ad Andr. Blauv.
will find that Chemical medicines are not to be neglected for Galenical, nor
Galenical for Chemical; for as Mathiolus writes. None can be an ordinary
Physician, that knows no Chemistry, and he is admirable that knows what is
Divine in Diseases, in Medicines and Nature, and finds out the fountains of
actions, all which may be done by Chemistry; but he that cleaves only to the
first qualities in things, cannot come to this. Other things that respect the
constitution, faculties, and actions, the causes and differences of Diseases
and Symptoms, the Signs, Prognostics, and Method of Curing, may be found in
Hippocrates and Galen, and their Interpreters. He that neglects these, is an
Emperick, and no Physician.

AN APPENDIX.
Chap. 19. Of the Constitution of Chemistry.
IN this Appendix, we suppose what Libavius wrote at large, and Beguin in
short, and what we mentioned in the fifth Book of Institutions. That though
Chemical Opeperations and Medicines are there added, yet here I will plainly
lay down as in a Table, the whole Nature of Chemistry, and its Constitution
from the places alleged, and add some admonishments. This I shall do without
calumniating any, or detracting from them.

For two may differ in opinion,
And still in friendship keep communion.
All Sciences and Arts, as they are found, ought to stand upon some Principles,
that reasons may be given of things done in them, otherwise it is rather an
ignorance then a science, yet Chemistry the most noble and useful Art, has few
things fortified with reason, and brought from certain Principles; for there
are many proceedings and Forms of Operation, of which few teach the causes and
Principles, so that it seems to be an Art without an Art. But as Physic so
Chemistry is wholly subject to the natural Science, and must follow the Laws of
Nature, in working, so that there may be a mutual consent between them both.

In the first Chapter of this Tractate, there is the Subject, Definition, and a
twofold end of Chemistry. But laying aside the former end, we shall here speak
only of the Constitution of Chemistry, as it serves a Physician, and helps him
to good Medicines; and we shall propound some things in Operations which may
serve for the last end.

A Chemist to obtain his end, must have some means or Mediums, which are
Chemical operations and instruments by which he works. Of which we shall
speak in order.

As for the instruments, the chief are fire or heat, the Menstruum, air and
water; but that agents may be applied to the patients, there are required
furnaces, glasses, and many other vessels. We spoke elsewhere of furnaces,
glasses, and other vessels, and of luting, Inst. l. 1. part. 3. sec. 2. c.
11.12.14.
and we added instruments for other operations. And Chap. 2. we spoke of fire
and heat.

The Menstrua are whatsoever things serve for solution, extraction and
separation of bodies: and this name is commonly given to liquors, which cast
upon bodies, have an actual force to dissolve or extract something out, as
common Water, distilled Waters, Dew, Spirit of Wine, Turpentine, distilled
Vinegar, and things distilled in it, Spirit of Salt, Niter, Vitriol, Aqua
fortis, and Regia, of which in the place of my Institutions cited.

We may bring all these liquors into three heads, some are watery, some have
Salt, others are oily, bodies are not dissolved, but by their proper dissolvers
that answer to their nature. The watery bodies are like water, and are
dissolved and extracted by watery Menstrua, Sugar and Salt, which melt in
water, dissolve salt bodies, and no other. Things spiritual are dissolved by
Spirits, salt things by salt Spirits, and extracted by oil and fats. Metals and
Stones by Aqua fortis, and Regia, and the like liquors. And without Salt no
Metal is dissolved, because all Metals are of a salt nature; therefore the
first melting must needs be by Salts. Mercury dissolveth gold, not so much by
corrosion as by similitude, or an occult quality. And Aqua fortis, though it be
very corrosive, dissolves not Rosin, Wax or Pitch, but they are dissolved in
oils and fats. Therefore get the proper Menstruum for dissolving of very thing.

Some understand by the word Menstruum, not only liquors, but other dry bodies,
which dissolve things, as Salt, Niter, Sulphur, which being added to Metals or
Stones, and resolved in a fire of reverberation, insinuate into the bodies
applied, and dissolve them.

Thirdly, Chemists must have air which conduces two ways, namely as it is
moist, and has waterish vapors, and as it is cold; as it is moist, it serves a
Chemist, when it is mixed with things by nature dry, and makes them of a moist
consistence; this is when air gets into Salts in moist places, and makes them
melt. And in some distillations the moist air causes the Spirits that are by
nature dry, and come forth like clouds, to turn moist, as in Oil of Sal Gem
made by a bell, in Spirit of Salt and Vitriol, and the like.

Also air serves in respect of its coldness, for cold by accident and binding
of Homogeneal bodies, does congregate; therefore Salts sooner grow together in
water, then in heat.

Fourthly, water is an instrument of the Chemists, not only as a Menstruum to
dissolve and wash, but to mix it self with dry Spirits in a moist air.

I should add Earth, and the like, but for offense, therefore in making Spirit
of Salt and Niter, Poters Earth, Bole, and sealed Earth, are used. In
distilling some Oils, the powder of Bricks, Sand and Ashes are used. First,
that the body to be distilled, may be as fine and small as may be, and be
better healed. Secondly, least the glass should be broken by things that easily
dissolve (as Niter) another body is added to make it dissolve gently. Also the
Chemists use other instruments for some operations, as Oil of Tartar, to
precipitate Pearl and Coral being dissolved, and other for others, but I doubt
whether these may be added to the former instruments.

As for Chemical operations, they are diversely divided, and I let every man use
his own way: I divide them into a Diacrisis, and Syncrisis, and Immutation.

Diacrisis is, when the Fabric of the Body is resolved, and that which was
one, is divided. This is done three ways 1. When the impure or strange bodies
are separated. 2. When the body is dissolved into Homogeneal parts. 3. When it
is dissolved into Heterogeneal parts. In which operations let the Chemists take
this proposition, let all things be made as pure, and subtle, and efficacious
as may be.

To the Diacrisis belong Purification, Calcination, Sublimation, Resolution,
Extraction, the Essence, the Tincture, Putrefaction, and Distillation.

Purification is by washing, and often dissolving, and coagulating, and
filtration, Instit. c. 8. etc. 10.
of which elsewhere. To this belongs drying or exsiccation, which is by
evaporation and exhalation, also burning, as when the sulphurous parts and
water which are not required to stay, do fly away, and that remains which you
desire.

Calcination is either by actual or potential fire, that is, by a liquor that
has power to corrode and dissolve, as distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Salt,
Instit. c. 6.
Niter, or Vitriol, of which Chap. 6. Also Metals, Minerals, and Stones, and
other hard things are calcined.

Sublimation is, to separate impurities, and to bring bodies to the least
Atoms. By all these ways the body is dissolved into Homogeneal parts, and
that which is dissolved is homogeneal.

Resolution is, when a body is dissolved into diverse Heterogeneal parts. In
this Diacrisis note, that the properties are in the whole, or in the parts,
therefore when you desire the force which is in the whole, you need not this
operation, but when you need the force that is in a part that depends upon the
whole, observe in what part it is. So Conserve of Roses is good in a Dysentery,
not Spirit of Roses. To this belong Tinctures and Essences, Inst. lib. 5. part.
3. sect. 3. c. 9.
of which elsewhere.

Concerning Tinctures observe, that there is no true Tincture which does not
remain after the Menstruum, is abstracted. If many Tinctures were examined by
this rule, they were not true, but that color is from the mixture of the
Menstruum with the body dissolved.

Diacrisis is also by Putrefaction, which tends to a kind of separation, as
parts by nature somewhat separated, may be better separated by art, Instit. loc.
cit. c. 7.
therefore as we showed, it is often used before distillation.

To this head, we refer all distillations by descent, by the side, by ascent in
a moist bath, dry, or vaporous, Instit. loc. cit. sect. 2. c. 11.
in ashes, sand, or open fire.

The second kind of Chemical operation, is the Syncrisis, when diverse things
separated, are joined together. This is done first by precipitation, when the
body dissolved in some Menstruum, and dispersed by a liquor, is again separated
from the liquor, and goes to the body, and unites it self. And he that
considers all precipitations, Instit loc. cit. 3.13.
may observe that precipitation is universally made when any thing is cast in
for solution, or infused, by whose force the liquor dissolving, or that which
in the liquor, is the cause or solution, is separated from the body dissolved.

To this may Reduction be referred, by which a body brought to a powder or
liquor, or the like, is restored to its first form: yet reduction is not in all
bodies that are dissolved by their Menstruum, or put on another shape by the
mixture of other things. For though these may be separated from their
Menstruum, yet they are brought only into the form of a powder, not into their
first form. This is done best by Precipitation. Reduction is used in Metals,
which being brought into diverse forms, may still be reduced. Now reduction is
by taking away the Menstruum, and that which brought another form into the
body. The Salt of Tartar is an usual instrument for reduction, not that it is
contrary to all corrosives, and breaks their force, but because it is a friend
to all Salts, and therefore attracts them, and unites them to it self by its
likeness, and so the body being freed from the Salt of the Menstruum that
dissolved it, is restored to its own nature.

Metals when melted or mixed with dissolving waters, are filthy, separated from
their Menstruum by precipitation, sometimes warm water is sufficient to
separate a Metal from its Menstruum.

To Syncrisis also belongs coagulation and concretion, of which in my
Institutions. Lib. 5. part 3. sec. 2. c. 13.


To this you may refer Digestion and Circulation, which is for this end, that
the liquid parts which are not sufficiently mixed, may be united by the least
bodies, of which elsewhere. C. 14.


To this belongs Cohobation, or an often distilling of the liquor cast into the
matter let in the vessel; this is, that what was not separated in the first
distillation, may be drawn out in the second or third, yet sometimes that the
matter which is volatile in the liquor, may be joined to the fixed.

The third kind of Chemical operation, is Immutation, as when we bring a new
manner of substance upon a thing. To this belongs first the changing of a dry
thing into a liquid form, this operation is called Deliquium, of which before.
For though the moist air is then joined to that body, Loc. cit. c. 4.
yet nothing is added that gives it peculiar strength, but the consistence is
only changed.

To this belongs that operation whereby solid bodies are made drinkable, where
we shall question whether gold may be made potable? Of which hereafter.
Secondly, to this belongs the contrary operation, as when a solid body is made
of a liquid, as Precipitate of Quicksilver, of which before. Lib. 5. part 3.
sec. 3. c. 18.
Thirdly, Fixation or Volatilsation belong to this, as when no part of the
thing is taken away, nor other thing added, and a fixed body is made of a
volatile, and a volatile of a fixed. It is called fixed or volatile, in respect
of the fire or heat, the thing in its own nature is such, but the heat or fire
makes it manifest, for that is fixed which endures the first, volatile is that
which flies away by heat. This is done by the addition of an Homogeneal body:
for fixed Salts may be made volatile by digestion, and also sublimed.

Vitrification or turning into glass, is the end of transmutation of natural
bodies, after they are melted by the strongest fire.

We have mentioned the operations which the Chemists use as means to obtain
their end. As for Chemical works, they are under two heads, according to the
twofold nature of Chemical bodies Some are Homogeneal, some are Heterogeneal,
but there are no words to express it: Some call the first work an Extract,
Libavius.
the last a Magistery. And in the special explaining of these, there are diverse
appellations, as Ens, Essence, Quintessence, the Secret, Magisterium, Panacaea,
and the like, but these are not used alike of all: but let us not fall out
about words but things.

There are three sorts of Chemical works. The first is when nothing is
separated from the whole but a thing is changed and made more useful, and a new
manner of substance or quality is induced, they call this a Magistery, but it
may be called unchanged or impersect. The second sort is when that which is
separated from the whole, or extracted, which may be called a Secret, or
separated body, or an Extract by the name of the species. The third is that
which holds the Compounds: for the Chemist does not only prepare Simples, but
Compounds, some as Elixirs Balsoms, and the like.

To the first kind belong first things that of solid become liquid as Oils made
by a deliquium, the making of which is in my Institutions. Lib 5. par. 3. sec.
2. c. 14.
As the Oil or Liquor of Tartar, and other Salts, which are not properly Oils,
but whole bodies impregnated with their salt Menstruum; and therefore melt in
the moist air: to this is drinkable gold referred, and other potable Metals.

The Chemists dispute whether Metals may be reduced into a liquid form of
themselves? I suppose the liquidity is from the Menstruum mixed, because all
Metals are of a dry nature, and they that think otherwise, let them show that
there is any moisture in them, if not, it is not in the power of art, that
these dry parts of Metals, and their dry fumes, should be turned into water.
And though the Chemists add nothing, yet if it be left in the moist air, it
gets into it, as appears by Vitriol calcined.

Of this kind are, the dissolvings of Pearl, Coral, Crab's-eyes. White vomiting
Vitriol and powder, and chalks of Metals. The golden Sulphur of Antimony,
Crocus of Mars, and other Metals, which is made only of the substance of Metal
resolved. But here we understand things plainly Homogeneal, and from which
nothing is separated, but only a new kind of substance is induced.

The second kind of Chemical works is called the Secret or separated Body,
where the whole body is not presented, but a part To this belong purified
Bodies, burnt and calcined, all the chalks of combustible things, and Salts
drawn from them. Also Extracts and Tinctures, or Essences. Also Distillations,
as Waters, Spirits, Oils properly or improperly so called, Sublimates and
Flowers, when the whole body is not sublimed, but part of it remains.

But it is absurd to make Extracts or Quintessences or Oils of all things,
especially of substances plainly subtle or Homogeneal. There is an example in
Pepper whose corns in a cold stomach, when the liver is hot are good, because
they heat the stomach, and hurt not the liver, but the Extract or Oil of Pepper
is not good, because it goes presently to the liver, and hurts it.

The third kind of Chemical work is of Compounds, Lib. 5 par. 3. sec. 3. c. 5.
to this belongs the Elixir, of which in my Institutes.

These are the differences in general of Chemical operations, of which there is
great variety according to the variety of bodies, as Vegetables, Animals,
Minerals and Metals, for every thing is not made of every thing, but one thing
of another: therefore the Chemists must understand, what may be made of every
thing. For Vegetables to this belong whole Plants and their parts: as of herbs,
shurbs, trees, leaves, flowers, seeds, etc. of these are made depurated Juyces,
Spirits, Oils, Extracts, and Tinctures, and Salts, you may ad juyces to these
in the preparing that they may last better, as Wine, or a little Spirit of Wine.

We showed in our Institutes the way of making simple and compound Waters and
Spirits. Lib. proxime Citato.
These are made of green or dry Plants, green Plants we distill in Balneo, or if
they be juycy, we make juyces, and clarify them in the embers, and distill
them; if they be less juycy, we add water, and distill them in a still, or add
water, and press out the juice, and then distill it. But when we make Spirits,
fermentation is made first.

A question may arise whether Oils and Spirits differ in Essence? This we leave
to every man's judgment.

Grosser Oils made by burning of bodies, are of woods and barks, as of Box,
Guajacum: because in these the oily substance cleaves so close to the wood,
that if you boil it, it cannot be drawn out.

Then observe in Extracts, that every Simple will not afford an Extract, for
little is extracted from things that have spiritual parts, and that have
spiritual and oily Waters, as Rosemary, Mints; but they whose strength is in a
slimy juice and are not volatile, have more extract, as Gentian, Calamus
Aromaticus, Carduus, and the like.

We said that Salts are made of Plants, but some do it only to delight the
eyes, Inst. lib. 5. s 3. c. 5.
and not increase the strength. They make Salts in Crystals, and sometimes they
pour Aqua fortis upon Salts vulgarly prepared as in making Tartar vitriolate
this is reprehended; from Salts of Plants there is also a Spirit as we showed
to be made. C 5.
Things called Faeculae belong to separations made of Plants.

Of Drops, and Rosins, and Gums are made Spirits and Oils, and an Extract of
Scammony called a Rosin, and it is pure Scammony separated from all its
impurity, as the Extract or Balsom of Aloes Also there is flour of Benzoin
sublimed.

From Tartar there is a cream of Crystal, a Liquor, Spirit and Oil, Salt, and
the Secret or great Magistery is made the same way, as the Magistery only
instead of spirit of Wine we use distilled Vinegar. Moreover the cream and
Crystal of Tartar is not a pure Salt, because it dissolves not in cold water,
and if it be distilled in a Retort it affords oil also. That called oil of
Tartar is not its proper Oil, but its Salt dissolved by Deliquium.

From Coral a Magistery is made, and many talk of a tincture of Coral: but if
it be considered the best Chemists dare not promise it to be true, but it is
the Solution or Magistery of Coral mixed with some Menstruum.

Chemists work also upon Animals and their parts, as Blood, Flesh, Horns,
Bones, Stones, Pearls, Perch stones, Crabs eyes, Galls.

Of Honey is made a Water or Spirit, of Wax there is made an Oil, and from
Butter. From fats of Beasts an Oil is distilled which is hotter and drier then
they. Of Urine is made Salt; from Blood only a fixed and volatile salt, water
and oil: but they are not safely given inwardly by reason of their stink, nor
outwardly, for other things may supply. Some make Mummy of blood which is
nothing but that fibrous part of the blood, and the beginning of flesh
separated from the serous and dried in the Sun. Also Mummy is made of Man's
flesh. And a Water is distilled from hearts of Beasts, and from Horns. There is
Physic made also, of Man's Skull and other bones burnt: or a Liquor, Oil, or
Volatile Salt; by a Retort.

From Stones bred in man's body there is made a Salt and Oil; and a Magistery
from Pearl, Crabs eyes, Perch stones; but I doubt that the spirit of Pearl is
mixed with a Menstrual Salt, therefore I suppose that Pearl vulgarly prepared
is wholsomer in many diseases.

As for Minerals and Metals they are objects of Chemistry. Of Amber there is an
oil. Of Sea salt or other, a Spirit or Oil. Of Niter is made Sal Prunellae.

From Sulphur there is flour by sublimation, of this flour there is a Tincture
and Balsom of Sulphur with spirit of Turpentine and Wine, and of the same flour
is Lac Sulphuris made.

The Chemists talk much of the oil of Talk, but of it self it is not made into
a liquor, but being calcined with a strong fire or with Niter and Vinegar
sprinkled upon it, the volatile Salt in the Vinegar unites it self with the
caclined Talcum, and then melts, he that can show better let him.

From Gemms are made Magisteries, then Tinctures, but if any colored Liquor be
from Gems, it is rather the dissolving of the Gemms then an extracted Tincture.

Things made of Minerals and other metals are not so easy, we shall speak a
little of some of them.

From Vitriol by distillation is first drawn a Phlegm and Spirit. Spirit of
Vitriol is thus made. Take Vitriol as much as you please, calcine it yellow,
pour enough of the spirit of Wine upon it to make it like a Paste, distill it,
rectify the spirit when it is extracted; thence make a salt of Vitriol by
pouring hot water upon the Caput mortuum or Lees. I see no cause why this may
not be counted a Salt. Some labor to make a green spirit of Vitriol.

Antimony first may be calcined, and then it is called Crocus metallorum from
its Saffroncolour. You may make flour of the same by calcination. There is also
a Stone or Glass made of Antimony. Some make a Tincture, a Regulus, and a
Butter. Antimony is made Diaphoretick, and loses its purging quality by the
mixture of fixed Salts: this is done when Antimony is often melted with Niter,
for Niter gives another kind of substance to Antimony, and makes it of volatile
fixed, this is so hard as Crollius writes wittily, the art of Fire cannot take
away the force of causing Vomit from Antimony, though many have attempted it:
because they abhor that quality of vomiting, nor has any Chemist this
preparation, though many brag of it; for if the vomiting quality be gone, the
purging quality must go with it: Nor is it an argument because some vomit not
after Antimony is taken by them, for that is from the strength of the stomach,
or the disposition of the humors to be evacuated.

Let us speak a little of the Physical use of Quicksilver, this only shows
that one thing keeping the same internal form and nature, may have diverse
external forms; it may be dissolved, sublimed, precipitated, poudered, made to
flour-like silver, into glass to be like a metal, coagulated and changed, and
many ways transformed in diverse liquors: yet so that it easily comes to its
old nature, flies away, and is fixed, nor is there any heterogeneal part that
may be separated, of it are made first many precipitates, of which there are
many descriptions, some call it Turbith, others distinguish it. Also there is
Mercurius vitae, Crollius called it the flour of the butter of Antimony, but
wrong. Of the same is made a Bezoard Mineral, then there is an ordinary
Sublimate, and a Mercurius dulcis, the secret of Coral is a kind of Sublimate.
Also there is a Silver flour made of Mercury, In Apocalyph. hermetica.
and waters, oils and spirits: Libavius has described the Mercury waters.

As for other metals some are fixed, others not, the fixed are Gold (which
alone loses nothing though long in the fire) and Silver, which because it is
more fixed then others, is counted fixed as Gold, we showed in our Institutes
the calcination of metals by fire and a Menstruum. Lib. 5. p. 3. s. 3. c. 5.
and 6.


From Lead is made Saccharum Saturni, if this be put into a Retort and
distilled, there is made a liquor called oil of Lead. Of Tinn is made a Crystal
and oil or liquor. Of Steel is made Crocus martis of which there are diverse
descriptions and tinctures. If Vitriol be dissolved in water and spirit of
Vitriol, it is after coagulated into Vitriol. Vitriol is made of Copper, called
Vitriolum veneris. Of Silver is made a Tincture.

There are many disputes of drinkable Gold, but I suppose that what is sold
for potable Gold is only the Magisteries mentioned and Gold dissolved into the
smallest parts and mixed with a menstruum, diverse menstruums are carried about;
the force of dissolving in all which, lies in the Salt. And Gold is to be
brought to that pass, that it may be dissolved in spirit of Wine or other
liquor, which may be done by diverse Menstruums. And in all the end is that the
body of Gold being thick and compact may be resolved into very fine atoms,
that being taken in it may with more ease exercise its force upon the body.
Therefore first they use stronger, then weaker menstruums, and if any menstruum
be an enemy to nature, it is separated by the fire or by washing. But then the
Gold does not of it self dissolve into a liquor, but by reason of Salt that is
mixed with it from the menstruum.

FINIS.

