Several Letters from IRELAND Of the late Good success of the Parliament
forces there ONE From Col. Hewson Governor of Dublin, sent to the Honorable
William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the PARLIAMENT.

Wherein were enclosed the Summons, and other passages between him and the
Governor of the strong Garrison and Fort of Ballisanon.

Together With the Propositions tendered by them, and refused. As also the
Articles upon which the same was surrendered, Dated the First day of March 1649.

TWO Other Letters from William Basil Esquire, Attorney General for the State
in Ireland.

March 18. 1649.
THese Letters and Papers are appointed to be Printed and published.

Imprimatur,

Henry Scobel. Cler. Parliamenti;





London Printed for Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens-head Tavern,
1649.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Parliament of
England.
SIR,
WHen his Excellency marched from Dublin toward Munster, he left me entrusted
with that Garrison, my self, and those left with me at that time being sick:
The first party that recovered were sent after the Army; to wit, about 800
Foot, and 200 Horse, which fought and beat the Enemy upon their march: Some
more of those sick men that were left recovering, and some recruits coming
over. After I had surprised the strong Fort upon the Bog of Allin, and taken
Castle-Martin in the County of Kildare, and placed a Garrison therein. About
the latter end of December, marched with a party of 1000 Horse and Foot into
the Island of Allin, and summoned Killmaog therein, but finding it not feazable
to storm without Guns, I marched to Rabride and Ponsers Grange, and took
them, and placed two strong Garrisons there, which did give me good footing in
the County of Kildare, then sent a party and took Kildare, Hertwell, and
Cotlingstowne, three useful Garrisons in the said County; and provisions being
spent returned back to Dublin, there endeavoring to get Guns, Mortar pieces,
and other necessaries ready to draw forth again with all possible speed; in
the interim I received Propositions from the Governor and Officers in the
strong Garrison and Fort of Ballisonan, the original whereof, I here enclosed
present you with all under their own hands, which being by me utterly rejected.

I marched upon Tuesday the 26 of Feb. with a party of 2000 Foot, and 1000
Horse, toward the County of Kildare, and took with me one Culverin, and one
Demi-culverin, and one Mortar-piece, the Enemy fired their Garrisons of Fort of
Lease, Blackreath, and the forementioned Castle of Kilmaog in the Island of
Allin; but I shall easily make it tenable again, it being very useful for
your service, they also did blow up the Castle of Athy, where they had a strong
Garrison, and broke up the Bridge. Upon the 28 Feb. I marched from the Naas,
and about four a clock with the Van of the party, I came to Bellisonan a strong
Garrison, double Works, and double moted, full of water one within another, and
amount with a Fort upon it, most of the Officers with me esteeming the taking
of it to be unfeazable, it being late, and I unwilling to lose time, did send
in a Summons, a copy whereof is here enclosed, and the enclosed answer under
the Governors hand was presently returned, and the Town which was without his
Works by him burned that night, I caused a Battery to be made and planted the
Artillery, and made a Fort for the security thereof, having intelligence that
the Lord of Castlehaven, with 4000 Horse and Foot would come to raise me within
two days, in which Fort I could secure the Guns and batter their Works, w^i^^
(...) to fight the Enemy if need were, we played our Guns and Morter-peece at
the Fort upon the Mount, intending before night to ^^orme it, having Ladders,
and all necessaries ready, but before any breach was made, the Governor did
send me a paper which is here enclosed, whereunto the enclosed answer was
returned, and he treated with me about the surrender, which was concluded
accordingly. The Articles s^^^^^ with both our hands herewith, is represented
unto you.

And now Sir, you have without the loss of one man this strong place, and
thereby most of the County of Kildare; those Garrison^ in this County yet
remaining, as Castle Dormount, and Kilkenny, with others, I hope you shall have
a good account thereof speedily from,

Bellisonan March 3. 1649. Your humble servant, Ioh. Hewson

SIR,
I Am now marching the Army to reduce that place you possess unto the
obedience of the Parliament of England, and it being apparent to the world that
God is making inquisition in Ireland for innocent blood, how far you and
those with you may be concerned therein, I shall observe by your Answer
hereunto.

These are to require you to deliver that place you now possess, unto me for
the end aforesaid: whatsoever your return hereunto may be and the effect
thereof, my Summons will justify the future proceedings of

Your Servant, J. Hewson.
28 Feb. 1649.
For the Governor of Bellisonan.
SIR,
I Am now in possession in this place by authority from my King, how you may
demand it by authority from the Parliament of England, I know not: England
denying their King, therefore your power I disobey: And for God, my King, and
Country, will defend this place to the uttermost of my power,

Sir, Your Servant Donno Kelly,
28 Febru. 1649.
For Col. Hewson Commander in chief of the Parliament party now at the Field
of ^^llisanon.
Propositions made by the Garrison, which were rejected.
WE do hereby employ Governor Donno O Kelly, for the delivery of the
hereunder Propositions to the Commissioners General of the Parliaments Forces
of Ireland.

Imprimis, That the party commanding this Garrison and Fort of Ballisonan, and
all other that will adhere to them are really and willingly to join to the
Parliament Forces, upon such terms as are hereunder written. 2 That a
Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and a Major besides Captains, and under
officers, he employed of the said party, constantly in the standing Army, of
the Parliaments Forces of this Kingdom; That in case any such officers come
in, 3 That they may have free liberty of their Religion and t^^^^ Priests
admitted and employed for to serve the said Regiment now intended. 4 That
neither Taaffe, nor Dillon shall be accepted of in the Parliaments party. 5
That their estates wrongfully detained and enjoyed by the said Dillon, Bourne
and Taaffes, may be allowed unto them by the stat^ of Parliament, 6 That their
Arrears since May last, may be allowed them, this and the aforesaid
Propositions may be granted by the General, Lieutenant General, Major
General, and Commissioners general of the Parliament Forces of this Kingdom^,
that what those Counties assigned to them for their pay, are in Arreare since
their coming to Ballisonan, may be forthwith caused to be paid. 7 That this
granted they shall obey any deriving power from the State of Parliament.
J. Gordon. Chapter Belly. Connor Belly. M. Donnogh.


Col. Hewsons last Summons.
SIR,
BLood I do not thirst after, yet so far a Soldier, as not to neglect present
opportunity, I shall for the end in your Letter mentioned, send Captain Hewson
according to your desire, provided you send one or two fully Authorized to
treat and conclude, and all to be concluded within half an hour, provided
also you do not work at all to repair what my Guns, and Mortar piece have
demolished; and to that end that Cap. Hewson may rem^i^e in the Mount duri^^
that half hour. Sir, I shall be glad if your wisdom prevent what ot^er^^^^
avoidably will fall out, though not desired by.

Your Servant I. Hewson
1 March, 1649.
SIR:
TO avoid the confusion of Christian blood we sent out a Drum ^o demand a
Parley, my desire for the reasons afor^said is, th^^ yo^ send in a Captain of
your^ to tr^^t with us, and we will send forth a Captain of ours, who shall
demand no more but what is honorable and just, and so Sir, I conclude;

Your Servant: Donno kelly.
March 1. 1649.
Articles agreed upon: between the Honorable Col. John Hewson of the one Part,
and Captain Donno^^^ Kelly Go^^r^^^t of Bellisanon in the County of Kildare of
the other part. 1 March, 1649.
IMprimis, That the said Garrison and Fort of Bellisonan, shall be immediately
delivered with all the A^^^nition, and (...) therein, except as in the ensuing
Article is agreed upon 2 That the said Governor Officers and Soldiers, shall
detain in the Castle until to morrow morning at ten of the clock if they
please and then they are to march out of the said Castle and Fort with a
Tr^^peter for Convoy Ten miles if they desire (...) next Irish Garrisons
within ten miles (...) f^^^^^ld, the Tr^^pet^r returning without any prejudice.
And the said Officers are (...) with their Horses and Pistolls, and with their
Colors flying and Drums beating, and the Soldiers with their Ar^ and Muske^^
lighted, and each Musketeer one pound of powder with Bullet and Match
proportionable. 3 Whatsoever Oats and Pease shall ^pp^^r to be in the Castle
belonging to Mis. Fitz Gerald shall be restored to her And lastly, for the due
performing of the aforesaid Articles, do hereunto set our Hands the day and
year first above written*
John Hew^on Donno. Kelly


For the right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker in the Parliament
of England,
Right Honorable;
UPon the sixth instant, (information being given that five Companies of the
Enemies Foot were come to Poores Court about eight miles from hence, on Wickloe
side) a Party was sent from this place under the command of Sir Theophilus
Jones to beat them our, or fight them, but before our Party got thither they
demolisht all the buildings, they pulled down the very walls, and fled away
into the woods; we cannot keep any Garrison there, because there is no manner
of shelter for our men there.

The tenth instant, Letters from Sir Charles Coote (then at Belfast) brought
the news of reducing Castle Do.

There was lately a general Counsel of the Clergy at Kilkenny, who treated
upon Propositions presented amongst themselves for carrying on of the War.

The Plague continues in Galway, where there has near twenty thousand dyed
since, the first of August last; most of their Gentry there have perished by it,
among the rest Ieffery Brown, heretofore a Practiser at Law in England, Sir
Richard Blague, both prime actors, and chief in the supreme Counsel, with
many others of their most eminent contrivers of the Rebellion are dead.

Ormond was lately at Portumny with the Earl of Clanrickard in Conaught.

On Wednesday last, Captain Molineux arrived here from Wexford, who brings the
news of our taking the Fort of Bally-haoke, over against Passage upon the
River of Waterford, so that all trading by Sea to Waterford is wholly stopped up;
besides, there is a very great fear and jealousy, between the Townes-men of
Waterford, and the Soldiers there who are of the Northern Irish.

We have certain news from Munster, that my Lord Lieutenant has been in the
Field this good while, and has taken Cashell and Callan (the latter being
within six miles of Kilkenny) with several other considerable Garrisons of the
Rebbels about those parts, and now about if not in Clonmell.

The Plague is very hot in Kilkenny.

The Toryes have behaved themselves so barbarously toward those of their own
Party, that the Friars and Priests have excommunicated them.

The Governor on Tuesday last marched into the County of Kildare, and we
hourly expect an account of the reducing of several considerable Garrisons
thereabout; great Guns are this day sent from hence unto him, the extreme
wants of accommodations of all kinds for our men will I fear weaken our Army,
and impede the present carrying, on of the service in the neglect of this
opportunity now the ^nemy is dispersed and distracted, and a small matter will
now effect that which a far greater will not hereafter; I have not else to
trouble your Honor, but humbly crave leave to rest, Sir;

Your Honors most humble Servant William Baft.
Dublin 16 Feb. 1649.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker in the Parlia^^^^ of
England.
Right Honorable,
IT has pleased God exceedingly to bless our Forces in th^^ p^^ce, in their
late march into the County of Kildare, where they have taken in the Fort and
Castle of Bellesonan by surrender, suprized Athy, being a Pass upon the
Barrow, and a place of very great concernment, both for the enlarging of our
Quarters, investing the enemy, and securing a pass to join with my Lord if
occasion require. In all which the Go^erno^r has placed Garrisons; as also in
K^e being the Castle of the ^^^^e of Allen, which the enemy had burnt and
endeavored to have ^ed, upon the rumor of his advance from hence; but the
works are now rep^^red and made tenable by ours.

Upon Saturday last he returned again hither to Du^^^^ havin^ (...) Forces in
the outquarters about the Na^^, but intends anot^er speedy m^rch if
accommodations may be by any means provided.

Our Forces about Wexford have recovered the Castle of I^ which was yielded
unto them, And have taken Brown-wooll by Mort^r* ^ll within the latter were put
to the sword.

Col: Treavour has by express sent his resolution to ^t the (...) and has
leave from the Governor to come into our Quarters, an^ to stay until my Lords
pleasure be further known.

I have not else to trouble your Honor but humbly rema^^e,

Dublin 2 March, 1649. Your Honors ^ost (...) S^r^^^^ WILLIAM BASTL.
Imprimatur.

Hen: Scobell Cler. Parli^^e^^^.



FINIS.

