SEVERAL LETTERS Of great Consequence INTERCEPTED BY Colonel Milton, near
Ruthyn IN WALES, Concerning Irish Forces to be brought into England, and other
matters of great consequence.

Together with a LETTER sent out of Ireland, to Mr. Pierrepont a Member of the
House of Commons, concerning the Passage, Imprisonment, and Enlargement of the
Earl of Glamorgan:

All which were Read in the House of COMMONS.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. Feb. 17. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker in the House of Commons.
SIR,
I Acknowledge with all humble thankfulness, the favor of the Honorable House
of Commons, in trusting me with your Service in these parts, and hold it my
duty, not only to perform that trust to the uttermost of my power in action,
but also upon all occasions to represent unto you the state of the Affairs
here; in pursuance whereof, I have now dispatched Mr. Fogg my Chaplain with
some Letters which I met withal here, who also can acquaint you with the cause
and particular occurrents since my coming hither, and will readily return unto
me what further Commands you shall please to lay upon me. The main end of my
coming hither was, to find out the Lord St. Paul's Forces, and to prevent his
conjunction with the Lord Ashley; but perceiving him to decline me, and to
retreat to Fanrust, being a Pass into Carnarvanshire, where I am credibly
informed he is now with his Forces: I have chosen rather to stay here, then to
advance any further toward him, he being Master of that Pass, and so may secure
himself: If I should march up to him, my being here I hope will keep him from
either joining with Ashley, or any way annoy the Leaguer before Chester; and
withal, I am certainly informed that this Castle is in a low condition, wanting
both Ammunition and Fuel. The Governor before my coming hither, being gone to
Conway for a supply of Powder, hoping that in case I be not called away upon
other occasions toward Chester, unto which all my designs shall be subservient.
I hope by Gods blessing not to make any long work of it.

Ruthin, 2^. of Jan. 1645. Your humble servant Tho. Mitton.

For His Highness the Duke of York.
May it please your Highness,
HAving received intelligence of your being at Worcester, and a dispatch now
going to His Majesty, I hold it my duty to acquaint Your Highness with a
report brought hither, or perhaps framed here, That your intention is to come
into this Kingdom, a thing so unprobable, that I can give no credit unto it;
yet I hold it my duty as well to His Majesty as Your Highness, to inform you,
That as yet there is no Peace concluded here, and that thorough an accident
lately fallen out (wherein the Earl of Glamorgan has a part) His Majesty's
Affairs here, and all His Servants, are not only upon very great uncertainty,
but in apparent and continual danger of surprise and distress, as well by the
Irish as by the Covenanters in the North, and other parts of this Kingdom, all
which is now advertised to His Majesty, and therefore if any such intention of
Your Highness coming into this Kingdom should be (which I take to be
impossible) I humbly offer, whether Your Highness may not hold it fit to
expect His Majesty's further pleasure, which He may declare upon the knowledge
He will receive of the state of Things here, by the dispatch that goes herewith
before any such dangerous adventure of Your Highness Person, as You must in
such case undergo in Your coming, and during Your Highness abode here. I
humbly beseech Your Highness to pardon the impertinence of this first address
to Your Highness from

His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 19. of Jan. 1645. Your Highness most
faithful and most humble Servant ^rmond.

To his much honored and worthy friend Sir John Wats Knight, Governor of
Cher^ Castle.
Noble Governor,
I Thank you for this, and all other courtesies; be pleased to read, and then
to Seal this enclosed, and you shall thereby understand, all I am able to say
of this great business, which God Almighty prosper.

Col. Butler, who will be with you at or before this Letter, will import all
the News of Ireland: He is a servant in ordinary of the Queens. And so
beseeching God to bless you, I remain, Noble Governor,

Conway, 25. of Ian. 1645. Your affectionate friend and servant, Io. Eborac.

To the Right Worshipful, his worthy Friend, Master Doctor Lloyd Warden of
Ruthin.
MAster Doctor, I thank you for your Letter, and will satisfy the Bearer: And
I beseech you to return these Letter, to the Noble Governor, The Duke of York,
to be sent him, as soon as may well be; for in Ireland they will not be
gainsaid, but that he is at Ludlow. The Boat stays, I thank you good Doctor,
and am

Conway, 25. of Ian. 1645. Your affectionate friend, Ioh. Eborac.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Ashley.
Most noble Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter of the 12. of January, I received late at night, the 24
of the same month. I have communicated to the Lord Byron, the Lord Marquess
of Ormond his Letter of the 12. of December. and by this time (not sooner) the
Lord Byrons Answer is at Dublin, which I sent by his Lordships Chaplain. It
employed some fears of holding out Chester, thus long: Col. Butler tells me even
now, that the men and shipping are still ready in Ireland, though retarded
hitherto by reason of this distraction; which sithence Tuesday last, is so
composed, that the Earl of Glamorgan is out upon Bayl of six or eight Noble
men, whereof the Lord Marquess of Clenrickard is one. From the Lord Lieutenant
I have received no Answer in writing as yet (though my Letters to his
Excellency were many sithence the first of January) nor from the Lord Digby any
more to the purpose, then this enclosed.

There is, Noble Lord, no relyings upon these Irish Forces for this Service,
though if they come, they shall be carefully transposed to such a Rendezvous,
as I shall hear is most fitting for the passage of your Lordships Army: And for
that end, your Lordship shall surely be punctually informed of their landing,
and condition.

In the mean time, it is fit your Lordship should understand, that under
Colonel Gilbert Byron, the Lord of St. Paul is in these parts in the head of
600 (as he says) but I believe of 500 Horse and Foot, good men and well Armed,
to be directed and employed by your Lordship. Next that, that Lieut. Col. Roger
Morton is landed with a piece of a Regiment (some 160 as Col. Butler tells me)
of the Lord Digbies raised in Ireland of English, and some Lorainneses, and he
will be able to make it up 200 upon his own credit (a Commissioner of Array and
Peace in this County) and will be, after a day or two his refreshment, at your
Lordships dispose.

I conceive your Lordship will receive better Information then I can give you,
of the Forces that our Garrisons are able to afford, from the worthy Governor
of Cherb. But I have it from good and knowing hands, that the Armed and
Fighting men in Chester are above 4000, whereof many may issue forth. I pray
God heartily (as I have cause) to bless and prosper your Lordships honorable
design: and desire your Lordship to esteem of me, as of one, who has long
loved your Lordship, and may truly write myself,

Conway, this 25. of January, 1645. Your Lordships most affectionate and humble
servant, Ioh. Eborac.
I have imported your Lordships Letter, and Sir John Wats to Col. Gilbert
Byron, to be sent to Chester.



May it please your Grace,
I Give you very many humble thanks for your obliging Letter by Master Moor: I
have likewise sent yours to the Marquess of Ormond; and I am glad to find
there, that you do not take the Alarm at my Lord of Glamorgans commitment so
hot, as upon it to despair of the relief of Chester; which, though it has been
somewhat retarded by it, yet I make little question now, but it will go on
speedily and effectually: And of this I desire you to certify my L. Byron,

Dublin, the 21. of Ian. 1645. Your Graces most affectionate humble servant,
George Digby.

For the Honorable William Pierpoint Esquire.
Honorable Sir,
I Send you herewith another copy of the Articles taken in the Bishop of Tuam's
Pocket, because we find that many of our Letters do miscarry; and we are not
in case to send expresses till the Ship with the Money come to us: Her stay is
a very great prejudice to the Service; for if she had been here, we had
prevailed with the British to send a 1000 men into Connaught, and you will
perceive by the enclosed from the President there, what he would expect to do
if he had them. We thought it was of concernment, to let the good party at
Dublin see how they were bought and sold; and therefore sent some Copies of the
enclosed Articles to them, who made such an uproar: That the Lord Digby
disclaimed the thing, and said, The King would not yield to them to save his
Crown, and his life; and that if any such thing were gotten, it was procured
surrepticiously; and therefore accused the Earl of Glamorgan of Treason, and
accordingly he was committed the 26 of the last to the Castle of Dublin. This
in all appearance was done to pacify the people; for a friend writes that he
might have been released of his close imprisonment within two days after, if
he would have acknowledged that he proceeded in it without Warrant, but he
justifies the Act, and so remains a prisoner.

I have written to you several times, that the Derry cannot be secured till
there be some power to displace Malignant Captains of that Regiment; and if the
Scotch Commissioners should now come, the Ordinance is expired the third of
this Month. I hope you are providing of a Deputy, who may easily cure all the
distempers of this Army.

I wrote to you formetly, that I was going into Connaught, and had been gone
before this, but the Frost and Snow was so great, that I could not well travel.
This day, God pleased, I begin my journey, and do hope, God assisting, to make
it useful to the public.

I believe a long Letter will be troublesome to you, and therefore I will not
detain you longer from reading the President of Connaughts, which has in it
very good news: And so conclude my self to be

Bilfast, ^. Ian. 1645, Your humblest servant Robert King
We shall endeavor to get 1000 to go in to Connaught, though the Money be not
come.



Prodromus Papae.
This was sent in the Packet with the precedent Letter.
THe Style, Audience and Substance of the Oration of the Popes Nuncio at
Kilkenny Dominus Johannes Baptista Renuccius.

Dominus Archicopiscopus and princeps Farmanuz, apud Confederatos Hiberniae
Catholicos Extraordinarius Apostolicus Nuncius,

Had Audience at the Castle of Kilkenny the 19. of November, 1645. where he
showed his Commission, and declared the Reasons of his coming, which was only
to establish according to his power,

1. The Roman Catholic Religion. 2. To preserve their Liberties. 3 And
lastly, to serve their Prince and Sovereign.
Which he did express with a great deal of sense and feeling in these words,
viz.

Et serenissimo vestro principi meipsum devoveo. Clapping his hand upon his
Breast,

But yet, that for their Religion they should fight and maintain it against all
the world. He said High Mass in the Church of Kilkenny upon Saint Andrews day.

FINIS.

