Several Considerations presented to the serious View of the several
Companies of this Honorable City, this day assembled for the choice of
Magistrates, and other Officers.
Read, Consider, Prosecute.
Gentlemen,
THere are but twenty six Aldermen in this City, and at least fourteen of them
enjoy great places of profit, conferred upon them by the Ruling party of Lords
and Commons, and Army Grandees. And for this end only, namely, that they may
preserve their interest in the City, and by the said Aldermens power and
prevalency, in respect of their authority, and Relation, may have the better
opportunity to enslave you, and make pou serviceable to the carrying on their
designs, namely, the perpetuation of their own power, though to the utter
ruin of the King and Kingdom.

The men engaged by such places of profit, are Alderman Woolaston, Gibs,
Foulke, Andrews, Avery, Edmunds Cullum, etc.

The inconveniences that come upon the City hereby, are many, but in particular
as follows.

1. By this means the very Rule by which this City is governed, is no other
then the will of those great Ruling men, by whom these Pentionary Aldermen are
acted: They not daring to promote or countenance any thing, unless it be
suitable to the pleasure of their great Masters whom they serve, and by whose
power they gain such great Revenues.

2. By this means All Taxes are continued upon us, for the countenance and
assured assistance of these men in such great power amongst us (who they know
will improve their utmost interest to enforce the people to obey what they
command, because they themselves are thereby advantaged) gives encouragement
to the said ruling Faction of Grandees to heap Taxes upon the City, as renewed
and redoubled Excises, Assessments, etc.

3. By this means you are deprived of the liberty of free Choice of your
Magistrates, being suffered to choose none but such as these Aldermen, (being
the major part) shall think fit, (most Courts of Aldermen consisting of the
greatest number of them) it being all the work they do for their great
pensions, namely to employ all their time and power to preserve the Interest of
the said ruling Faction in the City.

4. By this means you have nothing in agitation of public concernment but it
meets great opposition in all Councels; and not only so, but it is made known
also to the said Ruling Party, and if by them disliked, presently their power
is interposed, to hinder the said actings, and you thereby made liable to
Delinquency by virtue of their displeasure, which is a sufficient crime now
adays to destroy any man, witness the late impeachment of the Aldermen, etc.

5. It is the most unreasonable thing in the world, that Magistrates should
have the receiving and disposing of the public Treasure, for it does not only
serve as an inducement to corrupt tfiem, and make them servants to the corrupt
wills of those men, by whose power they enjoy those places of profit, but also,
gives them an opertunity to abuse and cheat the people; for if he that has a
sword in his hand may have the disposing of the public Treasure, he may be his
own Carver, (as some of them have been) and who shall dare to call him to an
account?

These Premises considered.
The only remedy against all these evils, and many more too large here to be
inserted, is

To cause all the said Aldermen so employed to do one of these things,

1. Either lay aside these their offices and places, and wholly apply
themselves to the work for which they were made Aldermen, or

2. To lay off their Gowns, and tie themselves only to their offices, and let
other men (not so engaged) be chosen to supply those places, upon whose good or
evil improvement, the well or ill being of this City chiefly depends.

This will make you free, conduce to a settlement, and be an universal good to
all parties and interests, therefore while it is called to day, prosecute it
peaceably and unanimously, and expect a blessing.

Farewell.

