The Sense of JOHN WARNERS SPEECH In his Personal Capacity, spoken by the Lord
Mayor OF LONDON

In his Politic Capacity: OR A Declaration delivered from John, and my Lord,
utterd from them both, with one Mouth, Apr. 25. 1648.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable OLIVER CRVMWELL And the rest of the Saints
MILITANT.

Signed Michell.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

The sense of JOHN WARNERS Speech.
FOrasmuch as it is Conceived, and Apprehended, by the Common Counsel, that
this City (at present) it in great danger.

Conceived etc: A mere conceit indeed; for where (I pray) lay the danger,
under Ground, or above Ground, in the Air, or above, or under water; was the
Thames to be blown up the second time, or was there any fear of Castles in
the Air, or another dangerous powder Plot, with an etc. Therefore give me
leave to expostulate in the language of Thomas Sternhold, Psalm. 2.

Why did the City, Tumults raise,
What Rage was in their Brain?
For mine own part, I know my self to be as very a knave and Coward, as any man
living (except the Lord of Oldsworth) yet I was no more afraid with any danger
or damage now from the Army, then of a Capon and white broth at a
Thanksgiving dinner, Then why shall such a one as I fear? And therefore I
declare now, they were the Fears, and Iealousies of the Common Cuckolds
[counsell I would say) and not mine own, the text is clear in the point.

Conceived and Apprehended by the Common Council.

Apprehended; in Good time Verily; Are the Common Counsel men all turn
Constables; or what do they Apprehend or catch at their own shadows (that is
themselves) to my knowledge (which I know and all men know is very slender)
there was no more ground of fear now then was in 88. or November 5th. 1605.
Out upon it; In my conscience (which is as little as my Science) Sir Walter
Earl, or Harry Pelham the Negro Mock speaker) has bit these Common Coxcombs,
and they are (now almost two Months before Midsomer) Ready to run mad with
Fears, and Jealousies.

These are therefore according to the desire and direction (...) the said
Court, to Will and require you in his Majesty Name.

Mark (Beloved) that therefore the meaning of it is this, Because these
Wise-acres of the Council fear, where no fear is, or was, therefore
[forsooth] I must be such an ass as to declare I know not what Jmaginary
danger. You se [dear S^s] it is not my desire or direction, but the desire and
direction of the Court, for my part I love not this directory, though I was
compeld to obey it. But if ever they catch me doing any good to this City
(especialy this Blew-bonnet-Scotified Council) I Will give 'em leave to Prinne
mine ears or hang me as they did one of my Predesessors, Nick. Brember was in
11th. year of King Richard the seconds Reign, Anno, (or Anna) 1388. He was a
stirring stickling fellow, and had he not been hanged he had been created Duke
of Troy, or of London by the name of Troy: He had been diverse times made Lord
Major, Which I purpose not to be, He loved his King dearly and Loyally (which
I yet never did) for his royalty he was hanged, and his throat cut after wards,
but follow his example he that list, if you will know more of him, Read Stowes
Chronicle, page 303. I confess he was an honester man then my self.

Thus you see that I who have been al my life, a Uoluntarie Hypocrite, am now
compeld to be one; And you know that Necessity has no more Law then I have
Loyalty; And therefore had not the Counsel desired and directed too, I (of my
self) would never have used his Majesty's name in the business, I would
sooner have declared in the Devils name, as in whom I have more interest, and
you too.

In his Majesty's Name, etc. And here my Brethren (the Saints I mean and not
the Aldermen) I must distinguish my self (as the Parliament did the King) into
two capacities, (viz.) into my Political and Personal. That is the Lord
Major, by which Office of Majestracie, I am of a capable capacity and
understanding to be a politician; But in my personal Capacity, I am plain
JOHN WARNER, and (in that sense) so I am out of my polliticall capacity, and
consequently no politician.

I could instance this Argument further, by demonstrations out of the Records
and Annalls of Quinbourough, where the Major spoke wisely as follows.

Beloved, J am by my place the Kings Iamag^, Therefore for a man to say more
then a Man can say, I hold it not fit to be spoken: But for a Man to say what a
Man ought to say, there I leave you my Brethren. Or as the Learnned Poetical
VVater-Poet said in his Laborious History of Nonsense.

More might be said, but then more must be spoake.
The Weights fell down, because the Iack-line broake.
But, to proceed Breathren, Ass I am John Warner I love my self and you, But
Ass a Magistrate I even have my self perfectly; Except in order to your ends,
or designs (the plunder and Ruin of the City) And those I am sure I have
promoted with as much Art and Industry as my zeal and Brains could attain
to; And my two (...) (Atkins and Pennington) and my self, who have made as
perfect a Triumvirate, or Iunto (hard words these are) of Catalines and Traitor
to this City of London as over were in Rome, or Hell, I tell you, you do hate
magistrates, and as I being ^o, I hate my self, if it be truly and hig^ly
principled; for (Dear Breathren Saints) Is not S^ilo come, Then must Septers
come and Crowns depart, the Inference is as clear as my Conscience. Has not
CHRIST made us free, why then should we be slaves, or Subjects to any King or
Parliament (for they would all be Kings too) in Kent or Christendom.

Follow then the Thrust (Victorious Souls) dispatch Charles Stewart, then
down goes monarchy: and then straight way those ^igg-widgeon Traytorly
Don-qu^^ksotts of Westminster, (most of them as mean and mechanic as our
selves) will tumble after, and vanish like their own Ordinances or a morning
Cloud.

Heye then up go we.

In his Majesty's Name, etc just as our fellow Hippocrites in the Gospel made
use of the Name of Christ the King of Kings; Math. 7.22. Have we not prophesied
in thy Name, (yes we have prophesied to some purpose, for all the people of God
are Prophets, and in thy name cast out Devils, No we have brought Devils in)
and in thy name done many wonderful Works. Yes as the wonder working
Parliament did in Richard the 2. time, Anno 1388. [that Parliament did Raise
and ruin whom they listed, and beheaded, hanged, Imprisoned, fined, Banished
and beggerd whomsoever they pleased, So that as we have done the work we may
expect their Reward in the text, we look to have the same Mittimus, Depart from
me ye workers of iniquity.

But to work iniquity by pattern, is but to sin by Authority: for has not
this blessed Parliament used the Kings name more then 7. years to his and his
friends Ruin, It is probable that they committed him to close prison in his
own Name, (as these) Charles King of England, we charge thee in thy personal
capacity that [in obedience to the authority of thy Politic Capacity] thou
submit thy self to be deprived of all the comforts of this life, [viz:] as
Wife, Children, friends servants, Estate, Dignity, Goods, possessions and
Liberty. I tell you (my Brethren that this deep State-logick, newly practiced,
newly printed, and newly come forth, Are not all writs Issued as formerly, and
all Briefes passed under the name of Charles by the Grace of God etc. down to
this very year 1648. And subscribed Given from our Palace at Westminster,
such and such a day, and in such a year of our Reign etc. when as poor King
Charles (Good man) God knows has not seen Westminster or White Hall, since
February 1641. except at a distance from Brainford or Hampton Court, etc.

The old saying was that all mischief begun in ^ni or Anni Domino (for we that
have the Gift of Tongues may speak the Language of the Beast) But all the
Plagues of Agypt began Annu Domino Regis. No Subject now is solemnly undon, but
in his Sovereign Lord and Masters name, the King, Nor was any honest Man, or
truly Loyal Royalist hanged or beheaded since these merry mad times, but they
have all suffered in the Kings name, though for the kings Cause or sake.

Thus Traitor B^rley late did seele
The Razor edge of Wild and Steel.
And so (Dear Brethren) I have done with the King; though you will do as you
have don, and never have done with him till he be undone.

These are therefore to will and require you etc. that presently upon fight
hereof, you (...) do repair to every Householder etc. and give them strict
Charge and Command at their Pex^ll^, That they do so Order and dispose of their
Servants, etc: That they be not only kept from Committing any entrage or
Misdemeanor, But that they, and their Servants etc, be in Readiness [According
to their several Capacities] with arms weapons, and Ammunition for the
preservation of the Peace, Defense of themselves, the City and the Magisthates
thereof, etc.

O rare Magistrates, O brave Lord Mayor. I am sure neither God or the King made
me a Lord, and none but fools and knaves made me mayor, and the troth is, that
I my self do know my self to be to better then a paper, or (at the best) a
Past^^ord Pageant: and my horse is but a Hobbyhorse. And yet I, even I, J
perce J, John, though not John a Leiden [or leaden Iohn] but John of London, I
my self [forsooth do Will and require etc. and what think you verily of my
Command that all the Citizens [upon occasion] shall with their Servants, keep
their houses till their throats be cut, in their own defense, that you King
Oliver (the Chieftaine of the Lord) might kill them in several* And gleane
them one by one at your pleasure, which (were they in full Bodies, and in a
posture of defense) I without the hazard of those precious Saints of
Whitehall* and the Mewes, the one Ambulent, the other Equitant, (Both Mil^tant)
And yet I further declare, for fashion sake; that,

The Trained Bands of this City, do from time to time, upon the Beat of (...),
Repair with all speed to their Colors* etc: and for the safety and welfare
of this City.

To their Colors, etc. Namely that the Citizens may be murdered in their Arms
and ^artial Equipage, as once the old Roman Aldermen were (in Pontificalibus
when the Gauls stormed the City.

This be confident of Brethren [for you (...) confide in mee] That the
leiutenant General [for the General himself is not wise enough to be trusted
with a secret] Brother Atkins, Brother, Pennington, and my self [with Foulk^,
our Auxilliarie, (...) laid a most exact Model of the Cities plunder first, and
then Destruction, or [which is worse] Captivity and perpetual slaverie, And
then would the Citizens have been forced to Hang out their new Lights. All had
been Goshen then, which now (if either the Protestant or ^resbyterian party
prevail, and we miscarry; (as it is to be feared we shall] will continue Egypt
still, and for want of our Light [though we be hanged out] (...) in darkness,
and in the shadow of death.

So much for the Text; Now two short words of Application, and I have (...);
The words are these (...) which I leave to your considerations ^o Conster land
Interpret.

Fini^, ^^ni^.

