SEVERAL PETITIONS Presented to His EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fairfax.

BY THE

Lievt. Generals Regiment. Col. Harrisons Regiment. Coll. Prides Regiment.
Coll. Deanes. Regiment.
TOGETHER WITH Lievt. Genesis Cromwels LETTER To his Excellency concerning the
same.

Printed in the Year. MDCXLVIII.

For His Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX.
My Lord,
I Find a very great sense in the affairs of the Regiments of the sufferings
and the ruin of this poor Kingdom, and in them all a very great zeal to have
impartial Justice done upon Offenders; and I must confess I do in all, from my
heart concur with them; and I verily think, and am persuaded, they are things
which God puts into our hearts: I shall not need to offer any thing to your
Excellency, I know God teaches you, and that he has manifested his presence so
with you, as that you will give glory to him in the eyes of all the World. I
held it my duty, having received these Petitions and Letters, and being desired
by the Framers thereof, to present them to you; the good Lord lec his will upon
your heart, enabling you to do it; the presence of Almighty God shall go along
with you: This prays,

Knottingsley Nov. 20. 1648. My Lord, Your most humble and faithful Servant. O.
Cromwell.

For the Honorable Lieutenant General Cromwell.
Honorable Sir,
SInce the Lord has done such great things for us in the former (but more
especially in the latter toward the long wished and expested setlement of this
poor Kingdom, and that as yet we cannot discern (by our best Observatious) that
good and blessed effect to give us any probable hopes of future quietness, or
promising security to those that fear the Lord, against their malicious and
restless enemies.

We are bold (in discharge of our duties, and upon very serious considerations)
to beseech your favorable assistance and approbation in presenting the
enclosed, ours and our Soldiers just, most necessary, and (as we hope) modest
desires, to his Excellency our much honored General, upon whom, together with
your self, and those under your Conducts, (as we humbly conceive) are
contracted the eyes of the well-affected and godly of the Land, as principally
under God their Deliverers and Saviors from Tyranny and Slavery; and unto whom,
as most proper instruments, we addrese our selves to appear in the Armies
behalf for settlement and security thereof; The justness, equity and necessity
of all which particulars, as they are pressing arguments upon our bearts to
this, so we hope they will be set home upon yours to do further herein as God
shall direct, who (we are persuaded) will yet further appear for his peples
salvations: And we trust the Lord will so guide us in our stations (in
prosecution of them) as that we shall not act any thing rashly, irregularly, or
unbeseeming us, as Christians or Soldiers, but in sobriety and modesty of
spirit submit to his dispensation in doing or suffering if the Lord bring us to
either, so as it shall be obvio^s we seek neither our own interest nor
perticklar parties, but the well being of the whole Kingdom, which indeed is
very dear to us, and for which (as a testimoay) the further hazards of our
bloods and labors is not dear to

Your most humble and faithful Servants etc.

To His Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, etc.
The Humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers in the Regiment of
Lieutenant General Cromwell.
Humbly shows,
THat in discha ge of our duty to the Kingdom our public ingagments for its
redemption and private obligations of addressing to your self for the regular
accomplishment of a speedy settlement, we presume, and in confidence of your
Excellencies favorable construction of this attempt to prostrate our present
thoughts and desires to your serious considerations, our exactest and most
impartial observations, dictate to us the designed ruin of us, and the faithful
in the Kingdoms, which though covered with fair and specious overtures, yet
with sadness and sorrow we are affected with beholding thereof; but rejoice in
this, that the Lord has stirred up many well affected, especially the large
Petitioners, to appear for Justice in a Petitionary way to the Parliament, and
of several Regiments unto your Excellency. We cannot be ignorant of the
hindering and obstructing of impartial Justice, by the powerful influence of
pretended friends, which speak audibly, a negligent remisness to our liberty,
and a covert Resolution to comply with what may add to our yoke; therefore we
are pressed in spirit humbly to beseech a Contribution of your Excellencies Power
and Interest for obtaining these our ensuing Requests.

1. That some speedy and effectual course may be taken for the discovery,
trial, and due punishment of all English, Welsh, and Scottish Enemies,
especially those that are principally guilty of all the bloods and treasures
that has bin spent in the Kingdoms, and particularly all those that have
abetted, contrived and countenanced the late Rebellions, that impartial Justice
may be done upon them, according to the many Petitions to that purpose,
especially that large Petition of Sepr. 11. 1648. whithout which we cannot
expect an happy issue of all our hazards and labors.

2. That the former Declarations and Concurrences of the Army therewith of no
further ad^vesses to the King, may not be unworthily deserted, without be being
acquitted or convicted of the charges therein contained.

3. That the Kingdom may be forthwith postured and settled in the way of a safe
and lasting Peace, for the preservation of honest men, and discountenancing of
our Enemies.

And because nature it self prompts us to an honest self-provision, no way
repugnant to the foresaid ends, we further beg your Excellencies favor;

1. To that end free quarter may be presently taken off, and provision be made
for our constant pay, whilst we be continued, and that Counties may be assigned
to every respective Regiment to that purpose.

2. That our Arrears, since the 15. of January last past, be paid up before we
pay our quarters, and the accounts of all former Arrears be so perfected, and
put into a present way, that they may be obtained.

3. That in the deductions for free quarter (if any must be) in this last
Summers service it be considered where we have bin, and the hardships we met
withal therein.

4. That the Horse quarters be not confined solely to market Towns; it having
bin experienced how many inconveniences did thence accrue, as to our selves, so
unto travelers, and the inhabitants.

5. That in our future pay effectual care be taken to supply us with current,
and not clipped, money; the Country, and our selves, suffering abundance of
damage, (and as we suppose) our Enemies designing thereby to divide us.

6. That effectual course may be taken to supply the Regiments of Horse, with
recruit horses, many having lost their own horses in prosecution of the late
Service, and are altogether disabled to mount themselves out of their pay,
which comes so slowly; it will not furnish them with other necessaries, and
many having exhausted all they had, or could get from friends, to mount
themselves.

These our Requests being so necessarily tendent to the Kingdoms and our own
welfare, that if by improvement of your Excellencies wonted vigilance they be
promoted, (for which our fervent prayers are continued,) as we are confident
shall leave your name a praise upon earth to posterity, and you will more
closely engage honest men, and give a fresh occasion to your Petitioners to
profess themselves.

Your Excellencies most faithful Servants.

For the Honorable Lieutenant General Cromwell.
Honored Sir,
WE presume your Honor will not account it strange (which our Consciences
tell us is our duty) that after so many wonderful, and glorious appearances of
the Lord with us, in our unwearied pains, and labor, for the reducing this
poor Kingdom out of its miserable thraldom, we should yet further evidence,
our fervent desires, of a vigorous prosecution of so good a work, in our
addresses unto those, from whom, as we humbly conceive, we may justly expect
the same. We do therefore earnestly beseech your honors free approbation, and
best assistance, for the greater furtherance of these our requests, that (if
the Lord so will) we may not see all ours, and the Kingdoms endeavors, under
so great pangs, and travails, to become fruitless. It greatly afflicts us,
that after so many strong attempts, and horrid Rebellions utterly to vassalize
not only us, but all the Kingdoms faithful Friends, those wicked Incendiaries,
should through the corrupmess of our Judges, not only hitherto (but as we have
great cause to fear, without redress some other way,) will still escape the
hand of Justice, whose lives we believe the Lord requires to appease his Wrath.
We cannot be unmindful, of that hard measure, we are like to receive from the
Parliament; notwithstanding all those extremities, and great hardships, which
we have willingly undergone to preserve Theirs, and the Kingdoms Interests, not
only in so long withholding our subsistence from us, but now at the last, in
their making so large deductions out of it, upon pretense of our Free quarter;
the which being rightly understood, will appear scarce worth the naming,
especially if our extraordinary losses of Horses, with the meanness of our
Fare, be therewithal considered. Thus craving your Honors favorable
construction of these our Proceedings, being acted forth from our Zeal to
Englands Happiness, continually imploring the blessing of the Almighty upon all
your Honors worthy undertakings for that end; we shall ever remain,

Wakefield the 7. of November. 1648. Your Honors faithful and humble Servants,
the Officers and Soldiers of Col. Harrisons Regiment.

The Humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of Colonel Harrison Regiment.
May it please your Excellency,
IN Conscience to the Kingdom and Your Excellency, our public Engagement for
its Redemption and private Obligation of addressing to your self for the
regular accomplishment of that end; We presume (in confidence of your
Excellencies favorable construction of this attempt) to prostrate our present
dissatisfactions to your serious thoughts. Our exactest and most impartial
Observations dictate to us a Resurrection (if 'twere ever buried) of the old
design to continue Englands Slavery; which though we acknowledge to be covered,
yet we conclude with two thin a vall for being concealed from an ordinary
piercing eye. We are not unacquainted with the proceedings of many Commoners in
a Petitionary way unto the Parliament, or of several Regiments unto your
Excellency in the like course; though not yet sensible what satisfactory answer
has been received of either. Nor can we be ignorant that the carriage of the
Houses in their Treating Overtures with the King, and obstructing Demurs of
impartial Justice-execution upon most notorious Delinquents, speaks audibly a
negligent Remissness as to our Liberty, if not a covert Resolution to comply
with what may add to our Yoke. Hence, acted from better principles, (not
forgetting our public Protests and Engagements) we take the boldness humbly to
beseech a Contribution of Your Excellencies interest to our ensuing requests.

1. That some speedy and effectual course may be taken for the trial and just
punishment of all English, Welsh and Scotch convicted enemies, and that neither
birth, or place, may exempt any from the hand of Justice; without which, as the
wrath of God will not be appeased, so neither can we expect a happy issue of
all our labors. 2. That the Parliaments former Declaration of No farther
Addresses to the King may not be unworthily deserted, but He speedily either
acquitted or convicted of the Charge therein contained. 3. That all Fomentors
and Abettors of the late Rebellion, whether in Parliament, City, or Kingdom,
may be discovered, and condignly punished. 4. That the Concurrences to a safe
and lasting may be dispatched according to the many Petitions to that purpose,
especially the late large Petition.
And because even Nature it self prompts us to a Self-provision, no way
repugnant to the aforesaid ends, we further implore your Excllencies favor.

1. That provision be made for our constant pay whilst we must be continued as
an Army, and the Counties payable to the respective Regiments therein assigned
to quarter. 2. That Arrears, since Jun. 15. be paid us before we pay our
Quarters; and the accounts of all former Arrears so perfected, that a certain
and speedy way be offered for obtainment of the same. 3. That with the
deductions for free quarter in the late service (if any must be) it be
considered, where we have been, and the hardship of our Service. 4. That the
Horse-quarters be not confined solely to the Market Towns, it having been
experienced how many inconveniences did thence accrue, as to our selves, so
unto travelers, and the inhabitants.
These our Requests (being so necessarily tendent to the Kingdoms welfare, that
(to our best understanding) there is not another way visible for its recovery)
if by improvement of your Excellencies wonted vigilance they be promoted, (for
which our fervent prayers are continued) as we are confident shall have your
name a praise on the earth unto posterity; so you may be assured your very
appearance for that end will more closely engage the honest hearts in England
for you, and give a fresh occasion to your Petitioners to profess themselves
against all opposers in prosecution of them, even to death. Your Exceliencies
most faithful Servants, etc.

To the Right Honorable His Excellency the Lord Fairfax, Commander in Chief of
all Forces raised or to raised by the Parliament.
The Humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of Col. Prides, and Col.
Deans Regiaments.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners looking back, and taking a serious view of those many
mercies and great deliverances which God has bestowed upon this poor Nation,
in making your Excellency, with those under your command, Instruments of its
deliverance, by being twice victorious over those numerous bodies, that were
convened in several places of this Kingdom to the utter ruin and destruction
thereof, had not God by his mighty power prevented it: And now after all this
our unwearied pains, and great hazard of our lives, we hoped to have reaped
some Freedom to our selves and the King, but instead thereof (if not timely
prevented) we fear the same miseries, if not worse are like to return upon us
again, by setting up the same usurping power, against which we have contested
so long, and, as we conceive, has bin the chief cause of all our misery, and
has cost this Kingdom so dear to subdue: And the people of this Kingdom being
also very sensible of their near approaching danger and misery thereby, as
appears by those many Petitions presented from London, and several Counties: We
also being ear witnesses of the peoples daily and sad Complaints of the heavy
Taxations that lie upon them, more especially, because they see the Kingdoms
Treature perverted to wrong uses, and the Soldier unsatisfied, for whom it is
pretended to be raised; whereby a heavier but then then these Taxes lie upon
them, by reason of Free Quarter, which proves so great a discouragement to the
Conscientious Soldiers, who have cheerfully undergone all other hardships.

Therefore our Humble Desires to your Excellency are, (That as God has
hitherto crowned you with faithfulness, and made you an Eminent Savior to this
poor intended ruined Nation) that you would yet continue (which we question
not) to stand by us, and the just Desires of the Kingdom, both in presenting
them to, and procuring them from the honorable House of Parliament, as
follows, viz. 1. That the Parliament be desired to take a review of their
late Declarations and Charge against the King, as also to consider his own Act
in taking the guilt of bloodshed upon himself, and accordingly to proceed
against him as an Enemy to the Kingdom. 2. That strict inquiry be made after
the chief Fomentors, Actors and Abettors of this late War, especially those who
were the chief Incouragers and Invitors in of the Scots Army, and that
exemplary Justice may be accordingly executed to the terror of evil doers, and
rejoicing of all henest men. 3. That all those, through whose hands the public
treasure of the Kingdom has run, may specdily be called to give up their
Accounts, that thereby the Kingdom may be satisfied, how those vast sums of
money that have bin raised therein are disposed of, and that so soon as the
necessities of the Kingdom will permit, that may be eased of all unnecessary
charge and burdens. 4. That that which is so insufferable for us to take, and
so intolerable for the people to bear, namely free quarter may be forthwith
taken off, by sending some speedy supplies to the Army; and by appointing
several Assignations to every Regiment of the standing Army; whithout which
neither we, nor the people can have any assurance to be freed from that great
burden. 5. That all unnecessary officers of the Kingdom may be taken off, by
which means great sums of money have needlessly been wasted, and that none of
the moneys, which shall hereafter be raised and collected, may be imbeseled or
suffisticated; but as it comes to the Soldiers, so it may pass to the Country
again. 6. That no person whatseover that has bin active, either directly or
indirectly, in this late War, shall be admitted to any place of trust, either
Military or Civil in this Kingdom, who by that means may have opportunity to
involve the Kingdom in new troubles, and all such persons who are so imployd
may be discharged from such employment.
These our desires we humbly offer, as being of absolute necessity to the
present and future well-being of this Kingdom; and seeing God has hitherto
made you faithful in the trust reposed in you; and there being such an
opportunity once more to appear for the public Interest, you may be confident
of the Providence of God, who delights in the way of Justice, Truth and Equity;
and for our parts we are resolved, by Gods assistance, to stand by you, and all
those that join with us, in our just desires.

FINIS.

