INQVISITIO ANGLICANA: OR The Disguise discovered.

SHEVVING The Proceedings of the Commissioners at White Hall, for the
Approbation of Ministers, IN The Examinations of ANTHONY SADLER Cler: (Chaplain
to the Right Honorable the Lady PAGETT, Dowager) Whose Delay, Trial,
Suspense and VVrong, presents it self for Remedy, to the Ld PROTECTOR, and the
High Court of PARLIAMENT: AND For Information to the Clergy, and all the People
of the Nation.

Heu Pietas! heu prisca fides!

PSALM. 102. 18. This shall be written for those that come after, etc. LONDON,
Printed By J. Grismond, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1654.

To his Highness The LORD PROTECTOR: The Petitionary Epistle of A. S. Cler'.
My Lord,
YOur much Injured Petitioner, presents these his impollisht Examinations to
the judicious consideration of your Highness.

For the Truth of Them, I shall be Deposed, or Exposed to a farther Trial; so
it be, in Public, upon Questions given, and a time to Deliberate.

It is the Comfortable Hope (as well as the Humble Request) of your Petitioner,
that he shall be Protected, from the Malignancy of Prejudice: even the
Prejudice of Mr. Nigh the Commissioner, against whose
over-busie-partiall-and-injurious Proceedings, your Petitioner does humbly
crave, the benefit, of that Justice; the Law, Reason, and Religion, may, or
shall give -- unto --

Your Highness most humble Petitioner, Anthony Sadler.

To the high Court of PARLIAMENT, The Petitionary Epistle of A. S. Cler'.
Mr. Speaker,
AS our Grievances are to be made Known unto you, so are they to be Redressed
by you.

I am therefore humbly-bold to implore your Legal Favor, that, these my
Examinations, with the Proceedings of the Commissioners, for Apprabation of
Ministers, may be so taken into Consideration; that, (Religion, being
maintained, and Justice done; and a Reformation, made)

Glory, may be to God;

Goodwill, to Men;

And in Earth, Peace.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. Anthony Sadler.

Inquisitio Anglicana: OR, The Disguise Discovered.
UPon the Reformation of Religion by King Ferdinand, the Spanish Inquisition
was first Invented, by the Dominican Friars; for the Enquiring after, and the
Finding out, and the Reclaiming of those, Moors and Jews, which lived in
Spain, in a Formal, but not Real Submission unto the Church of Rome.

The House for those Inquisitors, is very Strong; their Practice, very Strict;
their Proceedings, very Grievous: the Smallest Error in Religion, being
punished, with Death, Exile, Imprisonment, or Confiscation.

Their Flies or Informers, are very numerous; and let the Person Informed
Against, be never so Innocent, he is sure to Suffer, if his Estate be Great.

Whosoever Speaks in his Desence, or Shows him any Favor, is to wear the
Sambenito, to be publicly Whipped, and then Banished for ten years.

If they Suspect or Malign any one, he is forthwith Apprehended, and put to
the Rack, and if by Torments he cannot be drawn to Accuse himself, of Treason
or Heresy, (which they lay to his Charge) then they Flatter him, and let him
go: telling him withal, that (for their parts) they ever had a good opinion
of him, and that he was much Bounden to their Lordships, who were thus ready to
do him Justice: then they give him a special Charge, of Silence; which, if he
keep not, they ipso facto commence a Suit against him, and then, without ever
being Heard, he is either Starved, or Murdered in the P^ison.

When any one is in Question, he must make means to come unto his Trial,
which, if (after long-waiting, much-importu^ity, and great-expence) he have, he
is then brought into the Consistory, and let him Answer, What, and How he will,
(if it be not to their minds) they tell him, that they are not satisfied,
though they give no Reason, Why.

The manner of their Examination, is, first by oath; which, if he Refuse, th^n
an Indictment's drawn, and they charge him with Improbable, Incredible, and
such things, as he never knew nor heard of.

The several Articles, he must Answer to ex tempore, without any time of
deliberation: then they give him Pen, Ink, and Paper, to set down his Answers
in Writing; and if his First and Last Answers do any way differ, he is then
certainly undone.

I cannot make a full Parallel (God forbid I should) between those
cruell-Romish, and our -- English Inquisitors: and yet --

1. THey have, both alike, a Grand Commission, to Authorize their Doings.

2. Their Proceedings are alike, Severe, to those they Disaffect; being very
Partial, Close, Delatory, and Prejudicial.

3. Their Questions (be they Idle, Solid, or Captious) must be Answered to,
alike, ex tempore, and upon the sudden.

4. They have, alike, by their Informers, Intelligence from all parts.

5, They are alike, Examiners, Witnesses, and Judges in their own case.

6. And lastly, I cannot name the many ways they have, in the Spanish
Inquisition, to Question, and to ruin the Person, whom they do Malign.
Neither can I trace out the many Turnings that Mr. Nigh has to Delay, or
Delude, or Deny any Minister (though never so Worthy) Presented to a Living
(though never so justly) of the (chargeable and newfound) Instrument, of their
Approbation.

If they Dislike the Minister (and probably like the Living) -- Then -- (I do
not say, that they cannot Approve him, oh no, by no means, they cannot; because
(forsooth) he is Disaffected, i. e. not of their Opinion, Or else, secondly,

That his Answers are not to their mind, and therefore he is Insufficient. Or
else thirdly,

That there is a Caution against him, though he know not, by Whom, nor for
What. Or else fourthly,

That he carries his Hand by his side, and his Elbow up; and therefore he is
Proud. Or else fifthly,

That his Certificate is not Satisfactory, i. e. they do not know the
Subscribers, or not believe them to be Godly. Or else sixthly,

That he shall not have that Living (though some other he may) let him do what
he will. Or else seventhly,

That his Voice and Tone likes them not; and therefore he has not the Gift of
Utterance. Or else eighthly,

That he speaks too quaintly, and therefore is he a mere Humanist, and one that
has not the Spirit. Or else ninthly,

That if he will resign his Living quietly, he shall have a round sum of
money so to do.

I do not say of any of these things; no, I doubt not, but Mr. Sammois, and
Mr. Heart, and the rest, will appear in their own cases: but this, I can, and
do, and will say, that --) --

-- Then, they first Question the Form of his Certificate, and reject That: if
This will not do, Then secondly,

They Scruple the Persons, subscribing, and reject Those. If This will not do,
then thirdly,

He is (after three weeks it may be, if not much longer attendance) called for,
and Examined: and that a first, and a second time; by five, and then by nine
Commissioners: They use all the ways they can, to Baffle him, two or three
speaking at once to confound his memory, or Invalid his Answers. And if this
will not do, Then -- after a Long, and Strict Examination; they bid him.
Withdraw, and call for him no more -- And This, is my particular Case, which is
here fully Recollected, and now Presented to the Public View; by way, both of
Appeal, and Apology: an Apology, for my Self; and an Appeal, to The Lord
PROTECTOR and The High Court of PARLIAMENT,

I (Anthony Sadler, a Minister of the Gospel, Inwardly Called thereunto, by the
the Spirit of God; and Outwardly by the Ordination of Doctor Corbet, Bishop of
Oxon, in the year 1631,) was (upon the Death of the Incumbent Presented (by the
Lawful Patron to Compton Hayway, a Living in Dorsetshire, May the 25. 1654.

According to the Ordinance (for my Institution and Induction I submitted my
self to the Examination of the Comm^ssioners, in that case provided.

I put in my Cert^ficate upon the 10 of June; which (waiting constantly upon
them) was (upon the 14 day) Rejected, and Redelivered me by Mr. Nigh the
Commissioner, saying, It was no Certificate. --

The form of which was this:
Whereas the Bearer hereof Anthony Sadler, a Minister of Gods most holy Word,
and my Domestic Chaplain, having demeaned himself very Commendably in the
Performance of his Place, and Duty; Preaching upon all occasions, both soundly
and comfortably, as well to Others, as to my Self, and Family: I thought good
(he being now called to a more public Execution of his Function, for the Glory
of God, and the Instruction of his People) to Attest unto all those, to whom
these Presents shall come, That the said Anthony Sadler, is a well-deserving
Person, and of right godly Life, and Conversation.

Mr. Nigh asked me, If I had not seen the Ordinance? I told him, No. So his Son
showed it to me; and then, and there, and thence, I Transcribed their own Form;
which, upon the 19 of June, I exhibited, with the Hands, of --

LETICIA Lady PAGETT. WILLIAM Lord PAGETT. GEORGE MANLEY, late Justice of
Peace. JOHN VINER, Minister of Westminster. EDWARD MARTYN, now in Commission.
ANTHONY TINGLE Clerk of the Abbey at Westminster.

I waited day after day for Nine days, after this: using all the lawful
means, I could, that I might but come unto my Trial.

My Delay was very Troublesome (though not, it may be, Chargeable, as that of
Mr. Tailors was, who came from York to London, and being Called, Examined, and
Approved, at three weeks end; was yet stayed seven weeks after; and at the
last, (having spent above 20 li.) was enforced to return without their
Instrument; because (as M. Nigh told Him; and He, Me;) His Certificate was not
Subscribed by Hands they knew.) I say, my Delay was very Troublesome, causing
me to Trifle away my Time, to Neglect the Duty of my Place and Calling: at
last, (being Wearied with this strange Attendance) I sent in a Note to Mr. Nigh,
and Mr. Peter's, humbly entreating them, That I might have the Favor to be
Examined, for I had waited almost three weeks.

About twelve a Clock, I went away, (having a Familyduty to perform to an
Honorable Lady.) I was no sooner gone (so Curious are They to observe their
time) but I was Called for, and not being there Then, word was brought me
forthwith, That the Hands to my Certificate were not approved of: That
Afternoon their Clerk told me as much, and so gave me again my Certificate, and
my Presentation both. (I say my Presentation, for, This they kept all the
while, that they might be informed of the Value of it)

After this, (that I might not leave any way unassayed to come but to a
Hearing) I made my Address to the Master of the Rolls, (now Mr. Speaker) who
Subscribed thus,

THis Gentleman, Mr. Sadler, has Preached before me, with very good Approbation
of me; and I did before that time hear, and I was so informed, that he was a
godly Minister.

WILLIAM LENTHALL.


And to Doctor Temple, who Subscribed thus,

I Have received a good Testimony of Mr. Sadler, and do believe him to be a
man of Abilities to Preach the Gospel, and of a godly Conversation.

THO. TEMPLE.


Mr. Stevens, and Mr. Arnold, (high Burgesses of Westminster) and Mr. Morris,
a person well known to Mr. (one of the Commisioners) these gave me their
several Hands, to the former (those beforenamed and Rejected) which (being all
together to one and the same Certificate) upon the first day of July, I
delivered to their Clerk, and upon the third day I was called in before their
Worships, and Mr. Nigh having the Chair, began thus:

The first Examination before five Commissioners, July the 3. 1654.
Nigh. Question.

What is Regeneration?


Sadler. Answer. It is our Incorporation into Christ by Faith.


Nigh. Q. What, body into body?


Sad. A. No, Christ's body is Mystical.


Com. Q. What Is Regeneration?


Com. Q. What Is Generation? said another* both of them speaing at one time.


Sad. A. Regeneration is our New birth in Christ.


Com. Explain your meaning, that is but the word in the plain sense of it.


Sad. A. Regeneration is distinguished from Sanctification, says Wilson.


Nigh. Q. What, Wilson 's Dictionary? speaking ironically.


Sad. A. If you take Regeneration and Sanctification both as one, then --
Regeneration is a work of Gods Spirit, to bring the Will of Man unto the Will
of God.


Com. That Is something indeed.


Sad. The Definition, is a learned Authors.


Com. You may allege Popish Books.


Nigh. Q. What, is the Will only Regenerated, not the Understanding?


Sad. A. The whole man, both Outward and Inward.


Nigh. Q. Is Regeneration a Substance, or an Accident?


Sad. A. I do not well understand your meaning.


Nigh. Its plain, Answer --


Sad. A. Here I made a pause, as being much troubled in mind, at so captious,
if not ridiculous, a Question; and being silent -- Mr. Nigh said again --


Nigh. Q. In what Predicament?


Sad A. In the Predicament of Quality.


Com. Q. But are you Regenerated?


Sad. A. Yes.


Nigh. Q. Make that out.


Sad. A. I conceive you mean the work of grace in me.


Com. Q Well, and when was that?


Sad. A. About thirty years ago. [How old were you then? said Mr. Nigh.] I was
in my Though secret Devotion be always Private; yet Private Dev^tion is not
always Secret.
secret devotion. [He means Private, said Mr. Nigh, both interrupting, and
deriding me] I was Kneeling and Praying, that God would give a certain Evidence
of his Spirit; and show some good token upon me for good: whereupon, I heard,
as it were, a Voice, saying, I have a blessing for thee, I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee.


Nigh. Q. What, was it a Voice, was it Audible?


Sad. A. No, not in a Vocal way, it was a Motion.


Nigh. Q. Was it not a Delusion, as Eve 's voice to Adam?


Sad. A. No, I know it was no Delusion, but a good Motion: I know it was,
because a good Motion is always in express words of Scripture, or Consonant
to it: a Delusion may have some part of Truth, but not All: as the Devils was,
when he Tempted our Savior, with a Piece of Scripture.


Com. Q. And you are sure, that you have the Grace of God in you?


Sad. A. Yes, I am as sure I have a life of Grace in me, as I have a life of
Nature.


Com. Make that out.


Sad. A. As I have Breath, Heat, Sense, and Action in my Body, so have I in my
Soul.


Com. Q What is the Breath of the Soul?


Sad. A. My Longing, and Thirsting after God.


Com. Q. What is the Heat?


Sad. A A Zeal for Gods Glory, and my Affection to him. [Then spoke two more of
them, but what, I minded not, being intent upon the Allegory.]


Com. Q. What is the Sense of the Soul?


Sad. A. An Apprehension of my Indisposedness, and a Sense of Sin.


Com. Q. What is the Action of the Soul?


Sad. A. The good works I do, as works of Piety and Charity.


Nigh. This is all one, a thing studied --


Nigh. Q. What is Faith?


Sad. A. It is a Knowing, a Believing, and a Depending upon Christ, says one;
or, as says another, It is the Believing not only of Gods Word to be True;
but a firm Persuasion, that the Truth and Promises of that Word, belongs to Me.


-- Here (they not hearing, or not regarding what I said, nor suffering me to
speak a word more) I was frowned upon, and commanded to

Withdraw.

So I went out, and heard no more of it.

In the Afternoon I came again to know their Worships pleasure: and meeting
with Mr. Nigh, I desired to know the issue of my Examination: He told me, The
Commissioners did not approve. I then asked him, what he would have me do? He
told me, nothing could be done till there were nine Commissioners together. So,
between five and six a clock (there being a full Table) I was called in again,
and then (though Mr. Tombs had the Chair, yet) Mr. Nigh thus said to me,

You were not satisfied with what the Commissioners did in the Morning; but you
desire a further Trial of your Parts.

Then said Mr. Tombs --

The second Examination before nine Commissioners, July the 3. 1654.
Mr. Tombs. Quest


What is Original Sin?

Sad. A. It is the Corruption of our Nature, through Adam's fall.


Com. Q. Is Actual or Original sin greater?


Sad. A. Actual.


Com. Q. Is Pride or Murder, a Greater sin, than Original?


Com. Q. Is the Branch, said another, greater than the Root? -- That is well
put, said a Third.


Sad. A. Yes, Original sin is less than Actual; for, Actual sin is the
Aggravation of Original: there be degrees of sin.


Com. Q. Did Adam sin Willingly or Unwillingly?


Sad. A. Willingly, for, his Will was Free.


Com. Q. Was God Willing, or Unwilling of it?


Sad. A. It is a dark Question, I conceive, with submission to your judgment;
that, there was a Willing-Unwillingnesse.


Nigh. Q. Where do you find that in Scripture?


Sad. A The Question is as dark as the Answer.


Com. Q. What think you of Indeliberate Motions?


Sad. A. I do not well understand you.


Com. Q. Motions to Sin, before Consent are they Sinful?


Sad. A. Not Sinful, if not Consented to.


Com. Q. How so?


Sad. A. Because they be the Devils Suggestions, and are laid to his Charge.


Com. Q. Why, what are the Motions in our sleep, when we dream of killing, or
doing any other wickedness?


Sad. A. These Nocturnals are not sinful neither, if when we do awake we do
not Remember them, or Relate them with Delight, or any Yiedling to them.


Com. You told us in the Morning, that you were sure of the Grace of God in
You.


Sad. A. I did.


Com. Q. How have you that Assurance?


Sad. A. By Faith.


Com. Q. Is Faith Mediate or Immediate?


Sad. A. It is Immediate as Gods Gift; but ordinarily, it is Mediate, by the
Word and otherwise.


Nigh. Q. Do you Believe CHRIST, before you knew him; or Know CHRIST, before
you do Believe him?


Nigh. Q. How do you Exiricate your self?


Sad. A. I Know whom I have Believed.


Com. Q. What Evidence have you, that you Believe in Christ?


Sad. A. Because I have a Zeal to his Glory, a Sorrow for Sin, a Reluctance
against Sin, and I Apply the Merits of my Savior to my Self, saying, as Thomas
did, My Lord, and my God.


Com. Q. Is He your God, and your Lord only? Christ died for All, and shall
not All have the Benefit of his Death?


Sad. A. No, I know Christ's Death is Sufficient for as many Worlds of men, as
there be Men in the World: but surely, its not Effectual to All: its to all
Sorts of People, but not to All people.


Com. Q. Why not to All, as well as to You?


Sad. A. Because God will have Mercy, on Whom he will have Mercy. -- Yea, said
Mr. Tombs, and Whom he Will, he Hardens.


Com. Q. Does God Harden any Ones Heart?


Sad. A. Yes.


Com. Q. How can God Harden the Heart, and not be the Author of Sin?


Sad. A. God is said to Harden the Heart, when he Withdraws his Grace.


Com. Q. If God Withdraw his Grace, when he might Hinder Sin, Is He not the
Author of Sin?


Sad. A. God has a threefold Precept: a Precept of Trial, a Precept of
Obedience, and a Precept of Conviction.


Com. Q. Give Examples of each of them: What is the Precept of Trial?


Sad. A. That, by which, God Tempted Abraham.


Com. Q. What is the Precept of Obedience?


Sad. A. That, which God gives to his Elect: when he gives them a Command, and
Grace therewith, to Perform the Command.


Com. Q. What is the Precept of Conviction?


Sad. A. That, under which the Wicked lie; which, though they cannot Perform,
yet God is not the Author of Sin.


Com. Q. What is the Chief Point, in all the Scripture?


Sad. A. CHRIST, and Him Crucified.


Com. Q. Are you Justified by Faith?


Sad. A. Faith is my Righteousness, and Faith is my Justification.

There is a Justification before God, and a Justification before Men.

There is actus Vnus, and actus Successivus.

I am Justified by Faith, as Faith is the Instrument, or Hand, whereby I say
hold upon and Apply the Merits of my Savior, to my poor Soul: and Faith is my
Righteousness, as its Correlative, in reference to Christ's Merits.


Com. Q. But, all this while, here is no mention made, of Love to the Brethren.


Sad. A. I could not love God, if I did not love the Brethren, All my delight,
says David, is upon the Saints.


Com. Q. How long have you been at Westminster?


Sad. A. These seven years.


Nigh. Q. Do you know no Minister but Mr. Viner?


Sad. A. Yes, I knew your Self, and Many others.


Nigh. Q. Do not you know Mr. Roode?


Sad. A. Yes, but I have no Acquaintance with him.


Com. Q. How came you to know Doctor Temple?


Sad. A. I have seen him many times, at my Ladies, and I have been with him at
Battersy.


Nigh. Q. Had you never any Living, or Cure?


Sad. A. I never had any Living absolutely; I had a Cure at Bishop-Stoke; which
after the Living was Sequestered, I had 20l. a year allowed me by the Committee
of Southampton, as Mr. Major can affirm. My greatest time I lived was, with
Esquire Sadler in Hertfordshire, I was his Chaplain eleven years. -- Sir, were
it not, that I have a Zeal to advance Gods Glory, I would not take this
Preferment; I thank God, I can live, as I am.


Com. Q. What do you say of the Church of Rome, Is it a True Church or no?
Bishop Hall says, it is a True Church, and the Priests and Jesuits, and He
that was Executed the other day, said, It was a True Church: What say you?


Sad. A. Its no True Church. I think the Church of Rome, is as a Virgin
Defloured; She was Pure, but she is Defiled.

-- Then, they bid me

Withdraw.
I waited to be Called in again (according to their Custom) to hear the
Result: but I was called for no more; insomuch that when they Rose, I followed
Mr. Nigh, and asked him of the issue of my Examinations; He told me, The
Commissioners did not Approve; I asked the Reason why; but, he seemed to slight
me, and went away without speaking any farther to me.

I went forthwith to Mr. Peter's, and told him, I was sorry, that I was not
thought worthy of their Approbation: He answered, That the Commissioners had
not yet Concluded any thing, and that it was upon Suspense.

About a Fortnight after, I met with Mr. Lockier, and desired him, That a Vote
might pass, with me, or against me: He said, There was a Vote, and bid me ask
the Clerk: whom, upon the 7 of August I did, and having the Book reviewed,
there was only this Recorded, That such an One was Examined, and no more --

The 14 of August I wrote a Letter to Mr. Nigh, -- the Copy whereof is This --

Worthy Sir,
BEcause I have been twice Examined, first by Five, and then by Nine
Commissioners; and nothing as yet Determined (as upon Record) either for me, or
against me; and because my Life and Doctrine is generally known; and I am
Commanded by some Persons of Quality, to Satisfy the World, and to Justify my
Self, so far, as to a Prudentiall Vindication: And lastly, because my
Sufficiency for my Calling, is, by You, Obliquely, in the Negative: I have
followed the advice of my good Friend Mr. O. Sedgwicke, in making this Address
unto your Reverend Self.

Sir, I beseech you, to hold the Scale with Piety, and Prudence; and let it not
be turned by Policy, or Prejudice.

Fac Aliis fieri quod cup is ipse Tibi, is, a Gospel Precept; and even Mahomet
also, in his Alcoran, makes it Obligatory.

Remember (I pray you) the Mottoes upon the Spoaks in Sesostris Wheel: Imagine
my Case, Yours; and let God, and a good Conscience guide you, as you will
Answer it, at the Dreadful Day, of the Lords Coming.

You know Master Nigh, that every one has not the Boldness, it may be, the
Ingenuity, it may be, the Memory (no, the Ablest Scholar is sometimes
Indisposed, and Dull; and Haesitates at That; which, at another time, he is
Facetious In) to Answer Quodlibets ex tempore, and to make out upon the sudden,
the Gifts and the Graces, which are in him.

It is well known, I have, in this City, Preached (and the Text given me) upon a
Days Warning.

I have, and shall again (as occasion serves) Preach, both Practical, and
School Divinity; This, for Manifestation in regard of my Sufficiency; and That,
for Edification, in regard of the People.

I know, a Teacher of Gods Word, has a fourfold Duty; and the Word of God, a
fourfold Use; Three Practique, and One Contemplative.

I know, bonae sunt in Scriptur is sanctis Mysteriorum profunditates; quae ob
hoc Teguntur, ne Vilescant; ob hoc quaeuntur, ut Exerceant; ob hoc autem
Aperiuntur, ut Pascant.

Credimus, ut Cognoscamus; non Cognoscimus, ut Credamus.

Optimus est Lector, qui dictorum Intelligentiam expectet ex Dictis, potius
quam Imponat; and Retulerit magis, quam Attulerit.

Sir, give me any Controversed-Theologicall point, but That, of Free Will,
(which was never yet Decided by Oecumenicall or General Council) I shall be,
your humble Respondent in any Public Audience.

I must Entreat you, to Pardon my Boldness: I confess, the Prophet Excusabat
se per Verecundiam; and the Apostle affirms it, by a Question of Abnegation,
(...)? and yet, the same Apostle was enforced to a kind of Vainglory; if I am
so, You have Compelled me; and I crave your Excuse.

My Credit, and my Livelihood, are both Reflected on by the Suspense of your
Vote; and the Contingency of your Approbation.

Mr. Peter's told me, nothing was Concluded, and the 7 of this instant Aug: I
had the Book Revised, and found it so.

I humbly crave an Ultimate Answer, and a Positive Conclusion, upon my
Examinations, (which I have fully Recollected, and can produce) my Patron will
Present none other, till That be done.

If You please to Approve me (as God, and the World has, by my Meet Gifts, and
Lawful Ordination) I shall (God willing) Employ my Talent, to (my utmost
power) the best Advantage: but -- if you are resolved to Disapprove me, let it
be (I pray you) upon Record, and the Reason why; that (saving your Complement)
Aftertimes may know it, as well as You -- This is the humble, and but just
desire, of

Sir, Your Servant in the Lord, A. S.


Of this Letter, I had no Return; but -- This was (as were my Answers, my first
Certificate, and second Subscribers) Nauseated by his -- Worship: so that, (as
if his Will were the Law; his Power Unlimited; and both Unquestionable) I am
strangely kept (in an Arbitrary way) under the Hatches of their (displeased)
Pleasure: yea -- and all this (to the loss of my Time, Living, and Preferment)
without any reason rendered me.

Being therefore Enforced (I say Enforced) to this True Relation, and but Just
Appeal; I hope, the Lord my God, will so Bless it; as to be Successful, to
his Glory, and the Public good.

The End.

