OF THE NATURE OF THINGS, NINE BOOKS: Written by Philipp Theophrastus of
Hohenheim, CALLED PARACELSVS:

The Titles of the Nine Books. of the Generations Growths Conservations Life
Death Renewing Transmutations Separations Signatures
of Natural things.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Thomas Williams, at the Bible in
Little-Britain, 1650.

NINE BOOKS OF THE NATVRE Of Thing: Written by Philipp Theophrastus, of
Hohenheim, called PARACELSUS.
To the honest and wise man, John Winck Isteiner of Friburge, his most intimate
friend, and dear brother, Theophrastus Paracelsus wishes all health.
IT is most fit that I should (most intimate Friend, and dear brother) satisfy
your friendly, and daily requests, expressed in your frequent Letters to me:
and seeing that in your last Letters you do earnestly, and courteously invite
me to you, if it were convenient (I cannot dissemble with you) yet by reason of
many hindrances I cannot: but as for your other request, viz. that I should
give you some clear Instructions, I cannot deny you, but am constrained to
gratify you therein. I know the honesty of your mind, and that you do
willingly hear or see any thing that is new or wonderful in this art. I know
also that you have spent good part of your estate and life in it. Because
therefore you have expressed much good will, and brotherly fidelity toward
me, I cannot forget either, but am constrained to be thankful, and, if I
never see you more, to leave a brotherly legacy to you, and yours, as a
remembrance of of me. For I will not here only answer, and clearly instruct
you concerning those points only of which you have asked me; but will also
dedicate a Book to you, which I will call, Of the Nature of things, and will
divide it into nine little books. In this book I will satisfy all your
requests, and further then you demanded: although happily you will much wonder,
and perhaps doubt whether all these things are true that I shall write. But do
not so, yea believe them not to be speculations, and theories, but practical,
and proceeding from experience. And although I have not tried all of them my
self, yet I have them from, and have approved them by others, and know them by
that kind of experience, as also by the light of nature. If in some places you
cannot understand me what I shall say, and in some processes require of me
further explication, write to me privately, and I will declare the matter more
clearly, and give you sufficient instruction, and intelligence. Although I
believe you cannot well misunderstand what I shall write, seeing I know you are
so well qualified and gifted by God with arts, and a good understanding,
Moreover, you have known my mind and meaning, and therefore will quickly, and
easily understand me. Now I hope, and do not doubt, that you will respect this
present work, commended to you, and esteem of it according to its worth, and
not at all divulge it, but keep it in great secrecy for your self, and yours,
as indeed it is a hid, and great treasure an excellent gem, and precious thing,
which is not to be cast to swine, i.e. Sophisters, and contemners of all good
natural arts, and secrets, who are worthy neither to read them, much less to
have, know, or understand them. And although this book be very little,
consisting of few words, yet it is full of many, and great secrets. For I do
not here write out of speculation, and theorie, but practically out of the
light of nature, and experience, lest I should burden you, and make you weary
with many words, etc. Wherefore most dear friend, and loving brother, seeing I
have wrote this book out of love to you alone, and to no body else, I beseech
you that you will keep it as a thing of value, and a a great secret, and not
let it go out of your hands as long as you live, and at your death, bequeath
it in like manner to your children, and heirs, that they also may keep this
book secretly, which also I shall particularly desire of them, that they will not
let it go out of your family at any time, and be made public, so as to come
to the hands of Sophisters, and scoffers, who contemn all things, which are not
agreeable to them, and indeed detract from them: These are pleased only with
what is their own, as indeed all fools are wont to be, whom their own toys
only please, not anything which is another, hating all kind of wisdom.
Wherefore they account wisdom as folly: bec. nothing does the^ any good they
know the use of nothing. As one workman cannot use the instruments of another,
so a fool can use no weapons better then his own stick, or boughs; and
there is no sound pleasanter to him then the ringing of his own bell. Wherefore
most dear brother be you faithfully admonished, as I have entreated you, and do
what I have enjoined you, which I hope you will, and you shall do what is
right and well. Farewell with the protection of God.

Dated at Villacum in the year, 1537.
OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of the generations of Natural things.
The generation of natural things is twofold.
THe generation of all natural things is twofold: Natural, and without Art; and
Artificial, viz. by Alchymie. Although in general it may be said that all
things are naturally generated of the Earth by means of putrefaction. For
Putrefaction is the chief degree, All things proceed from putrefaction.
and first step to Generation. Now Putrefaction is occasioned by a moist heat.
The cause of putrefaction is a moist heart.
For a continual moist heat causes putrefaction and changes all natural
things from their first form, and essence, as also their virtues, The power and
nature of putrefaction.
and efficacy, into another thing. For as putrefaction in the stomach changes,
and reduces all meats into dung; so also putrefaction out of the stomach in a
glass, changes all things from one form into another, from one essence into
another, from one color into another, from one smell into another, from one
virtue into another, from one power into another, from one property into
another, and generally from one quality into another. For it is evident, and
proved by daily experience, that many good things, which are wholesome, and
medicinable, become after putrefaction naught, unwholesome, and mere poison. So
on the contrary, there are many bad, unwholesome, poisonous, and hurtful
things, which after their putrefaction become good, lose all their
unwholsomnesse, and become wonderful medicinable: because putrefaction
produces great matters, as of this we have a most famous example in the holy
Gospel, where Christ says: Unless a grain of Wheat be cast into the Earth,
and be putrefied, it cannot bring forth fruit in a hundred fold. Hence also we
must know, that many things are multiplied in putrefaction so as to bring forth
excellent fruit. For putrefaction is the change, What putrefaction is.
and death of all things, and destruction of the first essence of all Natural
things; whence there arises a regeneration, and new generation a thousand
times better, etc.

Seeing therefore putrefaction is the first degree, and step to generation; it
is very necessary that we know putrefaction well. Putrefaction is the first
degree to generation
Now there are many kinds of putrefactions, and one produces its generation in
another manner, then does another. One also sooner then another. We said also
that moisture, Putrefaction is manifold.
and heat were the first degree, and step to putrefaction, which produces all
things, as a Hen does her eggs. Wherefore through, and in putrefaction, all
mucilaginous phlegm, and matter is made living, whatsoever it prove to be at
last.

An artificial hatching of Chickens.
An example of this you have in eggs, in which there is a mucilaginous humor,
which by any kind of moderate continual heat is putrefied, and turned into a
living Chicke, not only by the heat of the Hen, but any such kind of heat. For
in such a degree of Fire eggs may be brought to maturity in a glass, and ashes,
and become living birds: yea any man may ripen an egg in his arm-hole, and
hatch a Chicke, as well as the Hen.

The raising of a dead bird to life.
And here we must take notice of something that is greater, and more then this:
viz. if that living Chicke be in a vessel of glass like a gourd, and sealed
up, burnt to powder, or ashes in the third degree of Fire, and afterward so
closed in, be putrefied with the exactest putrefaction of Horse-dung, into a
mucilaginous phlegm, then that phlegm may be brought to maturity, and become a
renewed, and new made Chicke: to wit, if that phlegm be again enclosed in its
former shell, or receptacle. This is to revive the dead by regeneration, and
clarification, which indeed is a great, and profound miracle of Nature.
According to this process may all Birds be killed, and made alive again, and
made new: and this is the highest, and greatest miracle, and mystery of God,
which he ever discovered to mortal man.

The Atificiall generation of Man.
We must also know that after this manner men may be generated without
natural Father, or Mother, i.e. not of a Woman in a natural way: but by the
Art, and industry of a skillful Alchymist may a Man be borne, and grow, as
afterward shall be showed.

The generation of men by brutes.
It is possible also that men may be born of beasts, according to natural
causes, but yet this cannot be done without much impiety, and heresy; to wit,
if a man should couple with a beast, and that beast should, as a woman does,
receive the Sperm of the man, with desire and lust into her matrix, and
conceive: then the sperm does of necessity putrefie, and by the continual heat
of the body, a man, and not a beast is thence produced. As the seed is, so is
the fruit.
For always as the seed is that is sown, so also is the fruit that is brought
forth; and unless it should be so, it would be contrary to the light of
Nature, and to Philosophy. Wherefore as is the seed, such is the herb that
springs from thence. So of the Seed of an Onyon is brought forth an Onyon, not
a Rose, nor a Nut, not a Lettuce. So of Corn, Corn is brought forth; of
Barley, Barley; of Oats, Oats: and so it is with all other fruits, which have
seed, and are sown, etc.

The force of women's imagination.
In like manner also it is possible, and not contrary to Nature, that an
irrational bruit should be produced by a woman, and a man. Neither are we to
judge of, or censure the woman, as the man, (as in the former case) she
therefore is not to be accounted impious, or heretical, as if she acted
contrary to Nature, but is to be imputed to her imagination. For her
imagination is always the cause of it. And the imagination of a breeding woman
is so powerful, that in conceiving the seed into her body, she may change her
infant diverse ways: because her inward stars are so strongly bent upon the
infant, that they beget an impression, and influence upon it. Wherefore the
infant in the Mothers womb in its forming is put into the hand, and will of
its Mother, as clay in the hand of the Potter, who thence frames, and makes
what his will, and pleasure is: so the Woman that is breeding, forms the fruit
in her body, according to her imagination, and her stars. Therefore it often
falls out, that of the seed of a man, Cattle, and other horrid Monsters are
begot, according as the imagination of the Mother is strongly directed upon the
Embryo, etc.

Now as you have heard, that by putrefaction, many, and various things are
generated, and made alive, so also you must know, that of many herbs, by
putrefaction diverse living creatures are bred, which they that are skilled in
these things know.

All animals that are bred merely of putrefaction are poisonous.
Here also we must know, that all such Animalls, which are bred, and made of
putrefaction, contain some poison, and are poisonous, yet one far more strong
then another, and one after another manner then another: as you see in
Serpents, Vipers, Toads, Frogs, Scorpions, Basiliskes, Spiders, Wood-bees,
Pismires, and many sorts of Worms, as Cankers, Maggots, Locusts, etc. All
which are bred in, and through putrefaction. Also amongst Animalls there are
bred diverse Monsters; And there are Monsters also which are not bred of
putrefaction of themselves, but are made by Art in a glass, as has been said;
because they oftentimes appear in a very wonderful shape, and form, fearful to
behold, as oftentimes with many feet, many tails, many colors, oftentimes
many heads, worms with the tails of Fishes, or feathers, and other unusual
forms, that the like have not been seen.

What Monsters are.
Wherefore not only all Animalls, which have not proper Parents, and are not
borne of things like to themselves are Monsters, but also those which are bred
of other things.

The secret poison of the Basilisk.
So you see it is concerning a Basiliske, which also is a Monster, and indeed a
Monster above all Monsters, and then which none is to be more dreaded, because
he can kill any man with his mere looks, and sight: and because his poison is
above all poisons, to which nothing in the world is to be compared. He
carries his poison in a most secret manner in his eyes, and it is a conceived
poison, not much unlike a menstruous woman, who also carries a secret poison
in her eyes, so that only by her looks a Looking-glass is fouled, and tainted.
So also if she look upon a wound, or an ulcer, she infects that in the like
manner, and hinders the cure thereof: so also with her breath, as well as
sight, she infects diverse things, corrupts, and weakens them; and so also with
her touch. For you see if she meddle with wine in time of her menstrues, that
it is suddenly changed and made thick; The Vinegar also that she medles
withal, becomes dead, and useless: so also Hot-waters lose their strength: In
like manner Civet, Amber, Gryse, Musk, and such like perfumes, lose their odor
by such a woman's carrying, or handling of them So also Gold, and Coralls lose
their color, also many Gemmes, and Looking-glasses are soiled therewith, etc.
But to return to what I proposed concerning the Basiliske, by what reason, and
in what manner he carries poison in his looks, and eyes; you must know that
he has that property, and poison from menstruous women, as is aforesaid. For
the Basiliske is bred of, and proceeds from the greatest impurity of a Woman,
viz. her Menstrues, and from the blood of the Sperm, if it be put into a gourd
glass, and putrefied in Horse-dung, in which putrefaction a Basiliske is
brought forth. But who is so courageous, and bold to make, take him out, and
kill him again, unless he cover, and fortify himself well first with
glasses: I should persuade none to do it, nay, I would advise them to take
heed of it.

Monsters do not live long.
But that I may proceed in treating of Monsters, Know that Monsters amongst
brutes, which are brought forth of other things, and not of their like, seldom
live long, especially if they shall live near, or amongst other brutes, because
of an imbred disposition, and Gods disposing, all Monsters are odious unto
brutes that are genuinely brought forth, and so also Monsters of men, which are
generated by man, seldom live long. And by how much the more wonderful, and
remarkable they are, so much the sooner they dye, so that none exceed the third
day amongst men unless they be presently carried into some secret place, and
kept apart from all men. Moreover you must know that God abhors these kind of
Monsters, and that they are displeasing to him, and that none of them can be
saved, seeing they bear not the image of God: whence we can conjecture nothing
else, but that they are so formed by the Devil, Monsters come from the Devil.
and are made for the Devils service, rather then Gods, because no good work
was ever done by any Monster, but rather all manner of evil, wickedness, and
devilish deceits. For as an Executioner marketh his sons in cutting off their
ears, putting out their eyes, burning their cheeks, fingers, hands, and cutting
off their heads: so does the Devil mark his sons through the imagination of
their Mothers, which in their conceiving they drew from evil desire, lusts,
and cogitations.

Monsters are to be shunned.
Also all men are to be shunned, which abound with, or want any member, or have
a double member. For that is a presage of the Devils, and a most certain
sign of some occult wickedness, and deceit, which follows upon it. Wherefore
they seldom dye without the Executioner, or at least from some mark made by
him.

The artificial generation of Men:
But we must by no means forget the generation of Artificall men. For there is
some truth in this thing, although it has been a long time concealed, and
there have been no small Doubts, and Questions, raised by some of the ancient
Philosophers, Whether it were possible for Nature, or Art to beget a Man out of
the body of a Woman, and natural matrix? To this I answer, that it is no way
repugnant to the Art of Alchymie, and Nature; yea it is very possible: But to
effect it, we must proceed thus.

Let the Sperm of a man by it self be putrefied in a gourd glass, sealed up,
with the highest degree of putrefaction in Horse dung, for the space of forty
days, or so long until it begin to be alive, move, and stir, which may easily
be seen. After this time it will be something like a Man, yet transparent, and
without a body. Now after this, if it be every day warily, and prudently
nourished and fed with the Arcanum of Man's blood, and be for the space of
forty weeks kept in a constant, equal heat of Horse-dung, it will become a
true, and living infant, having all the members of an infant, which is born of
a woman, but it will be far less. This we call. Homunculus, or Artificial.
And this is afterward to be brought up with as great care, and diligence as
any other infant, until it come to riper years of understanding. Now this is
one of the greatest secrets, that God ever made known to mortal, sinful man.
For this is a miracle, and one of the great wonders of God, and secret above
all secrets, and deservedly it ought to be kept amongst the secrets until the
last times, when nothing shall be hid, but all things be made manifest.

And although hitherto it has not been known to men, yet it has been known to
Fairies of the Woods, Fairies, Nymphs, Giants, etc. are made of arificiall men.
Nymphs, and Giants many ages since, because they come from them. For of such
Artificial men, when they come to Man's age, are made Pygmies, Giants, and
other great and monstrous men, who are instruments of great matters, who
obtain great victories against their Enemies, and know all secrets, and
mysteries: because by Art they receive their lives, by Art they, receive their
bodies, flesh, bones, and blood: by Art they are borne; wherefore Art is now
incorporated with, and imbred in them, and they need not learn of any, but
others are constrained to learn of them, for by Art they have their original
and present existeney, as a rose, or flower in a garden, and they are called
the children of Fairies, and Nymphs, by reason that in power, and virtue they
are like not to Men, but Spirits, etc.

Here it is necessary that we speak something of the generation of Metalls;
but because we have wrote sufficiently of that in our book of the generation of
Metals, we shall very briefly treat of it here, only briefly adding what was
omitted in that book. Know that all the seven Metalls are brought forth after
this manner, Of 3 principles Mercury the Spirit, sulphur is the soul, Salt the
body.
out of a threefold matter, viz. Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, yet in distinct,
and peculiar colors. For this reason Hermes did not speak amiss, when he
said, that of three substances are all the seven Metalls produced, and
compounded, as also the Tinctures, and Philosophers Stone. Those 3 substances
he calls the Spirit, Soul, and Body: but he did not show how this is to be
understood, or what he did mean by this, although happily he might know the
three Principles, but did not make mention of them. Wherefore we do not say,
that he was here in an error, but only was silent now, that those 3 distinct
substances may be rightly understood, viz. Spirit, Soul, and Body, we must
know, that they signify nothing; else but the three Principles,. i.e. Mercury,
Sulphur, Salt, of which all the seven Metalls are generated. For Mercury is the
Spirit, Sulphur the Soul, and Salt the Body, but a Metal is the Soul betwixt
the Spirit, and the Body (as Hermes says) which Soul indeed is Sulphur; and
unites these two contraries, the Body, and Spirit, and changes them into one
essence, etc.

Now this is not to be understood so as that of every Mercury, Whether metalls
can be made artificially by fire.
every Sulphur, or of every Salt, the seven Metalls may be generated, or the
Tincture, or Philosophers Stone by the Art of Alchymie, or industry, with the
help of Fire; but all the seven Metalls must be generated in the mountains by
the Archeius of the Earth. For the Alchymist shall sooner transmute Metalls,
then generate, or make them.

Living is the mother of metalls.
Yet nevertheless living Mercury is the Mother of all the seven Metalls, and
deservedly it may be called the Mother of the Metalls. For it is an open
Metal, and as it contains all colors, which it manifests in the Fire, so also
occultly it contains all Metalls in it self, but without Fire it cannot show
them, etc.

But generation, and renovation of Metalls is made thus: As a man may return
into the womb of his Mother,. i.e. into the Earth, out of which he was first
made a man, and shall again be raised at the last day: The regeneration of
metalls into tinctures.
so also all Metalls may return into living again, and become, and by Fire
be regenerated, and purified, if for the space of forty weeks, they be kept
in a continual heat, as an infant is in his Mothers womb. So that now there
are brought forth not common Metalls, but Tinging Metalls. For if Silver be
regenerated (after the manner as we have spoken) it will afterward tinge all
other Metalls into Silver, so will Gold into Gold, and the like is to be
understood of all the other Metalls.

Now forasmuch as Hemes said, that the soul alone is that medium which joines
the spirit to the body, it was not without cause he said so. The Soul is that
medium wherewith the soul is united to the body.
For seeing Sulphur is that soul, and does like Fire ripen, and digest all
things; it can also bind the soul with the body, incorporating, and uniting
them together, so that from thence may be produced a most excellent body. Now
the common combustible Sulphur is not to be taken for the soul of metalls,
for the soul is another manner of thing then a combustible, and corruptible
body.

What the soul of metalls is.
Wherefore it can be destroyed by no Fire, seeing indeed it is all Fire it
self: and indeed it is nothing else but the quintessence of Sulphur, which is
extracted out of reverberated Sulphur by the spirit of wine, being of a red
color, and as transparent as a Rubie: and which indeed is a great, and
excellent Arcanum, for the transmuting of white metalls, and to coagulate
living into fixed, and true Gold. Esteem this as an enriching treasure, and
thou may be well contented with this, only secret in the Transmutation of
Metalls.

Concerning the generation of mineralls, and half metalls nothing else need
be known then what was at first said concerning metalls, Where is the
generation of metalls and mineralls.
viz. that they are in like manner produced of the three Principles, viz.
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, although not as metalls of perfect, but of the more
imperfect, and baser Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, and yet with their distinct
colors.

Whence the generation of Gemmes.
The generation of Gemmes is from the subtilty of the Earth, of transparent and
crystalline Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, even according to their distinct
colors.

Also of Common Stones.
But the generation of common Stones is of the subtilty of Water, of
mucilaginous Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt. For of the mucilaginousnesse of Water
are produced all stones, as also sand, and gravel are thence coagulated into
Stones, as we often see.

For any stone pat in the Water, does suddenly contract mucilaginousnesse to to
itself. An artificial generation of Stones.
Now if that mucilaginous matter be taken from this Stone, and coagulated in a
glass, it becomes such a Stone, as was in that Water, but it would require a
long time before it would be coagulated of it self.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of the growth, and increase of Natural things.
Heat and Moisture the cause of the growth of things.
IT is sufficiently manifest, and known to every one, that all natural things
grow, and are ripned through heat, and moisture, which is sufficiently
demonstrated by rain, and the heat of the sun. For no man can deny that rain
does make the Earth fruitfully, and it is granted by all, that all fruits are
ripened by the sun.

An artificial ripening of things.
Seeing therefore this is by divine ordination naturally possible, who can
gainsay, or not believe that a man is able, through the wise, and skillful Art
of Alchymie, to make that which is barren, fruitful, and that which is crude,
to ripen, and all things to grow, and to be increased. For the Scripture says,
God has subjected all things to man,
that God subjected all creatures to man, and put them into his hands as being
his own, that he might use them for his necessity; and rule over the fish of
the sea, fowls of the air, and all things upon the Earth, nothing excepted.
Wherefore man might well rejoice that God should so endow him with the
excellency of Nature, that all the creatures of God should be forced to obey,
and be subject to him, especially the whole Earth, and all things which are
bred, live, and move in, and upon it. Since therefore we see with our eyes,
and are taught by daily experience, that by how much the oftener, and more
abundantly therain does moisten the earth, and the sun does again with its heat
and warmth dry it, so much the sooner do the fruits of the Earth come forth
and are ripened, yea all fruits do clearly grow, and increase, what time of
the year soever it be; Let no man henceforth wonder, The artificial generation
of fruit.
that the Alchymist also by a manifold imbibition, and distillation should not
do the same. For what else is rain but the imbibition of the Earth? and the
heat of the Sun, but the distillation of the un, which draws up those
humidities again? Wherefore I say it is possible by such a kind of Art, even in
the middle of Winter to bring forth green Herbs, Flowers, and other fruit,
through Earth, and Water, out of the seed, and root: If then this can be done
in all Herbs, and flowers, it may also be done in many other like things, as
in all mineralls, whose imperfect metalls by virtue of a mineral water may be
brought to maturity through the industry, and Art of a skillful Alchymist.

The ripening of mineralls.
In like manner may all Marcasites, Granati, Zineta, Arsenica, Talka, Cachymie,
Bisemuta, Antimonies, etc. (all which carry with them crude Gold, and Silver,)
be so ripened, that they may be equalized to the most rich veins of Gold, and
Silver, only by this Art. So also the Elixir, and tinctures of metals arc
brought to maturity, and perfected.

What the growing of the beard of a dead man signifies.
Seeing therefore, as it has been said, moisture, and heat do ripen all
things, and make them grow, Let none wonder, that the beard, hair, or nails
of a malefactor hanging on a Gibbet, or Wheel do for a long time grow, neither
let it be accounted for a sign of his innocence, as the ignorant believe; for
this is natural, and from natural causes. For whilst that any moisture
remains in him, his beard, hair, and nails grow, even till the second year,
or till he be wholly putrefied, etc.

We must also know, that there are many things that grow for ever, and are
increased in big nesse, weight, and virtue, in the Water, and Earth, in which
they continue good, and efficacious, as are Metalls, Marcasites, Cachymie,
Talka, Granuty, Antimony, Bisemuta, The augmentation of.
Gemmes, Pearls, Corals, all Stones, and Clay. So also it may be ordered, that
Gold may grow, and be increased in weight, and body, if only it be buried in
the Earth looking toward the East, and be always soiled with the fresh urine
of a man, and pigeons dung. How Gold may be generated in a glass.


It is possible also that Gold, through industry, and skill of an expert
Alchymist may be so far exalted, that it may grow in a glass like a tree,
with many wonderful boughs, and leaves, which indeed is pleasant to behold,
and most wonderful.

How the Philosophical Tree is made.
The process is this. Let Gold be calcined with Aqua Regis, till it becomes a
kind of chalk, which put into a gourd glass, and pour upon it good new Aqua
Regis, so that it may cover it four fingers breadth, then again draw it off,
with the third degree of fire, until no more ascend. The water that is
distilled off, pour on again, then distill off again. This do so long
until thou see the Gold to rise in the glass, and grow after the manner of
a tree, having many boughs, and leaves: and so there is made of Gold a
wonderful, and pleasant shrub, which the Alchymists call their Golden herb,
and the Philosophers Tree. In like manner you may proceed with Silver, and
other Metalls, yet so that their calcination be made after another manner, by
another Aqua fortis, which I leave to thine experience. If thou art skilled in
Alchymie, thou shall not err in these things.

To make an artificial stone of any form.
Know also that any flint taken out of River water, (and put into a gourd
glass, having River water poured upon it, that the glass may be filled,
which Water is again to be distilled off as long as a drop will arise, and
the Stone dried, and the Glass again filled with this Water, and again
distilled off, and this done so long till the Glass be filled with this
Stone) may in a few days by the Art of Alchymie be made very great, which the
Archeius of the Waters could scarce do in many years.

If then thou break the Glass, thou shall have a Flint in the form of the
Glass, as if it had been put into the Glass, and although this be not for
profit, yet it is a thing that is strange, and wonderful.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE THIRD BOOK. Of the preservations of Natural things.
THat things may be preserved, and kept from harm, it is necessary in the
first place to know what is an enemy to them, The enemies of things are be
known.
that so they may be preserved from that, and not be hurt, or corrupted by it
either in substance, virtue, power, or any way whatsoever. Much therefore in
this case depends upon the knowing of the Enemy of all Natural things. For
who can take heed of danger when he dotn not know what can hurt him? Truly no
body; Wherefore it is necessary to know ones Enemy, For there are many sorts
of Enemies. Wherefore it is as necessary to know evil things, as good things:
for who can know what is good, without the knowing of what is evil? Truly no
body. So no man can know what a blessing health is, that was never sick. Who
knows what joy is, that was never heavy, or sad? and who can rightly understand
what God is, who knew nothing of the Devil? Wherefore when God made known to us
the Enemy of our Soul, viz. the Devil, he also signified to us the Enemy of
our life, Death is the enemy of things.
viz. Death, which is the Enemy of our body, of our health, and the Enemy of
Medicinal, and all natural things: also he made known tous how, and by which
means it may be shunned. For as there is no disease against which there is not
created, and found some remedy, which should cure, and expel it: so also there
is always one thing ordained against another, There is a Contrariety found in
all things.
one Water against another, one Stone against another, one Mineral against
another: one Poison against another, one Metal against another: and so in many
more things, all which it is not requisite here to reciter.

Now how, and by what means every thing is to be preserved, and kept from
hurt, we must know, that many things are to be preserved in the Earth, and
especially all roots do for a long time remain in the Earth without losing
their virtue, or being corrupted: in like manner herbs, flowers, and all
fruits continue in the water incorrupted, and green: there are also many
fruits and apples that may be preserved in water from all manner of
putrefaction, until new fruit come again.

How to preserve flesh and blood.
So also flesh, and blood, which indeed are putrefied, and grow unsavory
quickly, are preserved in cold fountain water, and not only so, but by the
addition of new and fresh fountaine-water, may he turned into a quintessence,
and be for ever preserved from putrefaction, and an ill savor, without any
balsome. And this does not only preserve the flesh, and blood of dead things,
but also of the living, wherefore Man's body may be preserved from all manner
of putrefaction, and diverse diseases that proceed from putrefaction, better
then common Mummie. Mow that blood may be preserved of it self from
putrefaction, and stinking, and not as a quintessence, and so as it may
preserve the blood of the living (as we now said) thou must follow this
process.

How the Arcanum of man's blood is to be prepared.
Let the blood be separated from its phlegm, which is separated of its self,
and is driven to the upper part. This water pour gently out of the vessel,
and in stead of it put as much of the water of the salt of blood, which water
we teach to make in our Chirurgerie: That water does presently mix with the
blood, and preserves it so, that it will never be putrefied, or grow unsavory,
but continue many years as fresh, and very red as it was the first day: and
this indeed is a great wonder. But if thou do not know how to make this
water, or have it notin readiness, then pour upon it so much of the best, and
most excellent balsome, and this will do the same. Now this blood is the
balsome of balsomes, and is called the Arcanum of blood, and it is so
wonderful, and of such great virtue, that it is incredible to be spoken;
wherefore thou shall conceal it as a great secret in Physic.

How metalls may be preserved. What are the enemies of metalls,
In preserving of Metalls, their Enemies are first to be known, that so much
the better they may be preserrved from harm. The chiefest Enemies of Metalls
are all sharp corroding Waters, all Corrosive things, all Salts, crude Sulphur,
Antimony, and Mercury. But that you may know particularly how the show their
enmity, it is thus. Sharp Waters, and such things as are Corrosive, and Salts
show their enmity, in that they mortify, dissolve, calcine, corrupt Metalls,
and reduce them to nothing.

How the fume of Sulphur does discolor metallis.
Crude Sulphur shows its enmity in the fume thereof: for by its fume it takes
away from Copper its color, and redness, and makes it white. From white
Metalls, as Silver, Tin, Lead, and Iron it takes away the whiteness, and
makes them red, and yellowish. From Gold it takes away that fair amiable
yellowness, and golden color, and makes it black, and so foul, that nothing
can be more foul.

How Antimony spoils and discolours metalls.
Antimony shows its enmity in this, in that all Metalls with which it is melted,
or mixed, it spoils, carries away, and preys upon, and also not unlike to
Sulphur, by its fume it takes away from Metalls their true, and natural
color, and brings in another.

Quicksilver distroyes metalls, and how.
Quicksilver does destroy Metalls upon this account, in that it enters into
Metalls, with which it is joined, and dissolves them, so as that it makes an
Amalgama of them: Wherefore the fume thereof, which we common Mercury, makes
all Metalls brittle, that they cannot be malleated, and calcines them, also it
makes all red Metalls of a golden color, to be white: but it is the greatest
enemy of all to Iron, and Steel; for if common Mercury do but touch a bar
of Iron, or Steel, or that be but smeared over with Mercuriall oil, that bar
will afterward be broken like glass, and be bowed; which indeed is a great
secret, and deserves to be kept exceeding close. In like manner must the
Loadstone be kept from Mercury, for the like enmity it shows to that as to
Iron. For any Loadstone that Mercury has but touched, How the loadstone may be
spoiled.
or which has been smeered with Mercuriall oil, or only put into Mercury,
will never draw Iron more. Let no man wonder at this, for there is a natural
cause for it, and it is this, viz. because Mercury extracts the spirit of Iron,
which was hid in the Loadstone, which spirit draws the spirit of Iron to it:
and this is not only in the Loadstone, but in all natural things else, so that
always a strange spirit in a body which is not of the same Nature with it
self, draws to it self a body which is of the same Nature: and this we must
know to be so, not only in the Lodestone, but also in all other natural
things, as Minerals, Stones, Herbs, Roots, Men, and Brutes.

What antipathy there is betwixt metalls themselves.
That Metalls have an enmity, and hate one the other naturally, as you see in
Lead, which is naturally a very great enemy to Gold. For it breaks asunder all
parts of Gold, it makes it foul, weak, spoils, and destroys it even to
death, more then any other Metal.

Tin also hates, and is an enemy to all Metalls: for in makes them base,
immalleable, hard, unprofitable, if it be mixed with them in the fire, or in
melting.

Since therefore you have now heard of the Enemies of Metalls, you must next
know their preservatives, which keep them from all manner of hurt, or
corruption, also strengthen them in their Nature, and virtue, and exalt their
color.

Gold is preserved in boys urine.
First therefore concerning Gold, you must know, that it cannot be preserved
better, and fairer then in boys urine, in which Salt Armoniack is dissolved,
or in water alone of Salt Armoniack. In them in time the color is so highly
exalted that it can be exalted no higher.

How silver is preserved.
Silver cannot be better preserved then if it be boiled in common Water, or
Vinegar, in which Tartar or Salt have been dissolved. So any old Silver, that
is made black, and fouled, is renewed by being boiled in these waters: How Iron
and Steel may be served.
The best preservative for Iron and Steels is the lard of a Barrow-hog not
salted, which indeed preserves Iron, and Steel from rust, if once every month
they be smeered over with it. Also if Iron be melted with fixed Arsenicke, it
will be so renewed and fixed, How Copper is preserved.
that it will like Silver never contract rust. Copper may be preserved, if it
be only mixed with sublimed Mercury, or be smeered over with the oil of
Salt; and so it will never any more be grown over with verdegrease.

How Lead is preserved.
Lead can no ways be better preserved then in cold Earth, and in a moist
place, according to the Nature thereof. How the Lodestone is preserved.
The Lodestone is preserved best of all with the filings of Iron, and Steel,
for by this means it is never weakened, but daily strengthened.

The preservation of Salts.
Now concerning the preservation of Salts, and all things, that are of a saltish
Nature, and may be comprehended under the name of Salt (of which there are more
then an hundred sorts) you must know that they are to be preserved in a hot
dry place, and in wooden vessels, not in Glass, Stone, or Metalls: for in
those they are dissolved and become a Water, and an Amalgama which cannot be in
Wood.

Moreover you must know how some kind of Waters, and Liquors pressed out of
herbs, roots, The preservation of liquors with oils.
and all other fruits, and Vegetables, which do easily contract filth, and
slime as if a skin were spread over them, may be preserved. These Waters
therefore, and Liquors must be put up into glasses that are narrow toward the
top, and wide below, and the glasses be filled to the top, then add a few
drops of oil Olive, that all the Water, or Liquor may be covered: so the Oil
will swim on the top, and preserve the Liquor, or Water along time from filth
or flime. For there is no Water, or liquor if it be covered with oil, that
will be musty, or of an ill savor.

By this means also may two sorts of Water, of Liquors of Wine be kept apart
in one vessel, that they may not be mixed: and not only two sorts, but three,
four, five, and more, if only the oil be put betwixt: For they are severed by
the Oil, as by a wall, which will not suffer them to be joined together, and
united, for oil and water are two contraries, and neither can be mixed with the
other: For as the Oil will not suffer the Waters to be united, so on the
contrary, the Water will not suffer the Oils to be mixed.

How clothes are preserved.
Now to preserve Cloth, and Garments from moths, there is no better way then
with Mastick, Camphire, Amber Gryfe, and Musk, and Civet, which indeed is the
best of all, which does not only preserve them from moths, but also drives away
moths, and all other vermin, as Fleas, Lice, etc.

How all of sorts of Wood may be preserved.
Also all manner of Woods, as in Houses, Bridges, Ships, or wheresoever they be,
may be preserved so that they will never be putrefied, either in waters, or
under waters, or out of water in the earth, under the earth or above the earth,
whether they be set in the rain, or wind, air, snow, or ice, in winter, or
summer; also that they be not worm-eaten, nor that any worms may breed in them
whenever they be cut. Now this preservative is a great Arcanum against all
kinds of putrefactions, yea so excellent a secret that none may be compared to
it. And it is nothing else but Oil of Sulphur, Fixed oil of sulphur.
the process whereof is this. Let common yellow Sulphur be powdered, and put
into a Gourd glass, upon which let there be poured so much of the strongest
Aqua fortis, that may cover it three fingers breadth: then draw it often by
distillation, three, or four times; and last of all, till it be dry. Let the
Sulphur that remains in the bottom being of a black, sad red color, be put
upon marble, or in a glass, and it will easily be dissolved into Oil, which
is a great secret in preserving of Wood from putrefaction, and worms. For this
Oil does so tinge the wood that is nointed with it, that it can never be
washed out of it again. Many more things may be preserved with this Oil of
Sulphur, from putrefaction, as ropes, cords in ships, and masts of ships, in
carts, fishing-nets, and gins which Fowlers, and Hunters use, and such like,
which are oftentimes used in waters, or rain, and are otherwise easily rotted,
and broken, so also linen clothes, and many other such like things.

Which arepotable things, and how they are preserved.
Also you must know how potable things are to be preserved, by which we
understand Wine, Beer, Meade, Vinegar, and Milk. Now if we would preserve
these from harm, and in their full virtue, it is very necessary that you know
well what is an Enemy to them, and that is menstruous women: Which is an
enemy to them.
for if they do handle the foresaid things, or have any thing to do about
them, or look, or breath upon them, they corrupt them. For Wine is thereby
changed, and become thick, Beer, and Mead grow sour, Vinegar grows dead, and
loses its sharpness: and Milk grows sour, and curded.

This therefore you must well know, before you come to preserve each of these
in particular.

How Wine is preserved by Sulphur.
Wine is preserved chiefly by Sulphur, and the Oil of Sulphur, by which all
Wine may be preserved a long time, so that it be neither thick, nor any other
way changed.

Beer is preserved with oil of Cloves.
Beer is preserved with Oil of Cloves, if some drops thereof be put into it,
to every Gallon two or three drops, or, which is better, with the Oil of the
root of Avens, which does preserve Beer from sowring.

Meade is preserved with oil of Sugar. How Vinegar is preserved.
Meade is preserved with Oil of Sugar, which must be used as the Oil of Cloves
abovesaid.

Vinegar is preserved with Oil of Ginger, which must be used as the Oil of
Cloves abovesaid.

How Milk is preserved.
Milk is preserved with Oil of Almonds made by expression, which must be used
as the Oil of Cloves abovesaid.

Cheese is preserved with St. John's wort.
Cheese is preserved with St. John's wort from worms, for if it does but touch
it, no worm will breed in it: and if there be any m before, it will kill
them, and make them fall out of the Cheese.

How Honey is to be preserved. What its chief enemy is.
Honey has no peculiar preservative, only that it may be kept from its
Enemy. Now its chief Enemy is bread: for if a little bread made of Corn be
but put, or fallen in into it, all the Honey is turned into Emmots, and spoiled.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE FOVRTH BOOK. Of the life of Natural things.
What use the Air is for, as to the life of things.
NO man can deny that Air gives life to all things, bodies, and substances,
that are produced, and generated of the Earth. Now you must know what, and what
manner of thing the life of every thing in particular is; and it is nothing
else then a spiritual essence, What the life of things is.
a thing that is invisible, impalpable, a spirit, and spiritual. Wherefore
there is no corporeal thing, What things have life.
which has not a spirit lying hid in it, as also a life, which, as I said
before, is nothing but a spiritual thing. For not only that has life which
moves, and stirs, as Men, Animalls, Vermin of the earth, Birds in the Air,
Fish in the sea, but also all corporeal, and substantial things. For here we
must know that God in the beginning of the Creation of all things, created no
body at all without its spirit, which it secretly contains in it.

What is the difference betwixt the Spirit and the Body.
For what is the body without a spirit? Nothing at all. Wherefore the spirit
contains in it secretly the virtue, and power of the thing, and not the body.
For in the body there is death, and the body is the subject of death, neither
is any else to be sought for in the body, but death.

The Spirit never dies.
For that may several ways be destroyed, and corrupted, but the spirit
cannot. For the living spirit remains for ever, and also is the subject of
life: and preserves the body alive; but in the ruin of the body it is
separated from it, and leaves behind it a dead body, and returns to its place,
from whence it came, viz. into the Chaos, and the Air of the upper and lower
Firmament. Hence it appears that there are diverse spirits, as well as diverse
bodies.

The division of the Spirit according to the variety of bodies.
For there are spirits Celestial, Infernal, Humane, Metalline, Mineral, of
Salts, of Gemmes, of Marcasites, of Arsenicks, of Potable things, of Roots, of
Juices, of, Flesh, of Blood, of Bones, etc. Wherefore also know that the spirit
is most truly the life, The Spirit is the life of all Corporeal things.
and balsome of all Corporeal things. But now we will proceed to the species,
and briesly describe to you in this place the life of every natural thing in
particular.

What the life of man is.
The life therefore of all men is nothing elfe but an Astrall balsome, a
Balsamic impression, and and a celestial invisible Fire, an included Air,
and a tinging spirit of Salt. I cannot name it more plainly, although it be
set out by many names. And seeing we have declared the best, and chiefest, we
shall be silent in these which are less material.

What the life of Metalls is.
The life of Metalls is a secret fatness, which they have received from
Sulphur, which is manifest by their flowing, for every thing that flows in the
fire, flows by reason of that secret fatness that is in it: unless that were
in it, no Metal could flow, as we see in Iron, and Steel, which have less
Sulphur, and fatness then all the other Metalls, wherefore they are of a dryer
Nature then all the rest.

What the life of Mercury is. Mercury is like to a garment of skins.
The life of Mercury is nothing else but the internal heat, and external
coldness, i.e. it makes the internal part of its body hot, and the outward
part cold, and therefore might well be compared to a garment made of skins,
which does even as Mercury make hot, and cold. For if a man wears such a
garment it makes him warm, and keeps him from the cold: but if the smooth pare
of those skins be put upon his naked body, it makes him cold, and is good
against too much heat; wherefore it was a custom in ancient time and still is
in some places, to wear skins as well in Summer, as in Winter, as against cold
in the one, so against heat in the other. in Summer they turn the smooth side
inward, and the hairy side outward; and in Winter the hairy side inward, and
the smooth side outward. As therefore you have heard of the garment of skins,
so also it may be said of Mercury.

What the life of Sulphur is.
The life of Sulphur is a combustible, stinking fatness, for whilst it burns,
and stinks, it may be said to be alive.

What the life of Salts is.
Now the life of all Salts is nothing else but the spirit of Aquae fortis: for
that water being drawn from them, that which remains in the bottom, is called
Dead earth.

What the life of Gemmes and Coralls is.
The life of Gemmes, and Coralls is only their color, which with spirit of Wine
may be taken from them.

What the life of Pearls is.
The life of Pearls is nothing else but their splendour, which they lose in
calcination.

What the life of the Loadstone is.
The life of the Loadstone is the spirit of Iron, which may be extracted, and
taken away with spirit of Wine.

The life of Flints what.
The life of Flintes is a mucilaginous matter.

The life of Marcasites what.
The life of Marcasites, Cachymia, Talcum, Cobaltum, Zimri, Granata, Wismat, and
of Antimony is a tinging Metalline spirit.

The life of Arsenicks.
The life of Arsenickes, Auripigment, Operment, Realgar, and such like matters,
is a Mineral, and coagulated poison.

The life of Excrements.
The life of Excrements, i.e. of man's dung, or beasts dung is their stinking
smell, for this being lost they are dead.

The life of aromaticall things.
The life of Aromaticall things, viz. of Musk, Amber Gryse, Civet, and
whatsoever yields a strong, good, and sweet smell, is nothing else but that
grateful odor: for if they lose this they are dead and of no use.

The life of sweet things.
The life of sweet things, as of Sugar, Honey, Manna, Cassia, and such like is
in their tinging, and subtle sweetness, for if that sweetness be taken from
them by distilling, or subliming they are dead, unprofitable, and nothing worth.

The life of Rozzen.
The life of all Rozzens, as Amber, Turpentine, Gum, is the muciliginous
shining fatness, which gives that excellent vernish to them all: for when they
will yield no more vernish, and lose their shining, they are dead.

The life of Plants.
The life of Herbs, Roots, Apples, and other such like fruit, is nothing else
but the liquor of the Earth, which they lose of their own accord, if they do
but want water, and Earth.

The life of Wood.
The life of Wood is a certain Rozzen, for any wood if it want Rozzen can live
no longer.

The life of Bones.
The life of Bones is the liquor of Mummie.

The life of flesh.
The life of flesh, and blood is nothing else but the spirit of Salt, which
preserves them from stinking, and putrefaction, and is of it self as water
separated from them.

The life of every Element.
Now concerning the life of Elements, you must know that the life of Water is
its running. For when by the coldness of the Firmament is is congealed into
ice, it is dead, and its mischievousnesse is taken from it, that no body can
be drowned in it.

What the life of Fire is.
The life of Fire is Air, for Air makes fire burn with greater vehemence, and
heat: Also there comes forth from all Fire a kind of Air, which will blow
out a candle, and drives up a feather, as you may daily see before your eyes.
Wherefore the flame of Fire is choked if it be so stopped up, that it can
neither receive in Air, and let out its own Air.

What the life of Air is.
The Air lives by, and of it self, and gives life to all other things.

What the life of Earth is.
The earth of it self is dead, but the Element of it is an invisible, and
secret life.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE FIFTH BOOK. Of the Death, or ruin of all things.
What Death is.
THe death of all natural things is nothing else but an alteration and
destruction of their powers, and virtues, a predominancy of that which is
evil, and an overcoming of what is good, an abolishing of the former nature,
and generation of a new, and another nature. For you must know that there are
many things that, whilst they are alive, have in them several virtues, but
when they are dead retain little or nothing of their virtue, but become
unsavory, and unprofitable. So on the contrary many things, whilst they live,
are bad, but after they are dead, and corrupted, manifest a manifold power, and
virtue, and are very useful. We could bring many examples to confirm this,
but that does not belong to our purpose. But that I may not seem to write
according to mine own opinion only, but out of my experience, it will be
necessary that I produce one example, with which I shall silence those
Sophisters, who say, that we can receive nothing from dead things, neither
must we seek, or expect to find any thing in them. The reason is, because they
do esteem nothing of the preparations of Alchymists, by which many such like
great secrets are found out. For look upon Mercury, crude Sulphur, and crude
Antimony, as they are taken out of their Mines, i.e. whilst they are living,
and see what little virtue there is in them, how slowly they put forth their
virtues, yea they do more hurt, then good, and are rather poison, then a
Medicine. But if through the industry of a skillful Alchymist, they be
corrupted in their first substance, and wisely prepared ( viz. if Mercury be
coagulated, The preparation of Mercury Sulphur and Antimony.
precipitated, sublimed, dissolved, and turned into an oil; if Sulphur be
sublimed, calcined, reverberated, and turned into an oil; also if Antimony be
sublimed, calcined, and reverberated, and turned into an oil; also if Antimony
be sublimed, calcined, and reverberated and turned into oil) you shall see
how useful they are, how much strength, and virtue they have, and how quickly
they put forth, and show their efficacy, which no man is able to speak enough
in the commendation of, or to describe. For many are their virtues, yea more
then will ever be found out by any man. Wherefore let every faithful
Alchymist, and Physician spend their whole lives in searching into these three:
For they will abundantly recompense him for all his labor, study, and costs.

But to come to particulars, and to write particularly of the death, and
destruction of every natural thing, and what the death of every thing is, and
after what manner every thing is destroyed; you must know therefore in the
first place, What the Death of man is.
that the death of man is without doubt nothing else, but an end of his daily
work, the taking away of the Air, the decaying of the Natural balsome, the
extinguishing of the natural light, and the great separation of the three
substances, viz. the body, soul, and spirit, and their return from whence they
came. For because a natural man is of the earth, the Earth also is his Mother,
into which he must return, and there must lose his natural earthly flesh, and
so be regenerated at the last day in a new celestial, and purified flesh, as
Christ said to Nicodemus when he came to him by night. For thus must these
words be understood of regeneration.

What the destruction of Metalls is.
The death, and destruction of Metalls is the disjoining of their bodies, and
sulphurous fatness, which may be done several ways, as by calcination,
reverberation, dissolution, cementation, and sublimation.

Calcination of Metalls is manifold.
But the calcination of Metalls is not of one sort: for one is made with Salt,
another with Sulphur, another with Aqua fortis, and another with common
Sublimate, and another with Quicksilver.

What Calcination with Salt is.
Calcination with Salt is that the Metal be made into very thin plates, and
strowed with Salt, and cemented.

Calcination with Sulphur.
Calcination with Sulphur is, that the Metal be made into thin plates, and
strowed with Sulphur, and reverberated.

Calcination with Aqua fortis.
Calcinaion with Aqua fortis, is that the Metal be made very small, and
dissolved in Aqua fortis, and precipitated in it.

Calcination with Sublimate.
Calcination with sublimed Mercury is this, that the Metal be made into thin
plates, and that the Mercury be put into an earthen vessel narrow toward the
top, and wide at the bottom; and then let it be set into a gentle fire made
with coals, which must be blowed a little until the Mercury begin to fume,
and a white cloud go forth of the mouth of the vessel, then let the Plate of
the Metal be put into the top of the vessel, and so the sublimed Mercury will
penetrate the Metal, and make it as brittle as a stone of coal.

Calcination with Quicksilver.
Calcination with Quicksilver, is that the Metal be made very small, and
thin, and be amalgamated with Quicksilver, and afterward the Quicksilver be
strained through Leather, and the Metal remain in the Leather like chalk, or
sand.

Diverse other sorts of mortification of metalls.
Now besides these mortifications of Metalls, and destructions of their lives,
know also that there are yet more. For rust is the death of all Iron, and
Steel, and all vitriall, burnt brass is mortified Copper: all precipitated,
sublimated, calcined Cinnabar is mortified Mercury, all Ceruse, and Minium of
Lead is mortified Lead; all Lazure is mortified Silver: also all Gold from
which its tincture, Quintessence, Rozzen, Crocus, Vitriall, or Sulphur is
extracted, is dead, because it has no more the form of Gold, but is a white
Metal like fixed Silver.

But let us proceed to show how Metalls may be yet further mortified. First
therefore of Iron, A two fold preparation of Crocus Martis.
know that that is mortified, and reduced into Crocus this way. Make Steel into
very thin plates: Make these plates red hot, and quench them in the best
Wine-Vineger, do this so often til the Vinegar has contracted a considerable
redness, then distill of the Vinegar, til there be nothing but a dry powder
remaining. This is a most excellent Crocus Martis.

There is also another way of making Crocus Martis, which does partly exceed
the former, and is made with far less costs, and pains, and it is this.

Strew upon the plates of Steel, Sulphur, and Tartar, being both in a like
quantity; then reverberate them, and this will produce a most excellent Crocus,
which must be taken off from the plates.

Also you must know, that every plate of Iron, or Steel, if it be melted with
Aqua fortis; will also make a very fair Crocus; so also it is made with oil of
Vitriall, spirit of Salt, Alum water, the water of Salt Armoniacke, and of
Salt Nitre; as also with sublimated Mercury, all which mortify Iron, and bring
it into a Crocus; but none of these latter ways is to be compared to the two
former, for they are only used in Alchymie, and not at all in Physic;
wherefore in this, use only the two former, and let alone the rest.

The mortification of Coppet.
The mortification of Copper, viz. that it may be reduced into Vitriall,
Verdegrease, may be done many ways, and there are more processes in it, yet
one far better then another, The Vitriall of Copper is made two ways.
and one more profitable then another. Wherefore it is most convenient here to
set down the best, and most profitable, and to be silent in the rest. The best
therefore, the most easy, and exactest way of reducing Copper into Vitriall is
this.

Let plates of Copper be dipped in spirit of Salt, or Saltpeter, and let them
be hanged in the Air until they begin to be green, which indeed will quickty
be, wash off this greenness with clear fountainewater, dry the plates with
some cloth, and wet them again with the spirit of Salt, and Salt Nitre, and do
again as before, so long until the water be apparently green, or much Vitriall
swim on the top: then pour away the water, or evaporate it, and thou have a
most excellent Vitriall for medicine. In Alchymie there is not a fairer, more
excellent, and better Vitriall then what is made by Aqua fortis, or Aqua regis,
or spirit of Salt Armoniacke. And the process is this.

Let plates of Copper be melted with one of the aforesaid waters, and as soon
as the greeness is extracted, and the plates dried, let the greeness be taken
off with the foot of a Hare, or some other way as you please, as Ceruse taken
off from the plates of Lead: let them be again wetted as before, until the
plates be wholly consumed, thereby is made a most glorious Vitriall, that thou
can not choose but wonder at it.

How water of Saltpeter and Salt-armoniack is made.
The water of Salt Petre is made thus. Purify, and powder it; afterward
dissolve it of it self in a bladder, put in boiling water. So thou shall have
the water of Salt Petre.

The water of Salt Armoniacke is made thus: Calcine Salt Armoniack, and
dissolve it in a Cellar upon a Marble, and this is water of Salt Armoniack.

Verdegrease may be made two ways.
But to make Verdegrease out of Copper, there are diverse ways which it is not
needful here to recite. We shall describe only two, but with a double
preparation, viz. The one for Physic, the other for Alchymie. The process
therefore of Verdegrease to be used in Physic is this,

How verdegrease to be used in physic is to be prepared.
Take plates of Copper, which wet over with the following matter. Take Honey,
and Vinegar, of each a like quantity, of Salt as much as will serve to make them
up into a thick past. Mix them well together, then put them into a
reverberatory, or Potters furnace so long as the Potter is burning his pots,
and thou shall see the matter that sticks to the plates to be very black, but
let not that trouble thee. For if thou set those plates in the Air, all
the black matter will in a few days become green, and become a most excellent
Verdegrease, which may be called the Balsome of Copper, The Balsom of Copper.
and is commended by all Physicians. But nevertheless do not thou wonder that
this Verdegrease becomes green in the Air, and that the Air can change the
black color into so fair a green.

Air changes the Colors of things burnt.
For here thou must know that daily experience in Alchymie does show, that any
dead earth, or Caput Mortuum, as soon as it comes out of the Fire into the
Air, does quickly get another color, and leaves its own color which it got
in the fire. For the changes of those colors are various. For as the matter
is, so are the colors that are made, although for the most part they flow from
the blackness of the dead earth. For you that are skilful in Alchymie see that
the dead earth of Aquafortis comes black from the Fire, and by how many more
ingredients there be in it, by so much the more variously do the colors show
themselves in the Air: sometimes they seem red, as Vitriall makes them:
sometimes yellow, white, green, blew: sometimes mixed, as in the Rainbow, or
Peacocks tail. All those cololours show themselves after the death, and by the
death of the matter. For in the death of all natural things here are seen
other colors, which are changed from the first color into other colors,
every one according to its nature, and property.

The preparation of Verdegrease to be used in Alchyme.
Now we will speak of that Verdegrease which is to be used in Alchymie. The
preparation, and process of that is this,

Make very thin plates of Copper, strew upon them Salt, Sulphur, and Tartar
ground, and mixed together, of each a like quantity in a great calcining pot.
Then reverberate them twenty four hours with a strong Fire, but so that the
plates of Copper do not melt, then take them out, and break the pot, and set
the plates with the matter that sticks to them into the Air for a few days,
and the matter upon the plates will be turned into a fair Verdegrease, which
in all sharp Corroding waters, waters of Exaltation, and in Cements, and in
coloring of Gold, does tinge Gold, How Aes vstum, or Crocus of Copper is to be
made.
and Silver with a most deep color.

Now to turn Copper into Aes ustum, which is called the Crocus of Copper, the
process is this,

Let Copper be made into thin plates, and be smeered over with Salt made into a
past with the best Vinegar, then let it be put into a great Crucible, and set
in a wind furnace, and be burnt in a strong Fire for a quarter of an hour; but
so that the plates melt not: let these plates being red hot be quenched in
Vinegar, in which Salt Armoniack is dissolved, always half an ounce in a pint
of Vinegar; let the plates be made red hot again, and quenched in Vinegar as
before, always scraping, or knocking off the scales which stick to the plates
after quenching, into the Vinegar. Do this so long, until the plates of Copper
be in good part consumed by this means: then distill off the Vinegar, or let it
vapor away in an open vessel, and be coagulated into a most hard stone. So
thou have the best Crocus of Copper, the use whereof is in Alchymie. Many make
Crocus of Copper by extracting of it with the spirit of Wine, or Vinegar, as
they do Crocus Martis: But I commend this way far above it.

The sublimation of Quicksilver.
Now the mortification of Quicksilver that it may be sublimed, is made with
Vitriall, and Salt, with which it is mixed, and then sublimed, so it becomes as
hard as Crystal, and as white as snow: but to bring it to a Precipitate, the
process is this:

How to make a fixed Precipitat Diaphoreticall.
Let it first be calcined with the best Aqua fortis, then distill off the Aqua
fortis, and do this about five times, until the Precipitate become to be of a
fair red color: Dulcifie this precipitate as much as thou can: And lastly
pour upon it the best rectified spirit of Wine you can get, distill it off from
it eight, or nine times, or so often until it be red hot in the fire, and do
not fly: then thou have a Diaphoretical precipitated Mercury.

How to make a sweet Precipitate.
Moreover, you must take notice of a great secret concerning precipitated
Mercury, viz. if after it is colored, it be dulcified with water of salt of
Tartar, pouring it upon it, and distilling of it off so often, until the water
rises no more sharp from the Precipitate, but be manifestly sweet; then thou
have a precipitate as sweet as sugar, And the use of it
or honey, which in all wounds, Ulcers, and Venereal Disease is so excellent a
secret, that no Physician need desire a better.

Besides it is a great comfort to despairing Alchymists. For it does augment
Gold, and has ingresse into Gold, and with it Gold remains stable, and good.
Although there is much pains, and sweat required to this Precipitate, yet it
will sufficiently recompense thee for thy pains, and costs; and will yield thee
more gain, then can be got by any Art or Trade whatsoever: Thou may well
therefore rejoice in this, and give God, and me thanks for it.

How Quicksilver may be Coagulated.
Now that Quicksilver may be coagulated, I said that that must be done in
sharp Aqua fortis, which must be drawn off by Distillation, and then the
Precipitate is made. How Quicksilver may be turned to Cinnabar.
But that Quicksilver may be brought into a Cinnabar; you must first mortify,
and melt it with Salt, and yellow Sulphur, and bring it into a white powder,
then put it in a gourd, and put upon it Aludel, or head, and sublime it in the
greatest flux you can, as the manner is, so the Cinnabar will ascend into the
Aludel, and stick as hard as the stone Haematites.

There are two kinds of Ceruse. The preparation of them.
The mortification of Lead to bring it to a Ceruse, is twofold; the one for
Medicine, the other for Alchymie. The preparation of Ceruse for Medicine is
this:

Hang plates of Lead in a glazed pot over strong Wine-vineger, the pot being
well stopped that the spirits do not exhale: put this pot into warm ashes, or in
the Winter into a furnace, then always after ten or fourteen days, thou shall
find very good Ceruse sticking to the plates, which strike off with the foot of
a Hare: then put the plates over the Vinegar again, until thou have enough
Ceruse.

Now the other preparation of Ceruse for Alchymie is like the former, only that
in the Vinegar must be dissolved a good quantity of the best, and fairest Salt
Armoniack, for by this means thou shall purchase a most fair, and beautiful
Ceruse, for the purging of Tin, and Lead, and the whitening of Copper

The preparation of Minium out of Lead.
But if we would make Minium of Lead, we must first calcine it with Salt into
Calx, and then burn it in a glazed vessel, always stirring it with an Iron
rod, till it be red. This is the best, and chiefest Minium, and it is to be
used as well in Physic as Alchymie: but the other which Mercers sell in their
shops is nothing worth. It is made only of the ashes, which remains of the Lead
in the melting of it, which also Potters use to glaze their vessels, and such
Minium is used for Painting, but not for Physic, or Alchymie.

The Crocus of Lead.
Now that Lead may be brought into yellowness, the preparation of it is not
unlike to the preparation of Minium. For Lead must here be calcined with Salt,
and brought to a Calx, and afterward be stirred with an Iron rod in a Broad
basin, such as tryers of Mineralls use, in a gentle Fire of Coals, diligently
taking heed, that there be not too much heat, nor a neglect in stirring, for
else it will flow, and become a yellow glass. And so thou have a fair, yellow
Crocus of Lead.

How the Azure Color is made of silver.
The mortification of Silver, that of it may be made the Azure color, or
something like to it, is thus:

Take plates of Silver, and mix them with Quicksilver, and hang them in a
glazed pot over the best Vinegar, in which Gilt-heads have been first boiled,
and afterward Salt Armoniack, and calcined Tartar have been dissolved; in all
the rest do as has been said of Ceruse, then always after fourteen days thou
shall have a most excellent, and fair Azure color sticking to the plates of
Silver, which must be wiped off with a Hares foot.

The Mortification of Gold.
The Mortification of Gold that it may he brought into its Arcana, as into a
Tincture, Quintessence, Resine, Crocus, Vitriall, and Sulphur, and many other
excellent Arcana, which preparations indeed are many. But because for the most
part we have sufficiently treated of such Arcana in other books, as the
extraction of the Tincture of Gold, the Quintessence of Gold, the Mercury of
Gold, the Oil of Gold, Potable Gold, the Resine of Gold, the Crocus of Gold,
and in the Archidoxis, and elsewhere, we conceive it needless here to repeat
them. But what Arcana were there omitted, we shall here set down, As the
Vitriall of Gold, Sulphur of Gold, which indeed are not the least, and ought
very much to cheer up every Physician.

But to extract Vitriall out of Gold, the process is this,

How the sulphur, and the Vitriall of Gold are made.
Take of pure Gold two, or three pound, which beat into thin plates, and hanging
them over Boys urine, mixed with the stones of grapes, in a large gourd glass,
well closed, which bury in a hot heap of stones of Grapes, as they come from
the press; when it has stood fourteen days, or three weeks, then open it,
and thou shall find a most subtle color, which is the Vitriall of Gold
sticking to the plates of Gold, which take off with the foot of a Hare, as thou
have heard concerning other Metalls; as of the plates of Iron, Crocus Martis,
of the plates of Copper, the Vitriall of Copper and Verdegrease, of the plates
of Lead, Ceruse, of the plates of Silver the Azure color, etc. comprehended
under one process, but not with one manner of preparation. When thou have
enough of the Vitriall of Gold; boil it well in Rainwater distilled, always
stirring it with a spatle, then the sulphur of the gold is driven up to the
superficies of the water, as fat, which take off with a spoon: Thus also do
with more Vitriall. Now after all the Sulphur is taken off, evaporate that
rain water til it be all dry, and there will remain the Vitriall of Gold in
the bottom, which thou may easily dissolve of it self upon a marble in a
moist place. In these two Arcana's, viz. the Vitriall of Gold, and the Sulphur
of Gold lies the Diaphoreticall virtue* I shall not here set down their virtues;
for in the book of Metallic Diseases, and also in other books we have set
them down at large.

The mortification of Sulphur, that the combustible and stinking fatness may
be taken away, and it brought into a fixed substance, is thus:

The mortificaon and fixation of Sulphur.
Take common yellow Sulphur finely powdered, and draw from it by distillation
Aqua fortis, that is very sharp, and this do three times, then the Sulphur
which is in the bottom of a black color dulcifie with distilled water, until
the water come from it sweet, and it retains no more the stink of Sulphur. Then
reverberate this Sulphur in a close reverberatory as you do Antimony, then it
will first be white, then yellow, and lastly as red as Cinnabar. And when it is
so, then thou may rejoice: For it is the beginning of thy riches: This
reverberated Sulphur tingeth Silver most deeply into most excellent Gold, and
the body of Man into most perfect health. This reverberated, and fixed Sulphur
is of more virtue then it is lawful to speak.

The Mortification of Salts.
The mortification of all Salts, and whatsoever is saltish, is the taking away,
and distilling off the aquosity, and oylinesse, and of the spirit of them. For
if these be taken away, they are afterward called the dead Earth, or Caput
Mortuum.

The Mortification of Gemmes.
The mortification of Gemmes, and Coralls, is to calcine, sublime, and dissolve
them into a liquor, as Crystal. The mortification of Pearls is to calcine
them, and dissolve them in sharp Vinegar into the form of Milk.

The Mortification of the Lodestone.
The mortification of the Loadstone, is to anoint it with the oil of Mercury,
or to put it into Quicksilver, for afterward it will not draw Iron at all to it.

The Mortification of flints and stones.
The mortification of Flints, and Stones, is to calcine them.

The Mortification of Marcasites.
The mortification of Marcasites, Cachyma's, Talk, Cobaltus, Zinri, Granuti,
Zunitter, Unismut, and of Antimony is their Sublimation, i. e. that they be
sublimed with Salt, and Vitriall, then their life which is a Metallic spirit,
together with the spirit of Salt, ascends. And let whatsoever remains in the
bottom of the Sublimatory, be washed, that the Salt may be dissolved from
it, and then thou have a dead Earth, in which there is no virtue.

The Mortification of Realgar.
The mortification of Arsenickes, Auripigment, Operment, Realgar, etc. is, that
they flow with Salt Nitre, and be turned into an Oil, or Liquor upon a Marble,
and be fixed.

The Mortification of excrements.
The mortification of Excrements, is the coagulation of Air.

The Mortification of Aromatical things.
The mortification of Aromaticall things is the taking away of their good smell.

Of Sweet things.
The mortification of sweet things, is to sublime and distill them with
corrosive things.

Of Resines.
The mortification of Ambers, Resines, Turpentine, Gum, and such like, is to
turn them into Oil, and Vernish.

Of Herbs and Roots.
The mortification of Herbs, Roots, and such like, is to distill off from them
their oil, and water, and press out their liquor with a press, and also to
make their Alcali.

Of Wood.
The mortification of Wood, is to turn it into Coals, and Ashes.

Of Bones.
The mortification of Bones, is their Calcination.

Of Flesh.
The mortification of Flesh, and Blood, is the taking away of the spirit of Salt.

Of Water.
The mortification of Water is by Fire, for all heat dries up, and consumes
water.

Of Fire.
The mortification of Fire is by Water, for all Water, quenches Fire, and takes
from it its power, and force.

So now you are sufficiently instructed in few words how death lies hid in all
natural things, and how they may be mortified, and be brought into another
form, and nature, and what virtues flow from them. Whatsoever should have been
said further, we put in the following book, of the Resurrection of Natural
things.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE SIXTH BOOK. Of the Resurrection of Natural things.
The raising again of Natural things.
THE Resurrection, and renewing of Natural things, is not the least, but a
profound, and great secret in the Nature of things, and rather Divine, and
Angelical, then Humane, and Natural.

I desire to be here understood with great distinction, and no otherwise then
my opinion is, and Nature does daily, and manifestly show, and experience make
good, lest I should be exposed to the lies, and slanders of Mountebankes, my
enemies (which do construe all that I do in the worst sense) as if I would
usurp the Divine power, and attribute this to Nature, which she was never able
to perform* Wherefore we must cautiously consider that there is a twofold
Death, Death is twofold.
viz. violent, and voluntary. The one can raise a thing again, the other not.
Wherefore, do not believe those Sophisters that say, that a thing that is once
dead, or mortified, can never be raised again, and that make no account of
resuscitation, and restoration of things, which error indeed of theirs is not
the least. And indeed it is true, that whatsoever dies, or perishes with a
natural death, and what Nature mortifies* by reason of her predestination, God
alone can raise again, or must of necessity be done by his command: so
whatsoever Nature destroys, Man cannot restore ore again. What things may be
raised again.
But whatsoever Man destroys he can restore again, and being restored spoil
again, and Man has no further power of himself, and if he should attempt to
do any thing more, he would arrogate the power of God to himself, and yet
he would labor in vain, and be confounded, unless God did assist him, or he
had so much faith as to remove mountains: Even to such a man, this is possible,
and greater things then this. Because the Scripture says, and Christ himself
spoke it. If thou have faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, and faift unto this
Mountain, Go and be removed thither, and it shall be removed, and all thing
be possible to thee, and nothing impossible.

But to return to our purpose, what difference then there is betwixt dying, and
being mortified, and which of these may be raised again, so these are to be
understood. Whatsoever naturally dies has its end by predestination, and so
the will and ordination of God permits. What things can not be raised again.
Yet it happens that this is also done by diverse diseases, various casualties,
and this can never be raised again, neither is there any preservative to be
used against predestination, and the natural term of life. But that which is
mortified, may be both raised again, and revived, which may be proved by
diverse arguments, which we shall set down in the end of this book.

Wherefore there is a great difference betwixt dying, and being mortified, It
is one thing to Dye, and other thing to be Mortified.
neither must they be taken for one, and the same things, under the same name.
For in the very example they are far different. For look upon a man that dies a
natural, and predestined death, what further good, or profit is there in
him? Nothing, he is only cast into the earth to worms. For he is a stinking
carcass, and due to the earth.

But the same is not to be understood of a man that is slain with a sword, or
dies by some such like violent death. For his whole body is profitable, and
good, and may be prepared into a most precious Mummie. For although the spirit
of life went out of such a body, yet the balsome in which lies the life
remains, which indeed does as balsome preserve other men's bodies.

So you may fee in Metalls, when a Metal is about to die, it begins to be
overcome with rust, and as much as is thus overcome, is dead: and when all the
Metal is devoured with rust, it is all dead, and such a rust can never be
reduced into true Metal again, but it becomes only dross, and nor a Metal.
For it it is dead, and death is in it, neither has it any more balsome of
life, but is quite destroyed in it self.

The difference betwixt the Calx of Metalls, and their ashes.
Now the Calx of Metalls, and their ashes are two things: And there is a great
difference betwixt these two, for one may be revived, and brought back again
into a Metal, but the other not: the one is volatile, the other fixed, the one
died, the other mortified.

What the Ashes of Metalls is.
The Ashes is volatile, and cannot be brought back into of Metal, only into
glass, and dross: but the Calx of Metals is fixed, and may be be brought back
into its own Metal.

What the Calx of Metalls is.
But to understand the difference, and the cause, know, that in the Ashes there
is less fatness, and more dryness then in the Calx, which indecd makes it
fluxil: but the Calx is fatter, and moister, then the Ashes, and does still
retain its refine, and fluxibleness, and especially the Salt, which naturally
is fluxil, and makes Metalls flow, and reduces them. Hence now it follows,
that the Salt must be extracted out of the Ashes of Metals, that they may not
be brought back into a Metal, then they are perfectly volatile; and this
difference, and this clause is chiefly to be taken notice of, for much depends
upon it.

The errors of Mountebankes concerning Gold.
For amongst Mountebankes this is no small error, who in stead of Potable Gold,
the Quintessence of Gold, Tincture of Gold, etc. have given to men an impure
Calx of Gold, not considering the difference, and evil that follows upon it.
For there are two remarkable, and necessary things to be taken notice of here,
viz.

First, that Gold calcined, or powdered, if it be given to Men, is gathered
into one heap m the stomach, or goes forth again with the dung, and so it is
taken in vain, without doing any good: or that which is reduced by the great
inward heat in man's body, it gilds over, and makes hard in a crust, both the
bowels, and stomach, by reason of which the concoction of the stomach is
hindered, whence many, and various sicknesses follow, and at length death it
self.

When Metallike Arcana are to be taken inwardly.
As you have heard of Gold, so also must it be understood of all the other
Metalls, viz. that you take not any Metallic Arcanum, or Medicine into your
body, unless it be first made volatile, and it be reduced into no Metal.

How to make Metalls Potable and Irreducible.
Wherefore the first degree, and beginning to prepare Potable Gold is this: so
may such a Volatile be afterward dissolved in spirit of Wine, than both may
ascend together, be made volatile, inseparable. And as you prepare Gold, so may
you also prepare potable. and.

The raising again of things is proved by the Whelps of a Lion.
But to return to our purpose, let us prove by examples, and sufficient reasons,
that things mortified are not dead, and forced to abide in death, but may be
reduced, raised again, and revived, and this truly by man, and according to the
course of Nature. You see Lions how all of them are brought forth dead, and
first of all are made alive by the horrible roaring of their Parents, as one
that is asleep is raised with a noise, so also are Lions raised, How Lions are
made alive again.
not that they are thus asleep. (for they which sleep a natural sleep must of
necessity rise again, which the Lions of themselves do not.) For if they were
not raised by this roaring, they would remain dead, and life would never be
perceived in them. Wheerefore it is apparent, that by this roaring they receive
their life.

The reviving of dead Flies.
So also you see in all Animals which are not ingendered, but proceed from
putrefaction, as Flies, which if they be drowned in water, that no life at all
is perceived in them, and if they were so left, they would continue dead, and
never return to life of themselves any more. But if you cast salt upon them,
and put them in the warm Sun, or behind a warm furnace, they will recover
their former life, and this truly is a raising of them up again. For if this
were not done, they would continue dead for ever.

The generation of many Serpents of one.
So also you see in a Serpent, if he be cut into pieces, and these pieces put
into a gourd glass, and be putrefied in Horse-dung, the whole Serpent will
become living again in the glass, in the form either of Worms, or spawn of
Fishes. And if those Worms be in a fitting manner brought out of
putrefaction, and nourished, many hundred Serpents will be bred out of one
Serpent, whereof every one will be as big as the first, which is done only by
putrefaction. And as it is said of the Serpent, so also many other Animalls may
be raised, and restored again.

Hermes, and Virgils endeavor to raise themselves after Death.
According to this process Hermes, and Virgil have attempted (by the assistance
of Negromancy) to renew, and raise themselves after death, and to be born
again as infants, but it succeeded not according to their purpose.

The Resusecitation of Metalls is twofold.
But to omit examples, and fall upon the Praxis of Resurrection, and
Restoration, it is necessary, and most convenient to begin with Metalls,
forasmuch as Metalline bodies do oftentimes resemble Men's bodies.

The reducing of Metalls into Quickesilver.
We must, know therefore, that the Resurrection, and Restoration of Metalls is
twofold. The one which does reduce calcined Metalls into their first Metallic
body: the other which does reduce Metalls into their first matter, i. e. into
Quicksilver.

The process of the latter is this: Calcine a Metal with common Quicksilver,
put this Calx, and as much Quicksilver into a Sublimatory, and let them stand
so long till both be coagulated into an Amalgama; then sublime the Mercury from
the Calx, then grind it again with the Metallic Calx, and sublime it as
before, this do so often, till the Metallic Calx shall over a candle melt like
wax, or ice, and then it is well done. Put this Metal in digestion for a time,
and it will all be turned into Quicksilver, i. e. into its first matter, which
Mercury of Metalls is indeed called the Mercury of Philosophers, which many
Alchymists have sought after, but few have found. Now after this manner may
Quicksilver be prepared out of all Metal, viz. auri,.

The reduction of Sublimate, and the highest purging of it.
Now the raising again, or restoring of coagulated Mercury is done by
distillation in a retort: for Quicksilver alone ascends into cold water, the
Ashes of or Sulphur being left behind.

Now the raising again, or restoration of Mercury sublimed is done in seething
hot water: but it must first be ground very small, so the hot water will
seperates it from it the spirit of Salt, and Vitriall, which it carries up with
it, the quicksilver running in the bottom of the water. Now if this
Quicksilver shall be again sublimed with Salt, and Vitriall, and revived again
in Hot water, and this done seven, or eight times, it can never be better
purged, and renewed.

And this may be kept for a great secret in Alchymie, and Physic, and be much
rejoiced in. For by this means all the impurity, blackness, and
poisonousnesse* is taken away.

The reduction of calcined and Precipitated Mercury.
Mercury calcined can never be restored again without sublimation; for unless
it be sublimed after calcination, it will never be revived, wherefore thou
shall first sublime it, and then reduce it as other Sublimate.

The resuscitation of Azure Cinnabar, Aurum vitae, also of Precipitate, that
they may be reduced into Quicksilver is thus:

Take either of these, grind it small upon a marble, make it up into a past
with the white of an egg, and soap, then make pills of the bigness of
Filbeards, which put into a strong earthen gourd, upon the month of it put a
plate of Iron, with many little holes in it, and lute it on, and distill it per
descensum with a strong fire, so that it may fall into cold water, and thou
shall have the Quicksilver again.

The renewing of Wood that is burn.
Now the resuscitation, and restoring of Wood is hard, and difficult, yet
possible to Nature, but without much skilfulness, and industry it can never be
done: But to revive it, the process is this:

Take Wood which must, first be a Coal, then Ashes, which put into a gourd
together with die Resine, Liquor, and Oil of that tree, of each a like weight,
mingle them, and melt them with a soft heat, and there will be a mucilaginous
matter, and so thou have the three Principles, of which all things are
produced, and generated, viz. phlegm, fatness, and Ashes.

The phlegm of of Wood is its Mercury, the fat its sulphur, the ashes its salt.
The Phlegm is Mercury, the Fat is Sulphur, the Ashes is Salt. For whatsoever
fumes, and evaporates in the Fire is Mercury: whatsoever flames, and is burnt
is Sulphur, and all Ashes is Salt.

Now seeing thou have these three Principles together, put them in Horse-dung,
and putrefie them for a time. If afterward that matter be put in, and buried
in fat ground, thou shall see it live again, and a little tree spring from
thence, which truly in virtue is far more excellent then the former. This
Tree or Wood is, and is called Regenerated Wood, renewed, and restored, which
from the beginning was Wood, but mortified, destroyed, and brought into coals,
ashes, and almost to nothing, and yet out of that nothing is made, and renewed.
This truly in the light of Nature is a great mystery, viz. that a thing, which
had utterly lost its form, and was reduced to nothing, should recover its form,
and of nothing be made something, which afterward becomes much more excellent
in virtue, and efficacy then it was at first.

Algenerall rule for raising of things again.
But to speak generally of the Resurrection, and Restoration of Natural
things, you must know, that the chiefest foundation here, is, that that be
restored to every thing, and made to agree with it, which was taken from it in
mortification, and separated from it, which is hard to be here specifically
explained. Wherefore we shall conclude this book, and shall speak of these
things more at large in the next book, Concerning the transmutations of
natural things.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE SEVENTH BOOK. Of the Transmutation of Natural things.
IF we write of the Transmutation of all Natural things, it is fit, and
necessary that in the first place we show what Transmutation is. Secondly,
what be the degrees to it. Thirdly, by what Medium's, and how it is done.

What Transmutation is.
Transmutation therefore is, when a thing loses its form, and is so altered,
that it is altogether unlike to its former substance, and form, but assumes
another form, another essence, another color, another virtue, another nature,
or property, as if a Metal I be made glass, or stone: if a stone be made a
coal: if wood be made a coal: clay be made a stone, or a brick: a skin be
made glue: cloth be made paper, and many such like things. All these are
Transmutations of Natural things.

There are seven principal degrees of transmutation.
After this, it is very necessary also to know the degrees to Transmutation, and
how many they be. And they are no more then seven. For although many do reckon
more, yet there are no more but seven, which are principal, and the rest may
be reckoned betwixt the degrees, being comprehended under those seven: And
they are these,

Calcination, Sublimation, Solution, Putrefaction, Distillation, Coagulation,
Tincture.
If any one will climb that Ladder, he shall come into a most wonderful place,
that he shall see, and have experience of many secrets in the Transmutation of
Natural things.

The first degree therefore is Calcination, under which also are comprehended
Reverberation, and Cementation. What Calcination is, and its kinds are.
For betwixt these there is but little difference as for matter of Calcination:
Wherefore it is here the chiefest degree. For by Reverberation, and
Cementation, many corporeal things are calcined, and brought into Ashes, and
especially Metalls. Now what is calcined is not any further reverberated, or
cemented.

By Calcination therefore all Metalls, Mineralls, Stones, Glass, etc. and all
corporeal things are made a Coal, and Ashes, and this is done by a naked
strong Fire with blowing, by which all tenacious, soft, and fat earth is
hardened into a stone, Also all stones are brought into a Calx, as we see in a
Potters furnace of lime, and brickes.

Sublimation is the second degree, and one of the most principal for the
Transmutation of many Natural things: What Sublimation is and its kinds.
under which is contained Exaltation, Elevation, and Fixation; and it is not
much unlike Distillation. For as in Distillation the water ascends from all
phlegmatic, and watery things, and is separated from its body; so in
Sublimation, that which is spiritual is raised from what is corporeal, and is
subtilized, volatile from fixed, and that in dry things, as are all Mineralls,
and the pure is separated from the impure.

Besides Sublimation, many good virtues, and wonderful things are found out in
Mineralls, and many things are made fixed, and become constant, so as to abide
in the Fire, and that in this manner.

Let that which is sublimed be ground, and mixed with its feces, and be again
sublimed as before, which must be done so long, till it will no longer
sublime, but all will remain together in the bottom, and be fixed.

So there will be afterward a stone, and oil when and as often as thou
please, viz. if thou put it a-into a cold place, or in the air in a
Glass. The fixation of Mineralls into a stone.
For there it will presently be dissolved into an Oil. And if thou put is
again into the fire, it will again be coagulated into a Stone of wonderful,
and great virtue. Keep this as a great secret, and mystery of Nature, neither
discover it to Sophisters. Morevover, as in Sublimation many Corrosive things
are made sweet in the conjunction of two matters, so on the contrary, many
sweet things are made Corrosive: many sweet things are made sour, harsh, or
bitter; and on the contrary, many bitter things, as sweet as Sugar.

Rules concerning Salt Armoniack.
Here also we must take notice, that every Metal which is brought into
Sublimation by Salt Armoniack, may afterward in the cold, or in the air be
brought into an oil, and again be coagulated into a stone in the Fire, which
indeed is one of the chiefest, and greatest transmutations in all natural
things, viz. to transmute Metal into a Stone.

What Solution is, and its kinds.
The third degree is Solution, under which are to to be understood Dissolution,
and Resolution, and this degree does most commonly follow Sublimation, and
Distillation, viz. that the matter be resolved which remains in the bottom.

Now Solution is twofold: the one of Cold, the other of Heat; the one without
Fire, the other in Fire.

A cold dissolution dissolves all Salts, all Corrosive things, and all calcined
things. Whatsoever is of a Salt, and Corrosive quality, is by it dissolved into
Oil, Liquor, or Water. And this is in a moist, cold cellar, or else in the
Air on a marble, or in a glass. For whatsoever is dissolved in the cold,
contains an Airy spirit Salt, which oftentimes it gets, and assumes in
Sublimation, or Distillation. And whatsoever is dissolved in the cold, or in
the Air, may again by the heat of the Fire be coagulated into powder, or a
stone.

What things hot Solution dissolves.
But a hot Solution dissolves all fat, and sulphurous things. And whatsoever
the heat of the Fire dissolves, the same does coldness congeal into a Mass.

A double Solution viz. of Heat and Cold.
And whatsoever heat coagulates, is again dissolved by cold, or in the Air.
Here also we must know that whatsoever Air, or the Cellar does resolve, is of
a very great dryness, and has a secret corrosive Fire hid in it: so
whatsoever is dissolved in Fire, or in the heat thereof, has a sweetish
frigidity put of the Fire. Thus, and no otherwise is Solution to be understood.

Putrefaction what it is, and its kind.
Putrefaction is the fourth degree, under which is comprehended Digestion, and
Circulation.

Now then Putrefaction is one of the principal degrees, which indeed might
deservedly have been the first of all, but that it would be against the true
order, and mystery, which is here hid, and known to few: For those degrees
must, as has been already said, so follow one the other, as links in a chain,
or steps in a ladder.

The aforesaid order of Degrees is to be observed in making tinctures.
For if one of the linkes should be taken away, the chain is discontinued, and
broken, and the prisoners would be at liberty, and run away. So in a ladder,
if one step be taken away in the middle, and be put in the upper, or lower
part, the ladder would be broken, and many would fall down headlong by it with
the hazard of their bodies, and lives.

So you must understand the matter here, that those degrees follow one the
other in a just order, or else the whole work of our mystery would be marred,
and our labor, and pains would be in vain, and fruitless.

The force of putrefaction.
Now putrefaction is of such efficacy, that it abolisheth the old Nature, and
brings in a new one. All living things are killed in it, all dead things
putrefied in it, and all dead things recover life in it.

Putrefaction takes from all Corrosive spirit, the sharpness of of the Salt,
and makes them mild, and sweet, changes the colors, and separates the pure
from the impure, it places the pure above, and the impure beneath.

What Distillation is, and its kinds are.
Distillation is the first degree to the Transmutation of all natural things.
Under it are understood Ascension, Lavation, and Fixation.

By Distillation all Waters, Liquors, and Oils are subtilized out of all fat
things Oil is extracted, out of all Liquors, Water, and out of all Flegmaticke
things Water, and Oil are separated.

Cohobation. Fixation by Destillation.
Besides there are many things in Distillation fixed by Cohobation, and
especially if the things to be fixed contain in them Water, as Vitriall does,
which if it be fixed is called Colcothar.

Alum, if it be fixed with its proper Water, is called the Sugar of Alum,
which also is resolved into a Liquor, which Liquor if it be putrefied a
month, produces a Water of the sweetness of Sugar, which is of great virtue,
and an excellent secret in Physic, to extinguish any Metalline heat in Man,
as we have wrote more at large in our Book of Metalline Diseases.

And as you have heard of Vitriall, and Alum, so also Salt nitre, and other
Watery Mineralls may be fixed by Cohobation.

What Cohobation is.
Now Cohobation is, that the dead head be oftentimes imbibed with its own water,
and that again be drawn off by Distillation.

The force of Distillation in things to be Transmuted.
Moreover, in Distillation many bitter, harsh, and sharp things become as sweet
as Honey, Sugar, or Manna; and on the contrary, many sweet things, as Sugar,
Honey, or Manna, may be made as harsh as Oil of Vitriall, or Vinegar, or as
bitter as Gall, or Gentian, as Eager, as a Corrosive.

Many Excrementitious things lose their great stink in Distillation, Which
indeed goes forth in the water.

Many Aromaticall things lose their good savor.

And as Sublimation alters things in their Quality, and Nature, so also does
Distillation.

What Coagulation is, and its kinds.
Coagulation is the fixed degree: Now there is a twofold Coagulation, the one by
Cold* the other by Heat, i. e. one of the Air, the other of the Fire: and each
of these again is twofold, so that there are four sorts of Coagulations, two
of Cold, and two of Fire.

The Coagulations of Fire are fixed, the other of Cold are not.

The one is done only by common Air, without Fire. The other by the superior
Firmament of Winter stars, all which coagulate Waters into snow, and ice.

But the Coagulation of Fire, which alone is here to be taken notice of, is
made by an Artificial, and Graduall Fire of the Alchymists, and it is fixed,
and permanent. For whatsoever such a Fire does coagulate, the same abides so.

The other Coagulation is done by the Aetnean* and Mineral Fire in in
Mountains, which indeed the Archeius of the Earth governs, and graduates not
unlike to the Alchymists, and whatsoever is coagulated by such a Fire, is also
fixed, and constant; as you see in Mineralls, and Metalls, which indeed at the
beginning are a mucilaginous matter, and are coagulated into Metalls, Stones,
Flints, Salts, and other bodies, by the Aetnean fire in Mountains, through the
Archeius of Earth, and operator of Nature.

What things cannot be Coagulated.
Also we must know that Fire can coagulate no water, or moisture, but only the
Liquors, and Juices of all Natural things.

Besides also there can no phlegm be coagulated, unless in the beginning it
was a corporeal matter, into which by the industry of a skillful Alchymist it
may return.

So also any mucilaginous, matter, or spermaticke slimynesse may by the heat of
Fire be coagulated into a body and corporeal matter, but never be resolved
into water again.

And as you have heard of Coagulation, so also know concerning Solution, viz.
that no corporeal matter can be dissolved into Water, unless at the
beginning it was water: and so it is in all Mineralls.

What Tincture is, and its kinds.
Tincture is the seventh; and last degree; which concludes the whole work of
our mystery for Transmutation, making all imperfect things perfect, and
transmuting them into a most excellent essence, and into a most perfect
soundness, and alters them into another color.

Tincture therefore is a most excellent matter, wherewithal Mineral, and
Humane bodies are tinged, and are changed into a better, and more noble
essence, and into the highest perfection, and purity.

For Tincture colors all things according to its own nature, and color.

All things that are to be tinged must be fluid.
Now there are many Tinctures, and not only for Metalline, but Humane bodies,
because every thing which penetrates another matter, or tingeth it with another
color, or essence, so that it be no more like the former, may be called a
Tincture.

Wherefore there are many, and various sorts of Tinctures, viz. of Metalls,
Mineralls, Men's bodies, Waters, Liquors, Oils, Salts, all fat things, and
indeed of all things which may be brought to flux, out of the Fire, or in the
Fire.

For if a Tincture must tinge, it is necessary that the body, or matter which
is to be tinged, be opened, and continue in flux, and unless this should be
so, the Tincture could not operate. But it would be, as if any one should cast
saffron, or any color upon coagulated Water, or Ice: for so it would hot so
suddenly tinge the Ice with its color, as if it were cast into other water.
And although it should tinge, yet it would at the same time resolve the Ice
into Water. Wherefore those Metalls that we would tinge, must first be melted
in the Fire, and be freed from Coagulation.

And here we must know, that by how much the stronger fire is requisite for
their melting, so much the sooner the Tincture runs through them, as Leaven
penetrates, and infects the whole mass with sowreness; and by how much better
the mass is covered, and kept warm, so much the better is it fermented, and
makes the better bread: for ferment is the Tincture of Dowe, and Bread.

Feces are of a more fixed nature then their Phlegm.
We must also note, that all feces are of a more fixed substance then the
liquor of it is, also of a sharper, and more penetrating nature: as you see in
the spirit of Wine which is made of the feces of Wine, and of Aqua vitae, which
is distilled out of the grounds of Beer, and burns like spirit of Wine, and is
inflamed as Sulphur.

The preparation, and Nature of distilled Vinegar.
Also if of the feces of Vinegar another Vinegar be distilled, as commonly
spirit of Wine is distilled, there will be thereby made a Vinegar of so fiery,
and sharp a nature, that it consumes all Metalls, Stones, and other things, as
Aqua fortis.

How the Tinctures of Metalls must be made.
Moreover, it is necessary, that Tinctures be of a fixed, fluxil, and
incombustible nature, so that if a little of a place of any Metal red hot be
cast into them, they will presently flow like wax^, without any manner of fume
at all, and they penetrate the Metalls, as oil does paper, or water a sponge,
and tinge all Metalls into white, and red, that is, into Silver or Gold.

Now these are the Tinctures of Metalls, which it is necessary must be turned
into an Alcool, by the first degree of Calcination, then by the second degree
of Sublimation, must get an easy, and light flux. And lastly, by the degree of
Putrefaction, and Distillation are made a fixed, and incombustible Tincture, and
of an unchangeable color.

The Tinctures of Men.
Now the Tinctures of Men's bodies are, that they be tinged into the highest
perfection of health, and all Diseases be expelled from them, that their lost
strength, and color be restored, and renewed, and they are these, viz. Gold,
Pearls, Antimony, Sulphur, Vitriall, and such like, whose preparation we have
diverfly taught in other books; wherefore it does not seem to us necessary here
to repeat them.

Of Dying and Painting.
We shall write no more of Tinctures, seeing every extracted color may be
called a Tincture, which does indeed tinge things with a permanent color,
which do not go into the Fire, or preserve colors fixed in the Fire.

All these are in the hand, and power of the Dyer, and Painter, who prepares
them according to his pleasure.

How many degrees of the Alchymists fire there be.
It is very necessary in this book to know the degrees of Fire, which many ways
may be graduated, and intended, and every degree has a peculiar operation,
and one produces the same effect, as another, as every expert Alchymist, by
the daily experience, and exercise of the Art knows.

For one is as living, and flaming Fire, which reverberates, and Calcines all
bodies: Another is the Fire of a Candle or Lamp, which fixes all volatile
bodies: Another is a Fire of coals, which cements, colors, and purges Metalls
from their dross, exalts Gold and Silver to a higher purity, whitens Copper,
and in brief renews all Metalls.

Another Fire is of an Iron plate made red hot, in which the Tinctures of
Metalls are proved, which also is profitable for other things.

The Filings of Iron, heat after one fashion. Sand after another, Ashes after
another, a Balneum Maria after another, in which manifold Distillations,
Sublimations, and Coagulations are done.

Balneumroris after another, in which there are made many Solutions of
corporeal things.

Horse-dung after another, in which the chiefest putrefactions, and digestions
are made.

The Celestial fire.
And after another fashion works the invisible Fire by which we understand the
rays of the Sun, and that which is manifested by a glass, or Crystal, and
shows it operations and effects, of which Fire the Ancients wrote nothing at
all; and by this fire the three Principles of every corporeal thing may be
separated.

This Fire is of such wonderful force, that by it Metalls may be melted, and
all fat, and fluxible things, may upon the table without any Fire be together
with all combustible things, reduced into coals, and ashes.

Therefore after I have proposed, and opened to you the degrees of the Art of
Alchymie, and the degrees of the Alchmyists Fire: I will yet further show, and
declare to you in general, various Transmutations of natural things: of
Metalls first, secondly of Stones, and thirdly of diverse things in general.
The transmutation of Metalls therefore is a great secret in Nature, and it can
hardly be done by reason of many impediments, and repugnancies. Yet it is not
against Nature, nor Gods ordination, as many falsely affirm.

The Transmutation of Metalls into Silver and Gold.
But that the five lesser, and impurer Metalls, viz. and may be transmuted into
the greater, purest, and most perfect Metalls, viz. into and, it cannot be done
without the Tincture, or philosophers stone.

Now seeing we have before sufficiently opened the secrets of Tinctures in the
seven degres, and described them there, it is not necessary that we spend any
further labor in this, but rather be satisfied with those things, which we
have wrote in other books concerning the Transmutations of Metalls.

The Transmutation of Iron into Copper.
Now there are other Transmutations of imperfect, and impure Metals, as the
transmutation of into, which may be done diverse ways.

If plates of Iron be boiled in water of Vitriall, or be cemented with
calcined Vitriall, or being red hot be quenched in oil of Vitriall.

These three ways Iron may be transmuted into very good, and ponderous Copper,
which indeed flows well and has its weight as well as any natural Copper.

The Transmutation of Iron into Lead.
Plates of Iron may be as it were reduced, and transmuted into Lead, so that it
be as soft as natural Lead but does not flow so easily and the process is
this:

Take Filings of, and so much of the powder of Borax, mingle them well
together, put them in a crucible, and into a wind furnace, let there be made a
strong Fire, but so that the do not flow, but stand as it were in a Cement for
a whole hour, then increase the Fire, that it may be red hot, and flow: then
let the crucible cool of it self, and thou shall find the regulus of Lead in
the bottom of the crucible, soft, and malleable, as natural Lead can be.

The Transmutation of Copper into Lead.
But to transmute into the process is this:

First of all bring Copper with sublimate, and fixed Arsenick to be white, yea
as white as, then beat it small. Take this, and the powder of Borax, of each a
like quantity, and first cement it, then let it be melted into a regulus, and
thou have a true regulus of Lead.

The Transmutation of Lead into Copper.
Now on the contrary, it is easy to transmute Lead into Copper, neither does it
require much pains, and it is done thus.

Take plates of Lead, strew them over with calcined Vitriall, or Crocus of
Venus, cement them, and then melt them, and thou shall see natural Lead,
transmuted into good, ponderous, and malleable Copper.

A Metalline mixture like Gold.
Now if this Copper or any other Copper be beaten into plates, and strowed Over
with Tutia, or Capri Celaminaris, and be cemented, and lastly melted, it will
be transmuted into an excellent reddish Electrum like, to Gold.

To make English Tin out of Lead.
If thou will turn into make plates of, strew them with Salt Armoniack, cement,
and melt them, as abovesaid so will all the blackness, and darkness be taken
away from the Lead, and it will be in whiteness like fair English Tin.

Now as you have in brief heard of some Mutations of Metalls, so also know
that there, are Transmutations of Gemmes, which indeed are various, and in no
wise like.

Oil of Sulphur transmutes Gemmes.
For, you see how great Transmutations of Gemmes there lies in oil of Sulphur.
For any Crystal may be tinged, and Transmuted in it, and in time be exalted
with diverse colors, as to be made like to the Hyacinth, Granat, or Rubie.

To Transmute the Loadstone into great strength.
Know also that the Load stone may be transmuted into a tenfold greater power,
and virtue, and it is done thus:

Take the Loadstone, and heat it very hot in coals, but so that it be not
fired, which presently quench in the Oil of Crocus Martis, made of the best
Carinthian Steel, that it may imbibe as much as it can.

Thou shall by this means make the Loadstone so powerful, that thou may
pull out Nails out of a wall with it, and do such like wonderful things with
it, that the common Loadstone can never do.

Moreover, in Transmutation of Gemmes you must know that the world is placed in
two degrees of Tincture, and Coagulation.

To transmute the white of an Egg into Amber of any Color.
For as the white of an Egg may be tinged with Saffron, and then be
coagulated into a fair yellow Amber: with the; smoke of a Pinetree into black
Amber: with Verdegrease into green, like Lapis Armenius: with green juice into
Amber, like the Emerald: and with the Azure stone, into blew Amber, like a
Saphir: with the Wood called red Wood, into red, like a Granat, or Rubie: with
a purple color, like to an Amethyst: with Ceruse, like to Alablaster.

So all Liquors, especially Metalls, and Mineralls, may be tinged with fixed
colors, and afterward be coagulated, and transmuted into Gemmes.

How counterfeit Pearls are made.
So also may Pearls be made like true Pearls in form, so that for splendour,
and beauty they can hardly be discerned from the true: And they are made thus:

Cleanse the white of Eggs through a sponge, as purely as may be, then mingle
with it, the fairest white Talk, or Mother of Pearl, or Mercury coagulated
with Tin, and brought into an Alcool, then grind them all together on a
Marble, so that they become a thick Amalgama, which must be dried in the
Sun, or behind a furnace so long, until it be like Cheese, or a Liver.

Then of this mass make Pearls as big as thou will, which hang upon the
bristles of a Hog, and being thus boared through, dry them as Amber, and then
thou have finished them.

If they are not beautiful enough, anoint them over with the white of an Egg,
and dry them again, and they will be most goodly pearls, in form like the
natural, but not in virtue.

In the like manner are Coralls made, with which men endeavor to deceive one
the other as with Pearl. The process is this:

How Counterfeit Coralls may be made.
Take Cinnabar, grind it on a Marble, with the white of an Egg, for the space
of an hour, then dry it, as Potters do their Earth, then make it into what
form thou pleafest: Afterward dry them as much as may be, and anoint them
over with the white of an Egg, as thou did Pearl, and dry them by
themselves again.

So thou shall have Coral like to the natural in form, but not in virtue.

A Golden or Silver vernish*
Thou must also know, That the white of an Egg may be of it self coagulated
into most clear Vernish, in the coagulation of which Silver, or Gold may be
strewed.

There, are also many other, and various Transmutations of Natural things:
Whereof those which I know, and have had experience of, I will by the way set
down, and briefly declare to you.

How wood is made a stone.
And first of all know, That any Wood, if it be put for a certain time into
the water of Salt Gemme, is turned with much admiration into a Stone.

Coals of* stones.
Also Stones in the Aetnean fire are transmuted into Coals, which are called
stony Coals.

Glue of skins.
Also Glue is boiled out of Skins.

Paper of Linnen-cloath.
Of Linen cloth is made Paper.

Silk of Flax.
Of Flax boiled in sharp Lie made of the Ashes of Wood is Silk made.

Feathers may be Spun.
Also the feathery parts pulled off from quills, and boiled in that Lie, may be
spun, and weaved like Cotton.

Any Oil or Spermatick mucilage may be coagulated into Vernish.

Any Liquor into Gum, etc.

All these are Transmutations of Natural things, of which Science we have
spoken enough, and there-wee shall here make an end.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE EIGHTH BOOK. Of the Separation of Natural things.
The Chaos the Matter of the World.
IN the Creation of the world, the first separation began from the four
Elements, seeing the first matter of the world was one Chaos.

Of this Chaos God made the greater world, being divided into four distinct
Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Fire is the hot part, Air the
moist, Water the cold, and Earth the dry part of the greater world.

What separation shall be here spoken of.
But that you may in brief understand the reason of our purpose in this 8th.
book, you must know, that we do not purpose to treat here of the Elements of
all Natural things, seeing we have sufficiently discoursed of those Arcana in
the Archidoxis of the separation of Natural things: whereby every one of them
is apart, and distinctly separated, and divided materially, and substantially,
viz. seeing that two, three, or four, or more things are mixed into one body,
and yet there is seen but one matter. Where it often falls out, that the
corporeal matter of that thing cannot be known by any, or signified by any
express name, until there be a separation made. Then sometimes two, three,
four, five or more things come forth out of one matter: as is manifest by daily
experience, in the art of Alchymie.

What Electrum is.
As for example, you have an Electrum, which of it self is no Metal, but yet
it hides all Metalls in one Metal. That if it be anatomized by the industry of
Alchymie, and Teparated: all the seven Metalls, viz. Gold, Silver, Copper,
Tin, Lead, Iron, and Quicksilver come out of it, and that pure, and perfect.

What separation is.
But that you may understand what Separation is, note, that it is nothing else
then the severing of one thing from another, whether of two, three, four, or
more things mixed together: I say a separation of the three Principles, as of
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, and the extraction of pure out of the impure, or
the pure, excellent spirit, and quintessence, from a gross, and elementary
body; and the preparation of two, three, four, or more out of one: or the
dissolution, and setting at liberty things that are bound, and compact, which
are of a contrary nature, acting one against the other, until they destroy one
the other.

How many kinds of Separation.
Now there are many kinds of separation, many of which are unknown to us; those,
which we have experienced out of elementary, dissoluble natural things, shall
in this place, according to their kinds, be described.

The separation of the Microcos me.
The first separation of which we speak, must begin from man, because he is
the Microcosme, or little world, for whose sake the Microcosme, or greater
world was made, viz. that he might be the separator of it.

The body of man after death it twofold.
Now the separation of the Microcosme begins at his death. For in death the two
bodies of Man are separated the one from the other, viz. his Celestial, and
Terrestial body; i. e. Sacramental, and Elementary: one of which ascends on
high like an Eagle; the other falls downward to the earth like lead.

What the Elementary Body is.
The Elementary is putrefied, consumed, and becomes a putrid stinking carkase,
which being buried in the earth, never comes forth, or appears more.

What a Sacramental Body is.
But the Sacramental, i. e. Syderiall, or Celestial, all, is never putrefied,
or buried, neither does it possess any place. This body appears to Men, and
also after death is seen.

Hence Ghosts, Visions, and Supernatural Apparitions.

Whence the Cabalisticall art.
Hence by the ancient Magicians, the Cabalisticall Art took it is beginning, of
which we shall treat more at large in the books of Cabalie.

After this separation is made, then after the death of the Man three
substances, viz. Body, Soul, and Spirit are divided the one from the other,
every one going to its own place, viz. its own fountain, from whence it had
its original, viz. the body to the Earth, to the first matter of the Elements:
the soul into the first matter of Sacraments, and lastly the spirit into the
first matter of the Airy Chaos.

The separation of the Macrocosme.
What now has been spoken of the separation of the Macrocosme, the same also
may be understood in the greater world which the great Ocean has divided into
three parts, so that the universal world is severed into three parts, viz.
Europe, Asia, and Africa, which separation is a certain representation of three
Principles, Three parts of the World.
which can be separated from any Terrene, or Elementary thing. These three
Principles are Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, of which three the world was made,
and composed.

The separation of Metalls.
The next thing to be known is the separation of Metalls from their Mountains,
i. e. the separation of Metalls, and Mineralls.

By virtue of this separation many things come forth out of one matter, as you
see out of Mineralls come forth, The dross of Metalls, Glass, Sand, Piipitis,
Marcasite, Granatus, Cobaltum, Talk, Cachinna, Zinetum, Bisemutum, Antimony,
Litharge, Sulphur, Vitriall, Verdegrease, Chrysocolla, the Azure Stone,
Auripigmentum, Arsenicke, Realgar, Cinnabar, Clay of Iron, Spathus, Gyphus,
Ocree, and many more like to these, as also the Waters, Oils, Resines, Calxes,
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, etc.

Of Vegetables.
Vegetables in their separation yield, Waters, Oils, Juices, Resines, Gums,
Electuaries, Powders, Ashes, Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt.

Of Animalls.
Animalls in their separation yield, Water, Blood, Flesh, Fat, Bones, Skin,
Body, Hairs, Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt.

What a good separator ought to be.
He therefore that boasts himself to separate all natural things after this
manner, must of necessity have long experience, and perfect knowledge of all
natural things.

Moreover, he must be a skillful, and well practiced Alchymist, that he may
know what is combustible, and what not; what is fixed, and what not; what will
flow, and what not; and what things are more ponderous one then another: also
he must be experienced in the natural color, smell, acidity, harshnesse,
sowrenesse, bitterness, sweetness, the degree, complexion, and quality of
every thing.

The degrees of Separation. What and how many there be
Also he must know the degrees of Separation, as of Distillation, Resolution,
Putrefaction, Extraction, Calcination, Reverberation, Sublimation, Reduction,
Coagulation, Powdering, and Washing.

What distillation separates.
By distillation is separated Water, Oil from all corporeal things.

What resolution.
By Resolution are separated Metals from Minerals, and one Metal from another,
and Salt from the other Principles, and fat, and that which is light, from that
which is heavy.

By Putrefaction is separated fat from lean, Putrefaction.
pure from impure, putrid from not putrid.

By Extraction is separated pure from impure, Extraction.
and spirit, and quintessence from body, and thin from thick.

By Calcination is separated watery moisture, Calcination.
fat, natural heat, odor, and whatsoever else is combustible.

By Reverberation is separated color, Reverberation.
odor, what is combustible, all humidity, aquosity, fat, and whatsoever is
inconstant, or fluxil, in any thing, etc.

By Sublimation is separated the fixed from the volatile, Sublimation.
spiritual from the corporeal, pure from impure, Sulphur from Salt, Mercury
from Salt, etc.

By Reduction is separated what is fluxil, Reduction.
from what is solid, a Metal from its Mineral, and one Metal from another, a
Metal from its dross, fat from what is not fat.

By Coagulation is separated waterishnes from humidity, Coagulation.
water from Earth.

By Powdering are separated powder, Powdering.
and sand, ashes, and Calx, Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal one from the
other, and all powders, which are of an unequal weight are separated, and by
winnowing, as chafe from corn.

By washing are separated ashes, Washing.
and sand, a Mineral from its Metal, that which is heavy from what is light,
a Vegetable, and Animal from what is Mineral, Sulphur from Mercury, and Salt,
Salt from Mercury.

The Preparation of Metal is manifold.
But passing by the Theorie, we will now fall upon the practice, and come to
particulars.

You must therefore note, that the Separation of Metalls is the first by right,
and we shall therefore treat of it after this method, and manner.

Of the Separation of Metalls from their Mines.
By fluxing powders.
THe separation of Metalls from their Mines is done diverse ways, viz. by
boiling, and melting with fluxing powders, such as are sait Alcali, Litharge,
sait fluxile, the dross of Glass, Salt Gemme, Salt Petre, etc. Let them be
put in a Crucible, and melted in a furnace; so will the Metal, or regulus fall
to the bottom of the Crucible; but the other matter will swim above, and
become dross. Thou shall boil this Metalline regulus in a reverberating
furnace so long, till all the Metal become pure, and freed from all its dross
by this means the metal is well digested, and as I may say refined from all
its dross.

Many tinges one mine contains more then one Metal, as Copper and Silver,
Copper and Gold, Lead and Silver, Tin and Silver, you shall know it by this,
if the Metalline Regulus after Reverberation in a melting pot be sufficiently,
after the, true manner dissolved. For in it are all imperfect Metalls
separated, as are Iron, Copper, Tin, and Lead, and so with a double quantity of
Lead to the Regulus being put to it, they all go into a fume, and only fine
Silver, or Gold are left behind in the pot.

By Aquafortis.
Also two or three Metalls mixed together may be separated in Aquafortis, and
extracted the one, from the other. If two Metalls or one be resolved, the
other will fall to the bottom like sand, and be precipitated: and be after
this manner separated. Also Metalls may be separated by flowing after. this
process: Make metals flow, and when they are in flux, cast into them the best
flower of Sulphur as you can get, By Sulphur.
viz. an ounce to every pound of the metal, and let it burn, and by that means
it will draw up the lightest metal to the top, the heavy falling to the
bottom. Then let them stand together till they be cold. And so in one Regulus
two metalls are found, not as before mutually mixed, A wonderful power of
Sulphur in separation. By Quicksilver.
but one separated from the other by the Sulphur, as by a partition, as Oil
divides two Waters, that they cannot be joined together or mixed: Sulphur
therefore is a singular Arcanum worthy of great commendations.

Fixed metalls, as Gold and Silver, because they cannot well be extracted with
Fire or Aquafortis, must be amalgamated with Quicksilver, and so separated and
extracted, the Quicksilver being afterward extracted and separated by a
certain degree of Distillation from the Calx of the metals, viz. Gold, and
Silver.

After this manner also may other metalls, not only Gold, and Silver, but
Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, etc. as also whatsoever are prepared out of them, as
red Electrum, the white Magnesia, Aurichalcum, calcined Lead, Laton, Brass of
Cauldrons, and whatsoever metalls of this kind are transmuted, be with
Quicksilver, but first being powdered, abstracted, and separated from what is
heterogeneous. For the nature, and condition of Quicksilver is this, that it
will be united, and amalgamed with metalls, but yet with one sooner then with
another, according as the metal is of greater or less affinity to it.

In this consideration fine Gold is the chiefest, then fine Silver, then Lead,
then Tin, then Copper, and lastly Iron.

So amongst transmuted metalls, the first is part with part, then Ash colored
Lead, then Laton, then Brass of Caldrons then red, and the newest white.
Although for the first course Mercury may take no more then one metal, with
which it is amalgamated: yet that Amalgama is to be strained hard through
Leather, or Cotton cloth. For by this, means nothing but the Quicksilver will
pass through the Leather, or Cloth: and that metal which it did attract
remains in the leather, or cloth like Calx, which afterward thou may with
salt Alcali, or some other salt reduce into a metalline body by melting.

Now by this Art Quicksilver is much sooner separated from all manner of
metalls, then by Distillation, etc.

By this process with Mercury all metalls may after calcination, and powdering
be by a skillful, and industrious Alchymist extracted, and separated one from
the other.

In the same manner, and that easily, may Tin, and Lead be separated from
Copper, or Copper vessels, from Iron, and Steel overlaid with Tin without out
any fire, or water, by the Amalgama of Quicksilver alone.

Also Beaten Gold, or Leaf Gold, or Silver, as also any other metal beaten,
or ground, being written, or laid over with a pencill, or quill upon cloth,
parchment, paper, leather, wood, stones, or anything else, may be resolved by
Quicksilver, and so, that the Quicksilver may be afterward separated again
from those metalls.

By Corrosive waters.
Now the separation of metalls in Aqua fortis, Aqua Regis, and like corrosive
waters, is after this manner.

Let a metal that is mixed, and joined with another, be taken, and beaten
intto thin plates, or brought into powder. Put it into a separating vessel, and
pour upon it common Aquafortis as much as is sufficient, let them stand and
be macerated, until all the metal be resolved into a clear water. If it be
Silver, and contain any Gold in it, all the Silver will be resolved into water,
and the Gold will also be calcined, and settle in the bottom like black sand.
And after this manner Gold, and Silver are separated. If now thou will separate
the Silver from the Aqua fortis without Distillation, put a plate of Copper
into the water, and the Silver will presently settle in the bottom of the
water like snow, and the Copper plate will begin to be consumed by little, and
little.

The separation of Silver, and Copper by common Aquafortis is done after this
manner. Let the Copper which contains Silver, or the Silver which contains
Copper be brought to thin plates or powder, and put into a glass vessel, upon
which pour as much common Aquafortis as is sufficient: and by this means the
silver will be calcined, and settle to the bottom like white chalk: but the
copper will be dissolved, and turned into a clear water. If this water, together
with the dissolved copper be by a Glass funnel separated from the silver calx
into another Glass: then the Copper that is dissolved in the water, may be so
precipiated with common water, or rain water, or any other water, that it will
settle to the bottom of the Glass like sand.

Now the separation of hid Gold, from any metal, is by the degree of
Extraction in Aqua Regis. For this kind of water will attempt to dissolve no
metal, but only pure, fine Gold, etc.

The same Aqua Regis does separate also fine gold from gilded plate. For if
that be washed over with it, the Gold will be separated from it, etc.

By the degree of Reverberation.
Moreover also with cement by the degree of Reverberation two Metalls mixed
together may be separated the one from the other, but especially if they are
not in the like degree of Fixation, as Iron and Copper. For that Metal, which
is but little fixed, as Tin, and Lead, is all of it consumed by the degree of
Reverberation in cement. For by how much the more a Metal is fixed, so much
the less is it consumed by cement.

You must know therefore that fine Gold is the most fixed, and perfect Metal,
which can be destroyed, or consumed by no cement Next to this is fine Silver.
If then Gold, and Silver be mixed together in one body, which is wont to be
called part with part, or if Silver contain Gold, or Gold Silver: I say these
being thus mixed if they be reverberated into cement, then the Gold remains
entire, and not at all injured, but the Silver is consumed by the cement, and
so is extracted from fine Gold: so also is Copper from Silver, and Iron, and
Tin from Copper, and Iron, or Lead from Tin, and so forth.

Of the Separation of Mineralls.
AFter that we have explained (as hitherto we have done the separation of
Metalls from their Earth, and matter, as also of one Metal from another, and
how it is done having passed through it with as much brevity as might be: it
will in the next place be necessary that we treat also of those things out of
which Metalls grow, and are generated, as are the three Principles. Mercury,
Sulphur, and Salt, as also all Mineralls, in which the first being of Metalls,
i. e. the spirit of Metalls is found, as is manifest in Marcasites, Granats,
Cachymies, red Talk, the Azure stone, and the like, in which the first being
of Gold is found by the degree of Sublimation. So in white Marcasite, white
Talk, Auripigmentum, Arsenick, Litharge, etc. the first being of Silver is
found: In Cobaltus, Zinetus, etc. the first being of Iron: In Zinetus,
Vitriall, Verdegrease, etc. the first being of Copper: In Zinetus, Bisemutus,
etc. the first being of Tin: In Antimony, Minium, etc. the first being of Lead:
In Cinnabar, the first being of Quicksilver is found.

Concerning this first beginning you must know, that it is a volatile spirit,
as yet consisting in volatility, as an infant lies in the womb of its Mother,
which sometimes is made like to Liquor, sometimes to Alcool.

Whosoever therefore desires to busy himself about the getting of the first
being of any such body, or to separate it, must of necessity have much
experience, and knowledge in the Art of Alchymie.

For if he shall not diligently and skilfully work in Alchymie, he shall
attempt many things in vain, and accomplish nothing.

But after what manner the first being is to be separated out of any Mineral,
is sufficiently explained in the book called Archidoxis, and need not here
tediously be repeated.

But as concerning the separation of Mineralls, you must note, that many of
them are to be separated by the degree of Sublimation as fixed from those
which are not fixed, spiritual and volatile bodies from fixed bodies, and so
accordingly of all the members, as is declared concerning Metalls. For of all
Mineralls there is one, and the like process through all degrees, as the Art
of Alchymie teaches, etc.

Of the Separation of Vegetables.
How Vegetables are separated.
THe separation of those things, which grow out of the Earth, and are
combustible, as fruits, herbs, flowers, leaves, grass, roots, woods, etc. is
made many ways.

For first by Distillation the Phlegm is separated from them, then the Mercury,
then the Oil, then the Refine, then the Sulphur, and lastly the Salt.

All these Separations being made according to the Spagiricall Art many
notable, and excellent medicines, come from thence, which are to be used as
well within, as without the body.

But now seeing idleness is so much in request amongst Physicians, and all
labor and study is turned only to insolency; truly I do not wonder, that all
such preparations are every where neglected, and coals sold at so low a price,
that if Smiths could be o easily without coals in forging, and working their
Metalls, as Physicians are in preparing their Medicines, certainly Colliers
would long since have been brought to extreme want.

A reprehension of Physicians,
In the mean time I will give to Spagiricall Physicians their due praise. For
they are not given to idleness, and sloth, nor go in a proud habit, or plush
and velvet garments, often showing their rings upon their fingers, or wearing
swords with silver hilts by their sides, or fine and gay gloves upon their
hands, but diligently follow their labors, sweating whole nights, and days by
their furnaces.

The commendation of Chemists, and how they differ from other Physicians*
These do not spend their time abroad for recreation, but take delight in their
laboratory. They wear Leather garments with a pouch, and Apron wherewith they
wipe their hands. They put their fingers amongst coals, into clay, and dung,
not into gold rings. They are sooty, and black, like Smithes, or Colliers, and
do not pride themselves with clean, and beautiful faces. They are not
talkative when they come to the sick, neither do they extol their Medicines:
seeing they well know that the Artificer must not commend his work, but the
work the Artificer, and that the sick cannot be cured with fine words.

How many degrees of Alchymie there be.
Therefore laying aside all these kinds of vanities, they delight to be busied
about the fire, and to learn the degrees of the science of Alchymie: Of this
order are Distillation, Resolution, Putrefaction, Extraction, Calcination,
Reverberation, Sublimation, Fixation, Separation, Reduction, Coagulation,
Tincture, etc.

But how these separations may be done by the help of distinct degrees
according to the Art of Alchymie, has been in general spoken of already.
Wherefore it is needless here to make repetition.

But to proceed to particulars, and briefly to explain the practice, you must
know that Water, Spirit, Liquor, Oil, etc. cannot be separated after one and
the same process, out of Flowers; Herbs, Seeds, Leaves, Roots, Trees,
Fruits, Woods, by the degree of Distillation.

For Herbs require one process, Flowers another, Seeds another, Leaves
another, Roots another, Trees another, the Stalks another, the Fruit another,
Woods another.

The degrees of fire in Distillation.
And in this degree of Distillation, there are also four distinct degrees of
Fire to be considered.

The first degree of Fire in Distillation is Balneum Mariae, this Distillation
is made in Water.

Another degree of Fire is Distillation made in Ashes.

The third in Sand.

The fourth in a naked Fire: as also Distillation may be made by Aqua fortis,
and other sharp Waters.

With what degrees of fire every Vegetable is to be Distilled.
To the first degree of Fire belong, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, and such like.

To the second, Leaves, Fruits, etc.

To the third, Roots, and Boughs of trees, etc.

To the fourth Woods, and such like.

Note, that every one of these must be beaten small, and bruised before they
be put into the Still.

And thus much be spoken concerning the Distillation of Waters out of the
Vegetable substances.

As concerning the Separation and Distillation of Oils, the process is the
same as that of Water, only some of them are to be distilled per descensum,
and cannot ascend as Waters, the process of these in this case is to be
changed.

But Liquors are not separated in Distillation as Waters, or Oils, but are
expressed from their corporeal substances with a press.

And here we must know, that there are some Oils that are pressed out, and
separated after the same manner, by a Press as liquors are, and that for this
reason, because they should not contract an ill odor from the Fire, as
otherwise they would do.

Of this Order is the Oil of Almonds, Nuts, hard eggs, and the like.

Also we must note, that all Oils, if they be prepared, and coagulated
according to the Spagiricall Art, yield a kind of Vernish, Gum, Amber, or
Refine, which may be also called Sulphur, and that which remains in the
bottom of the Still may be calcined, and brought to ashes, and from it may
be with warm water alone, the Alcali extracted, and separated from it.

The Ashes which is left behind is called the Dead Earth, out of which never
any else can be extracted.

Of the Separation of Animalls.
IT is necessary, that Anatomy go before the separation of Animalls, that the
blood may be apart, the flesh apart, the bones apart, the skin apart, the
bowels apart, the tendons apart, etc. and after this must every one of these
be separated by it self by the help of the Spagiricall Art.

Therefore the separations in this place are chiefly 4.

Four degrees of the separation of Aninalls.
The first draws forth a waterie, and phlegmatic humidity from the blood. For
from the blood being after this manner, according to the process showed in the
book of Conservations, prepared, there comes forth a most excellent Mummie,
Mummie, etc.
and so excellent a Specificum, that any fresh wound may be cured, and
consolidated in the space of twenty four hours, only with one binding up.

Balsome, etc.
The second is the separation of fat from flesh; for that being separated from
Man's flesh is a most excellent balsome allaying the pains of the Gout, and
Cramp, and such like pains, if any part affected be anointed with it warm. It
helps also the tendons of the hands, or feet, being drawn together, if they be
daily anointed with it. It cures also the scab, and all kinds of Leprosy.

Therefore it is the chiefest Chirurgical specificum, and in all cases, as in
wounds and the like most profitable, etc.

The third is the separation of waterie, and phlegmatic moisture, together with
the fat extracted out of bones. For if these two be carefully by the Art of
Alchymie separated from Men's bones by the degree of Distillation, and the bones
be reduced, or burnt into most white ashes by the degree of Calcination; and
then these three be again after a right manner joined together, so that they
resemble butter, they become a most wonderful specificall Arcanum, with which
thou may soundly cure any fracture of bones without any pain at three
bindings up, so that thou do handle, and set the fracture according to the
rules of Surgery, and then apply that specificum by way of plaster, etc.

This also does most speedily cure the wounds of the skull, and any other
contusion of bones whatsoever.

The fourth, and the last is the separation of Refines, and Gummes from the
Skin, Bowels, and tendons. For this Refine being extracted, and separated out
of them by the degree of Extraction, according to the Spagiricall Art, and
congulated by the beams of the Sun, become a clear transparent Glue. Out of
this glue being prepared, extracted, and separated out of Man's body, as is
prescribed, a most excellent Arcanum, and specificall stiptick comes forth,
wherewith Wounds, and Ulcers may speedily be consolidated, and their lips be
brought together: (even as two boards are glewed together with glue put betwixt
them) so that you put two or three drops of it being resolved into the wound.
This also is a singular Arcanum for Burns, Falling of the nails, Scabs, etc. if
the place affected be nointed with it. For the skin will presently be brought
over the raw flesh.

There might many other separations of these and other things be reckoned up.
But seeing we have mentioned them in other places, it would be but lost
labor here to repeat them. It will be necessary that we speak of those things
here, of which we have made no mention elsewhere.

The last Separation is the last Judgment.
And lastly in the end of all things shall be the last separation, in the third
generation, the great day when the Son of God shall come in majesty, and glory,
before whom shall be carried not swords, garlands, diadems, scepters, etc. and
Kingly jewels, The Manner of the last Judgment.
with which Princes, Kings, Cesars, etc. do pompously set forth themselves,
but his Cross, his crown of thorns, and nails thrust through his hands, and
feet, and spear with which his side was pierced, and the reed, and sponge in
which they gave him vinegar to drink, and the whips wherewith he was
scourged, and beaten. He comes not accompanied with troops of Horse, and
beating of Drums, but four Trumpets shall be sounded by the Angels toward
the four parts of the world, killing all that are then alive with their
horrible noise, in one moment, and then presently raising these again, together
with them that are dead, and buried.

Matthew. 25.
For the voice shall be heard: Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Then shall
the twelve Apostles sit down, their seats being prepared in the clouds, and
shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. In that place the holy Angels shall
separate the bad from the good, the cursed from the blessed, the goats from the
sheep. Then the cursed shall like stones, and lead be thrown downward: but the
blessed shall like eagles fly on high. Then from the tribunal of God shall go
forth this voice to them that stand on his left hand: Go ye Cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil, and his Angels from all eternity:
For I was an hungry, and ye fed me not; thirsty, and you gave no drink; sick,
in prison, and naked, and you visited me not, freed me not, clothed me not,
and you showed no pity toward me, therefore shall you expect no pity from me.
On the contrary, he shall speak to them on his right hand: Come ye blessed,
and chosen into my Fathers Kingdom, which has been prepared for you, and his
Angels from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry, and you gave me
meat; thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was a stranger, and you took me in;
naked, and you covered me; sick, and you visited me; in prison, and you came
unto me. Therefore I will receive you into my Fathers Kingdom, where are
provided many mansions for the Saints. You took pity on me, therefore will I
take pity on you.

All these being finished, and dispatched, all Elementary things will return to
the first matter of the Elements, and be tormented to eternity, and never be
consumed, etc. and on the contrary, all holy things shall return to the first
matter of Sacraments: i. e. shall be purified, and in eternal joy glorify God
their Creator, and worship him from age to age, from eternity, to eternity,
Amen.

OF THE NATVRE Of Things.
THE NINTH BOOK. Of the Signature of Natural things.
IN this Book it is convenient for us speaking of the Signature of things in
the first place, to declare by whom things are signed, and who the Signator is,
and how many things there be that are signed. You must therefore know, that
things that are signed are of 3 sorts. The first sort of them Man signs: the
second, the Archeius: the third, the stars of supernatural things. Therefore
upon this account there are three Signators: Man, the Archeius, and Stars.

Moreover, you must note, that impressions signed by men do bring with them a
perfect knowledge, and judgment of hid things, and impart the knowledge of
their hid virtues, and faculties.

The marks of the Stars cause Prophecies, and Presages, and declare the
supernatural virtues of things, and take out the true judgments, and signs,
in Geomancy, Chiromancy, Physiognomy, Hydromancy, Pyromancy, Necromancy,
Astronomy, the Berillisticall art, and other Astrall sciences.

But that we may explain briefly, and truly all the signs, or marks, it will
be necessary in the first place, that we speak of those signs of which Man is
the Signer. Those being understood; you may the more rightly understand the
rest, whether natural, or supernatural. It is therefore known, that the Jews
carry about them, upon their cloak, or coat a yellow sign. And this is nothing
else but that mark, by which they would have you, when you meet them, to know
that they are Jews. So a Sergeant is known by his diverse colored coat, or
sleeve. So every Magigrate apparells his servants with his own colors, and
liveries.

Every Mechanic marks his work with a certain sign, that every one may know
whose work it is.

For which end Carriers wear the liverie of their master, or city, that it may
be known whom they serve and from whence they travel, that thereby they may
go the safer.

So every Soldier wears a mark, or badge, as colors, black, white, yellow,
green, blew, or red, etc. that he may be distinguished from the enemy. Hence
it may be known that this is Cesars soldier, that the Kings, this an Italian,
this a French soldier, etc.

These are signs which belong to order, or office, of which many more may be
reckoned up. But yet because we have intended to describe the signs of
natural, and supernatural things, we shall not fill up this book with other
signs.

As concerning those signs, which Man makes, which do not only respect order,
office, or name, but conduce to the knowing of his knowledge, age, dignity,
degree, etc. You must know concerning Money, that every kind thereof has its
peculiar trial, and mark, by which it is known how much it is valued at, who
is the Master of it, and in what place it is usually current. Hence is that
German Proverb, Money is no where more in request then where it was coined.

The same also is to be understood of things that are looked upon and examined
by men sworn and appointed for that purpose, before they be signed: as Cloth
which is marked with peculiar marks, by which it may be known, that in
examining they were found good, and proved. Why is a seal put upon Letters, but
that there is a certain bond, which it is lawful for no man to violate? For a
seal is a confirmation of Letters, whence they are of all men accounted
ratified. Without a seal an Acquitance is void, and of no force.

After the same manner many things are marked with few letters, names, or
words, as books, which being writ upon the outside but with one word, do
presently show what is contained within.

The same rule also there is for glasses and boxes in Apothecaries shops, all
which are discerned by peculiar names, or papers put upon them. Unless that
were done, who could discern so many Waters, Liquors, Syrups, Oils, Powders,
Seeds, Unguents, etc. and all simples? After the same manner does the Alchymist
in his Elabatorie mark with names, and papers all Waters, Liquors, Spirits,
Oils, Flegms, Crocus, Alcali, and all species, that thereby he may when there
is occasion make use of any of them, and know them: without the help of which
his memory could never bear them.

So also may all houses and buildings be marked with numbers or figures, that
the age of every one of them by the first sight of the number may presently be
known.

These and other things that are marked I was willing to show to you, that
these being comprehended, I might be the better understood by you in the rest,
and so the signification of every thing might be the more plain, and clear.

Of the Monstrous Signs of Men.
MAny men are brought forth deformed with monstrous marks, Diverse monstrous
signs or Marks.
or signs: so one abounds with one finger, or Toe, another wants one. The
fingers of some grow all together in the mothers womb. Another has a wry foot,
arm, or neck, etc. and brings it with him out of the womb. Another has a bunch
in his back: so also are Hermaphrodites born, i. e. they which are both Male,
and Female, and have the members both of Man, and Woman, or else want both. I
have observed many of these monstrous signs, as well in Males, as in Females,
all which are to be accounted for monstrous signs of secret evil ascendents.
Whence that proverb is made good; The more crooked, What monstrous signs show.
the more wicked: Lame members, lame deeds. For they are signs of vices,
seldom signifying any good.

As the Executioner marks his sons with infamous marks: so the evil Ascendents
impresse upon their young, supernatural mischievous marks, that they may be the
better taken heed of, which show some marks in their forehead, cheeks, ears,
fingers, hands, eyes, tongues, etc. being short, or cutted. Every one of these
infamous signs denotes a peculiar vice. So a mark burnt upon the face of a
Woman, or the cutting off her ears, for the most part signifies theft: the
cutting off the fingers, cheating Dicers: the cutting off the hand, breakers of
the peace: the cutting off two of the fingers perjured: the pulling out of the
eye, cunning, and subtle villains: the cutting out of the tongue, blasphemers,
slanderers, etc. So also you may know them that deny the Christian Religion by
a cross burnt in the soles of their feet, because viz. they have denied their
Redeemer.

But that passing by these we may proceed to the monstrous signs of Malignants
ascending, you must know, that all monstrous signs do not arise from an
Ascendent only, but offtentimes also from the stars of Men's minds, which
continually and every moment ascend, and descend with the fancy, estimation, or
imagination, no otherwise then in the superior firmament. Hence either from
fear, or terror of breeding. Women, many monsters, or children marked with
monstrous signs in the womb, are borne. The primary cause of these is fear,
terror, appetite from which is raised the imagination. If a women with child
begin to imagine, then her heaven by its motion is carried round, no otherwise
then the superior firmament every moment, with Ascendents, or risings, or
Settings. For according to the example of the greater firmament, the stars of
the Microcosme also are moved by Imagination, until there be an assault,
whereby the stars of the Imagination convey an influence, and impression upon
the Woman that is breeding, just as if any one should impresse a seal, or
stamp money. Whence these signs, and geniall marks are called Impressions of
inferior stars, of which many Philosophers have wrote many things, and men
have endeavored much to give a full, and rational account of, which could
never yet be done. Yet they do adhere, and are impressed on the infants, as
the stars of the Mother, whether frequent or violent, do rest upon the
Infants, or the Mothers longing is not satisfied: For if the Mother long for
this, or that meat, and cannot have it, the stars are suffocated as it were
in themselves, and dye: And that longing does follow the infant all its life
time, that it can never be well satisfied. The like reason is there of other
things, of which we shall not hear Discourse any further.

Of the Astrall Signs of Physiognomy in Man.
THe signs of Physiognomy receive their original from the superior stars; The
Original of Physiognomie.
this art of Physiognomy was greatly esteemed of by our Ancestors, and
especially by Heathens, Tartars, and Turks, etc. and other people, amongst whom
it was the custom to sell men for slaves, and it is not yet altogether laid
aside amongst Christians. Yet together with it many errors crept in, not yet
taken notice of by any, whilst every blockish ignorant fellow would take upon
him without any manner of judgment to judge of any one. Where it is worthy of
admiration that those erours should never be taken notice of from the works,
deeds, and abilities of the men.

Now if any one shall in this place argue against us, saying, that the signs
of Physiognomy are from the stars, and that the stars have no power to compel
any one or stir him up; he indeed does not speak amiss: but yet there is some
difference in it which must be taken notice of, because the stars compel some,
and others they do not compel.

For here we must know, who can rule or constrain the stars, and who can be
governed by them. Therefore for this you must note, that a wise man can rule
the stars, and not be subject to them. The stars are subject to a wise man, and
are forced to obey him, and not he the stars. But the stars compel an Animal
man, that whither they lead him he must follow, just as a thief does the
gallows, and a highway robber the wheel, the fisher the fishes, the fowler the
birds, the hunter the wild beasts. And what here is the cause of this, but that
such a kind of man does neither know himself, nor his own strength, never
considers, or thinks that he is the lesser world, and that he has the
universal Firmament with the powers thereof hid in him? Wherefore he is called
an Animal, an ignorant man, and a slave to any base service, and all earthly
matters; yet whereas he received that privilege from God in Paradise, that he
should rule, and reign over all other creatures of the Universe, and should not
be obedient to them; Man is the Lord of all other Creatures,
therefore God created him last of all, all the rest being made before him.
This privilege man afterward lost by his fall: but yet the wisdom of man was
not made servile, nor did he let that liberty go out of his hands. Whence it
is requisite that the stars should follow him, and obey him, and not he the
stars. And although he indeed be the son of Saturn, and Saturn his Ascendent;
yet he can remove himself from him, and so overcome him, that he can be the
offspring of the Sun; How a man may withdraw him self from one star, and
bring him self under another.
and bring himself under any other planet, and make himself its Son. And it is
the same case here as with a Digger, who for a time has spent his pains with
the Master of the Mines, and with the hazard of his life has performed his
service fathfully, at length reasons, and discourses with himself thus.

What will become of thee at last, if thou spendest all thy life under the
earth, and by thy continual labors do also bring thy body, and life into
danger? I will get a release from my Master, and I will serve another Master,
where my life may be made sweeter, where I may have plenty of meat, and drink,
where I may wear better clothes, have little work and much wages, where there
shall be no danger of the mountain hanging over me, and ready to fall upon
me, etc. After this manner he would be at liberty, when as otherwise he must
remain a Mercenary servant, and slave, pining away with much labor, and low
feeding, etc.

Now you see how a wise man commands the stars, and can remove himself from
any malignant planet, and bring himself under another better, how he can bring
himself out of slavery into liberty, and can free himself out of the prison
of an ill planet.

So also an Animal man, who is the son of the Sun, of Jupiter, Venus, and
Mercury, may remove himself from a benign planet, and subject himself to
Saturn, or Mars: such a man is like to a man, who runs from a religious
College, and being impatient of an easy life becomes a Soldier, or else a man
of no repute, who afterward spends all his life in sorrow, and misery.

Such an one also is a rich man, who being given to levity, spends, and wastes
all his goods, in Dicing, Feasting, Whoring, etc. which he gives himself to
so long until all be spent, then he comes to want, and being miserably
afflicted with infamous want, becomes deservedly a laughter and scorn to all
men, yea even to the very boys in the streets, whom you may hear saying:
Behold a beggarly man worth nothing, who when he was a Master disdained his
Mastership, and had rather be a slave, a beggar, a slave to servants, seeing he
can never come to his privilege again.

And hither does a Malignant star, or Ascendent drive him. Unless he had been
a fool, and dishonest, he had not left so certain a Dominion, which he had
over the stars, but had strove against it: And although of himself he knew
not how to resist the stars; yet he might have bent his mind to the examples
of others; thinking thus with himself: See how rich that man was, but
foolishly, and shamefully has brought himself to poverty. Also he lived
gallantly, without much labor, had so much meat, such wages, that he could not
live better. Now he lives sparingly, and sordidly, and in stead of Wine he
must drink Water, his labors daily increase, his wages decrease.

Now how often does such a kind of Man talk after this manner with himself.
What have I done? Whither am I running headlong, so basely spending my goods
that I got, who will repair my estate? If ever I shall receive what has been
thus spent, I will take a far other course of life, and will by my harms learn
to be wise, and will make amends for my evil deeds.

No man is wise by his own harms, but by another.
But it is convenient to know, that no man can be wise by his own harm. For
it is a foolish, and senseless thing to be wise by ones own harm. Let him
that will be wise, be wise by another man's example, not by his own. For he
that has once spent his estate, would spend it again if he should have it,
and he that once perishes, perishes for ever. He which once has cast a
Dice, casts it again. He which once stole, and escaped the gallows, will
endeavor to steal the second time also. For he thinks thus with himself. My
enterprises have succeeded once, and again, and why not the third, or fourth
time? If God should once restore what I have lost, he would restore it the
second, and third time, etc. If he did not forsake me in my first misery, he
will not in the second, or third, etc.

All these does an Animal man do, the servant, and slave of the stars, who is
turned every where, and moved by the stars, as a Reed in water.

And this is the reason why his life is spent in misery, and he dies in infamy.

Who therefore will sustain such servitude, and not deliver himself from such
a nasty prison? For any one may by his own wisdom, together with the help of
his star, deliver, and free himself from thence. Consider the matter thus:

A Fowler by his prudence, and help of his star, overcoming another star,
needs not go after birds, for they will come after him flying to unusual
places, contrary to their nature.

So a Fisherman can by making use of the wisdom which God has given him make
fishes swim to him of their own accord, so that he may take them up with his
hands.

A Hunter improving his wisdom, does by his star so compel the wild beasts,
that he need not follow them, but they will follow him without any impulse of
nature. So also of the rest of living creatures.

Stars are twofold.
Now for the better understanding of these things, you must know, that Stars are
twofold, terrestrial, and celestial, these of wisdom, the other of folly.

And as there are two worlds, the greater, and the lesser, and the greater
governs the lesser: so also the stars of the Microcosme do rule, and
overcome the celestial.

The end of the Stars is to serve, not command man.
Neither did God create the planets, and other stars of the heaven, that they
should rule over man, but that they, as all other creatures, should obey, and
serve him. And although the superior stars do incline men, and sign them as
also all other terrestiall bodies, with natural signs, according to the
manner of their generation; yet that is no power, or sovereignty, but only a
predestined command, and office, whereby nothing may remain hid, or
concealed, but the inward force, and power may be brought forth by exterior
signs.

Signs are twofold.
But to return to our purpose of the Physiognomicall signs of Men, you must
know, that they are twofold, in external shape indeed alike, but in power, and
effect unlike.

Some are from supernatural stars of the heaven, the other, from the inferior
stars, viz. of the Microcosme.

Whatsoever the superior star signs according to generation, even to the
middle age, that thing signed is predestined, not wanting peculiar powers. For
it does testify of the nature, and condition of Man. Whatsoever therefore the
inferior star of the Microcosme does sign in generation, has its original
from the Father, and Mother, viz. as often as the Mother by her imagination, or
appetite, fear, or terror has by contact affected her infant in her womb with
supernatural signs, which are called the Mothers marks, or the Womb marks, of
which since we have spoke already, we shall now save the labor of iteration;
seeing our purpose is only to treat of Physiognomicall signs, where we shall
speak only of the predestined signs of the stars, What are Physignomicall
signs.
under which we understand those signs of Men, which neither their Father, or
Mother had any likeness of in their body.

Of this sort are black, gray, little, or great eyes, long, crooked, sharp,
nose, pits in their cheeks, the cheek bone being raised up, a flat, or broad
nose, small, or great ears, long neck, long face, wide, or little mouth, thick
or small, many or few, black, yellow, and red hairs, etc.

If one, or more of these signs appear in Man, you must know, that they do
not want their signification.

But it is necessary that you consider them according to the Physiognomicall
art, and that you have certain knowledge of the Art of Signatures, whereby you
may know through the external signs the internal man.

What Black Eyes signify.
But to proceed to the practice of what we intended, and to reckon up some of
the signs of Men, and their signification in part.

You must know, that black eyes besides a healthful constitution, also many
times signify a constant mind, not wavering, or fearful, but lusty, hearty,
true and loving virtue.

What Gray.
Gray eyes are a sign of a deceitful, and changeable man.

Weak Eyes.
Weak eyes signify good judgment, witty, and profound deliberation.

Purblind eyes, and such as turn upward, Purblind.
and downward, and to both sides, signify a false man, and crafty, that cannot
easily be deceived, treacherous, hating labor, slothful, getting his living
slothfully, by Dice, Usury, Whoring, Robbery, etc.

Small and deep.
Small and deep eyes do for the most part signify weak, and feeble eyes, and
blindness ensuing in old age, as also strong men, warlike, bold, deceitful,
nimble, factious, patiently undergoing their condition, yet the end of whose
life is for the most part tragical, etc.

Great eyes, a covetous, ravenous man, Great.
especially if they hang out of the head.

Always Winking.
Eyes that are always winking, declare a weak sight, and a man to be fearful,
and solicitous.

Rolling Eyes show an amorous affection, Roling.
and a prudent man, and a man of quick intention.

Eyes continually dejected show a bashful, modest man, Continually dejected.
etc.

Eyes that are red, signify a bold, and strong man, Red.
etc.

Clear eyes, and not easily moveable, show an heroic, Clear.
magnanimous, strong, cheerful, and a man formidable to his enemies, etc.

Great ears show a good hearing, a good memory, Ears great.
attention, diligence, a sound brain, and head, etc.

Low ears are an ill omen. For, for the most part they signify a man to be
malicious, fraudulent, unjust, and a bad hearing, a bad memory, a bold man, and
easily exposing himself to dangers.

A long nose, and crooked downwards is a good sign, A long Nose.
it signifies a man to be valiant, prudent, close, rigorous, and yet just, etc.

A flat nose signifies a man to be malicious, lustful, given to lying, A flat
Nose.
inconstant, etc.

A sharp nose, a man to be a turne-coate, a mocker, Sharp.
etc.

A long nose a man to be slow in all his actions, and to be of a very quick
smell. Long.


The checkes with pits in them signify a man to be talkative, Hollow checks
a Scorner, contentious, etc.

A long chin, with a long face, signify a man to be given to anger, A long
Chin.
and slow to labor, etc.

A divided Chin.
A divided chin signifies a man to be faithful, officious, subtle, and
various in his words, speaking one thing, and meaning another, angry, yet sorry
for his anger, ingenious, and given to inventions.

A great Mouth.
A great and large mouth signifies a man to be a great devourer, silly,
foolish, imprudent, dareing, etc. A little mouth signifies the contrary.

Lips drawn to
Lips drawn to, where the upper is greater then the lower, signify a man to
be angry, warlike, courageous, yet for the most part of rude, and uncivil
behavior, and manners like to a swine.

Lips great beneath.
Lips great beneath, signify a man to be dull, foolish, and blockish, etc.

Hair signifies nothing by Art.
Judgment by the hairs either of the head, or beard, is not very certain,
because use teaches that they can be diverse ways varyed, as to be made
black, or yellow, or red, or white, and hoary, or curled, soft, or hard, as any
one desires to have them.

Hence it will come to pass, that many who are otherwise skillful enough in
the Art of Physiogmony, would be most shamefully deceived, whilst they should
rashly judge by the hairs, imputing that to the stars, which should rather be
ascribed to men themselves.

Yet it cannot be denied, but that hairs firmly fastened on the head, do
signify a good health of the head, as also of the whole body.

And this is the reason, why they that buy Horses pull their tails, that by
this means they may judge of their soundness.

So Hogs are tried by their bristles, Fish by their shells, and scales, a
Bird by his feathers, etc.

The neck, if it be too long, signifies a man to be sollicitous, Long Necks.
prudent, and attent, etc.

Broad Sholders and backs.
Broad shoulders, and back, signify a man to be strong, and able for carrying
or removing, etc.

Musculous Arms.
Arms that are musculous, signify a man to be strong and able for any
exercise, as beating, pounding, shooting, etc.

Hands that be hard signify a man to be laborious, Hard hands.
and a hireling, etc. Soft hands, the contrary.

A short Body.
A short body, and long legs signify a man to be a good runner, to be easily
satisfied with meat, and drink, and for the most part to be of a short life.

Great and clear veins under the middle age of man signify a man to be full
of blood and juice, but above the middle of his age to be commonly sick, yet
long lived.

Nothing can be judged by by the manners, and behavior of Men.
As much as concerns the manners, gestures of men, nothing can be so easily
known, and judged by them.

For experience teaches that these can every moment be changed, as to deceive
the Signator, and make him erroneous in his judgment: And because it has not
been observed hitherto so accurately by all Astronomers; It is therefore the
Signators part not always to look to the manners and actions of men, but
rather to other signs of the body, which are fixed, and can by no Art be
counterfeited or changed.

For if red hairs, moving the forehead, and eyelids, a cheerful, raised, and
unmoveahle countenance, a frequent agitation of the mouth, a stout mused
walking, and a light mind, should necessarily declare a man to be a gallant
soldier and stout, every one could by his industry and art make himself seem
to be such an one; that he might by his looks be the better approved of, and
obtain greater pay.

The like also may be judged of other kinds of behavior, which pretend to
wisdom, folly, truth, lying, fortune, victory, etc.

Of the Astrall Signs of Chiromancy.
COncerning the Signs of Chiromancy, we must hold that they do arise from the
superior stars of the seven planets; and that we must know and judge of them
by the seven planets.

What Chiromancy is.
Now Chiromancy is an Art, which does not only look into the hands of men, and
make judgment by their lines and wrinkles, but also considers all herbs,
woods, hard stones, earthes, and rivers, and whatsoever has lines, veins, or
wrinkles.

Neither does this Art want its errors, which those Astronomers were guilty of.

For they assigned the fingers of both hands to the planets, and chiefest
stars, whereas there are but five fingers in one hand, and in both ten, yet the
planets are reckoned but seven.

How then can these things agree amongst themselves?

Now if there were seven fingers on each hand, it then might be granted, that
every finger might be ascribed to several planets.

Whether the fingers be assigned to the Planets.
But yet it falls out many times, that some men may have but seven fingers on
both hands, the rest being casually cut off: but seeing that they were cut off,
and just seven were not at their birth, this matter cannot be related hither.

And if it should be so, that a man should be borne with seven fingers,
whether on one hand, or on both: yet that were monstrous, and beside the usual
order of Nature, and not subject to the stars. Therefore this also cannot
belong to this place.

But if there must be but five fingers on each hand, and seven planets, and
these mutually be compared amongst themselves, it would then be convenient
that the lots of the planets should be put into a box, to know which two
planets must give place, and be left out.

Yet because this cannot be, and the planets have neither dice, nor lots in
the Firmament; It would be worth wondering at, if any one should usurp this
power to himself, as to allot by the name of the planet, and sign, the thumb
to Venus, the forefinger to Jupiter, the midle-finger to Saturn, the
ring-finger to the Sun, and the little-finger to Mercury, in the mean time
casting out Mars, and the Moon, as it were out of their tribe and liberty.

Which things being so; who can wonder that Mars does stir up his sons with
just indignation to kill that caster of lots, or to bear a perpetual hatred
against him? Who can wonder why the Moon should enfeeble the brain of that
player, or take away his reason?

And this is their first error, which, as we have said, they have committed
in Chiromancy.

The second error in it is this:

It oftentimes happens that the original, and natural lines of the hands are
changed by hurts, and casualties, or are made greater, or lesser, or do appear
in other places.

For as if there be a highway obstructed by any thing or be stopped up by the
fall of a mountain, or be spoiled by the overflowing of waters, men go about in
another way near to it: so it happens in the old lines of the hands, that
sometimes after the curing of wounds, or ulcers, together with new flesh, also
new lines do grow out, and the old are quite abolished.

In the same manner also by reason of hard labors the lines are defaced, or
they which were original grow great; as it is in trees: For if a young tree
send forth many branches on all sides, these being cut off, the tree it self
becomes bigger.

But that we may at length proceed to the practice of the Art of Chiromancy,
and briefly declare our opinion; I would have you know, that I will indeed
change nothing of what concerns the hands, but acquiesce, and be satisfied with
the observations, and descriptions of the Ancients. Yet I purpose in this
practice of Chiromancy to write of those things, of which the Ancients have
made no mention of, as of the Chiromancy of Herbs, Woods, Stones, and the like.

The Chiromancy of Herbs and Woods.
And it must first be noted, that all Herbs, which are of one kind must be of
one, and the same Chiromancy.

But if their lines be unlike, and appear greater, or lesser in some of them:
that is, by reason of their age. We do therefore clearly profess, What use
is of them.
that the Chiromancy of Herbs, conduces to nothing else but to know, and
understand the age of any Herb, or Root.

But by way of arguing any may here object, that there is no herb as long as
it grows is older then another, four or five months at the most, if the
supputation begins from May till Autumn, at which time herbs die, and fall
from their root.

The condition of the spirit of the Herb.
To this I answer, that from God there is but one virtue in a root, which is the
first being and spirit of the herb, by reason of which the herb grows, and is
supported until the predestined time, and until it be exalted to the
production of seed. And this is a sign, and a mark, that the virtue returns
back to the root, and so the herb is dried. As long as that spirit which is
the chiefest virtue of the herb remains in the root, the herb every year is
renewed: unless it be, that that spirit together with the herb be taken way,
and decays. Then the herb is not renewed. For the root is dead, and has no
more life remaining in it.

But after what manner that spirit together with the herb is taken from the
root, or with the root from the earth, that the virtue thereof cannot go back
into the root, or from the root into the earth, is not to be considered in this
place. For that is a sublime mystery of Nature, and not to be openly discovered
by reason of ignorant Physicians, who do not only scoff at but contemn such
secrets. Therefore what here we have omitted, we shall set down in our
Herball.

Moreover, by how much the younger herbs are, so much the more do they excel
in power and virtue.

As by age a man is weakened, and fails in strength, so also do herbs.

But to know what the Chiromancy, and age of herbs, and such like things, is,
daily experience is required, seeing the number of their years is not written
upon them, but it must be divined, as I have said, by Chiromancy only.

Now Chiromancy does not consider numbers, letters, or characters, but lines,
veins, and wrinkles only, etc. according to the age of any thing. For by how
much the older a thing is, so much the greater, and easier to be seen are the
lines, and the virtue, and operation of the thing so much the duller.

For as a disease of one month or year, is more easily cured then that which
is of two, three, four, or five months, Young herbs must be applied to old
diseases, and so on the contrary.
and years: So an herb does sooner cure a disease of one month, or year, then
that which is of two, three, or four months, or years. And for this cause
young herbs must be applied to old griefs; and old herbs or medicines to
young or new diseases. For if an old herb should be applied to an old disease,
the blind would lead the blind, and both would fall into the ditch.

This is the reason why many medicines do not work, but are taken into the
body, and possess the members, as dirt sticks to the shoes, whence diseases
are afterward doubled, etc.

Now ignorant Physicians never considered this, but by their ignorance have
destroyed more then ever they cured.

In the first place therefore, you that are Physicians must know, that the
medicine must be younger then the disease, that it may be stronger to expel
it. For if the medicine be more powerful then the disease, the disease will be
overcome as fire is quenched with water. But if the disease be stronger then
the medicine, it turns the medicine into poison, whence diseases are afterward
doubled, and increased.

So if a disease be like Iron, it must be cured with a Chalybeat medicine. For
Steel cannot be overcome by Iron. The more powerful does always overcome, and
the weaker is overcome.

Although therefore it was not our purpose in the beginning to write in this
place of Physic, yet for the sake or true, and genuine Physicians, I could not
pass over these things in silence.

Of Mineral Signs.
How Mineralls differ.
MIneralls also, and Metalls before they come to the fire have their true
signs, and significations, which they have received from the Archeius, and the
superior stars, every one of them resembling some kind of them by distinct
colors, and differences of the earth. For the Mineral of Gold, is distinct
from the Mineral of Silver: so also is the Mineral of Silver from that of
Copper: and the Mineral of Copper from that of Iron: so the Mineral of Iron
from that of Tin; and Lead; and so of the rest.

No man can deny, but that the Mineral, and all Metallic bodies of Mines,
which lie hid in the earth, may be known by art of Chiromancy by their
exterior signs. That is, the Chiromancy of Mines, Veins, and Conduits, etc.
by which not only those things, which being hid within them, are brought forth,
but also a certain depth, and richness of the Mine, and plenty of Metal is
manifested. And in this Chiromancy three things are necessary to be known, viz.
the age, depth, and breadth of the veins, as has been said a little before of
herbs. For by how much the older the veins are, by so much the richer, and
more augmented are the Mines.

Concerning this we must know thus much, that all Metalls, which as yet lie hid
in their matrix do constantly grow.

Whence also it is manifest, that every thing that grows, although it be
placed out of its matrix cannot be made less, but forthwith grows, (i. e.) is
multiplied, and according to its substance, measure, and weight, grows until
the predestined time. Now this predestined time is the third part, of the
appointed age of all Mineralls, There are Three chief heads of all things.
Vegetables, and Animalls, which are the three chief heads of all earthly
things.

Now whatsoever does yet remain in its matrix, does grow so long until the
matrix dies. For the matrix has its appointed time to live, and die,
especially if it be subject to external Elements.

What is the term of Elements.
That which is not subject to them, has no other time, or term then the
Elements themselves have, with which it also shall die and perish in the day of
Renovation (which is their term.)

Hence it follows, that all things which are within the earth, are not
subjected to the external Elements, neither are they sensible of cold, or
moisture, or dryness, or wind, or air, by which they may be destroyed. Such
kind of bodies therefore cannot be putrefied, or contract any filthiness, or
stink, or die, as long as they continue within the earth, in their Chaos.

So much be spoken of Metalls, and as of them, so also it may be said of many
men, who in the caves of mountains live some hundreds of years, as if they
were giants, or pygmies, of which we have wrote a particular book.

But to descend to the practice of the Chiromancy of Mines, which we shall
give you to understand in few words; you must know that the veins by how much
the deeper, and broader they are, so much the older. For where the course of
the veins is a great way extended, and at length decay, and are not hidden, it
is a bad sign. For as the courses of the veins do decay, so also do the
Mines themselves decay, which they signify by their depth. Although sometimes
there are good Mines found, yet by how much the deeper they go, they do more,
and more decay, so that it is not worth while to work in them. But when the
veins are enlarged with other additions, or oftentimes cut off, it is a good
sign, showing that the Mines are good not only in the top, but that the same
also are increased, and multiplied in depth, and length for the most part, the
Mines being made more rich, afford pure gold, and so a most large treasure.

It is without ground, that many Miners commend those veins only which go
directly downward, and incline from the East to the West. For the nature of the
Mines and experience teaches, that veins often entimes which bend from the West
to the East, or from the South to the North, and so contrarily from the North
to the South, are not less rich then others are. Therefore there is no vein to
be esteemed before another. But we think it convenient to discourse of this no
longer.

By what signs Mines are discovered.
Now concerning the other signs of the internal earth, as also the colors of
Mineralls, we shall briefly discourse of them thus.

As often as Miners fall upon a fat earth, which does signify a vein of a pure,
and new metal, that is a very good sign assuring that, that Metal, of which
it is a vein, is not far off.

So also if the earth that is dug have no Metal in it, but be fat, of a
white color, or black, or like clay or green, or blue, etc. then that also is
a good sign of some good Metal that is hid under it. Therefore you must
continue digging, and not give over.

Miners in the first place have respect to the excellent, beautiful, and
chiefest colors, as are green earth, or Chrysocoll, Verdegrease, Azure,
Cinnabar, Sandaracha, Auripigmentum, Litharge of Gold, and Silver, etc. every
one of these almost do for the most part signify a peculiar Metal, or
Mineral.

So Verdegrease, Chrysocolla, green earth, for most part signify Copper.

So Azure, or white Arsenick, or Litharge of Silver signify the Metal of
Copper.

So Cinnabar, and Sandaracha do sometimes signify Gold, sometimes Silver, and
sometimes a mixture of both.

So Anripigmentum, red Sulphur, and Litharge of Gold, for the most part
signify Gold.

So when Chrysocoll is found mixed with the Azure, or the Azure with Chrysocoll,
and Anripigment, for the most part they signify an excellent and rich Mineral.

Where stones, or earth are found of an Iron color, they do certainly betoken
an Iron Mine.

You must note, that sometimes it comes to pass, that the Archeius of the
earth does by some secret passage cast up some Metal from the more inward part
of the earth. And that is a good sign.

Miners therefore must not be discouraged when they see such certain signs,
and hope of some excellent Mine lying under. And if thin leaves of Metalls,
like Talk, do adhere to rocks, or stones, that is a most sure sign.

What Coruscations signify in Mines.
Now concerning Coruscations they must be diligently, gently, and studiously
observed, for they are most certain signs of Metalls lying hid under them, as
also of the same extent, and same kind. Where yet we must note, that those
Metalls are not yet come to perfection, but are as yet in their first being.
And whither soever the Coruscation reaches, so far also reaches the course of
Metalls, etc.

Coruscations are of three colors.
Moreover you must know, that Coruscation is of a threefold color, as White,
Yellow, and Red, whereby all Metalls are discovered to us. For a white
Coruscation signifies white Metalls, as Tin, Lead, Silver, etc. a red
Coruscation signifies red Metalls, as Copper, and Iron, etc. a yellow
Coruscation signifies golden Metalls.

Add moreover, that a thin, and subtle Coruscation is the best sign.

For as you see it is in trees, that by how much the fewer flowers there are,
so much the better, greater, and more savory are the fruit: so also small and
subtle Coruscations signify subtle and excellent Metalls, as the contrary
do the contrary.

Moreover you must know, that as long as those Coruscations appear, whether
they be great, or small, or of this or that color, the Metalls in those Mines
have not yet attained to perfection, but are yet in their first being as the
sperm of a man in the matrix of a woman.

What Coruscation is.
But now what Coruscation is, we must consider in this place: and we must know
that it appears in the Mines by night like a sparkling fire, no otherwise then
gunpowder that is laid in a long train, and being kindled at one end makes a
long flashing.

After the same manner is Coruscation carried along, from the East to the West,
or from the West to the East, from the South to the North, or contrarily.

All these Coruscations, how ever they appear, are a certain sign of Courses
of Metalls, that by them they may be known, and Metalls as certain gifts of God
may be brought forth out of the earth. For what God created for man's use, he
put that nature into it that it should not be hid: and although it were hid,
yet he made peculiar external signs which conduce to the finding of it out,
by which the wonderful predestination of it may be known.

In the same manner if men hide treasures they mark the place with some
certain marks, and bury them by some bound, statue, or fountain, or any other
thing, that when there is occasion they may find, and dig them up again.

How Chaldeans and Grecians hide their treasure.
The ancient Chaldeans and Grecians, if in times of war fearing to be driven
away, or banished, they would hide their treasure, would mark the place no
otherwise, then propose to themselves a certain day, hour, and minute of the
year, and did observe in what place the Sun, or Moon should cast their shadow,
and there did bury, and hide their treasure.

What Sciomancy is.
This Art they call Sciomancy, i. e. the Art of Shadowing. By these shadowings
many Arts have had their ground, and many hid things have been revealed, and
all Spirits, and Astrall bodies are known.

These are Cabalisticall signs, that cannot deceive, and therefore diligently
to be taken notice of.

Divining Rods uncertain.
You must therefore take heed, that you suffer not your selves to be seduced by
the divinations of uncertain Arts; for they are vain, and fruitless,
especially Divining rods, which have deceived many Miners. For if they show a
thing truly once, they fail ten times.

Also we must not trust other fraudulent signs of the devil, which are made,
and appear in the night, and at some inconvenient times preternaturally, such
as are ghosts, and visions. For I would have you know, that the devil can
show, and cause signs, but out of mere fraud, and deceit.

So there is no Church built, but the devil has his Chapel there. There is
no Chapel built, but he sets up his Altar. There is no good seed, but he
sows amongst it his tares. The same is the nature of Visisions, and
supernatural Apparitions, in Crystalls, Berills, Looking-glasses, and Waters;
as they are by Ceremonial Negromancers contrary to Gods command, and the power
of the light of Nature basely abused.

Visions indeed are not absolutely to be rejected; for they have their place,
but then they must be done after another process: For now we are not any
longer in the first generation, but the second. Ceremonies therefore, and
Conjurations are not any longer to be used by us Christians in the
regeneration, as the Ancients in the old Testament; who lived in the first
generation used them. For those prefigurations were for us who were to live in
the New Testament.

Whatsoever things therefore the Ancients that were under the Old Testament,
and in the first Generation did do by Ceremonies; Conjurations, etc. we
Christians of the second Generation, and in the New Testament must do by
prayer, knocking, and seeking, and procure by faith.

In what chief points the foundations of Magic and Cabalie consists.
In these 3 chief points consists all the foundation of the Magical, and
Cabalisticall Art, by which we may obtain whatsoeve we desire, so that to us
Christians nothing is impossible.

But we shall desist to treat here of more things concerning these and other
monuments of Cabalie, spoken of sufficiently in the book of Visions. I refer
you thither, that you may see how wonderfully Christ the Son of God works by
his Angels in us Christians, and the faithful, and how brotherly he is
conversant with us. Whence we are the true Angels, and members of Christ, as
he is our head, as he is in us, so we live in him, as is taught in the book
of the Lords Supper.

But to return to our purpose concerning Mineral signs, and especially
concerning the. Coruscation of Metalline veins, we must know, that as Metalls,
which are yet in their first being, send forth their Coruscation, i. e. Signs,
so also the Tincture of Philosophers, What is the virtue of the Tincture of
Philosophers.
which changes all imperfect Motalls into Silver, and Gold (or White Metalls
into Silver, and Red into Gold) puts forth its proper signs like unto
Coruscation, if it be Astrally perfected, and prepared. For as soon as a small
quantity of it is cast upon a fluxil metal, so that they mix together in the
fire; there arises a natural Coruscation, and brigthnesse, like to that of
fine Gold, or Silver in a test, which then is a sign that that Gold, or
Silver, is freed and purged without all manner of addition of other Metalls.

How the Tincture of Philosophers is made astrall.
But how the Tincture of Philosophers is made Astrall, you must conceive it
after this manner:

First of all you must know, that every Metal, as long as it lies hid in its
first being, has its certain peculiar stars.

So Gold has the stars of the Sun, Silver the stars of the Moon, Copper the
stars of Venus, Iron the stars of Mars, Tin the stars of Jupiter, Lead the
stars of Saturn, Quicksilver the stars of Mercury.

But as soon as they come to their perfection, and are coagulated into a fixed
Metalline body, their stars fall off from them, and leave them, as a dead body.

Hence it follows, that all such bodies are afterward dead, and inefficacious,
and that the unconquered star of Metalls does overcome them all, and converts
them into its nature, and makes them all Astrall.

Gold that is made by the Tincture is better then natural.
For which cause also our Gold, and Silver, which is tinged, and prepared with
our tincture, is much more excellent, and better for the preparation of
Medicinal secrets, then that which is natural, which Nature generates in the
Mines, and afterward is separated from other Metalls.

So also the Mercury of a body, is made Astrally of another body, and is much
more noble, and fixed then common Mercury. And so of the other Metalls.

I say therefore, that every Alchymist, which has that star of Gold, can turn
all Red Metalls into Gold by tinging of them.

So by the star of Silver all White Metalls are changed into Silver: by the
star of Copper into Copper: by the star of Quicksilver into Mercury of the
body; and so of the rest.

But now how all these stars are prepared according to the Spagiricall Art, it
is not our purpose at this time to declare: but the explication of them belongs
to our books of the Transmutation of Metalls.

The nature of the red Tincture.
But as for that which concerns their signs, I would have you know, that our
Red tincture, which contains the stars of Gold to be of a most fixed substance,
of most quick penetration, and of a most intense redness, in powder resembling
the color of Saffron, but in its whole body the color of a Rubie; I say it is
a Tincture as fluxil as Wax, as transparent as Crystal, as brittle as Glass,
and for weight most heavy.

The nature of the white.
The white tincture, which contains the star of the Moon is after the same
manner of a fixed substance, of an unchangeable quantity, of wonderful
whiteness, as fluid as Resine, as transparent as Crystal, as brittle as
Glass, and for weight like to a Diamond.

The star of Copper.
The star of Copper is of a wonderful citrine color, like to an Emrald, as
fluxill as Resine, much heavier then its Metal.

The star of white Tin.
The star of white Tin is as fluid as Resine, of a dark color with some
mixture of yellow.

The star of Iron.
The star Iron is very red, as transparent as a Granate, as fluxil as Resine, as
brittle as Glass, of a fixed substance, much heavier then its Metal.

The star of Lead.
The star of Lead is like Cobaltum, black, yet transparent, as fluxile as
Resine, as brittle as Glass, equal to Gold for weight, heavier then other
Lead.

The star of Quicksilver.
The star of Quicksilver is of a wonderful white, sparkling color, like to
snow, in the extremest cold weather, very subtle, of a penetrating, corrosive
acrimony, as transparent as Crystal, flowing as easily as Resine, very cold to
the taste, but very hot within, as if it were fire, but of a very volatile
substance in the fire.

By this description the stars of the Metalls are to be known, and understood.

Also you must understand, that for the preparation of both tinctures, viz. of
the Red and White, you must not in the beginning take of your work the body of
Gold, or Silver, but the first being of Gold, and Silver. For it in the
beginning there be an error committed all your pains, and labor will be in
vain.

So also you must understand of Metalls, that every one of them receives a
peculiar sign in the fire, by which it is known.

Of this kind are sparks, flames, glisterings, the color, smell, taste of
fire, etc.

So the true sign of Gold, or Silver in the test is glistering.

That appearing, it is certain that Lead, and other Metalls that were mixed are
fumed away, and that the Gold, and Silver is fully purged.

The signs of Iron being red hot in the furnace, are clear transparent sparks
flying upward. Those appearing, the Iron unless it be taken from the fire is
burnt like straw, etc.

To know how Metalls have more or less of the three principles.
After the same manner any earthly body shows its peculiar, and distinct signs
in the fire, whether it have more of Mercury, Sulphur, or Salt, and which of
the three principles it has most of. For if it fume before in flame, it is a
sign that it contains more Mercury then Sulphur.

But if it presenlly burn with a flame, and without any fume, it is a sign
that it contains much Sulphur, and little or no Mercury.

This you see in at substances, as Tallow, Oil, Resine, and the like: but if
without any flame it goes all into fume, it is a sign that there is in it much
Mercury, and little or no Sulphur.

This you see happens in herbs, and flowers, etc. and other Vegetable
substances, and volatile bodies, as are Mineralls, and Metalls, remaining yet
in their first being, and are not mixed with any sulphurous body, which send
forth a fume, and no flame.

Mineralls, and Metalls, which send forth neither fume nor flame, do show an
equal mixtion of Mercury, and Sulphur, and a perfect fixation.

Of some peculiar Signs of Natural and Supernatural things.
WE must yet further speak of some peculiar signs, of which hitherto we have
said nothing.

In which Treatise it will be very necessary for you, that boast your selves to
have skill in the Art of Signatures, and desire to be called Signators, that
you rightly understand me. For we shall not in this place write
theoretically, but practically, and shall declare our opinion in few words.

What the art of signing is.
And first know, that the Art of signing does teach how true, and suitable names
are to be put upon all things, all which Adam truly knew. For presently after
the Creation he gave to every thing its proper name, as to Animalls, so Trees,
Herbs, Roots, Stones, Mineralls, Metalls, Waters, etc. And to all the fruits
of the earth, Water, Air, Fire, etc. And what names he put upon them all, were
ratified, and approved of by God: For from the true, and intrinsecall
foundation he took them all; not from opinion, or from a predestined
science, viz. the Art of Signing.

Adam the first signator.
Adam therefore was the first Signator. And it cannot be denied, that also from
the Hebrew tongue true and proper names do flow, and are put upon every thing
according to its nature, and condition.

The nature of the Hebrew tongue.
For what names are put upon them from the Hebrew tongue, do with the same
labor signify their virtue, power, and property.

So when we say, this is a Hog, a Horse, a Cow, a Bear, a Dog, a Fox, a Sheep.

The signification of a Hog, Horse, Cow, Bear, Fox, Dog, sheep, in the Hebrew
tongue.
The name of a Hog signifies together with it a filthy and unclean Animal: so a
Horse signifies a strong and patient Animal: a Cow, a devouring, and
insatiable beast: a Bear, a strong, victorious, and an untamed brute: a Fox, a
shifting, and crafty beast: a Dog, an animal false to those of his own kind: a
Sheep, a mild and profitable beast, and hurtful to none.

Hence it is that a man is called a Hog, for his sordid and swinish life.

And a Horse for his bearing, for which he is eminent.

And a Cow, because she is unsatiable with meat, and drink, and knows no
measure of her belly.

And a Bear, because he is misshapen, and stronger then other men.

A Fox, because he is a turn-coat, and deceitful, accommodating himself to
all, and offending none.

A Dog, because he is faithful to none, but his own mouth, is false, and
inofficious to all.

And a Sheep, because he hurts no body but himself, and is useful to all,
rather then to himself, etc.

In what herb s there is a signature.
After this manner also many Herbs, and Roots have got their name.

So Eyebright is so called, because it cures weak, and sore eyes.

So the Root Bloudwort is so called, because it stops blood better then any
other.

So the Herb Pile-wort is so called, because it cures the piles better then
other herbs.

The same also may be said of diverse other herbs, of which sort I could reckon
a great number, all which were so called from their virtue, and faculty, as
shall more largely be declared in our Herball.

Moreover, there be many Herbs, and Roots, which are denominated not only
from their imbred virtue, and faculty, but also from their figure, form, and
representation: As, Devills-bit, Five-leaved grass, or Cinquefoile,
Hounds-tongue, Adders-tongue, Horse-taile, Liver-wort, Ox-tongue, Lung-wort,
the herb Chameleon, St. John's Wort, or the herb boared through, the herb
Dog-stone, Tongue-laurell, Thorow-leafe, Turne-sole, and many others which
shall not here, but in the Herball be severally considered.

What signature there is in Animalls.
The same also holds concerning the signs of Animalls; for by the blood, and
its circle, and by the urine and its circle and diseases that lie hid in Man
may be known.

By the liver of a slain beast the flesh is known whether it be wholesome to be
eaten or no. For unless the liver be clear, and of a red color, but blew, or
yellow, or rough, or full of holes, the beast is diseased, and therefore his
flesh unwholesome.

The Liver the original of Blood.
And it is no wonder that the liver can show that by natural signs. For the
original of the blood is in the liver, and hence through the veins it is
diffused into the whole body, and is coagulated into flesh.

Therefore from a diseased, and ill affected liver, no sound or fresh blood can
be produced, as of bad blood no wholesome flesh can be coagulated.

Also without inspection into the liver, flesh and blood may be known. For if
both be sound, they have their true, and natural color, which is red, and
clear, mixed with no other strange color, as yellow, or blew. For those
strange colors do signify diseases, and sicknesses.

What the knots in the Navell of the Infant signify.
Also there are other signs worthy of admiration, viz. when the Archeius is the
Signator, and signs the navell in the infant with little knots, by which it
may be conjectured, what the Mother of the infant did bring forth or shall
bring forth.

The branches of a Hearts horn signify his age.
The same Signator signs the horns of a Heart with branches as the horn has, so
many years old is the Heart. And seeing he has every year a new born, the age
of the Heart may be known to twenty, or thirty years.

The circles of the horns of a Cow what.
So the Signator of a Cow marks her bornes with circles, by which it may he
known how many Calves she has brought forth. For every Circle signifies a
Calfe.

The teeth of a Horse.
The same Signator puts forth the first teeth of a Horse, that the first seven
years his age may be known by his teeth. For at first a Horse is brought froth,
with fourteen teeth of which every year her loses two, and so in the space of
seven years he loses all. So that after seven years his age can hardly be
known, unless by one that is very skillfull.

The bills and claws of Birds
The same Signator does sign the bills and claws of Birds with peculiar signs,
that the skillful Fowler may know their age by them.

The tongues of Hogs.
The same Signator does mark the tongues of diseased Hogs with little pushes,
by which their impurity is known, and as their tongue is impure, so is their
whole body.

Colors of Clouds.
The same Signator does sign clouds with diverse colors, by which the seasons
of the heaven may be foreknown.

Colors of the circle of the Moon.
So also he signs the circle of the moon with distinct colors, of which every
one is of peculiar interpretation. So redness signifies that there will be wind
greenness, and blackness, rain, these two mixed together wind and rain, the
same in the sea is a sign of great storms, and tempests; clearness, and a
bright whiteness is a good sign, especially in the ocean. For, for the most
part it signifies a quiet, fair season.

Whatsoever the Moon portends by her signs, shall come to pass the next day.

And so much for Natural signs. Now for Supernatural signs, they are things
of a particular science, as of Magical Astronomy, etc. and the like. It is
therefore necessary that you be skilled in them.

The kinds of Magical Astronomy.
Hence also many other Arts proceed, as Geomancy, Pyromancy, Hydromancy,
Chaomancy, and Necromancy, whereof every one has its peculiar stars, which
stars do so sign them after a supernatural manner. And you must know, that
the stars of Geomancy impresse their signs upon the earthy bodies of the
whole Universe, and that diverse ways. For they change the earth, and cause
earthquakes, and gapings, they produce hills, and valleys, and bring many new
Vegetables, they produce also Gamaheaus with naked figures, and images, having
wonderful virtues, and powers, which indeed they receive from the seven
planets, as the But or mark receives the arrow from the Archer.

But how those signs, and images of Gamaheaus may be known apart, and what they
signify magically; there is required a great experience, and knowledge of the
nature of things, which can by no means be here perfectly taught.

Here you must well note, that the stone, or every Gamaheaus, cannot excel in
the prperty, and virtue but of one star, and so be qualified but by one planet.

And although there be two or more planets in earthly bodies, as they are
joined together in the superior firmament: yet one is repressed by the other.
For as one house cannot bear two Masters, but the one thrusts out the other: so
also it is here; the one rules, the other serves: Or as one that overcomes him
that keeps any house, casts him out by force; and and sets himself, as master
of the house, disposing of all things according to his pleasure, and making the
other his servant.

So also one star expells another, one planet another, one Ascendant another,
one influence another, one impression another, one Element another; For as
water quenches the fire, so one planet destroys the property of another, and
brings in its own.

The same is after the same manner to be understood stood of their signs,
which are manifold, and not only characters, as many conceive, but all those,
which are sound in the whole map of the planets, i. e. whatsoever are of
affinity with, or subject to the planets.

What things are subject to the Sun.
But that you may the better understand me by adding an example: I would have
you know, that unto the planet of the Sun are subjected a crown, a scepter, a
throne, and all kingly power, majesty, and rule, and all riches, treasures,
ornaments, and furniture of this world.

What to the Moon.
Unto the planet of the Moon are subjected all husbandry, navigation,
traveling, and travelers, and such things as belong to these.

What to Mars.
Unto the planet of Mars are subjected all fortifications, armor, coats for
defense, Ordnance of War, spears, and all weapons, and whatsoever belongs to
war.

What to Mercury.
Unto the planet of Mercury are subjected all Artists, all Mechanic
instruments, and whatsoever is required to Arts.

What to Impiter.
Unto the planet of Jupiter are subjected all judgments, and rights, the whole
Leviticall order, all Ministers of Churches, ornaments of Temples, all jewels,
and such like.

What to Venus.
Unto the planet of Venus are subjected whatsoever things belong to Music, as
Musical instruments, venereall exercises, loves, whorings, etc.

What to Saturn.
Unto Saturn are subjected whosoever work in and beneath the earth, as Miners,
Pioners, Bearers of the dead, Diggers of Wells, as also all instruments serving
to either of these, etc.

What be the signs of Pyromancy.
Pyromancy draws forth its signs by the stars of the fire, in common fire by
particular sparks, flames, or noise, etc. in the mines by Coruscations: in the
Firmament by stars, comets, flashing, and lightning, and Nostock and the like
in Visions by Salamandrine, and fiery spirits.

What the signs of Hydromancy are.
Hydromancy gives its signs by the stars of the Water, by their overflowings,
their scarcity, discolorings, commotions, new streams, the washings away of
earthy things: in Magic, and Necromancy by Nymphs, visions and supernatural
Monsters in the waters, and sea.

What are the signs of Chaomancy.
Chaomancy shows its signs by the stars of the Air, and Wind, by the
discoloring, destroying of all tender, and subtle things, to which the Wind
is an enemy, by bearing off the flowers, leaves, boughs, and branches. If the
stars of Chaomancy are moved, spirits fall from the superior Air, and voices,
and answers are often heard: Also Trees are pulled up by the roots, and Houses
are thrown down. There are seen Hobgoblins, Household Gods, airy spirits, and
Woodmen, etc. also a heavenly dew, and manna falls upon Trees, and Herbs.

The signs of Necromancy.
Necromancy draws forth its signs by the stars of Death, which we call Evestra,
which are prophetical spirits, signing the body of the sick, and dying man with
red, blue, and purple spots, which are certain signs of death, in the third
day of their rising. They sign also the hands, and singers of men with a clay
color, which are certain signs of change, either good or bad. When therefore
the stars of Necromancy are moved, then the dead show some wonderful sign, as
Bleeding, and voices are heard out of the graves tumults, and tremblings arise
in the places where bones are laid, and dead men appear in the form, and habit
of living men, and are seen in Visions, in Looking-glasses, in Berills, in
Stones, and Waters, and diverse shapes. Evestra, i.e. spirits give their signs
by beating, striking, knocking, falling, casting, etc. where there is a great
hurly burly and noise only heard, but nothing seen, all which are certain
signs of death, presaging it to him, in whose habit they appear, or to some in
what place they are heard.

Besides, these signatures many more may be reckoned up. But seeing they bring
with them, evil, hurtful and dangerous fancies, and imaginations, and
superstitions, which may be an occasion not only of some misfortune, but also
death; I shall pass them over in silence. They are prohibited from being
revealed to us, seeing they belong to the school of secrets, and divine power.
Therefore now I shall put an end to this book.

FINIS.

