SERIOUS SOBER STATE-Considerations, RELATING To the GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND AND
The Garrison of DVNKIRK IN FLANDERS.

BY Theophilus Verax a Dunkirker.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. over against the Anchor in Little-Brittain, 1660.

Serious Sober State-Considerations, Relating to the Government of England, And
the Garrison of Dunkirk in Flanders.
1. WHether, a Peace with Spain, be not desirable both by the English and
Spanish Subjects? And whether an honorable closure with the King, be not the
most probable means to produce a good accommodation betwixt both Crowns?

2. Whether the composed Monarchical Government of England, is not the best
that ever was invented? And whether our late Distractions proceeded from the
effects thereof, or from the National sins; and because the Treble of it has
of late years, been tuned too high for the Bass? And whether the only way, to
procure the sweet Harmony of peace, is not to keep the Instrument of the
Commonwealth in Tune, allowing to the Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, of
which it is compounded, their due Rights and Prerogatives?

3. Whether since hard and dishonorable conditions of peace are seldom long
lived, See H. 3. and Montford E. of Leicester.
it be not dangerous to impose too high Terms upon the King upon his Admission?

4. Whether the rigid Episcopalians are not (next the Phanatique) the greatest
Obstructers of the King and Nations settlement; in their scribbling and
preaching against all forms of Government but their own?

5. Whether the Jesuits, and the Sectaries (their Brats) are not now laboring,
as for their lives, to widen the differences between Presbytery and Episcopacy,
thereby to obstruct any good Settlement? And whether it concern not the present
Governors to be extraordinary watchful of them?

6. Whether a Brotherly Union betwixt these two parties, and a dutiful
acquiescing in the determination of the ensuing Parliament, will not (under
God) be a great means to facilitate Settlement in Church and State? And whether
both parties are not in conscience and duty toward their Prince and Country
bound thereto, since there is no difference betwixt them, in any fundamental of
Religion, but only in Discipline and Form; which imports little to Salvation,
only upholds a Decency?

7. Whether the words of Desparadoes, and Chymney-corner health drinking
friends of the last and present King, were not more Enemies to both, than the
Swords of their adversaries; and did not these by their threats and sharing
estates before they had them, drive many by force to fight against the King,
that never intended any thing but quietness; and will not the like actings now
produce the same effects?

8. Whether Plurality of Factions are not dangerous, many times the overthrow
of a State or Kingdom, as that of York and Lancaster to England, the miseries
of France by the Royal, Politic, and Catholic League, the destruction of
Romes Commonwealth by the Factions of Pompey and Caesar?

9. Whether it be not dangerous for a Prince or Governor, to become head of
any Faction in his own Government?

10. Whether the Rump proceeded not according to Achitophel's and Machevil's
rule, in exposing the Kings and others lands to sale, forceing the Soldiers to
take parts for Arrears, thereby endeavoring a perpetual and irreconcilable
divisions in the Nations?

11. Whether it be not the safest and best way for Princes and Governors, to
admit persons to places of honor and trust annually? And whether hereby men of
wisdom, valor, and learning, by degrees, may not attain to dignity? and will
not this make them strain to out-go each other in virtue, since the door of
preferment will be thereby open to all indifferently, as they excel in
goodness; will not hereby several dangers be avoided, as Perpetuation,
Lawlesnesse, and all fear of bringing those to subjection that raised them,
taken away?

12. Whether the Purchaser of Lambeth-House be fit to keep the Records of the
peace at Westminster?

13. Whether the Lord Lockhart Governor of Dunkirk, be indeed a Scot, since he
so much transcends the nature of those he calls Countrymen?

14. Whether in former times the English have not lost their Towns and
Provinces abroad, by their Factions and divisions at home? And whether now the
same cause may not hazard the loss of Dunkirk.?

15. Whether old Capt. Chapman, must not in Justice be restored to his
command, being outed by the prejudice of a parcel of Traitors, Commissioners
from the Rump, without true ground, upon the Oath of Bromfield the Informer,
that was whipped under the Gallows, lost his Ear, and banished the Garrison,
within a small time after he had sworn against Chapman in Dunkirk?

16. Whether the other five Members, Captains of the Army in Flanders, Devoe,
Gargrave, Poxton, Fitz-williams and Muse, ought in Justice to lose their
Commands unheard, and their places supplied for the most part with Phanatiques,
by the Suggestions of Ashfield, Peirson, and Packer, who have been since outed
themselves, for endeavoring to betray the Liberties of their native Country?

17. Whether Fort Manning or Fort Loggerhead be the proper name?

18. Whether the Non-payment of the civil Officers their dues, be not the
ready way to cause them to study Knavery, if they never knew any before?

19. Whether it be not just that all the rest of the Phanatique Informers
should follow after Lieutenant Copeland?

20. Whether he be fit to be an Ammunition Commissary, that said it would
never be well with England until London were burnt to ashes, for standing for
their liberties, is glad at the out-ing of all Governments, and if the Turk
should rule, would be his Commissary, rather then be out of employment?

21. Whether the Colonels or the Master Gunner, have the more Authority,
since the Gunner can commit such as the Colonels discharge for the same
offense?

22. What so much Spanish cloth would be worth as would reach between
Bromfield's the Dunkirk Informers two ears?

23. Whether those that set Bromfield on work, to article and inform, being as
bad as Bromfield himself, may not in due time follow his steps?

24. Whether it be likely the woman at the Welcome to Dunkirk, will ever leave
her pimping cheating over-reckoning, sell by just measures and turn honest, she
having so long been used to such trade?

25. Whether it be not a shame to the Protestant Religion, that the English in
Dunkirk must be forced to send their Children to the Papists to baptize, or
keep them unchristned, as above 30. are at this time in that Garrison? And
whether an able Orthodox Ministry there is not more requisite then in any part
of the three Nations?

26. When these matters will be amended.

FINIS.

