Enchiridion Medicum: AN ENCHIRIDION Of the Art of PHYSIC.

Methodically Prescribing Remedies In such an Order. That it may be accounted
To the Sick-man a SANCTUARY, AND To the Studious a LIBRARY: CONTAINING A
Salubrious Remedy for every Malady incident to the body of Man.

Very necessary to be known and understood of all that desire their own Health.

Written in Latin, by our learned Countryman JOHN SADLER Dr. in Physic:
Translated, revised, corrected and augmented By R. T.

London, Printed by J. C. for R. Moon at the seven Stars, and Henry Fletcher
at the three gilt Cups in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

To his worthily respected friend, Mr. Christoph. Woodhouse of BERKHAMSTEED in
the County of Hertford, Doctor in Physic.
SIR,
I Remember amongst the legenda aurea of the ancient Philosophers, it is
recorded of Aristippus, Scholar to Socrates, that Cum civibus aliquot suis
navigans naufragio es ejeotus; quum in littore vidisset figur as Mathematicos
in littore depictas: salva, inquit, res est Amici, hominum vestigia conspicio.
Et ingressus civitatem proxima investigavit, qui nam essent illic disciplinarum
studiosis, cum his ubi congressus est summa cum humanitate tractaruns non ipsum
modo, verum and etiam comites illius. etc. When he was at Sea with some of his
Countrymen, they were by Shipwreck cast upon the shore of a strange country
Aristippus perceived some Mathematical figures drawn in the sands: Be of good
comfort friends (quoth he) for I see the steps of men: assuring himself and his
company, that there he saw the Emblems of Virtue, and that the Students therein
could not be far distant; from whom they might expect courteous entertainment:
and so they found it.

Sir, I am much encouraged to present this little Piece to you, having seen
your steps; and in this tempestuous age, wherein there is a Shipwreck of almost
all delightful studies, the steps of men, of lovers of Minerva, appearing about
your coasts: I say, this comfort affords me so much confidence, as to presume
this Translation will be acceptable to you: rejoicing that some plants of
Apollo flourish in your pleasant playns; so that I desire you amongst the rest
to receive this little branch within your walls; from whence I doubt not but
you will gather profitable fruits: which is the Ambition of

Yours really to serve you, Robert Turner.
London, ult. November. 1656.
To the Reader.
Custom rather then Necessity engages me, because I must not be out of the
fashion, to put a Preface before this book; in which I shall be as brief as may
be: for I brook not Prolixity, nor long-winded Lectures: semel dictum
sapienti, sat est. Then Reader let me only tell you, (if you know not already)
that this is a Translation of the Praxis Medicorum of Doctor Sadler, with the
addition of many private Receipts and Experiments of the ablest Physicians now
in practice. Indeed I was the rather induced to put this into English, because
it was the language of a City-Doctor, that he had rather the book were burnt,
then I should see it; which I hearing of, soon procured one of them, and now
freely communicare in unto all my Countrymen; hopeing it will sprout like the
Camomile, the better being trod on; and give pleasant and profitable fruit to
all that desire it; as does

Robert Turner.
Ult. November. 1656.
The Contents Tabulated Alphabetically.
A
ASthma Page, 6. Antidotes 8. 62, 63. Astringents 24. Abortion 74. 89.
B.
Bolusses 9. 10, 11. Bladder ulcerated 12. Pain in the bladder 56. Barrenness
77. Spitting bloed 117. Bladder excoriated 128.
C.
Cordial-water 3. 4. Cholick 11. 25, 58. Choler 22. 36, 44 98. Collyries 27.
28. Condites Cordial 32. 33 Cancers 38. Cough 67. 71, 72, 73, 103, 135. Catarrh
70. 107, 135. Corns 110. Cramp 175. 237. Conception 143.
D.
Cecoctions 34 35. Dropsy 46. 47, 49, 70, 92, 116, 121. 131, 132 Esy
deliverance 57.
E.
Eyes inflamed 27. Watry-Eyes 28. Eyes ulcerated 29. Eyes dym and itching 29.
30, 31, 32.
E.
Epilepsy 51. Electuaries 51. Epithcmes 110. Pain in the Ears 125. Ecl^gme
132.
F.
Phlegm 23. 37, 99. Fevers 35. 96, 110, 115, 130. French Pox 39. 41, 54.
Falling Sickness 51. 52, 66. Flix 63. 64, 111. Feaver-hectick 78. Fomentations
101. Red Face 103.
G.
Gout 11. 107, 113, 124. Gonorrhea 54. 55. Pain in the Guts 59. Gargarismes
106. 107.
H.
Headache 24. 25, 110. To comfort the heart 57. 62. Hoarseness 69. Hicket 74.
Hemorrhoids 97.
I.
Intestines 26. Infection 34. Tellow Iaundise 97. 110. Incessions 112. Juleps
114.
K.
Lungs Corrupted 10. 75. Liver inflamed 49. 73, 97, 126.
L.
Looseness 58. 63, 64. Liver obstructed 64. Liniments 121. To stir up lust 123.
Loho^h 134.
M.
Melancholy 23. 38, 43, 45, 46, 119, 120. Suffocations of the matrix 52.
Minde-distempers 182. Matrix coming down 88. 100. Palate of the Mouth 111 Milks
128. 129. Masticatories 237. A Pessary for the Molo 143.
O.
Obstructious 42. 43 49.
P.
Physic 4. 5. Pleurisy 21. 22, 36, 37 99, 103, 117, 118, 119, 135. Plague 61.
62, 63. Palsy 67. 122. Plasters 99. Smallpox 109. Pessaries 239. Pills 142.
Q.
Quinsy 84. 107. 108.
R.
Reins ulcerated 12. 56, 80. Reins inflamed 14. 18, 19, 51, 54, 55, 102.
Rupture 20. 78.
S.
Stone 1. 2, 3, 12, 55 60 112. Stomach 7. 14 15, 16* 71. Splcen 17. 45. 97, 82.
Weak sight 67. 68. Sleep to procure 81. 101. 122. Swooning 93. Scabs 103.
Scurvy 105.
T.
Terms to bring down 7. 65, 126, 238. 239. Tumors 20. Tympany 25. To stop the
Terms 66. 175. Toothache
V.
Ventricles to strengthen 5. Urine to cool 13. 53, 129. Ulcers 12. 13. Vomiting
15. 16, 103. Venereal pain 8. 39. Urine to provoke 48. To provoke venery 65.
W.
Womb swelled 18. Watrish humors 40. 76. Wind 60. 61* 97. Such as cannot hold
their water 60. 61, 80. Worms 103, 127. Whites 106. 107, 108. Womb swelled
102.
THE Sick Man's Sanctuary: Or, the Studious Man's Library: Wherein The Remedy of
every Malady is ranged into an Alphabeticall Order.
CHAP. 1. Aquae; or, Waters.
A Water for the Stone.
TAke of Straw-berryes one pound and a half, Spirit of Wine two pound, Juice of
Lemmons three ounces; mingle them, and let them be infused for the space of
twenty days; afterward put up in convenient glasses: and the dose of it is
one ounce.

Another Water for the Stone.
Take of the Water of Camomile, the Water of Pellitory; Ivy with the Berryes,
Horseradish root, Parsley, the Water of Fennel with the roots, of Broom
Flowers, Thime, of each one pound and a half; White Wind four pound, Venice
Turpentine two pound, the Seeds of Annis, and Caraway, of each half a pound;
Grummel Seed three ounces, Cinnamon one ounce and half, the Roots of Sperage two
ounces; Let such be pulverized, as are to be: Mingle them, and distill them
according to art: the dose is two ounces and a half, with White Wind and Sugar;
of each one ounce.

A Water to disperse the Stone.
Take of the Water of Parsley, Straw-berries, the best Wine, of each two pound;
tart Maligo one pound: first mingle both the waters, and then the Wine, with
one pound of white Sugar, continually stirring of it; exposing it to the Sun
for the space of eight days: the dose is three spoonfulls morning and night
before Supper.

Another Water against the Stone.
Take the four quarters of a hare, White Wind four pound, the Flowers of
Camomile and Broom, of each one p. and a half, Juniper berries, ^he Seeds of
stone-Crop, Parsley, Grummel and Annis, of each one ounce; pure Turpentine three
ounces, Nutmeg half an ounce; distill them together: the dose is three ounc.
upon an empty stomach; and after it is taken, walk three hours.

A Cordial and heart-chearing Water.
Take the Waters of Borage, Bugloss, and Rosemary, of each half a pound;
Rose Water three pound, Maligo-Sack two pound, Cinnamon 3 ounces and half;
Nutmegs three ounc. of all the Sanders of each half an ounce; Mace, Citron
Pill, Cloves, Ivory shavings, sweet Cane, Setwel, the Roots of Enulacampane,
Angelico, of each half an ounce; Galangal three dragmes: Let these be distilled
according to art; the dose of the Water is two ounces, with one dragme of
Manus Christi dissolved therein.

Another Cordial Water.
Take of Cloves, Galanga, Aq. Mirabilis Coll. Physic. London.
Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each one dragme; Juice of
Selendine half a pound, Spirit of Wine one pound, white-VVine three pound:
infuse them twenty four hours, and draw off two pound with an Alembeck: the
dose is three spoonfulls.

A Water against the Pthysick.
Take of Pine Kernels, the Pulpe of a Capon, of each four ounces; Plantain half
a pound; St John's Wort, Betony, Violets, Sage, Dittany, the greater Comfrey, of
each three ounces; Cinnamon, Nutmegs, of each three dragmes; Liverwort,
Lungwort, of each 1 ounce; Asses milk, as much as will suffice: make thereof an
infusion, afterward let it be distilled; and the dose thereof is two ounces.

Another for the same.
Take a Capon the Guts Aq. Caponis Coll. Physic. London.
being pulled out, cut in small pieces, the fat being taken away, boiled in a
sufficient quantity of Spring Water, in a close Vessel; take of this broth 3
pound, Borage and Violet-water, of each one pound and a half, white Wine one
pound, red Rose-Leaves two dragmes and an half; the Flowers of Borage, Violets,
and Bugloss, of each one dragme; pieces of Bread hot out of the oven half a
pound, Cinnamon bruised half an ounce: still it in a glass Still according to
art: the dose of this Water is three ounces mornings and night.

A Water to corroburate the Ventricle.
Take Mace, Cloves, Galanga, sweet Cane, Mint, Wormwood, Maidenhair,
Rhabarbe; Ginger condited: Mastick, of each six dragmes; Hot water, Mint-water,
Maligo Wine, of each one pint: Let the ingredients be infused in the liquors,
and afterward distill them: the dose is one ounce, when the Stomach is faint.

A Water for the Asthma.
Take of the Decoction of French Barley five pin^s, Liquorish bruised, Raisins
of the Sun stoned, of each six ounc. Figgs 30^ blanched Almonds five ounces,
Orris root two ounces and an half, Dates 12. Maidenhair, Hyssop, Hore-hound,
Peny-royal, of each one handful; the roots of Enulacampane, Foxes Lungs, of
each two ounces; Gum ^hraganth, Fenugreek, of each one ounce; the Flowers of
Bugloss, Borage, of each two Pugills; the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, and Caraway,
of each half an ounce; Honey of Roses 12 ounces, the four greater Cool Seeds, of
each half an ounce; Saffron two dragmes: Let all these be sliced, pulverized,
and infused, and di^^illed according ^^^art upon a gentle firo who dose thereof
is two ounces every third hour.

A noble and most excellent Water, to corroborate a cold Stomach.
Take of Aqua vitae three pintes, long and black Pepper, of each two ounces;
both the Cardamoms, of each half an ounce; Ginger one ounce, Cinnamon, Mace,
Nutmeg, of each one ounce and half; Aniseed three ounces, Galanga, sweet Cane,
Cloves, of each half an ounce: let them be reduced into a powder, and infused
for a whole night, and in the next morning add Claret Wine seven pints, and so
distill it according to art: the dose hereof is two ounces in a morning fasting.

A Water to bring down the Terms.
Take of the Waters of Peni-royal, and Mugwort, of each four pints, Hyssop,
Hore-hound, Marjoran, Betony, Thime, Balm, of each one handful; the Leaves of
Bays, and Ash, of each one Pugil; Saffron one dragme, Cassia-wood two dragmes,
Myrrh one ounce, Gen^ian one dragme, Madder-roots three ounces, Orris half an
ounce, Savine one ounce, the Seeds of Annis and Fennel, of each three dragms;
Castoreum half an ounce: let them be infused in the aforesaid liquor, and
distilled according to art: the dose is three ounces with a little Sugar.

Doctor Sadlers Treacle, or Epidemical Antidote.
Take of Carret-seed two scruples; the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, Madder,
Galbanum, Staechados, all the three Sanders, Storax, Camphire, of each two
dragmes; Parsly-seed, red Roses, Peni-royal, Rue, Borage Flowers, of each one
dragm, ^astoreum two scrup. Opium two dragms, Hore-hound one dragme and half,
Bdellium, Opoponax, Aloes, Cloves, Mace, Galanga, Mastick, Bole-Armoniack,
Tormentil, Angelico, Ginger, Setwel, of each two dragms; Troches of Vipers half
an ounc. Sagapenum one dragm, Cardamoms, Rosemary, Spikenard, Scordium,
Wormwood; the lesser Centory, Mint, Hyssop, of each half a dragme; Gentian,
Bay-berryes, Myrrh, Birth-wort, Cinnamon, sweet Cane, Olibanum, Saffron, of
each half an ounce; Acasia one ounc. Aloes, Agarick, Orris, of each one dragme;
Dittany two dragms and half; the three Peppers, of each half a scrup. the Seeds
of Piony with the Roots, of each one scruple; Venice-Turpentine three ounces,
Liquorish one ounce, Rhabarbe six dragmes, Agarick three dragms, Cassia newly
extracted 3 ounc. clarified Honey four pound and half, Rhenish-Wine one pint
and half: dissolve the Gums in the Wine, and the rest finely pulverized, mingle
them all together in an earthen Vessel, fermenting it upon hot Embers, the
Vessel being close covered.

Half a dragme of this taken in two ounces of the Decoction of Betony or
Rosemary, after the first sleep, does infallibly allay the vehement pains of
the Head.

One dragme of it taken in Mugwort-water, does bring down the Terms.

It helps such as are troubled with Epileptick fits, by taking one dragme of
it, in Pyony water.

It resists poison, and obstructs it is malign influence from invading the
Vitals. If one dragme of it be taken in a draught of Carduus water.

It is good against the Collick-passions: if one dragme of it be dissolved in
White Wind, where Camomile was boiled, it cures the Dropsy, if the droptical
do take two scruples and a half in Aqua Ebuli.

It is also good against all the affections of the Lungs, if two scruples be
taken for a dose, either in Maidenhair water, or broth, upon an empty Stomach.

Boli; or, Bolusses.
A Bolus against the corruption of the Lungs.
TAke of the species of London Dispensat.
Hiera picra two scruples, Flower of Brimstone one scruple, Turpentine washed
six dragmes: mingle them upon a stone, and make it into a Bolus.

A Bolus for the Colic.
Take of the Electuary of Bay-berryes one dragme, Oil of Amber six drops, Oil
of Aniseed eight drops, Oil of Vitriol half a scruple: mingle them, and make it
into a Bolus: take it in a Wafer, moistened in a little water, upon an empty
Stomach.

A Bolus for the Gout.
Take of white Julep called Mechoachan one dragme, Diacarthemus two dragmes,
with the Syrup of Stoechados; make it into a Bolus.

Another for the same.
Take Pulvis Arthriticus one scruple and a half, Rosin of Julep six grains,
powder of Sarsaperilla half a scruple, Oil of Guaiacum four drops; and with the
Syrup of the Juice of Buckthorn-berryes, make it into a Bolus: take it fasting
in the morning.

A Bolus against the Stone.
Take Diacatholicon, Venice-Turpentine, washed in Saxafrage-water, of each half
an ounce; the four greater Cool Seeds, Parsley and Fennel, of each one scruple,
Winter Cherryes one dragme: let them be well prepared, afterward mingled,
making thereof a Bolus, and divide it into two parts for twice taking in the
morning.

A Bolus for the Ulcers of the Reins.
Take of Cassia newly extracted one ounce, Mixarum two dragmes, white
Thorne-Berryes two scruples, the Seeds of Marshmallows half a dragm: add
thereunto a little Sugar, and make thereof a Bolus; which is to be taken in a
morning, four hours at least before meat.

A Bolus for the Ulcers of the Bladder.
Take of Cassia extracted one ounce, Oxyacanth three dragmes, the four greater
Cool seeds two dragmes, Sugar as much as will suffice to make it into a Bolus,
to be taken fasting.

A Bolus to allay the heat of Urine.
Take of Turpentine ten times washed in Plantain-water half an ounce,
Diacatholicon three dragmes, Diarrhodon Abbatis one scruple, Diatri^nsantalon
half a scruple, Diatrag. Fridg. two dragms, the best Sugar three ounces; make
it into a Mass, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg twice a day.

Another for the same.
Take of the four greater Cool seeds decorticated, of each one dragme,
Confectio Hamech, Cassia extracted, of each two dragmes; Lenitium half an
ounce, Turpentine washed six dragmes, Powder of Liquorish and Rhabarbe, of each
one scruple, and with the Syrup of water Lillyes, make it into an Electuary: of
which take the quantity of a Wall-nut, morning fasting, and at four of the
clock in the afternoon, every day as long as it lasts.

Cerata; or, Cerates.
A Cerate for the inflammation of the Reins.
Take Oil of Roses, Mi^tles, of each two dragmes; Oil of Water Lillies one
ounce, red Sanders, and Mirtle-Berryes, of each one dragme; Dragons blood one
dragm, the Musilidge of Flea-bone Seed, and Quince-seed, of each two dragmes,
Campher half a dragme, Wax one ounce. let the Oil and the Wax be washed a
little with the Water of Purslain, Plautain, and Woman's Milk; and make thereof
a Cerate.

An excellent Cerate for a weak Stomach.
Take of Galens Stomachical Cerate three ounces, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each
three dragmes; sweet Cane, Gallia Moschata, of each two scruples, Mastick two
dragms, Wormwood, Mint, of each half an ounce, Aromatic Wine three dragmes,
Musk one scrup. let those be powdered that are to be beaten, and make it into a
Cerate, according to art.

Another for the same.
Take Diapalma two ounces, red Sanders two dragmes, Mastick, Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Cloves, of each one dragme, Emplastrum Caesaris half an ounce; and with Oil of
Roses and Wax, as much as will suffice to make it into a Cerate, let it be
spead upon a Leather, adding thereupon four drops of Oil of Cinnamon: let the
Cerate be quilted with Sarsnet, and so applied to the Stomach.

A Cerate against Vomiting and the Imbecility of the Ventricle.
Take of Mastick two dragms and half; Laudanum two dragmes; Coriander Seed
prepared, red Coral, Galanga, Cloves, of each two scruples; Spikenard two
dragms, Storax one dragm, Oil of VVorm-wood and Spikenard, of each a little;
Wax as much as will suffice, to make it up into a Cerate; which must be
applied to the whole Region of the Stomach.

Another Cerate against Vomiting.
Take Mastick two dragmes and half, Landanum two dragmes, Storax one dragme,
Taccamahac, ointment of Orange Flowers, of each three dragms, Coral one dragme,
red Roses two dragmes, Musk four grains, Oil of Mace one dragme, Oil of
Wormwood and Spikenard, of each a little; casting in as much Wax as will body
it into a Cerate, and so apply it to the Region of the Ventricle.

A Cerate for a faint and weak Stomach.
Take of Cardamoms half a dragme, Cloves one dragme, Galanga two scruples,
Mastick two dragmes, sweet Cane three dragmes, Nutmegs one dragme, Storax,
Landanum, Mastick, of each half an ounce; Aloes one scruple, Aloes-wood one
dragme, red Roses two dragmes, Mint, Wormwood, of each two dragmes; Oil of
Mastick and Wormwood, of each two ounces; Turpentine two dragmes, Wax one
ounce and half; make hereof a Cerate.

An Excellent Cerate for the weakness of the Stomach, Spleen and Matrix.
Take red Roses, of all the Sanders, of each one ounce; Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegs, Galanga, Spikenard, of each two dragmes; Wormwood, Mint, Marjorane,
Balm, of each one dragme; Aloes-wood two scruples, Gallia, Moschata one
dragme, Mastick two ounces, Wax four ounces, Oil of Roses one pint and six
ounces: let these be commixed into a Cerate.

A Cerate for the Spleen.
Take of Amoniacum two dragmes, Bdellium, Opoponax, of each one dragme; the
Flowers of Melilot, Camomile, Germander, Maidenhair, the Bark of the roots of
Tamariske, and Capers, the Seeds of Plantain, Lin, and Fenugreek, of each two
scruples; Oil of Capers two dragmes, fresh Butter one ounce and half, Wax one
ounce, Ship-pitch one ounce: mingle them, and make them into a Cerate.

A Cerate against the hard swelling of the Womb.
Take Figs 5. boil them in water till they become a perfect pulpe; of this
pulpe take one ounce and half, Goose-Grease one ounce, Ship-pitch, yellow Wax,
of each one dragme and half; Oil of Lillyes half an ounce, Diachilon Simplex
two ounces: melt them together, and make thereof a Cerate, to be applied to the
hard swelling of the Womb.

An excellent Cerate against Weakness, Inflammation, and pain of the Reins.
Take of white Wax four ounces, Deer-suet two ounces and half, fresh Buttor one
ounce, Oil of Roses two ounces and half, Oil of Water-Lillyes, Oil of sweet
Almonds, of each half an ounce; Oil of Mirtles three dragmes, Venice
Turpentine, washed in Plantain-water two dragmes and half; Boars-grease washed
in Rose Water six dragmes, White Wind four ounces, Vinegar of Roses one ounce,
Rose Water two ounces: boil them together till a third part of the Wine be
consumed, then take it off from the fire, and after it has stood a little, add
these following powders: Mastick two dragmes and a half, white and yellow
Sanders two scruples, Amber two dragmes, Pearl one dragme, Diatrag. Fridg. one
dragme, Coriander-Seed prepared with Vinegar, two scruples; Spodium one dragme
and a half: Incorporate them in a hot Mortar, and in the end add of the
Musilidge of Flea-bane Seed three dragmes, Campher brought into a powder three
dragms; one white of an Egg beaten with woman's milk: let all those things be
agitated in a Mortar, till they be perfectly mixed and incorporated into the
consistency of a Cerate.

A Cerate for the Tumors of the Paps.
Take Oil of Linseed eight ounces, Oil of Roses four ounces, Honey clarified
three ounces, white Wax two ounc. Bean flower four ounces, Amoniacum one ounce,
Fenugreek half an ounce, Litharge three dragmes, Sage dry half an ounce: let
the Gums be dissolved in the Vinegar, and make thereof a Cerate, according to
art.

A Cerate for a Rupture.
Take Litharge of Gold, Lapis Hematitis, Dragons-blood, Bole-Armoniack,
Galbanum, Frankincense, Costus, Sarcocolla, Mastick, Mumy, Amoniacum, of each
one ounce; Earthworms, Ship-pitch, clarified Rosin, of each two dragmes;
Turpentine three dragmes, the greater and lesser Comfrey, of each six dragmes;
red Roses, Myrrh, Aloes, of each half a dragme; Galls, Balanstians, round
Birth-wort, of each one ounce and an half; Misselto of the Oak half an ounce,
Mutton-suet one pound, red Wine and Juice of the greater Comfrey: boil the
Juice with the Sheep-suet and Gums, to the consumption of the Wine and Juice;
and when it is consumed, add the Wax and Turpentine, and last of all the
powders; and make thereof a Cerate.

Clysinata; or, Glysters.
A Glyster for a pleurisy.
TAke of Mallows, Beets, Violets, Mercury, Barley cleansed, of each one handful;
12 Damask Prunes: boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to a pint, in
which dissolve Cassia newly extracted, and red Sugar, of each one ounce; Oil of
Violets and Linseed, of each one ounce and half; the yolks of Eggs two,
Sailnitre two scruples: make thereof a Glyster.

Another for the same.
Take of common Glyster Decoction one pint; In which dissolve Catholicon one
ounce; Electuary of the Juice of Roses three dragms; Species Hierae half a
dragme; Vomiting Wine two ounces; Oil of Camomile two ounc. red Sugar one
ounce: mingle it, and make thereof a Glyster.

A Glyster against Choler.
Take of Mallows and Borage, of each one handful; the greater Cool seeds one
ounce; the Seeds of Marshmallows two dragms; sharp and tart Prunes six; the
Flowers of Borage and water Lillyes, of each one Pugill; Damask Roses two
Pugils: make thereof a Decoction to a pint; In which dissolve Catholicon and
Diaprunum Solutinum, of each six dragmes; Oil of Violets and red Sugar, of each
two ounces: and make thereof a Glyster.

A Glyster against Phlegm.
Take of the Leaves of Rue, Peni-royal, Origanum, Calamint, Sage, Hyssop, tops
of Bays, of each one handful; the Seeds of Fennel, Annis, Caraway, Cummin,
rest-Harrow, of each two dragms; the Flowers of Staechados, Rosemary, Sage,
Camomile, Melilot, of each one pugil; powder of Coloquintida one dragme and
half: boil these in Common water to a pint; In which dissolve Hiera Picra and
Benedictum Laxativum, of each two dragms; Oil of Rue one ounce and half, common
Salt one dragme: mingle it, and make thereof a Glyster.

A Glyster against Melancholy.
Take Polipody of the Oak, the roots of Mallows and Marshmallows, of each two
ounces; the Leaves of Pellitory, Drop-wort, Fumatory, Beets, Fennel, of each
one handful; black Hellebore one dragme: Senna two dragms; Epithimus,
Tamariske, Cordial Flowers, of each one Pugil: make thereof a Decoction; In
which dissolve Confection Hamech half an ounce; Pulvis Hali two scruples; Oil
of Violets and Roses, of each one ounce: mingle them, and make them into a
Glyster.

An Astringent Glyster.
Take of the Roots of the greater Comfrey, Plantain, of each half an ounc.
green Galls, and Achornes, of each three dragmes; Mirtles two dragmes: boil
them in water, and in twelve ounces of the Colature, dissolve Acacia three
dragmes; Starch, sealed Earth, Gum Arabic, of each one dragme: add thereunto
Juice of Plantain two ounc. mix them for a Glyster.

A Glyster against the pain in the Head, called Cephalalgia.
Take of Mallows, Marshmallows, Violets, Beets, Barley, of each one handful;
Damask Prunes 12. the four greater Cool Seeds, of each one dragm: boil them,
and add unto the Colature, Diacatholicon, Manna, of each one ounce; Lenitive
Electuary half an ounce: mingle them up into a Glyster without Oils; for all
unctious Substances do but retard the purgative faculty.

A Glyster against Cephalalgia, proceeding from Phlegm.
Take of Betony, Hyssop, Hore-hound, Sage, Vervain, Bay Leaves, of each one
handful; Arabian Staechados, Camomile Flowers, of each two Pugils: boil them in
water to a pint, and to the Colature add two ounces of Sugar, Diaphaenicon
three dragmes; Benedictum Laxativum two dragmes; Honey one ounce and half: mix
them together for a Glyster.

A Glyster against the Tympany and Chollick.
Take of Peny-royal, Calamint, Camomile, tops of Bays, of each one handful;
Bay-berryes, the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, and Caraway, of each six dragmes: boil
them in a sufficient quantity of water, till half be consumed; of this
Decoction take twelve ounces; In which dissolve red Sugar one ounce, Electuary
of Bay Berries, Hiera Logadij, Hiera Picra, of each half an ounce; Oil of Rue
one ounce and half, Saltpeter one dragme: mingle them into a Glyster, and to
be injected before meals.

An Astringent Glyster to the Ulcers of the Intestines.
Take of Horse-tail, Plantain, Salomons seal, Shepherds Purse, of each one
handful: boil them in burnt Milk to twelve ounces; and in the Colature dissolve
two whites of Eggs: the best Bole one dragme and half; the Juice of white Poppy
one ounce: mingle them all together, and make thereof a Glyster. Let it be
given before meals, or three full hours after.

Collyria; or, Collyries, i. e. Waters for the Eyes.
A Collyry against Ophthalmia, i. e. an Inflammation in the Eye.
TAke Musiledge of Flea-bane Seed, extracted in Rose Water, Gum Thraganth and
Arabic, of each two dragmes; the white of an Egg well beaten: mingle them, and
make thereof a Collyry; which must be used morning and night.

A Collyry corroborating the Eyes against Ophthalmia.
Take Tutty prepared two dragmes; Camphor one scruple: let them be finely
powdered, and with the Water of Roses and Fennel, make thereof a Collyry, which
use morning and night.

A Collyry for watery Eyes,
Take washed Ceruss, Sarcocolla, Acacia, Olibanum, of each two dragmes; the
Stones of Mirabolans burnt, red Coral, and white, of each one dragme; Pearl
half a dragme, the Juice of Pomgranates boiled till half be consumed, as much
as will suffice; make thereof a Collyry.

A Collyry against a cold Rheum in the Eyes.
Take of Frankincense, Mastick, Cypress-Nuts, Myrrh, Aloes, of each two
dragmes; Tutty prepared, Sarcocolla, of each one dragme and half, Dragonsblood,
white Thorn-berryes, red Roses, of each one ounce: let all these be mingled
together, and with Fennel water make them into a Collyry; which drop into the
Eyes morning and night.

A Collyry against Inflammations, Ulcers, and Rheumes of the Eyes.
Take the whites of Eggs well beaten two ounces; Rose Water and Plantain-water,
of each two ounces; Juice of Apples clarifyed half an ounce: mingle them for a
Collyry, which must be often dropped into the Eyes, at the beginning of the
Inflammation: and if there be any pain that accompanies it, then add Troches,
Albi Rhasis, without Opium, or with Opium; If the pain be sharp, one dragme:
strain it, and use it as before; there may be also added a little of Woman's
milk, to assuage the pain, or the blood of Pigeons fresh and newly let out; or
the Decoction of the Seeds of white Poppyes, with a little Saffron to correct
it.

A Collyry against the Dimness, Watryness, Redness, and Itching of the Eyes.
Take of Sugar Candy, Hepaticks, Aloes, of each two dragmes; Lapis Caliminaris
prepared five grains; Camphor one scruple; white Wine, Rose Water, Eyebright
water, Salendine, and Vervine water, of each two dragmes: mingle them, and make
them into a Collyry.

Another of the same Nature.
Take Tutty prepared, powder of Pearl, of each half a dragme; powder of Aloes
one scruple: make of these small Pills, which infuse in Rose Water, Fennel or
Vervine; and so let it be dropped into the Eyes.

A Collyry for the scowring of Ulcers, and the dispersing of the whites in the
Eyes.
Take Syrup of Roses, Sugar Candy one dragme; Hartshorn, and Goats-horn burnt,
and finely powdered, and well washed in Rose Water, of each half a dragme; the
water of Salendine and Fennel, of each two ounces: mingle them well together.

A Collyry appeasing pain.
Take the water of Violets and Plantain, of each half an ounce; Troch Albi
Rasis with Opium, the whites of Eggs, the Juice of Fenugreek, washed in
Rose Water, of each half an ounce: mingle them.

A Collyry cleansing the Eyes.
Take of Frankincense, Myrrh, of each one scruple; Tutty prepared, Antimony
washed, of each half a scruple; and with the Juice of Salendine, dried in the
shade, make thereof a Collyry.

A Collyry for such as are pestered with the small Pox.
Take of Eyebright water one pint and half; put it upon the fire, and when it
boyles, cast into it Liquorish very well bruised two ounces: remove it from the
fire, letting it stand till it is cold: then adding thereunto the whites of
three Eggs well beaten, with two ounces of Plantain-water, make thereof a
Collyry.

Another for the same.
Substract a thin Musilidge from Quince-seeds, with white Rose Water, hanging
therein a small Nodule of Saffron, to give it a tincture, and let it be dropped
by degrees into the Eyes.

Condita; or, Condites, or Opiates.
A cordial Condite.
TAke of the Conserve of Rosemary Flowers, Bugloss, Borage, Succory,
Maidenhair, of each two dragmes; Citron-Pill condited one dragme and half;
species Diamosk Dulcis, Diarrhodon Abatis, the three Sanders, of each half a
dragme; Leaves of Gold Nu. 6. and with white Sugar, make it up into a condite,
covering it over with Gold: the dose is the quantity of a Nut, when the Stomach
is ill.

A Corroborating Condite.
Take of the Conserve of Water Lillies, Bugloss, Roses, Citron-pill Condited,
of each half an ounce; powder of Gemmes compound; Diambre Diamargaritan. Fridg.
of each half a scrup. of the Bone in the heart of a Heart, the Seeds of Citrul,
and Carduus, Tormentill, of each one scruple; the shavings or Filings of an
Unicornes Horn seven grains, Bezoar Stone six grains, five Leaves of Gold, with
as much white Sugar as will suffice, as will make it up into a Condite.

A restorative Condite.
Take of the Conserve of the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, of each half an ounc.
Confection of Alkermes half a dragm; Species Aromaticum Rosatum, of the
fragments of precious stones, both the Corals, of each half a dragm; Oxgyacanty
a dragme and half; Conserve of the Flowers of Bugloss and Borage, of each one
dragme and half; Oil of Cinnamon three drops: mingle them in a white Marble
Mortar.

An Antidotive Condite, or preservative against Infection.
Take of Mithridate two scruples; Venice Treacle one scruple; Conserve of
Wood Sorrel, and Mary-golds, of each one ounce; balm half an ounce; Mirabolans
Condited, Citron-pill, and Lemon-pill Condited, of each six dragmes; the powder
of Setwell, and Tormentil, of each two scruples; and with the Syrup of
Wood-sorel, and white Sugar, make it into a Condite; taking the quantity of a
Wall-nut, every morning fasting.

Decoctiones; or, Decoctions.
A Decoction against a hot burning Fever.
TAke of Succory with the Roots, Sorrel, Endive, of each one handful; the four
greater Cool-seeds, of each one dragme; Grass roots and Sparagrass macerated in
Vinegar, of each three dragmes: boil them in a sufficient quantity of water,
till it comes to a pint: add unto the clear Colature, white Sugar, and Juice
of Lemmons, of each three ounces: or in the end of the Decoction, add sharp
Vinegar and Honey well scummed, of each three ounces; white Sanders two scrup.
mingle them.

Another for the same purpose.
Take Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Borage, Violet Leaves, Straw-berry Leaves, and
Endive, of each one handful; Hartshorn, and Ivory shavings, of each half an
ounce; Scorzonery roots one ounce; well bruised Succory root half an ounc.
Citron-seed two scruples: boil all these in three pints of Barly-water, till a
third part be consumed; add thereunto Juice of Lemmons two spoonfulls: strain
it, and to the Colature add Aquae Cordialis Fridg. Saxoniae four ounces: mingle
them.

A Decoction against Choler.
Take the Roots of Garden Endive, Bugloss, Liquerish, the five opening Roots,
of each half an ounce: Maidenhair, and Violet Flowers, of each one handful;
the Seeds of Smallidge, and Fennel, Lavender, Egrimony, of each two dragmes;
Mastick one scruple, Raisins stoned four handfuls; Barley cleansed one handful:
Tamarinds and Damask prunes, of each one ounce and half: mingle them, and make
them into a Decoction.

A pectoral Decoction against a Pleurisy.
Take Raisins stoned, Liquerish, of each half a dragme; the Seeds of Annis and
Fennel, of each two dragms; Figgs Nu. vj. Dates one ounce; Barley cleansed two
handfuls, Hyssop, Maidenhair, of each two handfuls; Florentine Orris one
ounce: make a Decoction thereof, till half of the Liquor be consumed.

Another for the same.
Take Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, Lungwort, Liverwort, Garden Scurvigrass, of each
one handful; Raisins stoned four ounces, Liquerish half an ounce, Bears tooth
rasped two dragmes, Stone-Horse Dung one ounce, Figgs three ounces: make of
these a Decoction in spring water, boiling them till half the water be consumed.

A Decoction against Phlegm.
Take Hyssop, Betony, Hore-hound, Origanum, the Leaves of Bays, and Rosemary,
of each one Pugill, Guaiacum, (An Indian-wood so called) grossly powdered:
Sassafras, Sarsaperilla, of each one ounce, the Seeds of Fennel and Annis,
Juniper-berryes, of each two dragmes: the roots of Fennel and Persly,
Maidenhair, of each half an ounce; Orris three dragmer, Honey two ounces and
half: mingle them, and boil them in water, till half be consumed, and
afterward repose it for your use.

A Decoction against Melancholy.
Take of the Flowers of Borage and Bugloss, of each one ounce; Polipody, i. e.
Epithimus, Staechados, Maidenhair, Raisins stoned, the Bark of the roots of
Capers, the Bark of Tamarisk, the Bark of Ash, Fumatory, the flowers of
Camomile, of each one ounce: boil these in three pints of water, till half be
consumed.

A Carminative Decoction.
Take of the flowers of Camomile, Staechados, Rue, Melilot, tops of Bays, of
each half a handful; the seeds of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, Bay Berries bruised,
the seeds of Dill, Ladies Rose, and Rue, of each three dragmes: boil all these
in four pints of Water till half be consumed, and so preserve it for Glysters.

A Decoction for a Cancer.
Take of fresh water Crabs Calcined, and beaten into very fine powder two
dragmes, Self-heal, Sanicle, Bugle, Fluellen, of each one handful: boil them in
three pints of water till half be consumed: in the end adding Crabs eyes and
claws glosly pulverized, of each two dragmes; white Wine one pint: then strain
it for future or present use.

A Decoction against the Venereal Dolors.
Take the Raspings of Guaiacum four ounces, the Bark of the same one ounc.
Infuse them in four pints of Fountain water, according to art: afterward boil
them till half be consumed; adding toward the end of the Decoction,
Maidenhair, Succory, Borage, Carduus, of each one handful; Raisins stoned,
Liquerish, of each three dragms; Melon-seed two dragmes: boil them, and after
one Ebulution strain it: of this Decoction, take half a pint warm in hemorning,
and sweat after it.

A Decoction against Serose or watrish Humors.
Take of Lignum Guaiacum two ounc. Sarsaperilla one ounce and half, Sassafras
half an ounce: let them be infused in four pints of Fountain water; afterward
boiled till half be consumed, and let the Colature be kept in a glass, taking
every morning seven ounces very warm.

Another of the same Nature.
Take of Sarsaperilla cut small and cleansed from his Filaments three ounc.
Infuse it in Fountain water eight pints, for the space of eighteen hours: then
^dd thereunto Gum Guaiacum two ounces; boil them tillhalf be consumed: let the
Colature be put into Bottles, and drink thereof eight ounces in the morning,
sweating after it.

A Decoction for the French Disease.
Take of Guaiacum eight ounces, the Bark of the same, Sarsaperilla, of each
four ounces: bruise them very small, and infuse them in a pot close covered, in
twelve pints of water; then boil them till a third part be consumed, adding
thereunto Liquerish three ounc. Raisins stoned two ounces, Hartshorn one
ounce, Gum Guaiacum half an ounce: strain it, and let the Colature be preserved
in Glass Bottles, drinking of it for ordinary drink.

A purging Decoction of the same Nature.
Take Sarsaperilla, Lignum Guaiacum, of each three ounces; the Bark of the same
two ounces, Polipody, Epithimus, of each one ounce and half: Infuse them, and
boil them in six pints of Fountain water, till half be consumed; and at the end
of the Decoction add Alexandrian Senna two ounces; strain it, and let the
Colature be preserved in Bottles close stopped, drinking thereof half a pint
every other morning.

A Decoction opening obstructions.
Take of the five Opening Roots, Liquerish, Rose Leaves, the middle Bark of
Ash, the Bark of the Root of Capers, of each one ounce; Orris Root, fresh
Cinnamon, sweet Cane, of each half an ounce; Maidenhair, Wormwood, Hyssop
Carduus, Hore-hound, Fennel, Egrimony, of each one handful, the Seeds of
Annis, Ladies Rose, and Smallidge, of each two dragmes; Senna picked and
cleansed three ounc. dry Soldanella half an ounce, the Seed of dwarf Elder,
Gummeous Turbith six dragmes, Broom Flowers, Tamaris, of each one Pugil: boil
them in water where steel has been quenched three pints, to which add about
the end of the Decoction half a pint of White Wind: strain it, and with red
Sugar as much as will suffice, dulcify it, and it may be made into an Apozeme
by adding species Aromaticum Rosatum.

Another Decoction much of the same Nature.
Take Grass roots, Succory roots, Bugloss and Asparagrass, of each one ounce;
the middle Bark of the roots of Capers and Tamaris, of each three dragmes; the
Leaves of Borage and Bugloss, of each two handfuls; Caterach, Maidenhair, of
each one handful, Polipody two ounces, Raisins stoned one ounce, the Seeds of
Annis and Fennel, of each two ounces, the roots of Liquerish six dragms, the
three Cordial Flowers, of each one Pugil: first infuse them, and then boil them
in a sufficient quantity of clear water to three pints: strain it, and clarify
the Colature; which may be made into an Apozeme, by adding species Diatrion
Santalon three dragmes, and Syrup of Borage three ounces.

A Decoction against Melancholy.
Take Sparagrass roots, Hops, the middle Bark of Elder and Ash, Succory root,
of each one ounce; Scabiouse, Egrimony, Borage, Bugloss, Fumatory, Dropwort,
Maidenhair, of each one handful; sweet Prunes, Nu. vij. Aniseed two dragmes,
Succory Flowers one Pugil: boil them all in Whey, a sufficient quantity, till
it come to a pint and half.

A Decoction gently purging Sordid Humors.
Take of Rhabarbe, Senna, of each one dragme and half; Spikenard half a
scruple: Infuse them in a sufficient quantity of White Wind upon hot Embers,
strain out four ounces, add to the Colature Diacatholicon three dragms,
Confectio Hamech one dragme, Juice of Roses half a dragme: mingle them for a
Decoction.

A Decoction gently purging Choler.
Take Senna half an ounce, Pulpe of Tamarinds two dragms, the Cordial Flowers,
of each one Pugill; sweet Fennel Seed one dragme: boil them in a sufficient
quantity of pectoral Decoction, adding of the best Rhabarbe one dragme,
Chebulan Mirabalens half a dragme, Ginger, Squinant, of each eight grains;
Citron Pill one scruple: strain out three ounces and an half; add thereunto
Manna half an ounce, Syrup of Roses with Agarick half an ounce, Oil of Sulphur
three drops.

Another much of the same virtue, rectifying the blood, purging Melancholy, and
removing the obstructions of the Spleen.
Take Senna one ounce and half, Epithimus half an ounce, Polipody of the Oak
half an ounce, Rhabarbe two dragmes, Agarick one dragme and half, sweet Fennel
Seed three dragms, Caraway two dragmes, the Flowers of Violets six Pugils, tops
of Borage two handfuls, Russetins in Number two Decorticated, Prunes and
Currants, of each three ounces: boil them and infuse them in a sufficient
quantity of water; take of the Colature seven ounces, divide it into two parts:
in the first dissolve Sir. Magist. add Melanch. one ounce, Juice of Oranges
three dragmes, the compound water of Balm half a dragme: take it in the morning
early: three days after, take the second part, to which add Diaphaenicon two
dragmes, Syrup of Violets one ounce, Juice of Oranges one spoonful: mingle
them. But indeed these rather ought to be ranked in the Tribe of Potions, then
Decoctions.

A Decoction purging Melancholy.
Take Dropwort, Borage, of each one handful and half; Raisins stoned,
Epithimus, Polipody, Indian Mirabolens one dragme and half, Senna two dragmes:
make a Decoction, and to the expression add Cassia one ounce, Confectio Hamech
two dragmes, Syrup of Roses one ounce: mingle them and make it into a Haustus,
and to be taken in the morning; ordering the Body as the accustomed manner is
in all Purgations.

A Decoction against the Dropsy.
Take Lignum Sanctum one pound and half, China root one ounce, Fountain water
sixteen pints, White Wind two pints; to which add the roots of Asparagrass,
Fennel, Smallidg, Grass, Parsley, Butchers Broom, Madder, and Orris Roots, of
each two ounces; the Roots of Asarabacca, the Bark of the Roots of Tormentil,
Tamaris and Capers, of each one ounce; Egrimony, both Succories, Ceterach, or
spleenwort, and Maidenhair, of each one handful; Soldanella one handful and
half, the seed of Annis, Bishop-weed, of each three dragmes; Melon-seed bruised
one ounce, 20 Raisins stoned, Choice Cinnamon three dragmes, red Cicers two
Pugills: make a Decoction of these, ^^ill one part thereof be consumed; then
strain it, and to the Colature add yellow Sanders, Cinnamon and Orris root, of
each one ounce: fiat Decoctio.

A Decoction against Droptical Humors.
Take Lignum Guaiacum half a pound, the Leaves of Borage, Bugloss, Camomile,
Hyssop, Sage, Parsley, of each one handful and half, Egrimony two handfuls, the
Roots of Fennel, and Parsley, the Pith from within being taken away, of each
two; Orris root two ounc. Liquerish four ounces, Polipody of the Oak three
ounces, sweet Fennel seed four ounces, Bay-berryes two ounces, Cinnamon, Nutmeg,
Ginger, Mace, of each two dragmes: let the roots, the species, and the seeds be
bruised, and put into an earthen Pipkin, with thirteen pints of Water, and four
pints of white Wine; covering it close, putting it into a Kettle with water,
that it may stand in a Bath, with a good fire under it, for the space of twenty
four hours: afterward make an Expression, and take of the Colature, Mornings,
Noons, and Nights.

A Decoction provoking Urine.
Take of the Bark or rind of the Roots of Fennel, Parsley, Butcherbroom, of each
two ounces; Ciperus half an ounce, the Seeds of Bishop-weed, Coriander, Parsley,
Mastick, Carret, Annis, Cardamoms, Cummin, of each one dragme: boil them, and
add unto the Colature as much Sugar as will suffice to sweeten it.

A Decoction against the Inflammation and Opilation of the Liver.
Take of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, Egrimony, Endive, Succory, Fumatory, of each
one handful; the roots of Parsley and Fennel, of each one ounce; Raisins stoned
four ounces, Dates one ounce, Mace three dragmes, Cinnamon half an ounce,
Aniseed two dragmes, Fountain Water, and White Wind, of each three pints; Sugar
one pound, Liquerish one ounce: mingle them, and boil them, till half be
consumed: then strain it; and of the Colature after it is settled, take before
meals three ounces, for ten days together.

A Decoction against such Diseases as proceed from humidity.
Take Lignum Guaiacum six ounces, the Bark of the same two ounces, Sarsaperilla
two ounces and half, Chiny Root one ounce, sour Dock-root one ounce, Rhabarbe
one dragme, Turbith half an ounce, Agarick half an ounce, Polypody, Liquerish,
of each four ounces: the Pith of the Seeds of Meadow-Saffron half an ounce, the
Bark of Capers-root one ounce, the five opening roots, of each half an ounce;
Sage three handfuls, Roman Wormwood one handful and an half, Anniseed two
ounces, Honey one pound, Cinnamon six ounces, White Wind four pints,
Fountain Water sixteen pints: Infuse them a whole night, and boil them for a
good space: afterward strain them, and let the Colature be preserved in a
vessel closely covered: and take thereof every morning four ounces fasting, and
before Dinner and Supper three ounces: and after that the Decoction is spent,
boil the ingredients over again, with the same quantity of Water as before;
adding Wine two pints, and Honey of Roses two pound; of which take the same
quantity as before: only this latter Decoction must be drunk for thirty days
together; And every day for ten of the first, to sweat one hour: and if the
Body be costive, in the taking of the aforesaid Decoction; then use this
following mixture. Take of the aforesaid Decoction three ounces, Manna one
ounce, Syrup of Roses one ounce, Confectio Hamek two dragmes: mingle them into
a Ha^stus.

Electuaria; or, Electuaries.
An Electuary against the Epilepsy.
TAke fresh Pellitory half a pound; scummed Honey three pound, Ginger one ounce;
Cloves, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each five dragmes: mingle them, and make them into
an Electuary.

Another for the same.
Take of the powder of Pyony-root two ounces, of the powder of a Man's Skull two
dragmes, Elkes Claw one dragme; the Bird Jay dried and burnt one ounce and
half, Nutmeg and Mace, of each two scruples; Agarick six drag. Ginger four
scruples: Let all these be finely powdered, and mixed with four ounces of white
Sugar; dissolved in Aquae Langii: make it up into an Electuary, adding
thereunto four or five drops of Spirit of Amber: take of this every morning the
quantity of a Nutmeg.

An Electuary for the Epilepsy, and Suffocation of the Matrix.
Take of the foecula of Briony-Root half a pound, Honey, Raisons stoned, of each
three pound; baked Squils, Pine-Kernels bruised, of each one ounce and half;
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Mace, Ginger, Cardamomes, of each two dragms; Cloves, Long
Pepper, Staechados, of each one dragme and half; the Seeds of Rest-harrow,
Salgem, Gallia Moschata; of each one dragme; Spicknard half a dragme, Agarick
three dragmes: let it be given after six times taking, from two dragmes to
three.

Another of the same Nature.
Take of Pellitory, Rest-Harrow, Staechados, of each ten dragmes; Agarick five
dragmes, Cardamoms, round Birth-wort, Liquerish, the Seeds of Balsamit, Piony,
of each two dragmes; the Juice of Squils and Honey, of each equal parts: Let
them all be cocted to the Consistency of an Electuary.

An Electuary for the Reins and the Bladder.
Take Diaphaenicum two dragmes, Juice of Roses one dragme and half, Cassia half
a dram, Rhabarb half a dragme, Venice-Turpentine washed in Rose Water,
Conserve of Violets, of each three dragms; Treacle one dragme and half,
Diamargarit Frig. Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diambres, Diatrion Piperion; of each one
scruple; of all the Saunders half a dragme, Citron-pill one dragme, Sugar as
much as will suffice to make it into an Electuary.

An Electuary purging the Bladder, and allaying the heat of Urine.
Take Turpentine well washed in the Water of Marshmallows, Cassia newly
extracted, of each one ounce and half; Pulp of Tamarinds six dragms, Troches
Gordonii, Melon-seed Excorticated, of each three dragmes, Cucumber and
Pepon-Seeds, of each two dragmes; Rhabarbe thin cut, and macerated in Plaintain
water two dragmes: beat them together into an Electuary, with Syrup of Water
Lillyes, as much as will suffice: of which take three quarters of an ounce
every morning.

An Electuary cleansing the Reins, corrupted with a Gonorrhea.
Take Diacatholicon Lenitivum, of each one ounce; Confection Hamech six dragm.
Species Diatraganth, Frig. three dragmes, Rhabarbe finely powdered one dragme,
Liquorish, Aniseed, of each one scruple; washed Turpentine one ounce and half,
Cassia three dragmes: and with Syrup of Marshmallows make it into an
Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg, twice in a day.

An Electuary proper for those who labor under the French Disease.
Take of Aloes-wood, Lignum, Guaiacum, Sarsaperilla in powder, of each half an
ounce; the Seeds of Fennel, Carduus, Citron, of each two dragmes; the Roots of
Setwel, Birth-wort, and Gentian Cinnamon, of each one dragm. and half, Species
Diatrion, Santal-Diarrhodon, Abatis, of each one dragme and half; Mithridate
half an ounce, Conserve of Succory, and Borage, of each half an ounce; and with
half a pound of Syrup of Succory, make it into an Electuary: of this, take the
quantity of a Nutmeg twice in a day.

An Electuary purging both the Reins and Bladder.
Take Cassia newly Extracted from the Cane half an ounce, powder of Rharbarb
half a dragme, Agnus Castus seed in powder two scruples, Catholicon half an
ounce, Venice Turpentine washed in Rose Water one ounce; mingle them: take of
this two dragm. wrapped in a wet wafer twice a day.

An Electuary against the Stone.
Take of the four great Cool seeds, of each half an ounce; the Seeds of
Purslain, Endive, white Poppy, of each one dragme, powder of Marsh-Mallow Root
two dragmes, Saxafrage, Grumwel-Seed, of each one dragme and half; Winter
Cherryes, Senna, of each half an ounce; Sugar dissolved in Saxafrage and Parsley
Water four ounces: make it into an Electuary; take the quantity of a Nutmeg
three times a day.

An Electuary against the pains of the Bladder and Reins.
Take Venice-Turpentine, Cassia lately drawn, of each one ounce; Juice of
Liquerish, Marsh-mallow-seed, of each two dragms; Plantain-seed half a drag.
Winter Cherryes one dragme and an half, the Seeds of Melon, Cucumber and Gourd,
of each one dragme; and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Marshmallows,
make it up into an Electuary, of which take the quantity of a Chestnut three
times a day, first Morning, Noon and Night.

An Electuary against the hard Labor of a woman in Travel.
Take Myrrh, Castor, Storax, of each one scruple; Savine one scruple and half:
Cynamon, Cassia-lignea, of each one dram: Amber three drachms. Let these be
finely powdered, and mixed with a sufficient quantity of Sugar dissolved in
Savine-water, to make it up into an Electuary. The Dose is a dram or a half.

A Heart-chearing Electuary.
Take of Red-Roses, Aloes-wood, of each half an ounce: Mace, Nutmeg,
Gallia-Moschata, Cardamomes both the sorts, of each one dram: Cyperus two
drachms and an half: Cloves, Asarabacca, Mastich, Spikenard, of each one dram
and half: Mosch seven grains, Sugar dissolved in Cordial-water, and Syrup of
Cynamon, of each equal parts, as much as will suffice to make it up into an
Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg.

An Electuary against a sharp Looseness.
Take old Conserve of Roses two ounces, Pulvis Diamarg. frig. one dram and an
half, Bole-armeniack, Red Coral, of each two drachms: Sugar dissolved in
Cynamon-water, as much as will suffice.

Another for the same.
Take Rhabarb dried well by the fire and powdered two drachms, Pomegranate-pill
and flowers, of each one dram: Mastich and Olibanum, of each one scruple:
dried Turpentine in fine powder three drachms, Conserve of old Red-Roses three
ounces; and with syrup of Quinces make it into an Electuary. The Dose is two
drachms three or four times a day.

An Electuary against the pain of the Cholick.
Take of Agarick half an ounce, the roots of Orris and round Birthwort, Hyssop,
Mastich, Squinant, Carpobalsamum, Aniseed, of each half a dram: Gummeous
Turbith finely powdered and sifted, the weight of them all; and with honey as
much as will suffice to incorporate it into an Electuary. The Dose is half an
ounce.

An Electuary against the pain occasioned from the stopping of the small guts,
termed by Physicians Iliaco Passio.
Take of Cumin-seed, Assa-foetida, Caraway, Birthwort, the flowers of
Chamomile, Queens crown, Wormwood, Agarick, of each ten drachms: the three
Peppers, and Opium, of each one dram: Saffron, Carpobalsamum, Squinant,
Cynamon, of each two drach* the roots of Asarabacca, and Gentian, of each one
dram. Let these be pulverized and sifted; and with a syrup made of honey, and
the decoction of Squinant, Queens crown, and Chamomile, make thereof an
Electuary. The Dose whereof is two drachms, or three, or four, according to the
constitution and quality of the person taking it; which must be dissolved in
the decoction of Aniseed.

An Electuary dispelling Wind, and windy vapors.
Take Mastich, Aniseed, Ginger, of each one dram: best Turbith two drachms;
and with honey scummed, make it into an Electuary. The Dose of it is two
drachms.

An Electuary for the Fits of the Cholick and the Stone.
Take Turbith, Acorus, of each six drachms: Cumin, Caraway, of each one dram
and half: Agarick, Orris, Birthwort, of each six drachms: Origanum, Hssyop, of
each three drachms: Mastich, Squinant, of each one dram. Let these be
powdered and sifted; and with honey clarified made into an Electuary. The Dose
hereof is two drachms drunk in a glass of burnt Claret.

An Electuary for such as cannot hold their Water.
Take dried Spodium, Aloes-wood, the seeds of Purslain, Gum-Arabick,
Gum-Thraganth, Barberries, Turbith, Endive-seed, Bole-Armeniack of each four
drachms; and with honey of Roses make it into an Electuary. The Dose of it is
one dram every morning.

An Electuary against the Plague.
Take of all the Sanders, Lignum-Aloes, Cynamon, Nutmegs, of each one dram:
round Birthwort, the roots of Tormentil, Storax, of each two scruples: the
flowers of Rosemary, Bugloss, Borage, Violets, of each half a pugil:
Enula-campane, Angelico, of each half a dram: the fragments of the precious
stones, Pearl, Ivory, Coral, Gallia Moschata, of each half a scruple: Camphyr
six grains, Conserve of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Borage, of each two
ounces; and with the syrup of condited Citron, make it up into an Electuary.
The Dose is the quantity of a Chestnut in the morning.

An Electuary to revive the spirits.
Take species Diambrae, de Gemmis, Diamosch. dulcis, of each two scruples:
Laetificans Galeni one dram, Confectio de Hyacinthio one ounce, Confectio
Alkermes three ounces, Ambergrise four grains, two condited Nutmegs; and with
syrup of Gilliflowers make it up into an Electuary. The Dose is one dram in a
cup of burnt Claret.

A Preservative.
Take Manus Christi perlat. one ounce, Saphyr, Smaragd, of the bone in the
heart of a Heart, Saffron, Amber, shavings of Ivory, of each half a drach.
species de Gemmis, Diamarg. calid. Diarrhodon Abbatis, Aromaticum Rosatum, of
each one dram and half: Conserve of Roses, Citron-pill condited, Conserve of
Sorrel, Bugloss, Violets, of each one ounce: Sugar one ounce and half. Make it
into an Electuary with syrup of Cynamon.

An Electuary or Antidote against the Plague.
Take an Egg, out of which take the white; and put into the place where the
white was, one scruple of Saffron; which dry in the Egg so long, till it may
be powdered; adding thereunto Tormentil, Setwel, Angelico, Dittany, round
Birthwort, of each two drach. Sealed Earth one dram, Bole-Armeniack,
Citron-pill, Myrrh, dry Wormwood, dry Rue, Bugloss and Borage-flowers, Pearl,
of each half a scruple: Treacle fourteen ounces; which, together with
Carduus-water, make into the consistencie of an Electuary. The Dose is one
dram.

An Electuary against the Flix Lienteria.
Take Pearl one dram, Frankincense half a dram, Mastich one drach. and
half, Nutmeg, Mace, of each half a dram: red Coral, Bole-Armeniack, Lapis
Haematitis, of each two drachms. Make thereof a fine powder; afterward commix
it with syrup of Mint one ounce. Let it stand in a warm place for three hours;
afterward, add Conserve of old Roses three ounces, and with syrup of Mint
make it into an Electuary, covering it over with leaf-gold. The Dose is about
the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time.

An Electuary for the Looseness Diarrhaea.
Take of the meat or medulla of Quinces condited one ounce, preserved Citron
half an ounce, red Coral, Pomegranate-pill, of each three drach. Acacia one
ounce, Diamargarit. frigid. two drachms, Myrcle-seed one dram: Let them all
be powdered, and made into an Electuary with syrup of Quinces.

An Electuary for the obstruction of the Liver.
Take of the Conserve of the roots of Smallage, Conserve of the flowers of
Succory, Maidenhair, of each half an ounce: the species of Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Diatrionsantalon, of each two drachms: Troches of Egrimony one dram; and with
syrupo Byzantino make it up into an Electuary: of which take half an ounce for
a Dose.

An Electuary for the impotencie of Coition; or rather, to provoke to Venery.
Take of Diasatyrion three ounces, preserved Ginger, the brains of Sparrows and
Pigeons, Pine-kernels, Pistack-Nuts, Nettle-seed, Pepper, Cynamon, Rocket-seed,
of each one drach. and with the syrup of Ginger condited, make it up into an
Electuary; of which eat at pleasure.

An Electuary provoking the Terms.
Take Borax two drachms, Cassia-wood two scruples, Saffron three grains,
Troches of Myrrh one dram, Triferae magnae sine opio two scruples,
Juniper Berries one dram, Venice-Treacle two drachms, syrup of Mugwort half
an ounce, Sugar as much as will suffice to make it up into an Electuary.

An Electuary to stay the Courses.
Take Diarrhodon Abbatis half a dram, Diacynamomi one scruple, Diacorallii
half a scruple, Balanstians one dram, Bole-Armeniack, two scruples, sealed
Earth half a dram, Conserve of Comfrey, old Roses, of each half an ounce;
Sugar as much as will suffice: mingle them, and make it up into an Electuary;
of which take half an ounce for a Dose.

An Electuary against the Falling Sickness, called Morbum Comitialem.
Take Diacori three ounces, species Diamoschi, Aloes-wood, of each half a
dram, Cubebs six grains: Piony-seeds, Missleto, Man's scull prepared, Peacocks
dung, of each half an ounce: Conserve of Bugloss one ounce, Sage half an ounce.
Mingle them well together. Of this take the quantity of a N^^ three or four
times a day.

An Electuary against the Palsy.
Take Lavender-tops dry one ounce, Spike half an ounce. Let them be cut and
bruised, and finely beaten, and with half an ounce of Sugar dissolved in
Betony-water, adding thereunto Cynamon six drachms, Mace two drachms, Cloves
one dram. Mingle them, and make them into an Electuary, with syrup of
Stoechados. The Dose is two drachms.

Another of the same virtue, to prevent it.
Take of Acorus one dram, Ginger two ounces and an half, Peper, Pellitory, of
each one ounce: Castoreum ten drachms, Assafoetida, Opoponax, of each six
drachms: honey scummed, twice the weight of all the rest. Make them into an
Electuary; The Dose whereof is one dram every morning.

An Electuary for the weakness and dimness of Sight.
Take of the seeds of Fennel one pound and half, Mountain-Withy half a pound,
Germander half an ounce, the roots of Selendine five drachms, the seeds of
Anise, Smallage, Parsley, of each one ounce and half: Penyroyal, Hyssop,
Borage-flowers, Juniper Berries, Saxifrage, of each one ounce and half; and
with honey scummed, let it be made into an Electuary. This very Medicine cured
a certain woman who was almost blind for nine years together. The Dose of it
is half an ounce in the morning.

An Electuary for an Inflammation and pain in the eyes.
Take of the waters of Roses, Eyebright, and Vervain, of each half an ounce:
Tutty prepared one dram, Mother of Pearl finely powdered two drachms, powder
of Salendine, Fennel, Roses, Vervain, Aniseed, of each half an ounce. Make them
into an Electuary, with a little honey, if need require. The Dose is one dram.

For a Cough and Hoarseness.
Take Diapenid. Diareos, of each one ounce: the pulp of Raisins, and juice of
Liquorice, Hyssop, of each half an ounce: syrup of Horehound as much as will
suffice to make it up into an Electuary; of which take the quantity of a
Chestnut at a time.

Another for the same.
Take Lac Sulphuris rightly prepared ten grains, Balsamum Sulphuris two grains,
flower of Sulphur half an ounce, Liquorish and Enula-campane, of each three
drachms: Conserve of old Roses, Lohoch Sanum, Lohoch of Foxes lungs, of each
one ounce: oil of sweet Almonds as much as will suffice to make it up into an
Electuary, adding thereunto spirit of Sulphur twenty drops; of which take the
quantity of a Chestnut every morning and night, drinking a draught of Mace-Ale
after it.

An Electuary for the Dropsy.
Take a little quantity of Ginger, Salt of Wormwood one ounce: incorporate it
with a sufficient quantity of the oil of Salt, to make it up into an Electuary;
of which take every day six grains.

An Electuary for a Catarrhe, or, a Rheum distilling from the brain to the
throat and stomach.
Take of the oldest Conserve of Roses one ounce, Olibanum one dram and half,
powder of Liquorish one dram, Sugar Candy one ounce, syrup of Hyssop as much
as will suffice to make it into an Electuary; of which take the quantity of a
Nut often in a day.

Another of the same virtue.
Take of Lohoch sanum, and Conserve of Roses, of each half an ounce; Laudanum
four grains, juice of Liquorish three drachms, Philonum Persicum six grains;
and with the syrup of Poppies make it into an Electuary; of which take the
quantity of a Nut every night going to bed.

An Electuary for all sorts of Coughs.
Take Liquorish, Hyssop dry, Orris, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, of each one ounce;
Origanum three drachms, Foxes lungs prepared one ounce and half, Honey scummed,
Sugar, of each six ounces: reduce them into a powder, and make them into an
Electuary with two ounces of Aqua vitae; and eat thereof when occasion serves.

An Electuary to purge the stomach of gross humors.
Take of Maidenhair fresh three ounces, the roots of Orris, Pine-kernels,
Liquorish, Carpobalsamum, Horehound, Chamomile-flowers, round Birthwort, of
each one ounce and half. Let them be finely beaten and sifted, and with the
syrup made of Honey and the decoction of Maidenhair, (boiled together to a
consistency) make it into an Electuary; of which take three drach. in a draught
of the decoction of Hore-hound, Liquorish, and Hyssop.

An Electuary for an old Cough.
Take of the juice of Horehound half an ounce, Liquorish one ounce, round
Birthwort six drachms, flower of Sulphur two drachms, Sugar Candy half an
ounce. Make it into an Electuary with Honey.

Another for a continued Cough.
Take of Aniseed two drachms, Costus two scruples, Myrrh one dram, Galbanum,
white Peper, Henbane, Opium, juice of Liquorish, of each one dram and half;
Saffron half a drach. syrup of Hyssop as much as will suffice to bring it to
the consistencie of an Electuary; part of which must be exhibited going into
bed.

Another of the same nature.
Take Diapenidii, Diatraganthi, Sugar of Violets, of each half an ounce: with
the syrup of Liquorish make it into an Electuary. The Dose is two drachms.

A pectoral Electuary.
Take Lohoch of Pine-kernels one ounce, Diatraganth frigid. two drach. Orris
root half an ounce, Green-Ginger one ounce, Liquorish and Enula-campane in
powder, of each one dram and half: Sugar Candy in powder two ounces, pulp of
Roses three ounces, pulp of Raisins one ounce, tincture of Saffron, Aqua
coelestis, of each one scruple; spirit of Vitriol fifteen drops: mix them up
according to art, into an Electuary; adding, if need require, syrup of Jujubees
to mollify it; of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg, three times a day.

An Electuary for the afflictions of the Liver and Breast.
Take of the pulp of Raisins stoned four ounces, Saffron one dram, Calamus
Aromaticus, Bdellium, Squinant, of each one ounce and half; Cassia-wood one
dram, Cynamon half a dram, Spikenard three drach. Myrrh two drachms,
Turpentine half an ounce, Honey two ounces, the best Wine as much as will
suffice to coct them up into the consistency of an Electuary; of which take the
quantity of a Nutmeg, when occasion serves.

An Electuary to hinder Abortion.
Take Conserve of Roses, Borage and Bugloss, of each half an ounce;
Diamargarit. frigid. four scruples, Pearl two drachms, the fragments of
precious stones one dram, red Coral two scruples: mingle them into an
Electury; of which eat about a quarter of an ounce when the most danger is.

An Electuary for the Hicket.
Take of black, white, and long Peper, of each three drachms; Xylobalsamum one
ounce, Spikenard, Ladies Rose, the seeds of Smallage, Rest-harrow, Ginger,
Lovage, Cassia-wood, Enulacampane, the roots of Asarabacca, of each three
drachms. Let them be made with Honey well scummed, into an Electuary. The Dose
hereof is one dram, three hours before meals, rolling and wrapping it in a
wafer moistened with Wine.

An Electuary to purge the Lungs.
Take of Turpentine prepared with the juice of Lemmons three drachms, Honey of
Roses solutive three ounces: mingle them: take of this two drach. or three,
twice or thrice a day.

An Electuary for ulcerated Lungs.
Take of Lohoch sanum one ounce and half, Lohoch of Foxes lungs two ounces, Lac
Sulphuris one scruple, Vomiting Wine, Oil of sweet Almonds, of each half an
ounce; flower of Brimstone five drachms; and with the syrup of Liquorish and
Jujubees make it up into a soft Electuary; of which take the quantity of a
Chestnut, twice or thrice a day.

An Electuary to purge watery humors.
Take Cremor, Tartar, Alexandrian Senna, of each one ounce and half; Manna, red
Sugar, of each one ounce; Ginger, Aniseed, Cynamon, Galanga, of each one
dram; syrup of Roses five ounces: make it up into an Electuary. Of this
Electuary take half an ounce: dissolve it in three ounces of White Wind, adding
thereunto six drachms of the syrup of Buckthorn-barries; which must be taken in
the morning, keeping within doors: and so to diminish or increase the quantity
of the Electuary, as it operates upon the body.

An Electuary for such as have a cold body.
Take preserved Orris, Conserve of Stoechados, and Rosemary, of each three
drachms, Andromachus his Treacle, commonly called Venice-Treacle one dram and
an half, Electuarium Aromaticum Rosatum, species Diambrae, Cloves, of each half
a dram; and with the syrup of preserved sweet Cane make it into an Electuary:
of which take a little at morning and night.

An Electuary for Barrenness: or, A means to cause Conception.
Take of preserved Eringo, Citron-pill condited, of each one ounce; green
Ginger, Conserve of Rosemary-flowers one ounce and half, the powder of a Bulls
peezle, the powder of a Hares womb, Cocks treads, of each half an ounce;
species Diagalangal, Diamosch dulc. of each two drachms; Pine-kernels,
Hazle-nuts, of each three drachms; Staggs peezle two scruples, Lambs stones
burnt four scruples, Sugar a little; and with the syrup of preserved Citron,
make it into an Electuary, of which often take about the quantity of a Nutmeg
in a cup of Claret.

An Electuary for a Rupture.
Take Conserve of old Roses, Comfrey, Sage-flowers, and Acorus, of each one
ounce: Troches of Amber three drachms, Blatta-Byzant, (a fishes shell so
called) burnt, and washed in water, Cauda Equina two drachms; and with the syrup
of Quinces make it into an Electuary. The Dose of this is one dram, drinking
after it a little Red-wine.

An Electuary against a Hectic Fever.
Take Conserve of Bugloss, Borage, Violets and Satyrion, of each one ounce;
Pine-kernels infused in milk, the four greater cool seeds decorticated,
Cotton-seed, of each two drach. Snails prepared with salt and White Wind one
ounce, Anise one dram, Cynamon one scruple; and with the syrup of Succory
make it into an Electuary. The Dose is two drachms.

An Electuary for the yellow Jaundies.
Take of the Conserve of Maidenhair, and the roots of Smallage, of each one
ounce and half; Marigold-flowers one ounce, the powder of the three Sanders two
drachms, Diarrhodon Abbatis one dram, the four greater cool seeds small cut,
of each two drachms; and with the syrup of Endive make it into the consistence
of an Electuary. The Dose is two drachms, drinking after it one ounce of
grass-water.

An Electuary against the wind of the Spleen.
Take of the Conserve of Spleenwort two ounces, Troches of Capers one dram,
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diagalanga, of each one dram and half; the filings of
Steel macerated in Vinegar, and finely powdered, three drach. the seeds of
Purslain one dram; and with syrup of Sorrel make it up into an Electuary,
taking of it every day the quantity of a Chestnut, drinking after it a little
water of Tamaris.

An Electuary for ulcerated Reins.
Take of Cassia newly extracted from the Cane four ounces, Tamarindarum,
Mixarum, of each one ounce, mucilage of Fleabane-seed six drachms: with syrup
of Violets make it into an Electuary; of which take a little, and dissolve it
in Barly-water, and so drink it.

An Electuary for such as piss their beds.
Take Spodium torrefied, Lignum-Aloes, Purslain-seed, Gum-Arabick and
Thraganth, Barberries, Turbith, the seeds of Endive, Bole-Armeniack, of each
four drachms; and with the syrup of Myrtles and Honey, make it up into an
Electuary.

Another for the same purpose.
Take of the bladders of Oxen, Sheep, Hoggs, of each twelve: dry them in an
oven till they may be powdered: Hearts peezle, the rib of a dead man powdered,
of each two drachms; and with syrup of Quinces make it into an Electuary; of
which take half an ounce mornings and nights, drinking after it a glass of
Red-wine.

An Electuary to procure sleep.
Take of Roses, Violets, of each one dram and half; Opium, Henbane, white
Poppie, the bark of the root of Mandrake, the seeds of Endive, Lettice,
Purslain, Fleabane, Nutmeg, Cynamon, Sugar, of each one dram and half; the
three Sanders, burnt Ivory, Thraganth, of each one scruple; Hon^y despumed a
treble quantity. Mingle them, and make them into an Electuary; of which take
half a dram at night going to bed, or one scruple, or less, according to the
constitution of the person.

An Electuary for the vices of the Ventricle, Liver and Spleen.
Take Troches of Wormwood, Troches of Roses, the roots of Gentian, the flowers
of the lesser Centory, of each half a dram; Diarrhodon Abbatis, the roots of
Comfrey, Marshmallows, Liquorish, of each four scruples; Pimpinel, Amber, of
each one dram and half; Red Coral, Lemnian earth, Pearl, Bezoar, Crystal, of
each one scruple; Mastich two drachms, Steel brought into powder without
Vinegar half an ounce: Conserve of Maidenhair one ounce, Extract of
Winter-Cherries six drachms, Conserve of the Flowers of Angelico two ounces,
shavings of Hartshorn extracted with Wine one ounce, Extract of Saffron ten
grains, fine Sugar one pound and half: with the decoction of the roots of
Marshmallows, let it be made into an Electuary; adding Rose Water two ounces,
spirit of Sulphur one dram: mingle them. Take of this the quantity of a
Nutmeg, when occasion calls for it.

A cordial Electuary for all commotions of the mind.
Take of the Extract of Saffron two scruples, Diambrae one dram. Let them be
moistened with oil of Cynamon as much as will suffice: then take Setwel and
Angelico of each half a dram. Let these be sprinkled and madefied with the
Oil of Aniseed, Venice-Treacle two drachms, Musk eight grains, Philonium
Romanum half a dram: mingle them. Of this take a little upon a knife-point,
when occasion calls for it.

EMPLASTRA: OR, Emplaisters.
A Plaster for the Pleuresie.
TAke of the roots of Marshmallows four handfuls, flower of Barley four
ounces, Chamomile-flowers one ounce, Melilot-flowers, Violets, of each half an
ounce; oil of Chamomile, Almonds, of each two ounces: make thereof a Plaster.

Another for the same nature.
Take of the roots of Lilies and Marshmallows, of each two ounces; Mallows,
Pellitory, Violets, of each one handful; flowers of Melilot, Chamomile, Elder,
of each one pugil; Linseed, Fenugreek, of each one dram; boil them, but
first let them be bruised according to Art, and then pour off the Liquor, and
in a stone-morter beat the things boiled: to which add, Oil of Chamomile, sweet
Almonds, Capons-grease, of each one ounce; beane-flour, as much as will suffice
to body it: apply it over the whole side where the Pleurisy is; but before it
be applied, let the side be anointed with Sperma Ceti, and Oil of Almonds.

A Plaster for the Quinsy.
Take of the juice of Briony, honey, of each three ounces; the flower of
Linseed, Fenugreek, and Wheat, of each half an ounce; fresh-Butter two ounces,
Saffron half a dram: mingle them, and make thereof a plaster: apply it hot
about the Neck.

A Plaster for the stomach.
Take oil of Wormwood, Minte, Red-roses, Mastich, of each half an ounce; oil
of Spike, Nutmegs, of each to drachms; the powder of Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, of
each one scruple; Wax washed in Aqua vitae one ounce: make thereof a plaster;
which apply to the stomach, especially if the affection does proceed from cold
humors.

A Plaster to corroborate the Ventricle.
Take Taccamahac half an ounce, Storax one ounce and half, ointment of
Orange-flowers two drachms, oil of Mace one dram, oil of Cinnamon six dropps,
Amber-grease six grains; mingle them, and let them be made into a plaster, and
applied to the Ventricle.

Another for the same.
Take of Emplastrum stomach. magisteriale one ounce, Caranna, Mastich, Storax
stained, of each to drachms: Balsamum of Peru, one dram and half, oil of
Cinnamon one scruple: spread it upon Leather, and let a Sarsnet overspread the
plaster, and so apply it to the stomach.

A Plaster to stop the flux of a Catarrhe.
Take Rosine one ounce, Laudanum two drachms, Citron-pill, Lignum-Aloes, of
each two scruples: spicknard one scruple, Cloves half a scruple: the gums must
be dissolved in Vinegar; let the plaster be in breadth four fingers, and in
length five; which must be applied upon the Crown of the head, the hair being
shaven off.

A Plaster to stay Vomiting.
Take Wormwood, Minte, of each one handful; a dried crust of bread, infused in
Vinegar, half a pound, Mastick half an ounce, Cloves, Mace, of each two
drachms: let those be powdered that are to be beaten, and all commixed together
in a mortar with oil of quinces, into the form of a plaster; which must be
applied to the stomach.

A Plaster for the pain of the Spleen.
Take Amoniacum, Bdellium, of each one ounce: dissolve them in Vinegar of
Squills, and so boil them a little: afterward add of the best Agarick
powdered, the bark of the roots of Capers one dram; black Hellebor half a
dram Goats dung two drachms, Wax as much as will suffice to body it into an
Emplaister, and so to apply it spread upon Leather to the place affected.

A Plaster against Worms.
Take of the best Treacle half an ounce; Myrrh, Aloes, Dittany, Gentian,
Wormwood, Tormentil, of each half a dram: make them into a powder, and with a
heifers gall and Vinegar brought into a plaster: which apply to the stomach
and navel.

Another of the same virtue.
Take Gentian, Wormwood, Savine, Sow bread, of each one dram; Aloes, two
drachms; Theriaca, Diatesseron, three scruples and an half; juice of Woorwood,
and Vinegar of Squills, as much as will suffice to incorporate the powders,
which must be applied as before.

A Plaster for such as piss in their beds.
Take Laudanum, Mastich, of each two drachms; Aloes-wood, Cypress-Nuts, Storax,
Cinnamon, Turpentine, of each one drach. Olibanum half a drach. mingle them, and
with the juice of Mints, incorporate them into a plaster, which apply to the
Pecten and Perinaeum.

A Plaster to prevent the coming down of the Matrix.
Take Mastich, Laudanum, of each three drachms; Galbanum half an ounce,
Gum-storax two drachms; make hereof a plaster, which apply to the belly.

Another for the same purpose.
Take Emplastrum pro Matrice half an ounce, Storax and Galbanum, of each three
drachms; Liquid Storax, one dram. Melt these together, and spread them upon a
piece of Leather, in the middle fixing a little Cotton-wool, wherein wrap four
grains of the best Civet, which place just upon the Navel.

A Plaster to hinder Abortion.
Take Mastich half an ounce, Laudanum three drachms, Yellow-wax two drachms,
Bistort, Cypress-Nuts, Mirabolans, the juice of Cistus, Acacia, sealed Earth,
Red-roses, Bole-Armeniack, of each one dram and half: mingle them, and make
thereof a mass, which may be spread upon a piece of Parchment, and applied to
the Navel.

A Plaster to be used when abortion is feared from a cold cause.
Take Mastich five drachms, Clarified rosine, ship-pitch, Storax, Yellow-wax,
of each one dram and half; Laudanum three drachms; Mint, Bistort,
Frankincense, Gallia Moschata, Galbanum, Myrrh, Gum-Arabick, meg, of each one
dram and half; and with Turpentine, make it into a plaster, which must be
applied to the groyne, and reins.

A Plaster to Corrode flesh.
Take of the Egyptian Unguent two drachms; oil of Mirtles one ounce;
Mirtle-berryes, Olibanum, of each one dram: Red Wax as much as will suffice
to make it into a Plaster, to be applied where necessity calls for it.

A Plaster for the Toothache.
Take Spanish Flies one scruple, Euphorbeum four grains: mix them with about a
dram of Cobblers wax, and so spread it upon a little piece of Leather, and
apply it under the ear; which in twelve hours time will raise a blister: then
remove it, and let the humor out, clapping another plaster, made of Melilot,
to the place: the like may be done in Cararrhs, applying the same Vesiccatory,
to the fore part of the head, which will divert the Rheum from descending.

A Plaster against the pain of the Gout.
Take juice of Poppy, Wormwood, House-leeke, of each three drachms; Dialtheae
one ounce: Bullocks-dung fresh, one ounce; two yolks of Eggs, Biscat three
drachms; Saffron one scruple: the leaves of Violets, Mercury, Purslain,
water-lilyes: let these be beaten, and with one ounce of oil of Roses, made
into a plaster, and applied where the pain is.

A discussing Plaster.
Take Bdellium, Amoniacum, of each two drachms; Turpentine half an ounce:
Hyssop, Rue, Chamomile, beaten and sifted, oil of Bays one ounce, of the best
Treacle two drachms, Saffron one scruple and half, oil of Chamomile one ounce,
Wax as much as will suffice to incorporate it into a plaster.

A Plaster to stay the Whites.
Take white and red Coral, of each one dram and half; Amber one scruple,
Roses, Plantain-seed, of each one dram; the flakes of Iron prepared six
drachms, Galbanum half an ounce, Vinegar as much as suffices for the
Consistency of a plaster: which apply to the Belly.

Another of the same Nature.
Take bread toasted, and well infused in the juice of Mint and Vinegar one
ounce, Mastich, Balanstians, Bole-Armeniack, of each one dram; mingle them
into a plaster.

A Plaster for the Dropsy.
Take of the roots of Cucumbers, and Dwarf-Elder, of each two ounces; the flour
of Barley ten ounces, Goats-dung dry one pound, Vinegar one ounce and half;
Orris-root three drachms: make thereof of a plaster, with our Hydroptical
Lixinium.

Another for the Dropsy.
Take Boars-grease one pound, oil of Dill, Chamomile, Bays, of each one ounce:
the roots and leaves of Dwarf-Elder, Marshmallows, of each half a pound: Orris
four ounces, the juice of Smallage and Parsley, of each one ounce: the seeds of
Smallage and Parsley, of each half an ounce: Cloves two drachms; white wine six
ounces, Childrens piss four ounces, Turpentine four ounces, wax three ounces:
mingle them, and boil them according to art, till the juice and the wine be
consumed, and then make thereof a plaster.

A Plaster for such as are troubled with swoundings.
Take of the oils of Dill and Chamomile, of each one ounce and half:
Aloes-wood, Citron-pill, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Galanga, of each one scruple; all the
Sanders, red-Roses, of each half a scruple; Gallia Moschata three grains, Wax
as much as will suffice to make it into a plaster.

A Plaster for a certain blackness in the Face, proceeding from a blow or
contusion.
Take of the roots of the greater Comfrey, and the lesser, of each half a
pound; the flowers of Chamomile, Melilot, of each two drachms; Saffron half a
dram; Bean-flour four ounces: the flower of Fenugreek one ounce and half;
Butter five ounces, Wormwood, Cummin, of each one ounce: after that the roots
are boiled, beat them with the rest into the Consistency of a plaster.

A Plaster to take away Corns.
Take Galbanum, Amoniacum, of each equal parts: dissolve them in Vinegar of
Squills, boiling them to a just Consistency, adding oil Vitriol a few drops:
then spread it upon Leather, and apply it to the place.

A Plaster for the pain of the Head.
Take Caranna, Taccamahaca, Mastich, of each one dram; dissolve them in a
pipkin, adding thereto oil of Nutmegs one scruple: spread it upon Sarsnet, and
apply it to the forehead.

EPITHEMATA: OR Epithemes.
An Epitheme to corroborate strength.
TAke of the water of Balm, Scabious, and Carduus, of each three ounces:
White Wind one ounce, Confection of Alkermes, and de Hyacintho, of each four
scruples: Troches of Burnt-Ivory, Kermes berries, Citron-seed, of each one
scruple: Diambrae, Diamosch dulc. of each half a dram: Saffron five grains.
Mingle them, and let them be made into an Epithema; with which foment the
region of the heart, warm, twice or thrice in a day.

Another of the same nature.
Take of the waters of Roses, Sorrel, Bugloss, of each three ounces: all the
Sanders, both the Corals, of each one ounce and half; Camphyr three grains,
Diamargarit. frig. one dram; Saffron one scruple, Vinegar a little, make
thereof an Epithema, fomenting the heart therewith morning and night.

An Epithema for the affections of the heart.
Take of the waters of Borage, Bugloss, Roses, of each three ounces: Maligo
wine one ounce, powder of Gems one dram, the juice of Citron half an ounce,
Troches of Camphor one scruple, Crystal one dram; mingle them, and make
thereof an Epithema, which sprinkle upon a piece of Scarlet, and clap warm to
the heart, renewing it often.

An Epitheme to be used in hot burning Fevers.
Take of Barley cleansed half a Pugil, the flowers of Violets two Pugils, the
four greater Coole-seeds two ounces: water-Lillyes one pugil: boil them in
water, strain out three pints: dissolve therein oil of sweet Almonds and
Violets, of each three ounces: let them be stirred together with a wooden
Spatula, and make thereof an Epithema, which apply upon the whole Thorax.

An Epitheme for the Liver in hot fevers.
Take of the waters of Endive and Succory of each three ounces: Wormwood water
one ounce and half; white wine Vinegar one ounce, the seeds of Sorrel and
Purslain of each half an ounce: the powder of all the Sanders of each a dram
mingle them, and make thereof an Epitheme, with which foveare the region of the
Liver. But the heart must first be corroborated with an Epitheme, lest the
putrid vapors be transmitted from the inferior parts to the vitalls.

An Epitheme for the Hemorrhoids.
Take of the waters of Roses, Sorrel, Plantain and Bugloss of each three
ounces: all the three Sanders, both the Corrals of each one dram and half;
Troches of Camphor one drach. the seeds of Purslain half a dram; the seeds of
Poppy one scruple, Vinegar a little: make of this mixture an Epitheme, with
which foveate the Hemorrhoid veins branching out at the fundament.

ERRHINA: OR Errhines.
An Errhine for Choler.
TAke of the juice of Roses, Endive and Lettice of each one ounce, decoction of
Barley and Melon-seed three ounces; mingle them, and dissolve therein syrup of
Roses solutive one ounce.

Or thus.
Take of the decoction of Barley one pound, Honey of Roses two ounces, juice of
plantain and Nightshade, of each one ounce: Pomgranate-wine one ounce and half:
make thereof an Errhine, which is to be squirted up the Nose.

An Errhine for phlegm.
Take Rose Water half a pint, the juice of Marjoran Clarifyed four ounces,
juice of Betony two ounces, juice of Rosemary one ounce, Gallia Moschata one
scruple: let this be often drawn up at the Nostrills.

A stronger for the same purpose.
Take of the roots of Sowbread one dram, Elaterium half a dram: let them be
beaten into fine powder, and macerated in four ounces of white wind; strain out
the Liquor, and let this Liquor by little and little be drawn up into the
Nostrils. But it does not behove every one to meddle with this Medicine, except
those whose knowledge can inform them how to order it.

An Errhine for the ulcers of the Nostrills.
Take of the tops of Mirtles one handful, two unripe quinces cut into pieces;
boil them with water and wine: if there be an Inflammation, let them be boiled
only in Vinegar, and then make a strong Expression: add to the Colature Honey
of Roses four ounces, and make thereof an Errhine.

An Errhine for the Yellow Jaundise.
Take of the juice of Roses two ounces, juice of Betony one ounce, Scammony one
dram, Honey of Roses three ounces: boil them to a good Consistency, and so put
it up into the Nostrills with your finger. Those who labor under any distemper
of the eyes, the use of these Errhines are very Noxious to them, and also to
such as are troubled with the Vertigo, and Epileptick fits; because they make a
Commotion in the brain, and excite the humors which occasion the Fits.

FOMENTATIONES. OR, Fomentations.
A Fomentation for the coming down of the Womb.
TAke Chamomile, Sage, Balanstians, Galls, the bark of Oak, Knot-grass, and
Pine-leaves, of each one handful and half; Medlars one handful: boil them in
Chalibeate water: add to the Colature Dragons blood, B^le-Armeniack, Troches
of Sealed earth, of each one dram. After that they are well boiled, foment
the womb therewith.

A fomentation gently inciting to sleep.
Take oil of Roses one dram; Rose Water, Vinegar, woman's Milk, of each half
an ounce: Nu^megs two drachms, Poppy water half an ounce: mingle them, and
foment the front therewith very warm.

A fomentation to the gravel in the reins.
Take of Marshmallows, with the roots Mallows, Pellitory, Mercury, (the herb)
Chamomile-flowers, and Melilor, of each one handful; Linseed, and Fenugreek, of
each four ounces: and to the Colature add oil of Chamomile, and bitter Almonds,
of each two ounces: and so with a Sponge foment the region of the reins, as
hot as it can be endured.

A fomentation against the windy swelling of the womb.
Take of Mugwort, Hyssop, Betony, Calamint, Peniroyal, tops of Bays,
Juniper Berries, of each one handful; the seeds of Fennel, Annis and Cummin, of
each two drachms: boil them in small wine, and foment the lower part of the
belly therewith.

A fomentation for the reduess of the Face.
Take Mercury sublimed and finely powdered half a dram; let it be infused in
juice of Lemmons, five or six hours; bitter Almonds blanched, and beaten to a
paste four ounces: water two pints, Camphyr one scruple: mingle them, and make
thereof a fomentation, with which foment the Face, with a fine Sponge, morning
and night: but beware of the eyes and mouth, lest any of the Liquor enter in
there.

A fomentation for a Cough.
Take Sage, sweet Marjoran, Betony, Balm, Staechados, Chamomile, of each equal
parts: boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, with which whilst it is
hot, foment the Thighs and Legs.

A fomentation for such as have pustulls or scabbs in their Faces, arising from
a venereal cause.
Take of the best prepared Praeci^i^e^ twelve grains: inject it into six ounces
of Plantain water; boil it till it comes to three: foment the spots with the
water.

A stronger for the same purpose.
Take of Mercury two darchms, Plantain water, and Hony-suckle-water of each
four ounces: infuse them for four hours, and with the clear water foment the
spots.

A fomentation for a Pleurisy.
Take of Chamomile three handfuls, Wormwood two handfuls, Bay Leaves one
handful, the flowers of Chamomile and Melilot, of each three pugils; Linseed
and Fenugreek, of each half an ounce: boil these in a sufficient quantity of
water, till it comes to four pints: strain it, and put the Colature in
Ox-bladders, applying it as hot as can be endured to the side laboring under
the Pleurisy.

Another for a Pleurisy.
Take the roots of Marshmallows and Lillyes, of each two ounces; Linseed and
Fenugreek, of each three ounces: Chamomile, Dill, and Bays, of each one
handful; the flowers of Melilot and Elder, of each one pugil. Boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, and with a Sponge whilst it is hot foment the
side, afterward clapping to this Cataplasm. Capons-grease, oil of Almonds, and
ol. Irrinum, of each equal parts; Bay Berries three ounces finely powdered:
make thereof a Cataplasm, applying it as warm as it can be suffered.

A fomentation for the Scurvy.
Take of Wormwood three handfulls, S. John's Wort, Germander, Groundpine,
Chamomile, of each two handfulls: Scurvy Grass, Brooklime, Watercresses,
Elder, of each four handfulls; Sage two handfulls, horse reddish root four
ounces; boil them in a suffi^i^nt quantity of water for a fomentation, with
which foment the parts for the space of two hours twice a day: and after that
the fomentation has been used, let the parts be anointed with an Unguent for
the same purpose, described in its proper place.

GARGARISMATA: OR, Gargarismes.
A Gargarisme mitigating pain.
TTake Mouse-eare, Chamomile, Melilot, Dill, of each half a handful; red-Roses
one pugil, Raisins stoned one ounce: six sound figs: boil them in wine and
water, of each equal parts, till it comes to two pints: add thereunto of the
musilidge of Linseed and Fenugreek of each three ounces: make thereof a
Gargarism, and with a syringe squirt it into the mouth.

A Gargarism to be used in a hot Catarrhe.
Take of the roots of Cinqfoil two ounces: Cypress-roots, Cypress-Nuts,
Knotgrass, Pomegranate-pill, of each half an ounce; boil them in water and
Vinegar, and make thereof a Gargarism, by adding two drachms of syrup of Poppy.

A Gargarism in a cold Catarrhe.
Take of Ginger, Pellitory of Spain, long-Peper, Cloves, of each one drach.
boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, till half of it be consumed:
strain the rest, and use it as before.

A Gargarism against a Quinsy.
Take of the waters of Lettice, Nightshade, Plantain, Roses, of each four
ounces; Vinegar of Roses half an ounce: Album Graecum one dram; syrup of
Mulberries four ounces: Rhenish-wine four ounces: mingle them, and use it with
a Syringe.

A Gargarisme for a Quinsy in its greatest vigor.
Take species Diahirundinis, syrup of Mulberies, honey of Roses, of each one
ounce and half: Sugar two ounces, Saffron one scruple, juice of Lemmons half an
ounce, Succory water half a pint, Plantain water two ounces: mingle them, and
with a Syringe often wash the mouth, leaning backwards, Ejecting out what the
Syringe puts in.

Or thus.
Take Raysons, Barley, Roses, of each half a handful; Liquorish one ounce,
Marshmallows roots three ounces; Jujubees ten, figs five, the neasts of
Swallows half a pound: boil these in the water of Roses, Plantain, and Endive;
in the Colature dissolve Diahirundinis one ounce, honey of Roses three ounces,
syrup of the fine opening roots one ounce and half; mingle them, and make
thereof a Gargarism.

A Gargarism to be used by such as labor under the small Pox.
Take Jews-eares two drachms, Lentiscks decorticated half an ounce, Liquorish
six drachms, hartshorn three drachms, the inward bark of Elm two drachms,
red-Roses two pugills: boil them in fountain water, as much as will suffice to
make when it is strained one pint; to which add syrup of Mulberries two
ounces: make thereof a Gargarism.

Another for the same purpose.
Take Lentiscks decorticated (which is a kind of vetch) one ounce; Barley,
Gumlacc. Thraganth, of each one dram; four sound figs, eight Jujubees,
Raysons half an ounce: boil them in equal parts of Carduus water, and Scordium,
to a pint and half: add thereunto honey of Roses three ounces: Conquass them
together for a Gargarism.

Or thus.
Take Jews-Ears three dragms, Liquorish six dragms, decocted Barley two dragms,
Red-Rose-Leaves two pugils, Brier-tops one handful, Honey one ounce: boil these
in Plantain-water, and take of the Colature one pound and a half: to which
add, Syrup of Mulberries and Quinces, of each one ounce and a half: and so
make thereof a Gargarism, with which gargle the mouth often in a day with a
Syringe.

A Gargarism to be used by such as labor under a Fever.
Take Briar-tops, Wood Sorrel, Violet-leaves, of each one handful; Jews Ears
two dragms: boil them in Plantain-water a sufficient quantity, till there
remains half a pint: to which add Syrup of Mulberries, and Vinegar of Roses, of
each one ounce: mingle them.

A Gargarism for the Relaxation of the Palate of the Mouth.
Take Balanstians, Galls, of each half a dragm; Gum Thraganth, Frankincense,
Mastick, of each one dragm; Honey of Roses two ounces, Mulberries one ounce,
Vinegar six dragms, Plantain-water as much as will suffice: make thereof a
Gargarism.

A Gargarism for the Epilepsie.
Take Hyssop, Sage, the flowers of Rosemary, Calamint, Staechados, of each one
handful; of the Roots and Seeds of Piony, of each two dragms; Pellitory one
ounce: boil them in Piony-water, and make thereof a Gargarism.

INCESSIONES: OR, Incessions; or a Bath.
An Incession against the Stone.
TAke Philipendula, Saxafrage, Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory, of each two
handfuls; the Roots of Marshmallows and white Lillies, of each two ounces; the
flowers of Chammomile two pugils; the Seeds of Lin, Fenugreek, and Smallidge,
of each as much as suffices: boil them in a large quantity of Water, till a
third part of it be consumed, and so use it.

An Incession for the Cholick, and to bring down the Flowers.
Take Mugwort, Sage, Betony, Calamint, Origanum, Peniroyal, Hysop, Chammomile,
Melilot, Saint John's wort, and Southern-wood, of each half a handful; Bays,
Dittany, Rue, Savine, Marjorane, Birthwort, Asarabacca, Ladies Rose, Squinant,
Costus, Balm, Rosemary, of each half a handful; the Seeds of Fennel, Annis,
Caraway, and Cummin, of each half an ounce: boil them in water till a third
part be consumed: let the party sit over the rest, whilst hot, that the fume
may ascend up into the body.

An Incession against all manner of Flixes by the Fundament.
Take of Plantain, Shepherds purse, Cyperus, Purslain, Knotgrass, Sumach, Mint,
Mirtle-leaves, Cinkfoil, Nightshade, Water Lillies, of each one handful;
Balanstians, Mirtle-berries, Juice of Cistus, of each three ounces: boil them
in Water and Red-wine, of each equal parts; and so use the decoction.

An Incession for the Gout.
Take of Betony, Sage, the flowers of Chamomile, Staechados, Origanum,
Peniroyal, Saint John's wort, Germander, Rosemary, Bays, Acorus, Marshmallows,
Winter-savory, Fenugreek, of each two handfuls; Juniper Berries, and
Bay Berries, of each half an ounce: boil them in Water till a third part be
consumed, use the rest.

JULAPIA. OR, Juleps.
A Julep for a hot Fever.
TAke of red-Roses dry one ounce, Rose Water scalding hot four pints: add the
Flowers to the Water: which let stand together four or five hours, till the
Liquor has received out all the Tincture from the Roses: add thereunto Oil of
Vitriol two dragms, which filter, adding white Sugar one pound: mingle them,
and make thereof a Julep: of which take three spoonfuls every two hours.

Another Julep for a hot Fever.
Take Lapis Prunella six dragms, Rose Water half a pint, Sugar Candy two
ounces: make thereof a Julep; adding Oil of Cynamon three drops: of this take
two spoonfuls every third hour.

Another of the same Nature.
Take of the second decoction of Barley one pint, the best Sugar four ounces,
Vinegar and White Wind, of each two ounces: boil them a very little; and in the
end, add Rose Water five spoonfuls: of this take a draught at a time, drinking
no other drink.

Or thus.
Take of Rose Water half a pint, Syrup of Violets, four ounces;
Diatrionsantalon one dragm and a half, Oil of Vitriol one scruple and a half:
mingle them for a Julep: of this take four spoonfuls once in three hours.

Another Julep for a burning Fever.
Take of Sorrel, Woodsorrel, Violets, of each one handful; Hearts horn half an
ounce, Scorzonery-roots two ounces, the Juice of one Lemmon: boil these in
three pints of Barley-water, till it comes to a quart: strain it; and add to
the Colature Aqua Saxoniae four ounces, Citron-water six ounces, Syrup of
Lemmons, and Citron, of each two ounces; Spirit of Vitriol twenty drops: of
this drink three ounces once in two hours.

A Julep for the Dropsy.
Take of the Syrup of the five opening Roots three ounces, Syrupus Ebuli
according to our description, Egrimony, of each two ounces; Syrup of Hyssop,
and Horehound, of Endive compound, Maidenhair, Byzantinus, of each one ounce
and a half; Juice of Elder two ounces, Juice of Orris six ounces; the water of
Dodder, Egrimony and Endive, of each one ounce: let them be clarified and
aromatized with Diarrhodon Abatis two scruples; yellow Saunders, Cinnamon, of
each one dragm; Diamosch dulcis half a scruple: make them into a Julep: the
dose thereof is half an ounce.

A Julep for spitting of Blood.
Take of the Syrup of Mirtles, Poppies, Purslain, Quinces, of each one ounce
and a half; Syrup of dried Roses two ounces; Bole Armeniack two dragms, Lapis
Hematitis one dragm; the water of Purslain, Plantain, and Shepherds-purse, of
each two ounces and a half; Barley-water three ounces: let these be clarified
and aromatized with yellow Saunders, and Cinnamon, of each half a dragm; and
make thereof a Julep, of which take two spoonfuls every hour.

A Julep for such as labor under a Pleurisy.
Take syrup of Hore-hound, Maiden-haire, Violets, Liquerish, Jujubees, of each
one ounce: Scabious water three ounces; the decoction of Barley, Maidenhair
and Prunes six ounces, Rose Water two drachms; make thereof a Julep, adding
eight drops of spirit of Sulphur: take a spoonful at a time.

Another for the same purpose.
Take of the juice of stone-Horse-dung six ounces, syrup of Poppies, Jujubees
of each two ounces; Olibanum two scruples; which dissolv in one ounc. and half
of white wind; Nutmeg in powder one scruple and half: mix them together for a
Julep: divide it into two parts, the one drink at night going to bed, the other
the night following.

Another for the same purpose.
Take of the waters of Trifoyl, Scabious, Goats-beard, of each two ounces;
juice of Horse-dung one ounce, syrups of Liquorish, Maiden-haire, and
Coltsfoot, of each one ounce; Boars-tooth in powder one scruple: mix them
together, taking of this two spoonefulls, or three, every second hour, drinking
for ordinary drink a draught of Barly-water, in which boil some Liquorish.

A pectoral Julep.
Take syrup of Horehound, Coltsfoot, Maiden-haire, Liquorish, of each one
ounce; the waters of Sage, Carduus, Scabious, Hore-hound, Burnet, of each two
ounces: species Diaireos one dram and half; of the best Treacle one dram,
oil of Cinnamon six drops: mingle them, of which take a spooneful or two, every
two hours.

A Julep for the Epilepsy.
Take of Staechados, Betony (the Conserves of them) and of the flowers of Sage,
of each one ounce: syrup of sweet Cane condited, two ounces; the waters of Sage
and Betony, of each six ounces: Aromaticum Rosatum one dram; Conserve of
Pyony two drachms; make it into a Julep, of which take three or four spoonfulls
before the fits.

A Julep for the Hypochondriack Melancholy.
Take syrupus de pomis Redolentibus of Fumatory, Epithimus, of each one ounce:
of the waters of Bugloss, Borage, Balm, Scabious of each two ounces; Pearl
prepared one dram; mingle them, and make thereof a Julep, of which take one
ounce at a time.

A Cordial Julep.
Take syrup of Cloves, Gilliflowers one ounce, Cardiacae half an ounce,
Confection of Alkermes half a dram; Citron-water two ounces, Rose Water half
an ounce, Aqua-Mariae three ounces: mingle them: take of this one spooneful at
a time.

LINIMENTA: OR Liniments.
A Liniment for such as labor under a Dropsy.
TAke of Hog's Grease one pound, oils of Dill, Chamomile, and Bays, of each four
ounces: the roots and leaves of Dwarf-Elder, the roots and leaves of
Marshmallows, of each half a pound; Orris three ounces, juice of Smallidge,
and Parsley, of each half an ounce; Cloves two drachms; white wind six ounces,
Childrens urine three ounces; Turpentine, Wax, of each four ounces: mingle
them, and boil them till the wine and the juice be Consumed; then strain them,
and make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the parts affected.

A Liniment for the Scorbutical and Droptical humors.
Take of Garden-Scurvygrass six handfulls, salt Scurvygrass and Watercresses
of each four handfulls, Chamomile and Brooklime of each two handfulls, Lavender
and Horseradish-root of each one handful and half: boil these in
Neates-foot-oyl three pound, (but first juice one half of them, the other boil)
till the juice be consumed; press out the oil, and with this oil anoint the
parts daily.

A Liniment for the Palsy.
Take of Common oil two pound, Chamomile flowers one handful and half; Sage,
Betony, Rosemary, of each one handful, Castoreum half an ounce: Euphorbeum two
drachms; Myrrh, Bdellium, gum of Ivy, of each two drachms; white Poppy,
Mustard Seed, of each one dram; Castor-wine one pound: let those be powdered,
that are to be beaten grossly; boil them with Cinnamon, Mastich, Enula-campane
and Acorus, of each one dram, to the Consumption of the wine: afterward let
it be strained, and add oil of Turpentine three drachms; and make thereof a
Liniment, with which anoint the parts.

A Liniment for the palpitation or panting of the heart.
Take oil of Dill, Mace, of each one ounce: Aloes-wood, Citron-pill, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, Galanga, of each one scruple and half; all the three Sanders,
red-Roses, of each half a scruple; Gallia Moschata six grains: Wax a little,
to body it into a Liniment.

A Liniment to cause sleep.
Take Uuguentum Refrigerans, Populeon, juice of Henbane, Letice, oil of Roses,
Violets, of each half an ounce; Opium one scruple and half, dissolved in wine:
make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the Temples.

A Linament for the pain of the Gout.
Take Oil of Roses half a pound, white-Wax six ounces, Turpentine three ounces,
Gum Elemni two ounces, Alume three dragms, fresh-Butter six dragms; Vinegar,
White Wind, the Waters of Roses, Lettice, and Plantain, of each two ounces;
Juice of Purslain, Knotgrass, of each one ounce: boil them together for eight
hours, afterward press it out into a clean Vessel: and when it is almost cold,
then add Fenugreek one dragm, the three Saunders of each one dragm and a half;
Bole-Armeniack, Dragons Blood, of each two dragms; sealed Earth one dragm,
Ceruse three dragms, Lithargy of Gold and Silver, of each two dragms; Red Coral
three dragms, Musilidge of Marsh-mallow-roots one ounce: let those that are to
be beaten, be finely powdered, and all mingled, stirring of them with a
Spatula, till it be cold.

A Liniment for the Cramp.
Take oil of Earthworms, the Marrow of a Bullocks Neck, the Suet of a Ram,
Castoreum, Costus, of each half an ounce; oil of Foxes one ounce; Unguentum
Pomatum one ounce: Indian Balsame one dram and half: mingle them, and make
thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the place affected.

A Liniment to cause stifness of the yard, and to provoke to lust.
Take oil of Lillies one ounce, oil of Castoreum half an ounce; Euphorbium,
Pepper, Mustardseed, of each one dram; Gallia Moschata one scruple: oil of
Mace one dram; Aromaticum Rosatum, half a dram: mingle them, and make them
into a Liniment, with which anoint the lower part of the belly, the yard and
the reins.

A Liniment to stop the Inordinate flux of the Terms
Take oil of Quinces, Mirtles, Mastich, of each half an ounce; Lapis Hematis,
red Corral, Acacia, the juice of Cistus of each two drachms; Unguentum Album,
half an ounce; Ackornes Balanstians, of each one dram and half; with a little
Wax, make it up into a Liniment, with which anoint the belly down to the thighs
and the reins, night and morning.

A Liniment for the Terms that are stopped.
Take of Turpentine and Aloes, of each one dram; Coloquintida two drachms,
the seeds of Coloquintida one dram, the Gall of an Ox half an ounce: mingle
them, and make a strong Expression, adding black Soap one ounce: make thereof a
Liniment, with which anoint the breast.

A Liniment for the affections of the Liver, from an inflammation.
Take white and red Saunders of each two drachms; oil of Wormwood one ounce,
flowers of Succory powdered three drachms; Roses, Violets, of each one dram;
juice of Succory and Wormwood, of each three drachms; make thereof a Liniment.

A Liniment for the pains of the Earos.
Take juice of Rue cocted in the rine of a Pomgranate, oil of bitter Almonds
three drachms; oil of Dill, Castoreum, of each one dram and half; juice of
Onyons torrefied two drachms and half; Aqua vitae two drachms: mingle them, and
make thereof a Liniment.

A Liniment for the Worms.
Take Mithridate, powder of Coloquintida, Lignum Aloes, the Gall of an Ox,
shavings of hartshorn, Myrrh, of each one dram; the best Aloes half a
dram, juice of Rue and Wormwood, of each three drachms: oil of Wormwood one
ounce: Wax as much as will suffice to body it into a Liniment.

LACTES: OR, Milkes.
Almond-Milk for the Excoriation of the reins and bladder.
TAke of the flowers of Violets, Borage, of each half a handful: Liquorish
bruised four drachms; the four greater Cool seeds of each one drach*
winter-Cherries one dram and half, Mace one scruple: boil them all in two
pints of Barley water, till a third part be consumed; then make a strong
Expression, which with four ounces of blanched Almonds, beaten in a
stone-Morter, make into Almond-Milke, adding at the end Red-Rose-Water two
spoonfulls, white Sugar four ounces: mingle them: of this drink at pleasu^^.

A Milk to allay the heat of urine.
Take of the second decoction of Barley three pints, the four greater
Coole-seeds of each two drachms; white Poppy-seeds, and Agnus Castus-seeds of
each one dram; Almonds blanched one ounce: beat the seeds and the Almonds in
a stone-Morter; then pour on the Barley water, Conquassing of them together with
the Pestil, till it acquires the Color of Milk; which after it is strained,
add thereunto syrup of Marshmallows, Water Lillies, of each two ounces; the
best oil of Turpentine twenty drops: mix them together: drink often of this,
till the heat be allayed.

Almond-Milk for the flix Dysenteria.
Take of Smiths water, where his hot Irons are quenched, four pints, the waters
of Roses, and Mallows, of each two pints; Cinnamon one ounce; Cloves half an
ounce, Pomgranate-pill six drachms, quince-seed bruised one ounce, Mastich half
an ounce, French Barley half a handful, Liquorish bruised half an ounce: boil
them till a third part be consumed, adding conserve of quinces one ounce,
conserve of old Roses two ounces, Sugar of Violets four ounces: boil them a
little, and with the Almonds beaten in a Mortar, make a Milk, of which drink at
will.

An Amigaalated Milk for a Fever.
Take of fountain water four pints, the Leaves of Endive, Violets, and Borage,
Bugloss, Straw-berries, Sorrel, and Succory, of each half a handful;
Maidenhair one ounce, damaskprunes cut number twelve, Raysons stoned two
ounces, the rind of the root of Fennel one one ounce, the root of Asparagrass
half an ounce; Fennel-seed half an ounce; Mace, Cinnamon, of each half a dram:
first take the roots, herbs, and fruit, and boil them a little; afterward add
the Maidenhair; after that, the Cinnamon seeds, and berries of winter cherries,
number thirty: mingle them and boil them till half be consumed: let the
Coluture be Clarified and aromatized with Yellow Saunders two dramchs; then
take sweet Almonds blanched, number thirty, Pine-Kernells half an ounce, the
four greater Coole-seeds, of each half a dram: let these be beaten well in a
Mortar, and with the aforesaid decoction and Rose Water, make Almond-Milk
according to art, of which drink a draught every three hours, as long as
necessity requires.

LIXINIA: OR, Liemade of Ashes.
A Lixinium for the Dropsy.
Take of the ashes of Broom, Wormwood, Juniper-wood, the stalks of beans, of
each one pound; the ashes of the interior bark of Ash, one pound and half; all
which by adding water, make a Lixinium, adding thereunto some white wind, of
which take four ounces, with two ounces of Sugar, in the morning fasting, and
at four of the Clock in the afternoon.

A Lixivium for the Dropsy and Gout.
Take of the ashes of the Leg of a Horse burnt one pound; bean-water six
ounces, common salt half a pound: mingle them, with which wash the parts
affected.

LOCH: OR, Eclegme or Lohoc. i. A liquid Confection thicker then a syrup, and
thinner then an Electuary.
A Lohoc against a Cough.
TAke Lohoc de pine, Lohoc sanum, of each three drachms; Diatraganthum frigidum
one scruple, Pennidees one ounce, Treacle one dram; Orris, Hyssop, Liquorish,
the seeds of Mallows, Foxes Lungs, of each one dram; syrup of Liquorish as
much as will suffice to make it into a Lohoc or Eclegm; of which take a little
often in a day.

A Lohoc for difficulty of breathing.
Take of the Lohoc of Fox Lungs, half an ounce: Diatraganth calid two scruples:
Diatrion Pierion half a dram; Orris, Liquorish, Enula-campane, Anniseed, of
each half a dram; and with half an ounce of syrup of Horehound, and three
drachms of syrup of Hyssop, make it up into a Lohoc, of which take a little
upon a Licorishstick ever and anon.

A pectoral Lohoc for gross and thick phlegm.
Take of the juice of Squills, Honey scummed, flower of Brimstone, of each equal
parts: boil them to the Consistency of a Lohoc, of which take half a spoonful
five or six times in a day.

A Lohoc for the Cough of Children.
Take of flax-seed dried and beaten to powder two ounces, powder of Liccorish
two drachms, Mosch three grains, Amber-grease one grain: make it with Honey
into the form of a Lohoc, of which let them lick a little of it, upon the end
of a Liccorishstick.

A Lohoc for the Exulceration of the Lungs.
Take Diatraganth frigid, Diacymini, of each two scruples; Dianisi, Diareos, of
each two drachms; Venice-Turpentine one dram; syrup of Liccorish,
Maidenhair, and Horehound, of each one dram; powder of Liccorish half an
ounce: mingle them, take half an ounce of this three times a day.

A Lohoc for the Asthma, which is a disease through the stoppage of the Lungs,
causing difficulty of breathing, and wheezing
Take of Raysons stoned, bitter Almonds and sweet blanched, of each four
ounces: Turpentine one ounce, Penidees three drachms, three figs, Orris-root
three drachms, juice of Liquorish half an ounce, Saffron half a dram, the
flour of Linseed half an ounce; and with Asses Milk make it into a Lohoc.

A Lohoc for a Pleurisy.
Take of Enula-campane, and Coltsfoot of each two ounces, the Leaves of Hyssop,
Horehound, Pimpinel, Lungwort, and Maidenhair, of each one handful: Raysons
stoned, Figs, Dates, of each half an ounce, the seeds of Lin, and Mallows, of
each two drach. Cinnamon, Saffron, of each one scruple: boil them to the just
consistency of a Lohoc, by adding thereunto Sugar Penideated half a pound, and
Honey as much as will suffice: take of this half an ounce three times a day,

A Lohoc for a Catarrhe.
Take of juice of Liccorish half an ounce, the powder of Anniseed,
Enula-campane, Licorish, of each one dram the balsam of Sulphur ten grains,
Laudanum three grains, Storax strained one scruple, syrup of Poppies, and
Jujubees, of each one ounce and half: dissolve the juice of Liquorish, the
Balsam and Laudanum in one ounce of Aqua Celestis: afterward incorporate them
all together, adding Clarified Honey, as much as will bring it to the
Consistency of a Lohoc: the dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg going to bed, and
of a small Nut in the morning fasting

MASTICATORIA: OR, Masticatories; or Apophlegmatisms: i. e. A Medicine chewed
in the mouth, drawing humors from the Head.
A Masticatory for the Epilepsie.
TAke of Pellitory of Spain one ounce, Mastich three drachms, White Wax as much
as will suffice to incorporate them into little morsels, like unto the
similitude of a Filberd; which must be chewed in the mouth for half an hour,
upon an empty stomach.

A Masticatory for the Cramp and Palsy.
Take of Green-Ginger one ounce and half, Mustard Seed, Pellitory, of each half
an ounce; of all the Peppers one dram and half; Castoreum, Mastick, of each
one one dram; sweet Cane two drachms: mingle them, and make thereof Pastills
for Masticatories.

A Masticatory for the pain of the head.
Take Marjoran, Sage, Betony, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, of each one dram;
Gallia-Moschata half a scruple, Honey, Wax a little: make thereof Troches for
Masticatories.

PESSARIA: OR, Pessaries;
Which is a certain Medicament thrust into the Privities of a woman, with a
string tied to it, to pull it out again.

A Pessary to bring down the Terms gently.
TAke the powder of Mugwort, and Dittany, of each half a dram, Myrrh,
Galbanum, Storax, Agarick, of each two scruples; Savine well bruised and beaten
half a dram; Saffron half a scruple, the best Treacle, Juniper Berries, of
each one dram, and with the juice of Mercury make it into a Pessary, which
let it be involved in a little Sarsnet, and so put up.

A stronger Pessary for the provocation of the Terms
Take Myrrh, Aloes, of each one dram; Saffron half a dram, Ammoniacum, the
root of Gentian, Turpentine, of each three drachms; juice of Wormwood, oil of
Spicknard, of each two drachms; mingle them, and make it into a Pessary.

A Pessary to stay the inordinate flux of the Terms, or to stop them when
they continue beyond their course.
Take Acacia, Gum-Arabick, Amber, Olibanum, Balanstians, Dragons blood, of each
one dram and half; Galls, juice of Cistus, of each two drachms;
Mirtle-berries powdered one dram; juice of Knotgrass one dram, Frankincense
two drachms; and with the juice of Plantain incorporate them into a Pessary,
rolling it in Sarsnet after the form of a finger, and so put it up with a
thread tied to it, to pull it out again.

A Pessary to bring down the child in the womb, whether alive or dead.
Take of the root of Sowbread half an ounce, the Leaves thereof one handful,
Savine two handfulls: beat them together till they come to a past, add
thereunto the Gum Opoponax half an ounce, the juice of Sowbread as much as will
suffice to incorporate them into a just Consistency: of which take as much as
will make a roll as thick as ones thumb, thick at the one end, and small at the
other; wrap it in Sarsnet, with a thread tied to the end of it, besmearing it
with oil of Almonds, that it may pass up into the body without hurting the
part^; and after it has layen in twelve hours, draw it out.

A Pessary for a flux of blood.
Take Knotgrass-root, Comfrey beaten well, of each half an ounce: Mastich,
Starch, Frankincense, Linseed burnt, of each one dram; and so with astringent
juyces made into a Pessary, annexing a thread thereunto, to draw it out again.

A Pessary for the suffocation of the Matrix.
Take Taccamahac, oil of Mace, of each half an ounce: Gallia Moschata, one
scruple and half, species Aromaticum Rosatum one dram, Storax strained two
drachms; or of Spicknard, Rams suet, as much as will suffice to make it into a
Pessary.

A Pessary to cause Conception.
Take Storax, Spike, Cassia, Nutmeg, the Raspings of hartshorn, of each two
drachms; Opobalsamum one dram, white Wax three drachms; and with the marrow
of a heart, make it into a Pessary, which must be used immediately after
Copulation.

A Pessary for the swelling of the womb.
Take Frankincense, Galbanum, Amoniacum of each one dram; goose-grease, the
Marrow of Calves Legs, the ointment of Marshmallows, of each one dram: let
the Gums be dissolved in Honey, and then all mixed together, and so involved as
before.

A Pessary for the coming down of the womb.
Take of Castoreum, Mastich, of each two drachms; Assafoetida one ounce:
Frankincense, Mirtle-seed, of each one dram; and with Astringent juyces make
it up into a Pessary.

A Pessary for the Molo, that is, a hard swelling, or a piece of flesh in the
womb of a woman.
Take Borage, Birthwort, Dittany, Gentian, white Hellebore, Saffron, of each
half a dram; Scammony one scruple, Galbanum two drachms; and with the juice
of Mint, make it into a Pessary, to be ordered as before prescribed.

PILVLAE: OR, Pills.
Pills purging phlegm, Choler and Melancholy.
Take of the Leaves of Sena half a pound, Troches of Coloquintida one ounce and
half, Aloes one ounce, Agarick, Turbith, Rhabarb, of each two ounces: the roots
of Black-Hellebore, Devills-Milk, of each one ounce: Diagridium half an ounce;
let all these be finely beaten and sifted: then take Cinnamon one ounce and
half: Aniseed, Mastich, Spike, of each a dram; Red-Roses one handful, species
Diambrae, Diarrhodon Abatis, of each half an ounce: macerate them for fourteen
days in strong spirit of wine; make a strong Expession, and let the Colature be
evaporated in a Bath, till it comes to the Consistency of Honey, with which
incorporate the aforesaid powders into a mass for Pills.

Wonderful Pills for the Gout.
Take Lignum Sanctum three pounds, Sarsaperilla one pound, Ginger two ounces,
Galanga cut and beaten one ounce; infuse them in a sufficent quantity of
Aquavitae, and let them stand infused in a hot place, well covered, for four or
five days: expess the spirit out, and evaporate it to a just Consistency. The
dose hereof is one dram.

Other approved and most excellent Pills for the Gout.
Take Sarsaperilla twice washed, and cut very small, and well bruised, one
pound: infuse it in ten pints of fountain water for three days, afterward
boil it upon a gentle fire, to six ounces: make thereof a strong Colature: then
dissolve of the best Aloes two ounces, and boil it gently upon a fire, till its
humid part is evaporated: then add the powder of Myrrh and Saffron, of each
two drachms; and so continue boiling of it, till it comes to the Consistency of
Honey, and make thereof a mass for Pills; take two scruples of these made into
Pills, every morning and night, and so to continue it for twenty days.

Purging Pills for a Catarrh.
Take Pil. Hierae cum Agarico one scruple and half, Pil. Cochiae, Mastich, of
each one scruple, syrup of Betony, as much as suffices to make it into Pills
number five, of which take three after the first sleep.

Approved Pills for a dry Cough.
Take of the seeds of white Poppy, Spickenard, Nutmeg, Olibanum, of each one
dram; Treacle half a drach. Saffron half a scruple: make it into Pills; keep
one of them under the tongue going to sleep.

Others of the same Nature.
Take Bole-Armeniack washed in Rosewater one dram and half, Starch one
dram, Gum-Arabick and Thraganth, of each half a dram; Liquorice one dram,
Olibanum one scruple, Saffron a scruple, Sugar Candy and Penidees, of each two
drachms and half; and with Syrup of Violets make them into Pills: one of them
continually keep under the tongue.

Other Pills curing a Catarrh.
Take of Castoreum, Myrrh, Storax, Galbanum, Pepper, Nutmeg, Poppy-seed, of
each half a scruple; Opium prepared in Spirit of Wine twelve grains: and with
Syrup of Horehound let them be made into Pills, to be used as the former.

Pills purging gross Humors.
Take of Mace, Galangal, Nutmegs, Agarick trochischized, Mechoacan, of each one
dram; Saffron, Cloves, Ginger, of each half a dram; Rhabarb half an ounce,
Aloes washed twelve drachms, Mastick one dram: make thereof a mass with
Syrup of Stoechados: the dose is two scruples made into Pills, and taken one
hour before supper.

Pills of the same Nature.
Take Aloes, Hierae, Diacoloquintida, Rhabarb, Troches of Agarick, of each two
drachms; Scammony prepared, by wrapping it in a brown paper, and holding it
over a little Brimstone burnt upon Coals, one scruple and half, Mastick half a
dram; and with the Syrup of Hops make it into a mass for Pills: the dose is
a dram made into Pills, fasting in the morning.

Pills to provoke the Terms.
Take species Hierae Picrae one ounce, Myrrh, the root of Birthwort, Saffron,
Madder-root, Castoreum, of each half a dram; extract of Mugwort one dram
and half, Steel prepared one dram; and with the Syrup of Calamint, make it
into a mass for Pills: Of which Pills, take five every other day, about that
time the courses used to flow.

Pills to suppress the Terms.
Take Myrrh, Cinnamon, Borax, Cassia-wood, of each half a dram: Salt of
Wormwood two scruples, species Hierae two drachms; and with the juice of
Savine, let it be made into Pills about thirty: of which take three every other
day in the morning, using an hour or two exercise after.

Pills against the white Fever, or the green Sickness.
Take Steel prepared half an ounce, Rhabarb, Aloes, of each one dram and
half; Hiera Picra two drachms, Gum-Ammoniacum, Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar of
Squills, of each one dram and half; Species Aromaticum Rosatum, Diambrae,
Saffron, Salt of Wormwood, of each one scruple; Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
two drops: mingle them, and make thereof a mass for Pills. Take half a dram
made into Pills, in the morning, exercising the body; and so in the like manner
before supper, for the space of thirty days.

Pills for the suffocation of the Womb.
Take Treacle-Venice half an ounce, Castoreum two drachms, Oil of Amber one
scruple: and with Syrup of Stoechados make them up into a mass for Pills.

Pills to bring down the Secundines.
Take Cinnamon, Savine, of each one dram; Cassia-lignes, Castoreum, of each
one dram and half; Dittany, Calamint, Birthwort, and Mugwort, of each half a
dram; Myrrh one dram, Saffron one scruple, Oil of Amber half a scruple;
and with the juice of Mugwort make it into Pills: of which take one dram
every morning and night.

Pills to procure Maids Terms.
Take Pil. Hierae cum Agarico one dram and half, Pill of Opoponax three
drachms: extract of Rhabarb, Centaury, and Gentian, of each one dram; Steel
prepared, (as shall be declared by and by) four drachms, the roots of Aaron
prepared, Tartar vitriolated, of each two scruples; the Chemical Oil of
Wormwood one scruple, Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves, of each six drops* Syrup of
the five opening roots, to make them up into a mass for Pills; and make of
every dram in that mass, six Pills, which gild: take two of them every
morning, and so many also at four of the clock in the afternoon, drinking after
them a draught of Wormwood or Steel-wine, exercising the body an hour after.

The Method to be observed in the preparing of the aforementioned Steel.
Take of the filings of steel as much as you please, put into a Mortar; pour on
as much Oil of Vitriol, as will dissolve it: Let it lie in the Mortar till it
is dry: when it is dry, it will quickly be powdered, and look of a bluish
color: Let it be cast through a fine sieve, and so preserved.

Another prescription of Pills for the green Sickness.
Take Aloes two drachms, Myrrh in powder two drachms, the roots of Gentian,
round Birthwort, Dittany, and Saffron, of each one dram; Madder-roots,
Mithridate, of each one dram: and with the syrup of Mugwort, make it up into
Pills, adding unto the mass Sal Martis half a dram, (the manner of that
Salt-preparation is below prescribed) take five of the Pills for a dose three
or four days together, before the new Moon.

The preparation of Sal Martis, or Salt of Mars.
Take of the purest Oil of Vitriol half a pound, spirit of Wine the strongest,
one pound: put them together into a new Iron drying pan, which must be covered
with a large tile, and so set in a convenient place for fourteen days: the
Term of time being ended, a Salt will appear round about the pan; which take
clean off, and put into a Glass, reposing it in a place near unto the fire,
that it may be preserved for future use.

Another for the same purpose.
Take of the Salt of Mars two drach. powder of Gum Thraganth one scruple, and
with the Musilidge of Gum-Thraganth make it into Pills, of every dram twelve;
of which take three every morning, drinking after them Aqua Lumbricorum,
Magist, Sabinae, of each six drachms; Sugar half an ounce, excercising the body
an hour after, using this method for twenty days together.

Sudorifick Pills for the Venerean disease.
Take of Sarsaperilla four ounces* Guaiacum six ounces, the bark of the same
two ounces, China one ounce hartshorn, Ivory, of each six drachms; Saffron two
drachms, Scutcheneel one dram and half; Egrimony, Sage, Betony, of each one
handful; round Birth-wort-root one ounce and half, Cardamomes, Cloves and
Galangal, of each halfa dram: infuse these in a sufficient quantity of spirit
of wine for the space of ten or twelve days; afterward make a strong
Expression, and evaporare the Colature till it comes to a perfect extract, of
which extract take half a dram; add thereunto ten grains of Antimonium,
Diaphoreticum, which mix together, and take early in the morning, drinking
after it a draught of the decoction before prescribed, for the same disease,
and sweat two hours after; continuing in this course for twenty days together.

Pills for the Hemorrhoids or Piles.
Take the seeds of white Henbane, and white Poppy, of each one dram; Lapis
Haematitis, red Corral, of each half a dram; sealed earth one dram, Camphor
half a scruple, Mastich two scruples; and with syrup of Mirtles, make them into
Pills, of which take half a dram for a dose.

Pills for the Epilepsy.
Take Cinnamon, Ginger, Mastich, Nutmegs, Pyony-root, Hermodactyls, Turbith, of
each one dram and half; Indian Salt three drachms; Saffron, Liquorish, of
each one scruple and half: Aloes one ounce, juice of Sage and Betony, of each
one ounce and half; juice of Rosemary four ounces: let them stand in the Sun
till they become dry, and so make thereof a mass for Pills. The dose is half a
dram, every day before supper two hours.

PIlls for the Epilepsy.
Take Aloes washed in Sage-water, half an ounce, Troches of Agarick three
drachms; seeds of Piony, the roots of the same, Mastich, Nutmeg, Accorus,
Saffron, Salt of Betony, the powder of a dead man's Skull, of each one scruple;
Assafoetida half a scruple, Castoreum twelve grains: mingle them, and with
syrup of Staechados; make them into Pills: the dose is four scruples.

Pills for the Yellow Jaundise.
Take earthworms prepared with white wind half a dram; Diaspolit eight
grains; with Oxymel Simplex make it into three Pills, which are to be taken in
the morning, and so continued for the space of six, or nine days.

Purging Pills for a Gonorrhea.
Take Jalop, Diaturbith cum Rhabarbero, Mercurius dulcis, of each half a
dram; and with syrup of Roses solutive make it up into twelve Pills: taking
four of them at a time, purging for three days together.

Or thus.
Take Extractum rudii half a drach. oil of Guaiacum three drops, Mercurius
dulcis one scruple: make them into Pills, taking them all at a time, repeating
them over again for three or four days together.

Astringent Pills for a Gonorrhaea.
Take of Turpentine washed two ounces, boil it gently to the Consistency of
honey, to which add the powder of Nutmeg two drachms, of Colophony one dram,
burnt Lead well washed in Plantain-water half an ounce: make them up into
Pills, of which take three in the morning, noone, and night.

Or thus.
Take Gum-Arabick, Thraganth, Amber, Mummy, Bole-Armeniack, of each as much as
you please: beat them into a fine powder, and with the syrup of Mirtles, make
thereof a Mass for Pills: out of every dram form four pills, taking one of
them every meal, and two in the morning.

Other Pills for stopping a Gonorrhaea or flux of Sperm.
Take Turpentine washed in Plantain-water one ounce: boil it for half an hour
in the water; afterward mix with it these powders following, Bole-Armeniack,
white-Poppy-seed, Nutmegs, Lettice-seed, red-Corral, shavings of Ivory, Agnus
Castus-seed, of each half a dram: make thereof Pills.

Pills for the worms.
Take Agarick, Rhabarb, Gentian, Myrrh, Dittany, burnt hartshorn, Mint,
Coraline, Horehound, Wormwood, of each one dram; Saffron one scruple, Aloes
two scruples: with syrup of Rhabarb, make thereof a Mass for Pills: the dose is
half, continued for eight days.

Pills for the Hypochondriack Melancholy.
Take of Cretensian Epithimus one ounce, the best Aloes half an ounce, Nutmeg,
Cloves, Senna, of each two drachms; Salt of Wormwood half a dram,
Gum-Amoni^^um dissolved in Vinegar of Squills three drachms; the bark of black
Hellebore six drachms, Saffron one scruple: and with the syrup of Epithimus
make thereof a Mass for Pills, forming four Pills out of every dram; adding
to every dram one scruple of Extractum Rudii: take three every other day
fasting, or an hour before Supper.

Pills for the Dropsy.
Take species Hierae simplicis, one dram; the Salt of sea-colworts, Pills of
Laureol, of each one scruple: Elaterium four grains; mingle them, and make
them into pills; divide them into two parts for two doses.

Other Pills for the same purpose.
Take Eleterium half a scruple, Pulvis Soldanellae, Ginger, Mechoachan of each
one scruple, Galangal, Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, of each half a scruple, and
with the juice of Orris make them into Pills: take three of them for a dose.

Pills for the windyness and hardness of the Spleen.
Take of Senna, Troches of Agarick, of each one dram; Pills of Fumatory,
Annis, Mastich* of each one scruple: extract of black Hellebore, half a
scruple, the bark of the root of Capers one dram; Saffron half a scruple; and
with the syrup of Hops, make them into Pills: the dose is one scruple made into
Pills before supper; which must be continued for the space of thirty days.

An excellent Pill for the head and stomach, called the Viatican Pill.
Take the true Amomum, or in the want of it Aniseed, Mastich, Ginger, Acours,
Cardamoms, Cinnamon, Setwel, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, Saffron, Cubebs, Aloes-wood,
Turbith, Manna, Agarick, Senna, Cassia Lignea, the five Mirobalans, of each one
scruple: Rhabarb one ounce, Aloes two ounces, and six drachms; Carduus,
Scordium, of each half a dram; and with syrup of Roses make it into a mass;
of which take the first day one Pill, the next day two, the next three, and on
the fourth day four: they will keep the body soluble, resist poison, defend the
stomach from all ill vapors, with many other virtues: it may be used a whole
year, by taking one or two of them once in ten days. There is no Pill in the
world endued with more eximious qualities then this.

Pills for the mother.
Take Assafoetida, Castoreum, of each one dram; Vine-seed four scruples: make
thereof powder, and with the syrup of Staechados, make them into Pills: of
these take half a dram, at night going to bed; and so continue for the space
of ten days.

Pills for the pain of the head.
Take Pil. Macri two scruples, Rosine of Jalop four grains, Pil. Cochiae the
lesser ten grains, oil of Juniper Berries and Nutmegs, of each three drops:
make them into six Pills, to be taken in the morning.

Pills for Rheum in the Eyes.
Take Extractum Rudii one scruple, Rosine of Jalop four grains, oil of
Guaiacum two drops: make them into Pills, and take them at once.

POMA ODORATA: OR, Apples to smell to.
An Apple against the Epilepsy.
TAke of the roots and seeds of Pyony, of each one dram and half; the seeds
of Roman Gith, macerated in Vinegar one dram, Castoreum half a dram, powder
of Elkes-Clawes half a dram, Camphor half a scruple. And if the disease be
not per cousensum uteri, let these Aromaticks be added: Cloves and Cinnamon, of
each one scruple; Mosch and Amber, of each grains two: and with Gum-Thraganth,
dissolved in Rose Water, make it up into the form of an Apple, which must often
be smelled to.

An Apple for the plague, and the refreshing of Languishing Spirits.
Take of the best Laudanum two drachms, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Benzoin, Storax,
the root of Angelico, Nutmeg, sweet-Cane, Myrrh, Spike, Amber, Coral,
Frankincense, of each half a dram; Camphor half a scruple, Gum Juniper one
scruple, red Roses half a dram, all the Sanders two scruples, Mace one
scruple, oil of Cinnamon six drops, oil of Anniseed four drops, of the best Bole
one scruple, Amber half a scruple, Mosch four grains: and with Rose Water and
white-Wax, as much as will suffice to make it up into a Pomander, which must be
often smelled to. This has been often confirmed for a wonderful preservative
in the time of the Plague at London, 1636.

A Pomander to perfume the body.
Take of Storax, Benzoin, Laudanum, of each two drachms, Rhodium-wood one
dram; damask-Roses, half a dram; Orris one scruple, dust of small-Coal one
dram and half; Musk Cod two drachms, Amber-greace and Civet, of each ten
grains; oil of Rhodium and Cinnamon of each two drops, and with the Musilidg of
Gum-Thraganth extraced in Rose Water, as much as will suffice to make it into a
Pomander, of what form you please; which if it be carried in the Pocket, will
yield a most fragrant scent.

POTIONES: OR, Potions.
A Purging Potion against the Hypochondriack Melancholy.
TAke of syrup of Roses solutive four ounces, Confectio Hamech three drachms,
species Aromaticum Rosatum half a dram; mingle them, and make thereof a
Potion.

A purging Potion against Choler.
Take Rhabarb one dram: let it be infused in Succory-water three ounces:
strain it, adding Cassia drawn newly from the Cane, Diaman of each half an
ounce; Electuary of the juice of Roses two drachms, oil of Cinnamon three drops:
make it up into a Potion.

A Potion purging phlegm.
Take Agarick Trochiscized, one dram and half; Rhabarb two dragms; Cinnamon,
Ginger, of each one scruple and half: macerate them in Hyssop-water three
ounces, for twelve hours: afterward let it be pressed out, and strained,
adding Diacarthemus, two drachms; syrup of Staechados half an ounce, species
Aromaticum Rosatum one scruple: mingle them, and drink it off at a draught.

A Potion purging phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy.
Take of the infusion of Senna three ounces, Diacatholicon half an ounce,
Diaphaenicon two drachms, Diamannae one dram, syrup of Succory one ounce, oil
of Cinnamon three drops: mingle them, and make thereof a Potion: let it be taken
in the morning, using the acustomed manner of proceeding, as ordered in all
purgations.

Another for the same end and purpose.
Take Rhabarb two scruples, Chebulan and Citron, Myrabolens, of each one
scruple; Senna three drachms, pulp of Tamarinds one dram and half, the
Cordial flowers, of each one pugil: Squinant ten grains, Ginger six grains,
sweet Fennel-seeds half a dram, Yellow Saunders and Citron-pill, of each half
a scruple, Manna six drachms; infuse them for twelve hours in white wind and
Succory-water, of each three ounces: strain it, and add to the Colature Syrupus
adversus Melancholium of Roses, with Agarick, of each half an ounce, Tartar
Vitriolatum ten grains, spirit of Sulphur two or three drops: mingle it for a
Potion; take it early in the morning, not drinking any posset drink till it
has wrought once.

A Potion against the stone and the wind of the Spleen.
Take of Senna two ounces, Cloves two scruples: let them be infused in half a
pint of Strawberry-water, to which add the flower of Cassia one ounce,
Turpentine washed in Saxafrage water, and dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg,
half an ounce: Nutmeg two drachms; species Aromaticum Rosatum one dram, syrup
of Hops, Drop-wort, Marshmallows, of each one ounce; oil of Cinnamon six drops,
spirit of Sulphur one scruple: mingle them, and divide it into three parts, for
three several Potions.

A purging Potion for the Jaundise.
Take Rhabarb two drachms, Cinnamon one scruple, Troches of Agarick half a
dram, Ginger half a scruple: let them be infused in white wind and
Endive-water, as much as will suffice: let there be of the Colature three
ounces: add thereunto Manna one ounce and half; mingle them, and make thereof a
Potion.

Or thus.
Take of Rhabarb one dram and half, Spickenard eight grains, Agarick one
dram: let them be macerated in the waters of Endive and Wormwood for twelve
hours, and to the Colature or Liquor strained out, add Diamanna, Electuary of
the juice of Roses, of each two drachms; Salt of Wormwood, Diacurcumae, of each
half a scruple, Yellow Sanders one scruple: mingle them for a Potion.

A Potion for the flix Diarrhaea.
Take of the conserve of old Roses, Berberies, of each half an ounce; Smallidge
prepared with syrup of wine two grains, Diascordium one dram, Mithridate one
scruple: dissolve them in the waters of Plantaine, Sorrel, and Red-Roses, of
each one ounce; syrup of the bark of Citron-pill one ounce: mingle and make
them into a Potion, to be taken in the morning fasting.

A purging Potion for the flix Dysenteria.
Take Torrefied Rhabarb one drach. and half, Yellow Mirabolens Torrefied also
one dram, powder of hartshorn half a dram, Plantain-water two ounces,
syrup of dried Roses one ounce: make it into a Potion.

A Potion to bring down the Secundines or after*birth.
Take Aloes-wood, Cassia-wood, Myrrh, Saffron, Cinnamon, Agarick, Savine,
Assafoetida, Amber, Castoreum, of each one scruple: Sugar one ounce and half:
let them be infused in Aquavitae; afterward press out the Liquor, and drink
one ounce of it for a dose.

A Potion to bring down the Terms.
Take juice of Savine one dram; Saffron two grains, the compound water of
Horsradish-root one ounce: Dulcifie it with Sugar; let it be repeated for four
days together, or more, if need require.

A Potion for the Mother.
Take Nutmeg bruised three ounces, fountain water one pint and half: boil them
till half be consumed; and to the Colature add white Sugar four ounces: boil
them a little together: of this take one ounce every morning, and at four of
the Clock in the afternoon, drinking after it posset drink, in which let there
be boiled tops of Thyme.

A Potion causing sleep.
Take of the syrup of Poppies, Diacodium, of each half an ounce: Lettice-water
two ounces, Diamargarit frig. two scruples; mingle them, and drink it off going
to bed.

A Potion for the Dropsy.
Take of the juice of Orris three drachms; Elaterium six grains: mingle them;
drink it off fasting.

Another Potion for the Dropsy.
Take of Lignum Guaiacum one pound, Egrimonie one handful, Asarabacca half a
handful, Maidenhair, Dodder, Dwarf-Elder, of each one handful and half; the
five opening roots, of each half an ounce: Madder-roots, the roots of Orris and
Elder, of each one ounce, Liquorish, sea-colworts, of each three ounces; the
seeds of Fennel, Annis, Parsley, Smallidge, Alkanet, of each one dram; Cinnamon
three drachms, of the Cordial flowers, of each one pugil: the seeds of
Meadow-Saffron one ounce and half. But if it be a Dropsy with a swelling of the
Spleen, then add the roots of Capers, Elder, Tamarisk, and the inward bark of
Ash, of each half an ounce: boil them in ten pints of fountain water, and four
pints of white wind, till full four pints be consumed: add to the Colature
syrup of Egrimony half a pound; mingle them. The dose is four ounces, three
times a day, at morning, before dinner and supper.

A Potion to cause sweat.
Take of the best Treacle, one drach. Gum of Guaiacum one dram and half, Salt
of Wormwood one scruple, Bezoar stone three grains, Carduus-water two ounces
and half, species Aromaticum Rosatum one scruple and half: mingle them for a
Potion.

Another of the same Nature, to drive any thing from the heart.
Take of Treacle-water three ounces, Venice-Treacle half a dram, Alkermes two
scruples, Gascoin-powder one scruple, syrup of Gilliflowers one ounce: mingle
them, drink it off at a draught, afterward cover the body warm, that it may
sweat.

A cordial Potion.
Take of Damask-Rose-water half an ounce, Citron-water two ounces, Mint-water
six drachms, Aqua-Coelestis half an ounce, Aqua-Mariae two drachms, Magister of
pearl ten grains, Alkermes two scruples; Syrupus Cardiacus, and syrup of
Cinnamon, of each half an ounce; mingle them for a Potion, dividing into two
parts for two doses.

A Potion of Mechoachan, purging saltish, watrish, and scorbutical humors.
Take of Mechoachan four ounces, Hermodacts, Guaiacum, of each three ounces:
Ginger two drachms; Sarsaperilla, Liquorish, of each two-ounces; Nutmeg three
drachms, Bindweed one ounce and half: prepare them singly as their nature
requires, and put them in a bag, with one ounce of Senna, including in the bag
a flint-stone, to cause it to sink to the bottom; which bag put into a little
Rundlet containing three Gallons of beer new and fresh; which after it has
stood five days, draw out a bowl full to drink morning and night.

A Potion clarifying the blood, allaying the heat of the Liver, and purging
away all serose humors.
Take Senna three ounces, Monks Rhabarb six ounces, Madder-roots, and
Dock-roots, of each two ounces; Figword, and Drop-wort, of each one ounce and
half; Sarsaperilla three ounces, Guaiacum six drachms, Liquorish one ounce, the
Leaves of Liverwort, Ceterach, Mugwort, Egrimony, Scabious; of each one hand^ul
and half: Arch-Angel-flowers one handful, the seeds of Annis and Fennel, of
each one ounce: include them all in a bag, putting a stone therein; which bag
hang in a Runlet containing three Gallons of new beer, and after five or six
days drink a large draught thereof twice a day, in the morning, and at four of
the Clok in the afternoon.

An excellent Ponado, broth, or water gruel for a Cough.
Take of the roots of Avens, Scabious, flower de luce, Asarabacca, Polypody,
Lovage, Columbine, Tormentil, long-Birthwort, Strawberry, Sorrel, Madder, of
each one ounce: slice them thin, that are to be sliced; and then take
Staechados, red-Sage, Endive, Ceterach, Wood Sorrel, Maiden-haire, of each one
handful; English Liquorish one ounce and half: boil all these in two Gallons of
Conduit-water till three quarts be consumed; let it settle, and pour off the
clear, and with it make Ponado, or water gruel, as you would do with common
water: and every mess you eat, let it be sweetened with Sugar Candy on the
daytime; and if you eat any of it at night, add these syrups thereunto.

Take syrup of Mirtles, Horehound, Hyssop, Betony compound, Scabious compound,
Corral, and spirit of Mint, of each one ounce: mingle them together, and eat
thereof.

Purging prunes.
Take Senna two ounces, Anniseed half an ounce, hartshorn half an ounce,
Rhabarb two drachms; boil them in a pint and half of water: dissolve in the
Colature three ounces of Manna; in that Liquor stew one pound and half of
prunes, adding four ounces of Rose Water: of those prunes eat four of five
every morning with three or four spoonfuls of the syrup.

PVLERES: OR, Powders,
A Powder for the pangs of a woman after Travel.
TAke of the greater Comfrey dry one dram; Peach-Kernells, Nutmegs, of each
two drachms; Amber one dram, Ambergre^ce one scruple: make it into a Powder:
the dose is a dram in a draught of white wind.

Or thus.
Take the stones of Dates and Peaches, of each one dram and half; Nutmegs
four scruples, Pulvis Diamarg. Calid. Annis condited, of each one dram and
half; Cinnamon two scruples, Saffron half a scruple, Sugar to the weight of them
all; make of these a fine powder: take two drachms with white wind, twice or
thrice in a day, if the pains be vehement.

A Powder to bring down the Terms.
Take of choice Cinnamon half an ounce, the roots of Birthwort, Valerian
Hyposelini, of each two drachms; Troches of Myrrh one dram, Saffron one
scruple, species Diambrae two scruples, Sugar to the weight of them all; make
thereof a Powder: the dose is one dram taken in the decoction of Cicers.

A Powder staying the courses.
Take of the seeds of white-Poppies, the seed of white-Henbane, shavings of
Ivory, hartshorn, Red Roses, sealed earth, Pomgranate-pill, of each half a
dram; Lapis Hematitis, Corral, Mastich, of each one scruple: the dose is half
a dram, taken in broth morning and night, which is very effectual.

A Powder for a Coagulated blood, occasioned by a fall or a bruise.
Take of the roots of Madder, and Rhabarb, Sperma Caeti, Mummy, Crab's-eyes,
Amber, of each one dram; mingle them, and make thereof a Powder: the dose is
a dram in Scabious-water.

A Powder for the preservation of sight.
Take Betony, Rue, Saxafrage, Salendine, Penniroyal, Anniseed, Eyebright, of
each half a Pugil: Cardamoms, Ginger, Fennel, Origanum, Galangal, of each one
dram; Vervine two dragms: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder, which must
often be taken in broth.

A Powder against the stone.
Take Powder of Venice-Turpentine three drachms, winter-Cherries, Broom-seed,
Saxafrage, Parsley, Smallage, the roots of Drop-wort, Galangal, Rest-harrow,
Agarick, of each one dram; the dose is two scruples, taken in white wind
fasting.

A Powder for the Gonorrhaea.
Take Olibanum, Corral, Troches of Camphor, Lapis Hematitis, Agnus-Castus-seed,
of each one dram; Nutmegs two drachms, cocted Turpentine powdered three
drachms, Pearl one scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder: the dose
is one dram with the white of an Egg in a cup of red-wine.

A sneezing Powder.
Take Pellitory, Betony, Marjoran, of each one dram, Castoreum, Mace, Cloves,
of each half a dram: white-Hellebore one scruple, Mosch two grains, Tobacco
half a scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder, which must be snuffed
up at the Nostrills.

A Powder for the coming down of the womb.
Take Akorns, Cypress-Nuts, Bole-Armeniack, Dragons-blood, Mastich Balanstians,
Acacia, Frankincense, of each half a dram; and when it is powdered, sprinkle
it upon the womb.

A Powder for obstructions.
Take the roots of China, flower de luce, and Sarsaperilla, Agarick, of each
one dram; Anniseed, Fennel, and Smallidg-seed, of each one dram; the
filings of Steel one dram and half; the Salt of Wormwood, Spicknard, of each
one scruple* Sugar two ounces: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder: the dose
is one dram and half, in white wind, walking an hour after.

A Powder to expel worms.
Take the roots of Rhabarb, Asarabacca, and Ditany, of each one dram;
Coraline, Myrrh, Citron-Pil, Ivory, hartshorn burnt, Purslaine-seed, red,
Corral prepared, Agarick, of each half a dram; Saffron one scruple: mingle
them, and make thereof a Powder: the dose is one dram in Purslain-water and
white wind.

A Powder for a Cancer in the mouth.
Take of dried Frogs, Crab's-eyes, and Crabs-Claws, of each one dram; burnt
hartshorn half a dram; mingle them, and with a quill blow the Powder upon
the ulcer.

SACCVLI: OR, Bags.
A Sacculus to corroborate the head.
TAke of the flowers of Chamomile, Marjoran, Sage, Staechados, Betony, Roses,
of each half an ounce: Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one drach, sweet Cane one
dram and half; mingle them, and let them be powdered and put into a Sacculus
that is cut in the form of a Cap, the powder being quilted in it, and so the
Cap worn upon the head.

A Sacculus for the stomach.
Take of Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mint, Wormwood, Red-Roses, Galangal, sweet
Cane, of each two drachms; Mastich, Spicknard, Storax, Cassia-wood, Aloes-wood,
of each one dram; Mosch three grains; Gallia Moschata one scruple: mingle
them, and make thereof a powder for a Sacculus; which must be quilted, and
applied to the Region of the stomach, and so worn.

A Sacculus cooling the Liver.
Take of the flowers of Buglos, Borage, Violets, Roses, both the Corrals, all
the Sanders, of each one dram; Water Lillies two scruples, Spodium one
scruple, Camphor half a scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a Sacculus.

A Sacculus for the pain in the head, Cephalalgia.
Take of the flowers of Violets, Roses, Water Lillies, of each one Pugil; the
seeds of Lettice, Purslain, Henbane, white-Poppies, Lapis Hematitis,
red-Corral, of each one dram; all the Sanders, of each half a scruple: after
they are powdered, let them be included in a Sacculus, and applied to the front.

SVFFVMIGIA: OR, Suffumigations.
A Suffumigation for an Asthma and ulcerated Lungs.
TAke of the Leaves of Hore-hound, Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Maidenhair, Scabious,
Red-Roses, of each two drachms Turpentine two drachms, Olibanum, Mastich,
Benzoin, of each one dram, with Gum-Thraganth, dissolved in cabious water:
make them into Troches, which must be thrown upon burning Coals, morning and
night, and the fume received into the mouth and the bed.

A Fumigation for a Catarrh.
Take of Gum Juniper, Gum of Ivy, Red-Roses, Stora^, Benzoin, of each two
drachms; the Powder of the roots of Orris, the Leaves of Horehound, of each one
dram; Mastich, Frankincense, of each half a dram; Nutmeg, Spicknard, of
each one scruple; Saffron half a scruple: make thereof a gross powder, and with
a little Turpentine reduced into Troches, let the fume be received as before.

A Fumigation for Hysterical fits.
Take Galbanum, Castoreum, Peucedani, of each three drachms; Pepper one
scruple, Opobalsamum half a scruple, Sulphur four grains: infuse the Galbanum
in the best Vinegar, and let the rest be beaten and commixed with the Galbanum;
part of which lay upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, and let the fume ascend up at
the Nostrills and Privities.

Or thus.
Take Galliae and Aliptae Moschatae, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Laudanum, Storax,
of each one dram; Bays, Marjoran, Calamus Aromaticus, Cassia-wood, of each
two drachms: let them be powdered, and with Liquid Storax made into Troches,
which lay upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, and set it so that the fume may ascend
up at the Privities.

A Fumigation for the coming down of the womb.
Take of the juice of Cystus, Acacia, Balanstians, Cypress-Nuts,
Mirtle-berries, of each a dram and half; Frankincense, Olibanum, Mastich,
Dragons blood, of each one dram: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder,
which throw upon live Coals, which place between your Legs, that the fume may
ascend into the womb, having a blanket wrapped close about you, that no air may
expire.

A Fumigation to provoke the Terms.
Take of Peniroyal, Mugwort, Calamint, Marjoran, the Leaves of Bays in powder,
of each one dram and half, Cassia-wood, Costus, Amomum, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Savine, Myrrh, Galbanum, Bay Berries, Indian Leaves, Orris-root, of each one
dram: make thereof a gross powder, which cast upon Coals, placed as before.

SVPPOSITORIA: OR, Suppositories.
A Suppository for such as desire to go to stool, but can do nothing; called by
the Doctors Tenesmus.
TAke Frankincense, Gum-Arabick, Yellow-Wax, Opium, Saffron, of each one
dram; mingle them, make them into a Suppository, which put up at the
fundament, anointing the end of it with Butter.

A Suppository for the Cholick passions.
Take of the seeds of Annis, Fennel, Cummin, and Caraway, of each two scruples:
Benedictum Laxativum, half a dram; Coloquintida one scruple, Cambugia half a
dram, common Salt a dram; and with concreted Honey one ounce, make a
Suppository, the length of ones finger.

A strong and sharp Suppository.
Take Honey boiled to a just Consistency one ounce, Euphorbium, Coloquintida, of
each six grains; black Hellebore, Scammony, of each one scruple.

A common Suppository.
Take Honey boiled and concreted one dram; species Hierae one drach. Sal. Gem,
Agarick, of each half a dram: mingle them, and make thereof a Suppository.

SYRVPI: OR, Syrups.
A solutive Syrup against Melancholy.
TAke of the flowers of Borage and Bugloss, Rosemary, Chamomile, and Germander,
of each half an ounce: black Hellebore, Senna, Polypody, Epithimum, of each six
drachms; the roots of Borage, Bugloss, and Maidenhair, of each three dragms;
Fumatory, Egrimony, of each one Pugil: boil them in water, till a third part be
consumed; add the juice of Pearmains, Fumatory, of each six ounces: and with a
good quantity of Sugar, boil it till comes to the Consistency of a Syrup.

A Syrup for a Hectic Fever.
Take four snails prepared in white wind, the flowers of Violets and Roses,
French Barley, Maidenhair, of each one handful and half; the flowers of Borage
and Bugloss, of each two Pugils; of the four greater Cool seeds, Liquorish, of
each half an ounce: three Figs, Raysons stoned six dragms; Quince-seeds,
Sorrel-seeds, of each half an ounce: sweet Almonds, Gum-Traganth, of each three
drachms; Lettice and Purslaine, of each half an ounce, burnt Ivory two dragms;
white-Poppy-seeds two drachms; boil them till a third part be consumed, and to
the Colature let four pound of Sugar be added, to boil it up into a Syrup.

A Syrup purging the Spleen.
Take of the seeds of Smallidg, Ashbroom, Cardamoms* of each half an ounce: the
roots of Dwarf Elder, black Hellebore, Asarabacca, Acorus, Madder, Bryony,
Orris, and Capers-root, of each half an ounce: the Cordial flowers of each one
pugil; Fumatory, Spleenwort, the flowers of Sage and Rosemary, of each one
handful; Senna Epithimus, Polypody, of each one ounce and half: Wormwood,
Tamaris, of each half a handful; Raysons cleansed two ounces; the seeds of
Annis and Fennel, of each three drachms; Gentian, Gum Lacc. sweet Cane, of each
half an ounce: boil them in Chalibeate-water, till the third part be consumed;
and the Colature boil up with Sugar into a Syrup.

An Hydroptical Syrup.
Take of the roots of Dwarf-Elder, Madder, Asarabacca, of each one ounce; Orris
one ounce and half, the roots of Fennel and Parsley, of each half an ounce;
Dodder, Egrimony, Endive, Betony, Ceterach, Wormwood, of each one handful;
Liquorish half an ounce, Raysons stoned two ounces, the seeds of Meadow-Saffron
bruised one drach. Senna two ounces and half, Polypody of the Oak four ounces,
white Agarick three drachms, Turbith two drachms, the seeds of Melon, Carret,
and Fennel, of each one dram; the flowers of Broom half a handful: Ginger,
Mechoacan, Cinnamon, of each two drachms; boil them in water to twelve pints: to
the Colature add our droptical Lixivium six ounces, Vinegar of Squills two
ounc. Sugar as much as will suffice to boil it up into a Syrup, according to
art.

A Sudorifick Syrup.
Take of Lignum Sanctum one pound, the bark of the same half a pound: let them
be infused in Rhenish-wine and water of each six pints, the flowers of
Chamomile and Staechados, of each one handful; Liquorish one ounce: boil them,
and toward the end of the decoction, add the seeds of Annis and Fennel, of
each two drachms; Setwel, and Angelico-roots of each half an ounce, the flowers
of Borage and Bugloss, of each one Pugil and half: Saffron one dram; strain
it, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, boil it up into a Syrup, adding
Salt of Wormwood two drachms.

A purging Syrup for the French Pox.
Take Lignum Guaiacum one pound, the bark of the same three ounces,
Sarsaperilla two ounces, Hermodacts one ounce, Turbith, Mechoachan, of each
half an ounce; sweet Cane, Thyme, of each two drachms; white wind,
fountain water, of each six pints: let the woods be powdered, and infused for
the space of twelve hours, upon a gentle fire, afterward boil it for two hours
together, adding Agarick half an ounce, Maidenhair, Staechados, of each half a
Pugil: boil them again, and at last add Epithimus one ounce, the flowers of
Borage, Bugloss, and Rosemary, of each one Pugil; Senna one ounce and half:
boil them again gently, and then strain it, and let the Colature settle, and
the limpid part boil up with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, till it comes to a
just Consistency.

A Syrup provoking the Terms.
Take Fumatory, Hyssop, Mugwort, Calamint, Marjoran, Peniroyal, Germander,
Hops, Thyme, Mother-wort, Maidenhair, Balm, of each one handful; Savine two
ounces, the five opening roots, of each half an ounce: Acorus, Anniseed,
Fennel-seed, Origanum, Cinnamon, Cassia-wood, the four greater Cool seeds, of
each two drachms; sweet Cane one ounce, the Cordial flowers, of each one Pugil:
Madder-root one ounce and half the roots of Valerian, and Birthwort, of each
half an ounce; Juniper Berries two ounces, Saffron half a dram: let these be
boiled in a sufficient quantity of water; let the Colature be boiled with Honey
to the just Consistency of a Syrup.

A Syrup for the stone.
Take of white wind, fountain water, of each two pints, the waters of
Saxafrage, and Pellitory, of each a pint: the roots of Fennel, Parsley,
Saxafrage, Rest-Harrow, of each half an ounce: the four greater Coole-seeds, of
each two drachms; the seeds of Annis, sweet-Fennel, Parsley, Saxafrage, and
Smallidge, of each three drachms; the seeds of Cummin prepared half an ounce:
Gromwel-seeds one ounce, Coriander prepared two drachms; the roots of Bind-weed
one ounce, winter-Cherries two ounces, Raysons stoned three ounces, Liquorish
one ounce and half: mingle them, and boil them till half the Liquor be
consumed: add to the Colature Cassia newly extracted four ounces; and so with
Sugar boil it up into a Syrup.

A Syrup purging the Reins.
Take of the roots of Dropwort, Rest-Harrow in powders, of each two scruples,
the seeds of Saxafrage and Grumwel, winter-Cherrys, Mallows, of each one
dram; the four greater Coole-seeds, Aniseed, of each half a dram;
Straw-berry-water, as much as will suffice to infuse them in a Bath, adding the
flour of Cassia four ounces: afterward strain it, and with Sugar boil it
gently into a Syrup.

A Syrup for the Scurvy.
Take of the juyces of Fumatory, Hops and Scurvygrss, of each one pint; juice
of Egrimony and Watercresses of each half a pound: let them be clarifyed,
adding all the Sanders, of each one dram, which with Sugar boil up into a
Syrup.

Syrup of Lemons.
Take a Lemon, and cut it in the middle, stuff in neatly ten Leaves of Gold;
bind up the Lemon again: beware of letting out the juice; and let the Lemon
hang in the air, for three days: then press out the juice, and with Sugar boil
it into a Syrup.

And this is a very good Cordial upon alloccasions, having admirable virtues in
it. A Syrup for a cold.
Take half a pint of Anniseed-water, and four ounces of Damask-Rose-water,
eight ounces of white Sugar Candy: put the water and Sugar Candy into a Basin,
and set it over a Chafingdish of Coals; and when it boyleth, burn it as you do
wine; stirring it till it will burn no longer: then take it off the fire, and
put in your Rose Water, and stir it till it be cold: of this take a spoonful at
a time, as often as you please.

TABELLAE: OR, Tablets.
Cordial Tablets.
TAke of species Diambrae, Diamosch dulcis, Diarrhodon Abatis, both the
Corrals, Laetitiae Galeni, of each one scruple: Aromacicum Ro^a^um, Pearl
prepared, of each half a scruple; Mosch eight grains, Sugar two ounces,
Balm-water as much as will suffice to make it into Tablets, of which take one
at a time.

Other Cordial Tablets.
Take of Loafe-Sugar half a pound: add to it Rose Water 2 ounces, dissolve it
upon the fire, and coct it to a just Consistency: then add Alkermes half an
ounce, Pearl one scruple, Amber-grease six grains: cast them upon a Marble,
and cut them Checquer-wise; eat one of them at a time.

Tablets for the Epilepsy.
Take Dianthos, Diambrae, Diamarg. of each two scruples, the roots and seeds of
Pyony, of each half a dram; Aromaticum Rosatum one scruple and half, conserve
of Sage, our Treacle, of each one drchm; Castoreum half a dram, Sugar five
ounces: and with Betony-water form them into Tablets.

Tablets for the Dropsy.
Take the species of the 3 Saunders, Dialaccae, Diacurcumae magnae, of each one
dram; our Treacle one dram and half; the seeds of Annis, Carret,
Dwarf-Elder, and Fennel, of each half a dram; Sugar six ounces: and with the
water of Dwarf-Elder, make them into Tablets.

Tablets Corroborating the Ventricle and Matrix
Take of sweet Cane, Galangal, the species of the three Peppers, Diacynamomi,
of each one dram; Cloves, Mace, Spodium, all the Saunders, Gallia-Moschata,
Coral, of each half a drach. Pearl one drach. Saffron one scruple, Amber half
a scruple, dried Mint one dram, Sugar twelve ounces: and with the water of
Mint, make them into Tablets.

Tablets against abortion.
Take of the powder of Red-Roses, Spodium, Pearl, both the Corals, the bone in
the heart of a heart, of each half a dram; Hearts horn burnt half a dram;
Rhabarb Torrefied four scruples, Diamargar. two scruples, Sugar of Rosemary
five ounces, Rose Water as much as will suffice to form them into Tablets
according to art.

Tablets against a Gonorrhaea.
Take Agnus-Castus-seeds, the seeds of Rue, Annis, Nettle, Mint, Lettice,
Citron-pill, of each half a dram; red-Corral, Troches of Amber, Frankincense,
Lignum-Aloes, of each two scruples and a half: powder of Turpentine one dram,
Sugar half a pound: form them into Tablets according to art.

Tablets cooling the Liver.
Take the species of the three Saunders one dram; red Coral prepared,
Melon-seed, Lettice and Endive, of each one scruple and half; Troches of Ivory
burnt two scruples, Diarrhodon Abatis without the hot species one dram,
species Diamarg. ^rig. half a dram; without Borage-water form them into
Tablets.

VNGVENTA: OR, Unguents.
An Unguent against the disfigurement of the Measles.
TAke of the flour of Lupines, Solomon's seal, of each half an ounce; the Cerus
of Lithargie, Sarcocolla, of each one dram; Melon-seed, Rose Water, of each
two drachms; ointment of Orenge-flowers, one dram and half; Oil of sweet
Almonds one ounce: mingle them, and make them into an Unguent, with Hogs-suet,
with which anoint the face where the marks are.

An Ointment to take away the prints of the small Pox.
Take of sweet Almonds two ounces, Dear-suet, Oil of Eggs, Sperma-Caeti, of
each half an ounce; Rose Water two ounces: incorporate them together, anoint
the face therewith often.

An ointment for the Scabs.
Take Quicksilver killed in the juice of Lemons and fasting Spittle two ounces,
the powder of Enula campane, Lithargie, of each one ounce: Ung. Psoricon Alex.
one ounce and half: Turpentine, Oil of Bays, Ceruss washed in Fumatory-water,
of each six drachms; Ointment of Cerus two ounces: Frankincense, Mastich, of
each two drachms; juice of Fumatory half an ounce: pure Wax, Rosine of the
Pine Tree, of each three drachms: mingle them, and by boiling, make them into
an Unguent.

An Unguent to cool the Liver.
Take of the juice of Succory, and Roses, of each half an ounce: juice of
Lettice two drachms; Oil Violets and Roses, of each half an ounce; Ointment of
Saunders one ounce, red-Correl one dram; the seeds of Sorrel, Endive and
Purslaine, of each half a dram: Lambs-suet and Wax, of each one ounce; all
the Saunders of each half a dram: boil them till the juice be con^umed; add
Diarrhodon Abatis without its hot species two drachms: make it into an Unguent.

An ointment against the worms.
Take of the juice of Mugwort, Savine, of each half an ounce, the root of round
Birthwort, Dittany, of each one dram; Oil of Orris, Bays, of each one ounce:
Goose-grease one ounce and half, Saffron two drachms: Wax as much as will
suffice: boil it till the juyces be consumed.

VOMITORIA: OR, Vomiting Medicaments.
A Sir. of Tobacco to cause vomiting.
TAke of Tobacco one ounce, white-wine-Vinegar three ounces: infuse them for
thirty hours, in a cold place: strain it, and with a sufficient quantity of
Sugar coct it to a Syrup: the dose is one ounce or six drachms.

Another.
Take of Crocus Metallorum powdered half an ounce, white-wine-Vinegar eight
ounces: infuse them in a Bath twelve hours; strain it, add white Sugar four
ounces, coct it to the Consistency of a Liquid Oxymel. The dose is half an
ounce or six drachms.

Another Vomit.
Take Crocus Metallorum eight grains: infuse it in white wind two ounces; to
the Colature add Syrup of Violets one ounce: mingle them into a Vomiting Potion.

Or thus.
Take Hydromel two ounces, Asarabacca powdered one dram: make it into a
Haustus.

Another Vomit.
Take Gillae Theophrasti, or his Salt of white-Vitriol, half a dram; dissolve
it in any Liquor, and it will provoke gently to Vomit.

Or thus.
Take Gum. Cambugiae one scruple: Cremor Tartar half a scruple, Oxyacant one
dram; Oil of Anniseed three drops: mingle them, and take it in the morning,
keeping within doors.

A Vomiting water of Tobacco.
Take of the best Rhenish-wine three pints, the Leaves of green Tobacco three
handfuls; let them be distilled according to art, and the Liquor keep in a
Glass well covered: the dose is one ounce; and the Remedy is most delicate.

A Vomiting Electuary of Hellebore.
Take of white-Hellebore, dry and bruised, half a pound; common water six
pints: make thereof an infusion for three days; afterward boil it till half be
evaporated: make an Expression, to which add Honey one pound and half, and coct
it to the Consistency of Honey: the dose is from an ounce and half to two
ounces, taken in the decoction of Aniseed.

But great care is to be had in the use of Hellebore; for according to
Hippocrates judgment, it is very dangerous, and oftentimes causes Convulsions.
A Vomiting Potion.
Take of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum one ounce: Oxymel of Squills half an
ounce, Mithridate one scruple, Carduus-water four ounces: mix them together for
a Potion.

Auxilium multis succus and herbafuit. Ovid.
FINIS.

