SEVEN ARGVMENTS PLAINLY PROVING THAT PAPISTS Are Traiterous Subjects to all
true CHRISTIAN PRINCES.

With a Touch of Jesuits Treacheries.

Estote proditores

Betraye your Country


the pope, riding a seven-headed lion-like beast, encourages clerics and laymen
to rebel.

Printed in the Year 1641.

SEVEN ARGVMENTS PLAINLY PROVING That Papists are traiterous Subjects to all
true Christian PRINCES.
The first Reason.
ALL good Subjects which obey for conscience, as every one ought to do, must
have their consciences informed by the word of God.

But perfect Papists hate our Assemblies, ^espise the preaching of the Word,
which should direct their consciences both in duty toward God, and loyal^ie
toward their Prince; and in stead thereof, entertain a strange worship.

Perfect Papists the worst knot of thieves, and why.
Therefore perfect Papists cannot be sound hearted Subjects. I have heard wise
men say, that there is no knot of thieves so dangerous, as when there is a
whore in the company. There is none so arrand a whore in the world, as the
strumpet of Babylon, who is an actual dealer in wicked and ungodly practices
against all Kings and Kingdoms. Then whether hearts hating GODS truth, which
should rightly inform them, and carousing of this whorish cup, which does
strangely enchaunt them, be faithful to his princely person, or peace of this
Realm, I commend it to the judgment of all them that love our prosperity.

The second Reason.
Papists obedience but at the Popes pleasure.
THey that carry a countenance conformable to his Majesty's Laws no longer then
it stands with the Popes pleasure, can be no true hearted Subjects.

But perfect Papists obey his Majesty's Laws no longer then it stands with the
liking of the Pope, as the Jesuit Heart sometimes confessed.

Therefore perfect Papists can be no good subjects.

Greater cause to fear than to trust them.
Here let the true Subjects understand, that the Pope has powered an opinion
into his Papists, that Kings and Princes, if he dispense with them, may break
their faith and promise: that nulla fides est servanda cum haereticis, no faith
is to be kept with Gods friends and his foes; that Papists with liberal
permission may swear and unsweare, if advantageable opportunity do occur:
which since that they do believe to stand in his power to dispense withal,
and that he is both able to pardon them, and willing to reward them; yea that
it is within his reach not only to give them the Kingdom of England, but the
Kingdom of heaven also: then let them swear, their protestations are not
worth the paring of a rotten apple, their obedience is but at the Popes ad
placitum: Whereupon arises a good caveat, that we rather tie short than trust
a two-legged Fox.

The third Reason.
Papists read and recommend popish libels.
THey that receive, entertain, read and recommend such lying libels and
heart-stealing pamphlets, as whereby his Majesty's right is impeached, his
regiment reviled, his title of supremacy defaced, his faith defamed, Christian
Religion nourished by him, called heretical, devilish, and damnable, and the
professors thereof worse then nullifidians and infidelious Atheists, can be no
good subjects.

But this is the dealing of our perfect Papists.

Therefore the conclusion follows, that such can be no good subjects.

Many wicked and traiterous pamphlets have been scattered in this realm to
darken the glory of the Lords anointed, to weaken the good wills of his
highness loving subjects, to win worthless male-contented malicious
wretches treacherously to conspire with our sworn enemies, whereby to fortify
the Romish faction. These have and do want no favorers to scatter them in
corners, to send them to their lovers, to commend their substantialnesse as
matters unanswerable, both such Merchants as send them, and such brokers as
utter such Babylonish wares, are right worthy to pay their heart blood for
custom.

The fourth Reason.
Papists receive pardons to free them from loyalty.
THey that receive pardons, absolutions, and such like stuff, to exempt, and
free themselves from loyal obedience, are but subjects in show, watching their
times to work their own wills.

But our absolute Roman Catholics receive pardons and absolutions, to acquit
them from dutiful allegiance.

Therefore shake a perfect Papist out of the masking weed of his pretended
conformity, and then shall you find that an heart devoutly affected to the
Romish Religion, is as deeply infected with the venom of treason.

Gregory 13. Pius 5. Sixtus 5.
The dealings of the Popes is not unknown, of Gregory the 13. Pius 5. and
Sixtus 5. who laboring our subversion by Englands unnatural children, have
sent their pardons and absolutions to free them from subjection; a thing
abhorring from all Religion, hated of the Heathen, the age present loathes it,
and succeeding posterity shall be astonished to hear of such cruelties.

The fifth Reason.
The Pope erecteth seminaries for the hatching of Fox-Priests, and Catholics
receive them to nursing.
THey, for whose catholic good the Pope pretends the erecting of his
seminaries, and therefore receive from thence such subtle treacherous and
disloyal wretches, as infect them with poison, and persuade them to treason,
cannot be faithful and true hearted subjects.

But the Pope makes his Catholics believe that he erecteth seminaries for
their good, and they also receive and entertain his Jesuits and Fox-Priests,
issuing out of those dens of Idolatry.

Therefore the conclusion follows, that such can be no good subjects.

Parsons. Campion.
Parsons, Campion, and Heart, with the rest, cast in the Popes mould and fitted
for the service of the beast that sits upon the seven hills, have wanted no
entertainment in this Land in their times, although there were nothing more
intended of them then this, namely, to set the subjects against their Prince,
and Englishmen against their own Country, as leave was given to Parsons and
Campion by Gregory 13. to interpret the Bull of Pius Quintus.

The sixth Reason.
Papists gape for a golden day.
THey that are weary of these days, and live in hope of another world, which in
their ordinary byword they call their golden day or year of Jubilee, can be
no faithful subjects to him, by whose gracious government these days are
continued.

But the Papists are weary of these days, and languish in looking for their
golden day, which Almighty God send them in leaden haste.

Therefore Papists can be no good subjects.

Believe them without further proof.
That the Papists are weary of these days and times, wish the death of his
Majesty, and alteration of State and Government; there needs no further proof
then their conspiracies, their treasons and secret attempts, their platformes
and practices for foreign invasion: whereby it is evient, that these are the
days of their grief and sorrow; and that they regard the safety neither of
Prince nor Country, so they may return to the flesh pots of Egypt, and eat
their fill with peaceable freedom.

The seventh Reason.
Papists regard no state, so that Popery may prevail.
THey that regard not into what subjection, slavery, shame and dishonor his
highness, his Kingdom and subjects be brought unto, so that their blind
worship and pageant of Papistry may be erected, can be no good subjects.

But perfect Papists neither regard Majesty of the Prince, nor dignity of the
Nobles, nor gravitie of age, nor difference of sex, nor excellency of
learning: so that Popery may be set up in stead of the Gospel.

Therefore such can be no good subjects.

Woeful experience.
The desperate dealings and damnable practices of Papists heretofore prove
plainly, that allegiance to their Prince cannot keep them from treason; the
duty of love to their natural Country, cannot withdraw them from favoring
rebellion at home, nor lincking with strangers abroad; that the duty of
obedience of children to parents, or of parents affection to children, cannot
keep them from unnatural cruelty; that the duty of mutual love, and
society betwixt the husband and wife cannot remove them from monstrous
immanitie; that the duty of kind and natural pity cannot stay a Papists
hands from murdering feeble sex, tender babes, or reverent age: lastly, that
the duty of familiarity in youth, of friendship in graver years, of
continual society during all the life passed, cannot stay a Papists hands
from sacrificing his dearest friends. Nay, which is more, not only are they
contented to yield their bracelets and carerings to the framing of the golden
calfe, as did Israel, nor to offer their friends in sacrifice, as did that
unnatural King of Moab in offering his sons to assuage the ire of his angry
Gods; but to make their own lives a prey to their enemies; as did the
Athenians, when they accorded by casting of lots to give themselves to be
devoured of that ghastly monster Minotaurus.

Wherefore since it is so clear a case, that the consciences of these
Catholics are altogether Romish; that they hold the Popes Excommunication
against our dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty to be lawful; that they yield
their obedience no longer then durante beneplacito of the Pope; that they
receive and commend such libels as deface our Church, abuse his Highness
person, and all his loving subjects; that they receive pardons to exempt
themselves from dutiful obedience; that they receive and entertain the
enemies of this Realm, Jesuits and seminary Priests; that they look for a
golden day, and long for an alteration; that they care not to conspire at home
with traitors, and to plot abroad with strangers, whereby to convey the crown
to a forrainer: subence, I say, this is so, then two conclusions do follow.

First, that every perfect Papist is a secret traitor to his Prince and
Country. Our land cannot be at ease, so long as these lie on her stomach.
They prick and wound her sides, not with praying against her (for their
imprecations we hope, are irrita vota) but with preying upon her: and when all
stratagems fail, ready to fetch arguments from the shambles, and conclude in
ferio.

Whose Religion is politic, learning bloody, affections malicious, ambitious,
divellish. The Inquisition is their Grammar, fire and faggot their Rhetoric,
fleet and fetters their Logic, the Cannons roar their Music. and poisoning
is their Physic.

Whose Priests have such almighty power, that they can make their Maker, that
whereas in their Sacrament of Order, (as they term it) GOD makes an impotent
creature a Priest: now in their Sacrament of the Altar, the Priest shall make
Almighty God. Yea, as he made them with a word, and put them in their mothers
womb: so they can make him with a word, and put him in a box. They that thus
blaspheme their Creator, shall we trust them with their fellow creature?

It was an ingenuous answer of a Spanish Noble man, commanded by Charles the
fist 10 lodge the Duke of Bourbon at his house in Madrid; I will obey thee, but
set my house on fire so soon as the Duke is our of it. My Predecessors never
built it to harbor Traitors.

Did he think that a conspirator would poison his house; and shall we think
that such are no infection to our Land? David did counterfeit himself mad.
when he was not, for his own security: these are mad, and dissemble it;
till by one frantic act, they can bring us all to ruin. If they were
foreign, public and professed enemies; we would not blame, not fear them)
While Kingdoms stand in hostility, hostile actions are just. But these are
domestical, intestine, secret adversaries, bred and fed in the same Country;
therefore the more intolerable, as the more pernicious.

Tut, they can satisfy their consciences by distinguishing of Treasons,
Indeed, all their Religion is a religion of distinctions: such as that is, that
an excommunicate Prince may be dethroned; and being once uncrowned, may on his
penitent submissio^ be restored to the Church, Quoad animam, non quoad rognum.

Thus they leave positive, textuall, school divinity, and fall to
Crowne-divinitie Antichrist pleads, their Religion is maintained by the
Fathers. Did ever any Father allow of Treason? Shame they not to aver it? If
any abused, wrested, falsified writing of the Fathers did seem to consent to
their errors: yet we know, that Audiendi Patres, non ut Judices, sed ut
restes: The Fathers be heard as witnesses, not as Judges. It is Gods Scriptum
est, not their traditum est, that must give decision of all doubts.

And secondarily, that it is a safer way to trusse than to trust a two-legged
Fox. Our gracions God that has hitherto protected us, bless his Majesty, and
the nigh Court of Parliament, that through their wisdoms, zeal and courage,
Gods glory may be promoted, the undermining of these Foxes, which destroy our
Vines, soundly sifted, and secret traitors sharply punished. Then shall
England less fear her ruin (which GOD forbid) by strangers force, when
vengeance deserved shall strongly sease on household foes; nay, else may England
more suspect the weakening of her present state, by nourishing a Viper in her
own bowels, than Popish power, or any else, who gnash their teeth at her peace
and welfare.

Thus holding Popery to be an hotch-potch of new Religion coined in the mints
of the Babylonish whore, who contendeth to advance, her Kingdom above the
Kingdom of Christ, by all means that themselves, or hell it self can invent,
by cruelty, by blood, by deceit, by abusing the word of God, by equivocation,
by what not? yea ^^ee has so taught (...), the Priests and Jesuits, and (...)
by them seduced to swear and forswear, to promise and protest, by whatsoever
can be named, (although they have no purpose to make good any of their vows in
this kind) as that they have almost left no means whereby a man may be
assured of another intentions, although he vow it never so seeming setiously.

Call to mind the great and serious protestations that Warson the Priest made
in his Quodlibeticall questions, That albeit he differed in Religion from that
which was professed in the Church of England, yet if either Pope or Spaniard
should seek by hostile means to invade his Country, he would willingly spend
his substance, nay his dearest blood against any such as should attempt it, and
yet he himself was the first afterward as I remember, that came to the
gallows for violating it. If I could find any thing that good is in either
Priests of Jesuits, I would commend them for it, but because I cannot, holding
them all to be traitors in heart unto his Malestie, and their favorers to be
scarcely good subjects; I will end for their commendations with the words of a
late, but witty, Satyrist, Fevet illis, quisquis de illis tacet.

A TASTE OF THE BLASPHEMOVS Treacheries of wicked JESUITS.
SUch is the most bloody, and most blasphemous impudency of these Romish
Incendiaries, that when they put on a devilish and desperate resolution, to
murder any Emperor, King, or Prince, whom they have once pronounced to be an
Heretic, and excommunicate person; and thereupon intend to murder him by
some Raviliack, whom they make choice of for the execution of the said Treason;
that after such an unfortunate and wretched person is once allured, and entered
into their place of consultation, or chamber of (Philonicall) prayers,
(forsooth) as they call them: These infernal firebrands kneel all down, who
in their prayers observe their time; and put before the intended traitor, a
knife folded up in a scarf; shut up in a little Box, covered with an Agnus
Dei; written about with black letters of perfumes, odoriferous Characters: and
when they draw it out themselves, they cast or sprinckle some drops of holy
water upon it, which done, they hang at the hafte of the said knife, five or
six grains of Corrall, which are blessed by them, who blasphemously give him
to understand, and make him believe that so many blows, as shall be given by
him with the said knife; so many souls shall be released out of Purgatory.

Afterward, putting the knife into the intended Murderers hand, they
pronounce these words, saying;

Go now like Jephte, with the Sword of Sampson in thy hand, the Sword with
which David did cut off Golia's head, the Sword of Gidion; yea, the Sword with
which Judith did cut off Holophernes head; the sword of the valiant Machaboes,
and the same with which Saint Peter did cut off Malcas his care, yea, I say,
the sword of Pope Julius the second, with the which (breaking the forces of
oppugning Princes) he took out of their hands with great effusion of blood,
the Cities of Sezza, Imola, Fayance, Bologna, and many other Cities: Go thus,
I say, thou magnanimous Champion of the chair of Rome, and be valiant, and God
strengthen thine arm for the great work now intended by thee. After which,
this infernal kennell of Romish bloodhounds kneel all down, and the most
wretchedly renowned and cursedly quallified amongst them, with a cauterized
conscience and immarbled heart, pronounces the bloody Conjuration, impiously
and impudently saying as follows.

Come Cherabims, come Seraphims, and highest Thrones that rule, come blessed
Angels: yea, blessed Angels of charity, come and fill this holy Vessel with
glory and eternity, and bring him presently the Crown of the Virgin Mary, of
the Patriarchs, and of the Martyrs, for he belongs no longer to us, but to
you.

And thou Oh dreadful and terrible God, who have revealed to him in these our
Prayers and meditations; that he ought to murder a Tyrant, and confound a
Heretic, and to give the Crown to a Catholike-King. And being by us disposed
to this meritorious Murder, vouchsafe to fortify his senses, and increase his
forces: to the end that he may accomplish this thy great will; and vouchsafe to
arm and furnish him with the harness of thy powerful providence, that he may
valiantly perform the worthy work he has piously undertaken, and may happily
escape from those who would apprehend him: give him Eagles wings, that the
spite and malice of those Barbarians whom he goes against, may not once touch
his sanctified members. Extend also the beams of thy joy and celestial
relicitie upon his sacred soul, to the end that by the blessed influence
thereof, the parts and members of his body also may be encouraged and enabled
to this great work, and that it may chearefully dispose it self to this holy
Combat without fear or shrinking pusillanimitie.

This accursed Conjuration being thus audaciously and gracelesly uttered, they
carry the thus enchanted bloody Regicide, and set him before an Altar, where
they show him a Picture, wherein the Angels are seen and shown to have lifted
up and elevated long since James Clement, a bloody Jacobine Friar, and
represented him (as it were) before the Throne or God, saying:

Lord, behold thy Pupil, behold thy well-instructed Champion, and the
accomplisher of thy justice: Whereupon all the Saints rife out of their feats
to make him room, and give him place among them. And when all these things are
thus done and finished, there are no more but four Jesuits only left with
him, who when they come near him; they with diabolical impudency and lying
flattery, say unto him: that they seem to perceive that there is some Diety
infused into him, and that they are so astonished with the radiant light
shining and glistering in him, that they hold it their honor to kiss his
hands and feet, and make him madly to believe that they account him not a mere
man any longer; but that they esteem themselves (as it were) as they say,
half unworthy of the happiness and glory which he has already obtained by
his Catholic resolution, and sighing deeply before him; they say unto him: we
would that God had chosen us, and called us to your estate: since we should be
truly assured, that we should go really and directly into Paradise without
coming at Purgatory.

And thus having intoxicated and bewitched the miserable wretch, they thus
leave him to his intended bloody design.

The end of the Conjuration.

O Lord preserve our Noble King CHARLES, and all his posterity from the power
of all such Romish Regicides and bloody Traitors, who thus plot and practice to
build up their Romish Synagogue with blood. And grant good God, that our
gracious King Charles, may with his posterity, long continue a happy and
prosperous Reign over this Kingdom, for the maintenance and propagation of
Christ's Gospel in despite of Antichrist, and all his bold and bloody
adherents: and let every good and loyal subject, and true hearted English
Christian say, Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

