The AUTHOR ON His FRONTISPIECE.
THat each fair Fancy, may the Fancy find,
Of th'Emblems meaning, and the Authors mind:
The Moral of the Model's This. -- The Tree,
Presents the King: cut down, His Tragedy.
No Feller seen --; the Murder in Disguise.
The Dead Tree-Dry --; the King's poor Obsequies.
The Regal Scepter broke; and stately Crown,
By Rebels Fury turned upside-down;
Do show a Change of State. Records are burned;
And Monarchy to Anarchy is turned.
The Root, not Dead --; does Emblemize the strength,
Of happy Hope, to Sprout again, at length.
The lively Branches --, are the Issue Royal.
The Angel's Trumpet --, is the Subject Loyal.
The Mode Triumphall, with a flying Wing;
Is England's Joy, our Sovereign's Welcoming*
The Taller Branch, its growing through a Crown;
The King his Birthright shows; the Crown, his Own.
The other Two, alike in Leaves, but Lower;
Show their Alliance to the Higher Power.
The Hand, above --; is God. The Water-pot,
Is Providence. The Streams that do allot,
Each Branch, his Sent of Water --; are God's Grace,
To make us Lovall, to the Royal Race.
Thus, th'Emblem is Divine: the Moral, plain:
Divinely-moral, in each Sovereign;
King Charles the First, His Murder: and His Son,
King Charles the Second's Restoration.
So says Anthony Sadler.

There is hope of a Tree if it be cut down that it will sprout again, and ye
branches thereof will not cease, though ye root of it wax old in ye Earth, and
the stock thereof be dead in the Ground; yet by the sent of water it will bud,
and bring forth boughs like a Plant. Job. 14. 7. 8. 9. Maughan sculp


MERCY in a MIRACLE SHOWING, The Deliverance, and the Duty, OF The KING, and
the People.

IN A SERMON

Preached at Mitcham in Surry, June 28. 1660. in a Solemn CONGRATULATION For
the Restoration of his Majesty to his Royal Throne.

BY ANTHONY SADLER, Late Chaplain, to the Right Honorable Leticia, Lady
Pagett, Dowager, Deceased.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for L. Sadler, 1660.

TO THE KING HIS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
Dread SOVEREIGN,
CUshi in the Court gave happy Counsel; and Ahimaaz from the Camp, brought
happy Tidings, for the Preservation, and Restoration of King David.

But -- my poor self (having neither Counsel to give, nor Tidings to bring
unto my Lord, the King) I -- even I (standing still, to see the Work, the great
Work of God; in the Becalming of this so Tempestuously-factious Nation) have, I
have indeed, Gratefully beheld, and Publicly declared, the merciful
dispensations of Gods wonderful providence, toward your Majesty, and your
People.

Your (Long Banished) Royal Self, is now Restored to your proper Throne: and
your (long Enslaved) Loyal People, are now Restored to their proper Freedom.

May your Majesty be ever thankful to the Lord: seeing -- the Honor is Yours:
the Happiness, is Ours: and the Glory, His.

May your People also be, ever Loyal to your Majesty -- being,

Englands Monarch, as to your Birth:

Gods Vicegerent, as to your Right:

Christendomes Mirror, as to your Virtues:

And the Worlds Wonder, as to your Restoration.

Nor is my Tongue now only, as the Pen of a Since the first apprehending of my
Person by a Troop of Horse, 1643. but especially 1654. under the (so called)
Protector his (so called) Council of State, and his (so called) Commissioners,
for my Inquisitio Anglicana.
ready Writer; neither is my Pen now only, as the Tongue of a ready Orator;
surely no:

My known Loyalty, will vindicate mine Integrity; and my known Sufferings, will
Vindicate my Loyalty, from all Flattery and Falsehood. Yea --

This very Sermon will present your Majesty with all the Loyal Zeal, and
affectionate Loyalty; that was, and is, and shall be ever (as due) confessed,
and (as true) observed;

by -- Your Majesty's -- Most Obsequious -- And Observant -- Subject. ANTHONY
SADLER.

MERCY in a MIRACLE. St. MATTHEW, 8. 25. Lord save us, we Perish.
THe happy issue of this Text, joyfully presents you, with the just cause of
this days solemnity: for, the Text implies, and this day expresses, a Solemn
Thanksgiving for some great Deliverance.

The Dsciples were in a raging storm, and so (God knows) were we* their Storm
was made a Calm, and so (Gods name be praised) is Ours.

The danger of the Disciples case was very Obvious, and their Preservation was
very Eminent; being wrought by Gods natural Son, ((...)) the Christ of God, and
the Savior of the World.

As for our Case, the Case of poor England, the Case of a sinful Nation, (and
therefore justly miserable) the case of a miserable Nation, (and therefore
justly sad) Ah my brethren, we were so near a Ruin, utter Ruin (because
deserved) that -- our Preservation, was not only Eminent, but strange: so
strange, that (as when God turned again the Captivity of Jacob) we (as people
in a Dream) do scarce believe the Truth of so strange a Preservation.

A Preservation, at such a time -- when (first) the whole Land was distracted,
with as many Miseries as Opinions.

When (Secondly) the very brands was kindled to set the pile on Fire.

When (Thirdly) the Royal City was made a Scorn, the Chains and Posts broken
up; the Gates and Percullesses broken down.

When (Fourthly) all the Royal Progeny, all the Honorable Nobility, all the
Reverend Clergy, all the loyal Gentry, and all the true-hearted Commonalty of
the Land, were disdained and proscribed to a bloody Massacre.

When (Fifthly) some Feared, others wondered and All complained. In a word --

When we knew not what to do, nor where to go: that -- then, (now in this so
violent a Tempest; a Tempest of more then common despair) that, then the great
God of Heaven and Earth, should (upon a sudden) in a way so unlikely, and at a
time so needful, should so turn about (as he has now done) the great. Wheel
of all Transactions: This, oh this (as the shadow upon the Dial, Vmbra diem,
docet umbra deum) certainly, it could not but tell us, that God was there.

God was there indeed, for though the instrument was obvious; yet the work was
misterious, and God in Both.

Let the Lord Monk have his deserved praise; yea, and his reward too, but let
the Lord of Hosts, God Almighty, have all the Glory, and our thanks for ever.

For, As great Deliverance has God given to his King, as to his people; yea to
the people, by their King, Gods Adopted Son, (...), the sure foundation of a
settled state.

O see what it is to wait upon God: God may delay, but he will not deny, to
help his servants.

Witness the return of our Sovereign, to his Throne; and his Subjects to their
Freedom.

The Lord make his Majesty truly Happy; his People truly Loyal; and all truly
thankful; for this Regal Restoration. thus --

If God stop his Ears, it is to open our mouths; if he afflict us, it is to make
us pray -- Lord save us, we Perish.

The Text (in General) is a prayer; wherein we might observe these three things.

1. The Form of it. 2. The Authors of it. and -- 3. The Reason of it.
or if you please

We might observe these four things,

1. The Deliverer, in the word, LORD. 2. The Deliverance, in the word, SAVE. 3.
The Delivered, in the word, US. 4. and Lastly, the Impulsive Cause thus moving
them to supplicate, that Deliverer, for this Deliverance, to his Delivered in
the word PERISH.
Lord save us, we Perish.

Thus is the Text a Prayer, and a Common Prayer too: here is (resonantia
compassionis) a fellow-feeling of each others Condition: and here is
(consonantia orationis) an holy Fellowship in each others supplication.

Each with, and each for other prays: and all pray, and altogether: saying,
Lord save us, we Perish.

And the Use of this, is to teach us; that Common Prayer (and in special that
of the Church of England, made public to the World by many Renowned and Godly
Princes; by many Reverend and Religious Prelates; by many lawful and Zealous
Parliaments. 1. To be so sound and Orthodox, that the Doctrinal part, is part
of our Religon. and 2. So plain and easy, that the meanest Capacity may know
what to say; and to say Amen to what he knows.) Common Prayer it is (vis unita)
Religion made strong in piety toward God; it is Vinculum Charitatis,) Religion
made known, in Charity toward our Neighbors.

For, 1. It shows forth each others minds.

2. It helps forward each others duty.

And, 3. It brings about each others purpose, to have what we pray for; and to
give the Lord the glory.

It was even so with these Disciples, the Case of One was the Case of All; and
the Prayer of One, was the Prayer of All: They be All as One, in point of their
Condition; and They be All as One, in point of Their Supplication: And if we be
(as They were) in one common Danger, we must say (as they did) in one Common
Prayer, -- Lord save us, we Perish.

But to pass by this of the Text (in general,) there is (in particular) a
twofold meaning, to be given of these words.

The first, is Litteral and plain.

The second, is mystical and obscure.

In the Litterall sense is meant, Affliction and Trouble, signified by that
outward Tempest, which our blessed Savior, and his Disciples, were now in.

In the mystical sense is meant Transgression and Sin, signified by that
inward Tempest, which the poor forlorn soul is woefully tossed with, through
her guilt and fear; her guilt of Sin, and fear of Punishment. now --

In point of Affliction, man is a Sufferer.

In point of Transgression, man is an Offender.

In point of both, God only is a Savior.

So that the sense of the word, is this;

Lord save us; else we perish in our Sins:

OR,

Lord save us, else we perish in our Sufferings.

In the mystical sense (whereby is meant Transgression; and wherein man is an
Offender,) you have these 3. Observations

First, That our Natural Condition is a sinful Condition, full of fear. --
SAVE US.

2. That our sinful Condition, is a woeful Condition, fu^l of danger. -- WE
PERISH.

3. That our poor Souls are undone for ever, if they be not preserved by a
Gracious Savior: -- Lord Save us, we Perish.

But in the litterall sense (whereby is meant affliction; and wherein man is a
Sufferer) one Observation only (which shall be God willing the subject of my
discourse) Presents its self, as most remarkable, and it is this. --

That the condition of all mankind, while they are on this side Heaven, is a
very sad condition.

And that for these three Reasons. because,

First, it is sad Naturally.

2. It is sad Universally: and,

3. It is sad Continually.

FIRST, It is sad Naturally.
From the King to the Beggar the way of Job is the way of all, to come into the
World Naked.

Naked came I (says he,) out of my Mothers womb; It is true by experience,
and true upon record. Job 1. 21.

And as we are born Naked, so are we born miserable: for (from him that sits
upon the Throne, to him that sits upon the Dunghill,) the saving of Eliphaz is
applicable to all. -- Man is born unto trouble, as the Sparks fly upwards. Job.
5. 7. -- The sparks fly upwards, because by nature they are Light: and Man is
born unto Trouble, because by Nature he is sinful: so sinful, that (flebile
principium) he is no sooner born, but he Cries; Thus --

Man's first entrance on this Earthly Stage,

Is solemnized with Tears: a strange Praesage,

Of stranger passages: his Infant -- Cries.

True-tragical-events, do Oraelize.

They do indeed, for punishment is the effect of sin; and Man being born
sinful, he is therefore born miserable; his Condition on this side Heaven is a
sad Condition; even Naturally: -- that is the First Reason.

SECONDLY, It is sad Universally.
I shall not instance, in the Troubles of David; (who was the most Upright, and
Famous among the Jews.

Nor (2.) shall I instance in the Afflictions of St. Paul (who was the most
Learned, and zealous among the Gentiles.)

Nor (3.) shall I instance in the Catastrophe Policrates (who was the most
Fortunate and Flourishing among the Heathen.)

Nor (4) shall I instance in the Solicitudes and Sufferings of the late King
Charles, (who was the most Excellent of Princes; and the best among
Christians.) no,

None of these; shall Center the Lines of my discourse; but I shall instance
One for All, and that is -- our Blessed Savior (who was and is, and is for
ever; the Son, the only Son, (primogenitus, unigenitus) and the best beloved of
his Father.

God had one Son without Sin; but not one without Sorrow. No, Christ himself,
to whom all things do bow and obey: He before whom the blessed Angels worship,
and the devils themselves do tremble: ((...)) God-and-Man, and between God and
man the only Mediator: He whose name is wonderful Councellor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father; the Prince of Peace, Esaias. 9. 6. He, even He, as he is
man, and lives here in this valley of Tears, He, even He, must be a weeping
too; and his Condition is a very sad Condition. Yea, so very sad, we do not
read that (at any time) he Laughed, but that he Wept we find thrice upon Record:

1. Over Jerusalem he Wept there. 2. At the grave of Lazarus he Wept there. 3.
In the garden, upon his Antepassion, he Wept there.
He wept for Jerusalem, so says St. Luke. He beheld the City and wept over it.

He wept for Lazarus, so says St. John, Jesus wept, then said the Jews,
behold how he loved him, John 11. 35. 36.

Lastly, he wept for Himself, so says St. Paul, In the days of his flesh, he
offered up strong Crying and Tears, unto him that was able to save him from
Death, Heb. 5. 7. -- thus

For Jerusalem, he wept Tears of Compassion.

For Lazarus he wept, Tears of Affection.

For himself he wept, Tears of Lamentation.

The story in this Chapter (in which you have my Text,) will witness the
Observation true, for if Jesus Christ himself be upon the Sea, the ship he
sails in shall be dangerously tossed; and the Disciples with him shall be
exceedingly afraid: So afraid, that they shall hastily disquiet their Lords
repose, and though he be asleep, they will not let him rest; for they came to
him and awoke him saying, Lord save us, we perish.

Thus, is our Condition, on this Heaven, a very sad Condition; because, --

It is so Universally, that is a second Reason.

THIRDLY, It is sad Continually.
I had no peace (says Job) neither had I quietness, neither had I rest; yet
trouble came, Job, 3. 26. it came indeed, it came with a witness; yea, it came
with four witnesses, each after other: and all upon a sudden, to salute their
Master, with their mournful news, saying -- The Oxen were plowing, and the
Asses feeding in their places, and Sabeans came violently and took them: yea
they have slain the servants, with the Edge of the Sword; but I only am
escaped, and come alone to tell thee.

And while he was yet speaking, another came and said, the fire of God is
fallen from Heaven, and has burnt up the Sheep and the Servants, and devoured
them: but I only am escaped, and come alone to tell thee.

And while he was yet speaking, came another and said; the Caldeans set out
three Bands; and fell upon the Camels, and have taken them, and have slain the
Servants with the Edge of the sword; but I only am escaped, and come alone to
tell thee.

And while he was yet speaking, came another, and said, thy Sons and thy
Daughters were eating and drinking Wine, in their eldest Brothers House; and
behold there came a great wind, from beyond the Wilderness, and smote the four
corners of the House; which fell upon the Children, and they are dead; and I
only am escaped, and come alone to tell thee.

Thus, each after other, and all upon a sudden, salute their Master, with most
mournful News.

Alas poor man, from the Womb to the Grave; as he is born with Cries, so he
lives with Crosses.

Take Moses, who was Gods servant: take Aaron, who was Gods Saint: take Abraham
who was Gods Friend: take David, who was a man after Gods own Heart: yea, (as I
said before) take the only Son of God, who is the Welbeloved of his Father: and
we shall find them all, bearing the burden, of continual Troubles.

Good Lord! how short is our time here; and yet, oh how many, are the miseries,
of our momentany continuance.

Here we live, but alas, (God knows) scarce a day without some trial, trouble;
some trial or other to disquiet us; or, some trouble or other, to discomfort us.

Alas, the pains and patience, which every one in his several calling, must
sadly undertake; is as hard to be undergone, as to be understood.

Oh with what care, and fear do even Princes wear their Crowns? (when by the
desperate presumption of Rebellious subjects) the very Crown it self (in a
Cursed Ambition) is taken from their Head, and their Head, from their Shoulders.

Ah -- (in fandum renovare cogor) what an Ugly and Fatal Lodging, that most
Royal Martyr, when (before his own Gate) he had a Scaffold for his Bed, and a
Block for a Pillow, to sleep his last in his own Blood: Thus look every way,
upon every one, we shall find them All, bearing the burden of continual
Troubles. yea --

If we look upon our now gracious King Charles the Second, (for whose
wonderful Restoration we now keep Holy Day.) Was not his Princely Pupill-age,
enforcedly trained up in the dreadful School of an intestine War?

Has not his whole life been from that time to this, a dangerous Pilgrimage,
from one Kingdom, to another people?

Oh how many Plots and Complots, were there to betray his Councels, to destroy
his Person?

After his Just Coronation in his Kingdom of Scotland, and his Just Advance to
regain his native Kingdom, and the Throne of England: How tedious was his
march? How perilous were his Quarters? How impotent was his Army? How potent
was his Adversary? How he was besieged (though he was not taken) and how he was
beaten (though he was not Conquered) I want words to make the Relation full.

Ah! to what a miserable Extremity, and to what an extreme Necessity, was his
Sacred Majesty exposed? when (as today) he was valiantly fighting for his three
Kingdoms; is yet, within a night or two flying for his dear life, disrobed of
his Princely Habit, wandering in a Wood, lodged in a Tree, and glad of a piece
of Bread: -- well,

God's providence, and the King's (then) preservation, was Mercy in a Miracle:
and God's Mercy, and the King's (now) Restoration, is the wonder of the world.
And --

What shall we say now, since the King's swaying of the Scepter, is not more
Royal then Auspicious? What shall we say now, since joyful England sings a
Requiem in the lap of Peace? What shall we say now, since every one sits under
his own Vine, and eats the fruits of their own labor? What shall we say now,
since the King is restored to his proper Throne? The Parliament, to its proper
Constitution? The Church to its proper Right? The Law, to its proper Courts?
And the whole Nation, to its proper Freedom? What shall we say now? Are the
troubles even of the King himself now ended? Or rather, are not the Thorns of
continual Care platted together in the Jewels of his Crown?

O Solon, Solon -- nemo ante obitum faelix. -- Ah my brethren, what Craesus
found, the King feels, and all may say, that our Condition in this world, is
to bear the burden of continual troubles.

Certainly our Prayers, our Pity, our Lives, our Fortunes, All are but the due
Subsidiaries, to the careful managements of our godly King.

His very person is Sacred, so may his Troubles be; even Sanctified to be
undergone.

The Lord (in mercy) be gracious to his Majesty, that while the government of
so many Millions of people, are committed to his Charge, he may neither faint,
nor fall, under the pressures of so great a charge. for --

It cannot be avoided, and it must be endured (as the lot of all mankind, on
this side Heaven,) to bear the burden of Continual Troubles: So says Job, in
the 14 of that book the last verse, While his flesh is upon him, he shall be
sorrowful and while his soul is in him it shall Mourn.

Let me crave your patience, to instance this truth but once more in our Lord
and Savior; who from the place of his Birth, to the place of his Burial, was
born very meanly, lived very poorly, and dyed very sadly.

1. He was born very meanly, yea, so very meanly born, that Bethlem (though St.
Hierome calls it a pretty City, yet Micah calls it a little City; and) that is
his place, a common Inn in that City is his House: the Stable in that Inn is
his Room: the Mainger in that Stable is his Cradle: the Beasts at the Mainger,
are his Company: Ah, so contemptible is his Birth, that he is rejected and
despised of men, Esaias. 53. 3.

2. As Christ was born very meanly, so he lived very poorly; yea, he so very
poorly lives, that even of a strange woman he begs, and begs for very water,
John. 4. 7.

He is so poor, that his Disciple must fish for money, to pay his Tribute. He
is so poor, that (alas poor man) he has no house nor home: no he is so very
poor, that (as if his condition, did bespeak our compassion,) he puts the Foxes
and the Birds before him: The Foxes (says he) have holes, and the birds of the
Air have Nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his Head. No,

He is so very poor, that he is hated, and scorned, and blasphemed: one while
he is accounted a Deceiver, then for a Devil; one while for a Glutton and a
Wine-bibber, then for a friend of Publicans and Sinners: one while for a mad
man, then for a Fool, in the end he a Malefactor; and so thirdly he very s^dly
dies. --

Yea so very sadly, that an Angel from Heaven strengthens him in his very Ante
passion.

He so very sadly dies, that his Agony is Horrid, and his prayer importunate:
so importunate, that he prays a first, a second and a third time; he falls
upon his knees, he falls upon the ground, he falls upon his face and prays; --
Father -- Oh my Father, -- Abba Father, If it be possible let this Cup pass
from me, Matthew. 26. 39. Mark 14. 36.

Oh! what a death did our dear Savior dye! when a Cup so filled, and filled so
full; with the most bitter wrath, of his most wrathful Father, against those
sinners he undertook to save; even that Cup drink off he must and will; yea he
must drink it off, and did. Insomuch,

That his Agony is so very strange, he sweats blood; and that blood, not in a
thin distilling or forcing out its way, through the Curious pores of his most
tender body: no, but it was so much that it came forth by drops, and those
drops so many, that each followed other trickling down to the Ground, Luke 22.
44. Yea,

He so very sadly dies, that he was much affected, though he was not disturbed:
though he was not disturbed in his Superior Will, he was much affected in his
Natural Will: yea so, and so much affected, that he was much moved in,
(though he was not Removed from,) the work of man's Redemption. No, but --

He so very sadly dies, that, Pertulit dura verba, duriora verbera, durissima
Supplicia. Taking the Infirmities of our frail Nature, he bore the punishment
of our sinful Nature: and that such punishment, as none but God the Father
could Inflict; and none but God the Son could Bear. In a word,

He so very sadly dies, that he dies shamefully, painfully, and notoriously; he
dies shamefully without the City, painfully upon the Cross, and notoriously
among Thieves: among them, ay, and between them too, as if he had conducted and
led them thither. Thus -- our blessed Lord and Savior being,

Born very meanly.

Living very poorly; and,

Dying very sadly.

Our observation is as True as Lamentable. That,

The Condition of all mankind, while they are on this side Heaven; is a very
sad Condition.

Because First, it is so Naturally. 2. It is so Universally. 3. It is so
Continually.

Well then is it so, that Jesus Christ and his Disciples are in a great
Tempest? Must all Mankind (per tot discrimina rerum) through many Afflictions,
enter into Heaven? And must all allwaies suffer in the world, Ere they shall be
glorified in the world to come?

This then may serve to Exhort, and to Encourage us, to bear Christ's Cross
with patience; and to submit our Will to God's Will, in whatsoever comes to
pass.

And that for these three Reasons.

Because

1. Our sufferings, are not things New. 2. Our sufferings are not things
Strange. and, 3. Our sufferings are not things Remediless.
1. Our Sufferings are not things New, so says St. John, 1. Epist. 3. 13.
Marvel not (my brethren) if the world hate you: it is no New thing.

If the world hate You, ye know (says our blessed Savior,) that it hated Me;
it hated me, before it hated You, John 15. 18. Ye know it, it is so obvious to
your observation, it is not worth your wonder. Marvel not: for, our sufferings
are not things New.

2. They are not things strange: so says St. Pet. 1 Epist. 4. 12. Dearly
beloved, think it not strange, concerning the Fiery Trial which is to Try you;
as though some strange thing happened unto you. for,

Your Ttroubles are but your Trials, and as they are not New, to be wondered at:
so they are not strange to be thought on: so thought on, as to have your
thoughts troubled when your troubles come. no,

Come they will, and come upon All, and by All (both Prince and people) they
should be borne patiently. for,

Troubles are not such New things, as to be wondered at with amazement; nor are
they such Strange things, as to be thought on with despair. And that because,

3. And Lastly, our sufferings are not things Remediless; not Remediless, --
no,

Blessed be God, we have a better Vmbrage to save us from the Heat, then the
Gourd of Jonah.

We have a better Deity, to supplicate for help; then the Idol of Ahab.

Our God is in Heaven, and this God is our hope, and strength, A present help
in Trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. He is so because his power's Allmighty: and he will be
so, because his Mercie's infinite.

And yet God many times, suffers his dear Children to be brought low; yea so
very low, that (with the Prophet Eliah) they are weary to live, and do desire
to dye: for so we read 1 Kings. 19. 4. He went a days Journey into the
wilderness, and came, and sat down, under a Juniper Tree, and desired that he
might dye: and said, It is now enough, O Lord take away my life, for I am not
better then my Fathers.

But why does the Lord deal thus hardly with his poor Servants, and seem to
afflict them even unto death? why does God leave them many times so to
themselves, that they know not what to do, nor where to go? as if their misery
were past all Remedy? why truly --

The Reasons may be these three.

1. To make them the more sensible of their danger, and the more zealous for
deliverance: that they might the more consider, the condition they are in, how
sad it is; and how much it needs, the help of Heaven.

When the Israelites in Egypt, had their Task doubled; and that they must make
up their Tale, and yet go find their Straw; they then (says the Text,) saw
themselves to be in an evil case: a case so evil, that it made them cry to
Moses; and Moses to cry to God; and God for to save the people: being sensible
of their bondage, and zealous for Deliverance.

Or (2.) God may suffer his dear Children, to be brought very low, to make a
trial of their Graces.

If Satan afflict Job, it shall be to try his Patience. If Rabshaketh revileth
Hezekiah, it shall be to try his Confidence. And if God himself tempt Abraham,
it shall be to try his Faith.

If the Lord suffer an open Enemy, to Assault us; or a private Enemy, to Abuse
us; if the Lord suffer our Wife, and Children, our Liberty, and Livelihood, and
all we have to be taken from us: if the Lord suffer the Ship of all our dear
Enjoyments, to be Gravel'd in the Sands of Obloquie, or to be split against the
Rocks of Tyranny; the Reason of all may be but our trial only: and that either
of our Patience (as in the case of Job) or of our Considence (as in the case of
Hezekiah) or of our Faith (as in the case of Abraham.) Or --

3. And lastly, God may suffer his dear Children to be brought very low: to
make them the more thankful when Comfort is given, and Help is had.

When the Israelites had a Raging Sea before them; and a Barren Wilderness
besides them; and an Armed Enemy behind them: then (says the Text) they were
sore afraid, so afraid, that they cried out unto the Lord. And what then?
Stand still (says Moses) and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show
to you, to day, Exodus 14. 13.

Stand still, i. e. be not afraid but hope, stand still and see, i. e. be not
Faithless, but believe: the Salvation of the Lord, i. e. his Power, as being
most able to save, which he will show to you, i. e. his mercy as being most
willing to save, You, and that even now to day, i. e. his wisdom as having his
set time to save.

God has his set time indeed, and here he showed it; so showed it, that Moses
and the Children of Israel, Sang a Song unto the Lord, Exodus 15. 1.

Thus, when Comfort is given, and Help is had, it makes Gods Children to be the
more thankful.

This made the Israelites, to keep their Paschal Feast; to praise the Lord, for
their Freedom from Pharaoh, Exodus 12.

This made Deborah, to sing her Trinmphal Song; to praise the Lord, for the
Victory over Sisera, Judge. 5.

This made David to indite his grateful Psalm, to praise the Lord for his
Deliverance from Saul, Psalm. 18. Yea, and This, makes England, to keep this
Holy; (even a Feast of Congratulation) to praise the Lord for the Restoration
of our Sovereign: and the Freedom, Victory, and Deliverance of our Religion,
Laws, and Liberty, from Pharaoh, Sisera, and Saul, i. e. all the Enemies of
God, and the King.

And thus for these three Reasons, does God (many times) suffer his Saints and
Servants to be brought very low. As --

1. To make them, the more Zealous. 2. To make them the more Famous; and, 3. To
make them, the more Thankful.
Or if you please; why God suffers his Saints, and Servants to be so much in,
and so often under Affliction.

The Reasons may be these Four.

Because

1. There is Help for it. 2. There is Honor with it. 3. There is Comfort in
it; and, 4. There is Profit by it.
By Affliction there is Profit.

For by the misery and the Affliction, which the Children of God are brought
unto; they are brought the sooner Home (like the Prodigal to his Father) to
know God, and themselves; God's Justice, and their own Deservings.

Yea, by the smart of Affliction, they do happily feel God's Anger to the
bewailing of their sins: they do bewail their Sins, to the amending of their
Lives: they do amend their Lives, to the gaining of God's Favor, and they
gain his Favor, to the obtaining of his Glory. And thus,

By Affliction there is Profit.

SECONDLY. With Affliction there is Honor.
For Affliction makes the Servant like his Lord: and Christians like their
Savior; who (dispising the shame) endured the Cross.

We read 2. Sam. 15. 30. that David went up the Mount of Olives, and Wept as he
went up, and had his Head covered, and went bare footed, and all the people
that were with him, had every man his Head covered, and as they went up they
Wept.

They did so, it was their Piety to Weep for the King; but their Honor to
Weep with him.

If the sufferings of the King affect the Subjects with Sympathy and Zeal; it
is magnum indeed, but not mirum; because it is the Subjects Honor, as well as
Duty, to be as their Sovereign, in the worst of Dangers.

The Marquess of Ormond.

The Lord Willmot.

And the rest of the Royal Worthies; they could not choose but Grieve, to suffer
with the King; in that, the King himself did suffer, and yet they could not
choose but Rejoice too, to suffer for the King; in that, the Kings Cause, was
God's, and God's Cause -- and -- the King's, was Theirs. Theirs --

Renowned Nobles, it was their Duty to suffer with it; but their Honor to
suffer for it. for,

With Affliction, there is Honor.

THIRDLY, In Affliction there is Comfort.
Comfort indeed, such as made the Disciples to rejoice, when they were Beaten;
and to sing Psalms, when they were in Prison.

And well they might; for the Author of all their Sufferings, is most Gracious:
the inflicting of them is Just: the measure of them is Moderate: the time of
them is Short: and the end of them is Blessed. for,

In Affliction, there is Comfort.

LASTLY, For Affliction, there is Hope.
There is so, for Gods Cause, found a Constantine its Defender, in dispite of
the Arrian Heresy. and,

God's Prophets, found an Obadiah their Preserver; in dispite of Jezebel's
Cruelty. and,

God's King, found a Jehoiada, his Restorer, in dispite of Athaliahs Treachery.
Yea, and so has our now dread Sovereign, Charles the Second; he has (in
dispite of the Treachery, the Cruelty, and Heresy of all his Enemies) found the
King of Kings, his Helper, to defend him; and his Defender, to Preserve him;
and his Preserver, to Restore him; and his Restorer, to Establish him, in the
Throne of his Kingdom, and the Hearts of his People.

Oh! what cannot the Lord do? above means, against means, without means, and
with any means? when --

By means of (that most trusty Lord) the Lord Wilmot, God did defend the King:
by means of (that most Elect Lady) the Lady Lane, God did preserve the King:
and by means of (that most Auspicious General) the Lord Monck, God did Restore
the King.

Oh! what will not the Lord do for those that serve him? Because the King
puts his Trust in the Lord, in the Mercy of the the most High, he shall not
miscarry. He shall not, no, he did not: for by a few single (singular) persons,
such a King is so Restored; that all Christendom admires: and such a
Restoration, is so established; that all the world's amazed.

Oh how should this encourage us, never to fall back, never to fall off, and
never to fall away from God: both to own his Cause, to espouse his Quarrel,
and to suffer for his sake. because, --

When all is done, that evil men can do; and when all is done, that evil Angels
can suggest. Undone we shall not be, No, so says the holy Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.
8. 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but
not in despair: Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down but not destroyed.

Why? the Psalmist tells you, Psalm. 37. 23: 24. The Lord orders the good man's
goings, and makes his way acceptable to himself.

Though he fall he shall not be cast away; for the Lord upholdeth him with his
hand. And therefore our greatest Misery, is not past a Remedy: Oh no, (Blessed
be God) there is --

Help for it.

Honor with it.

Comfort in it. and,

Profit by it.

Now to bear up thy poor Soul, against the most boisterous winds, and the
raging Sea of the most tempestuous Troubles; remember these Four things.

1. That come what will, the Disciples of Jesus Christ cannot but do well.
God's followers are under God's Providence; and his Providence is no less
allsufficient then Misterious.

For (remember 2.) That Condition is the best which the Lord sends: come a
Calm or a Tempest, Prosperity or Adversity, Health or Sickness, Life or
Death; that Condition is the best, which the Lord sends; because, every
Condition to a Child of God is a sanctified Condition

The Lord will sanctify our Sorrows, by giving us comfort; (and I, blessed be
God have found it so.)

The Lord will sanctify our Poverty, by giving us Contentment: (and I, blessed
be God have found it so.)

The Lord will sanctify our Troubles, by giving of us Patience; (and I blessed
be God have found it so.)

The Lord will sanctify our Patience, by giving us Deliverance, (and you, and
I, and All, blessed be God, have found it so; as at this day.

Therefore (remember 3.) that thou have Jesus Christ with thee in the ship.

If at any time a Tempest shall Arise, upon thy Goods, by way of plunder; or if
a Tempest shall Arise upon thy good Name, by way of Slander: or, if a Tempest
shall Arise upon thy Liberty, by way of Imprisonment; or, if a Tempest shall
arise upon any thing thou have by way of Oppression, then remember (I say,)
that thou have Jesus Christ with thee in the ship; though he be but in the
hinder part; yet there he is, absent himself he will not, and want for help
thou can not so long as he is there. for,

4. And lastly remember, that as the Glory of Jesus Christ shall (one day) be
Thine, so (for the present) thy sufferings shall be his.

His Glory shall be thine; for the Glory that thou gave Me, I have given
Them, (says Christ) that they may be one, as we are one. Father, I will that
they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am; that they may
behold my Glory. John 17. 22. 24. and till then, --

Thy sufferings shall be his; Saul, Saul, (says Christ) Why persecutest thou
me? Me, the Lord is wounded through his servants sides, and the wrongs done
them, are as done unto himself. Acts. 9. 4.

Come then, Oh come poor soul acheer, let not thy Heart be over sad; nor thy
Spirit disquieted. The Deluge did but mount the Arc the nearer unto Heaven:
and the Tempest here, did but make the Disciples to know the Lord the more.

No Winds nor Weather, nor Waves, nor Rocks, can Wrack the Vessel in which
Christ sails; no, nor Words, nor Actions, nor Men, nor Devils, can Assinate
the King; whom the Lord preserves. for,

The Lord will hide him, and that privily; he will hide him privily, and that
by his own presence, from the provoking of all men: ye a, and he will keep him
too, and that secretly; he will keep him secretly, and that in his own
Tabernacle from the strife of Tongues, Psalm. 31. 22. and now --

Oh (miranda loquor) what a providence have we seen, made happily obvious, to
the glory of our good God; the settlement of this disturbed Nation, and the
wonder of all the World!

Oh, how may our Mouths be filled with Laughter, and our Tongues with Joy,
since the Lord (in mercy) has (so strangely and so truly) made, our Bondage to
cease; and our Freedom to return!

Oh, that our Lawful king, our Native Prince, (so long a time, by so strong a
hand, Banished from his Rightful Throne) should now return, return in peace;
without any blood spilt, or any person hurt in so wonderful a Triumph; that his
Majesty should be brought Home, with prayers of affection, and tears of joy:
flying (as it were) upon the Wings of the love and loyalty, of all faithful
Subjects: certainly it is a providence, never to be forgotten: it is a mercy to
be acknowledged; this day, henceforth, and for ever!

Oh let us so Honor the King, as to serve God; and so serve God, as to love
our Neighbor: that so, being always Holy toward God, and Loyal to our
Sovereign, and loving to each other; we may keep, and always keep, the Unity
of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace.

Which that we may, let us so live, as becomes the Gospel; let us (now) so
rejoice, as becomes good Subjects: and Oh, remember (I beseech you) that, it is
not the owning of the King's Cause, nor the Honoring of the King's Person, nor
the Drinking of the King's Health; but it is our fearing of God, and amending
our lives: which will make the King Happy, and our selves blessed. To conclude
--

Let us remember, when any Affliction does befall, either our Prince or the
Church, or the State, or our selves, then not to think it either Strange, or
New, or Remediless.

Not Strange, because it is Natural:

Not New, because it is Common:

Not Remediless, because it is Curable:

For we have a Lord to save us, in the most perishing Condition: This day we
have (knowingly) found it; and we do this day thankfully acknowledge it, in the
present Restoration of our Sovereign King Charles.

And therefore that the Lord our God, may bless our King, and bless US All;
let us ever Pray, --

Lord Save us, or we Perish.

FINIS.

