A SAD MESSAGE FROM HEAVEN Threatening Destruction to ENGLAND: EXCEPT Speedily
prevented by real Repentance and amendment of LIFE.

Prove. 28.2. For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof.

But, Woe to them for their day is coming, the time of their Visitation,

Jer. 50.27.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Vere, and are to be sold at his shop at the upper end
of the Old-Bayley, 1648.

Symptoms of Ruin, OR, The Sword and Famine, the Attendants of Oppression.
Whatsoever things were written aforetimes were written for our learning, Romans
15.4.

But,

Ier. 6.10,11,13.
To whom shall I speak and give warnning that they may hear (says the
Prophet.) Behold, their ears are uncircumcised they cannot hearken. The word
of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it. 11 Therefore am
I full of the fury of the Lord, I am weary with holding in, I will power it out
upon the children abread. 13 For from the least of them even to the greatest of
them, every one is given to covetousness, And from the Prophet to the Priest
every one deals falsely Isa. 1.23.
A wonderful and horrid thing is committed in the land, Thy Princes are
rebellious and companions of Theives, Every one loves gifts and follows
after rewards. Ier. 22.27.
Their Princes in the midst thereof are like Wolves ravening the prey, to
shed blood and destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. Micha 2.2.
They covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses and take them away,
so they oppress a man and his house: Even a man and his heritage. Mark 12.40.
Which devour widows houses, and for pretenses make long prayers.

Yea thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.31.
They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words but they will not do them, for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness.
Amos 3.10.
For they know not to do right says the Lord, who store up violence and
robery in their Palaces. Psalm. 14.4.
Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? Who eat up my people as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord Psalm. 53.4.
Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voices to be
heard on high. Hos. 9.15.
For all their princes are reuolters. Isa, 56.11.
They are greedy dogs which can never have enough. Hag. 1.7.
Therefore Thus says the Lord of hosts, Consider your doings. Isa. 58.5.
Is it such a fast that I have chosen, will ye call this a fast? and an
acceptable day to the Lord? Amos 5.16.21.22.
Therefore the Lord the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus, I hate and detest
your Fast days, and I will not smell in your Solemn Assemblies, Though you
offer me burnt offerings, and your meat offerings, I will not accept them. Isa.
66.3.
He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man, He that sacrifices a lamb,
is as if he cut off a dogs neck: He that offers an offering, as if he
offered swines blood, And he that burns Incence, as if he blessed an Idol.
Isa. 1.15.
And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea,
when ye make many prayers I will not hear, your hands are full of blood. Prove.
2.13,14.
Who leave the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness Amos
5.23,24.
Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked,
Therefore, Take away from me the noise of your lying, for I will not hear the
melody of your Viols.

But let Judgment run down as water, and righteousness as a mighty
stream. Isa. 58.6,7.
Is not this the fast that I have chosen to lose the bonds of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke. 7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring
the poor that are cast out into thy house, and when thou see the naked that
thou cover him. Mat. 9.13.
Go ye and learn what that means, says our Savior, I will have mercy and
not sacrifice. For Ps. 25.10.
All the ways of God are mercy and truth. Pro. 14.2.
He that walks in his uprightness fears the Lord, But he that is perverse
in his ways dispiseth him Ezekiel. 2.3 4.
But They and their fathers have transgressed against me, even to this very
day, for they are impudent children and stif-hearted. Deuteronomy. 32 5.
They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children,
they are a perverse and crooked Generation. Isa 66.3.
Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their souls delights in their
abominations. Ier. 18.12 13.
And they say -- But we will walk after out own doings, and we will every one
do the imaginations of his evil heart. 13 Therefore thus says the Lord, ask
ye now amongst the heathen who has heard such things. Isa. 1.2
Hear Oh Hearens and give ear Oh Earth, I have nourished children, and they
have rebelled against me. Isa. 5.3 4
Judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard: What could I have done more for
them. Ps. 107.6.
When they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of
their distress. Mat. 11.21.
And if the mighty works which had been done in you had been done in Tyer and
Sydon they would have repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes. Job. 37.14.
Harken unto this, consider the wondrous works of God. Hag. 1.7.
And Consider your doings. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord O foolish people and unwise? Ier. 5.29.
Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? Deuteronomy. 23.25.
I will heap miseries upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them. Ier. 13.14
25.
And I will dash them one against another, the father and son together says
the Lord, I will not pity nor spare nor have merry but destroy them. 25 This
is thy lot, the portion of thy measure from me says the Lord, Because thou
have forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood Ier. 11.22.
Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold I will punish them, their young
men shall dye by the sword, and their sons and their daughters shall dye by
famine. Eze. 7.27.
And the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled, and I will do unto
them after their ways, and according to their doings will I judge them. Isa.
3.11.
Woe to the wicked it shall be evil with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. Ps. 7,16.
His mischeife shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate.

Deuteronomy. 32.41,42.
If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on indignation. I will
render vengeance to mine Enemies, I I will reward them that hate me. 24. I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood, And my sword, shall devour flesh. 1 Samuel
15.33.
And as thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childles
among women. Rev. 13.9,10.
If any man have an ear to hear let him hear. 10 He that leads into
captivity, shall go into captivity, And he that kills with the sword, shall
be killed with the sword Mich. 7.13.
The land shall be desolate, because of them that dwell therein for the fruit
of their doings. Pro. 12.14.
And the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him. Judge. 1.6,7,
And Adonibezeck said threescore and ten Kings having their thumbes and their
great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table, as I have don, so God
has requited me.

1 Samuel 7.9 10,11,12.
And Nathan said unto David. 9 Thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the
sword and have taken his wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the
sword of the children of Ammon. 10 Therefore the sword shall never depart from
thy house. 11 And I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto
thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of the sun. 12
Thou did it secretly, but I will do it before all Israel, and in the sight
of the sun. b For there is nothing hid that shall not be manifested, neither
any thing kept secret but that it shall come abroad 1 Cor. 3.8.
And every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor.

Ps. 18.25,26.
With the upright man thou will show thy self upright, and with the froward
thou will show thy self froward, Mat. 7.2.
And with what measure you mere it shall be measured to you again. Gen, 9.6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image of
God made he man. Mat. 26.52.
And Jesus said -- put up again thy sword into his place, for All they that
take the sword shall perish with the sword. Jam. 4.1,2,3,4.
From whence comes wars and fightings among you come they not hence? even of
your lusts. 2 Ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to have. 3 That ye may
spend it on your lusts. 4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses Know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? Therefore Ps. 68.30.
scatter thou the people that delight in war, yea, Thus says the Lord. Amos 9
1.
I will slay the last of them with the sword, he that flees of them shall not
flee away, and he that escapes of them shall not be delivered. For Ezekiel. 6.12.
He that remains and is beseiged shall die by the famine, thus will I
accomplish my fury upon them. Mic. 2.1,2,3.
And now Oh ye Princes this commandment is for you; if ye will not hear to
give glory to my name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon
your blessings y^, I have cursed them already, Because ye did not lay it to
heart. 3 Behold I will corrupt your seed and spread dung in your faces even the
dung of your solemn feasts Hos. 9.9.
For they have deeply corrupted themselves as in the days of Gibiah (Judges 1)
Therefore he will remember their iniquities he will visit their sins. For, Job
35.9.
by reason of multitudes of oppressione they make the oppressed to cry, they
cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty. Job. 20.19
Because he has oppressed and forsaken the poor, because he has violently
taken away an house which he built not. Ps. 94.9.10.
He that planted the ear shall not he hear, he that formed the eye shall he
not see? He that chastises the Heathen shall he not correct? He that teaches
man knowledge, shall not he know? Isa. 49.26.
For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy I will arise
says the Lord. Ps. 12.5.
And I will feed them that oppressed thee with their own flesh and they shall
be drunk with their own blood as with new wine. Isa. 10.13,14
For he says by the strength of my hand have I done it, and by my wisdom I
have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasuries, and I
have put down the Inhabitants of the land, as a valiant man. 14 And my hands
has found as a nest the riches of the people, and as one gathers eggs that
are left have I gathered all, etc. Hab. 1.16.
Thus they sacrifice to their net, and burn incense unto their Drag, Because
by them their portion is fat. Therefore Ezekiel. 21.9,10,11,28,30,31.
Thus says the Lord a sword a sword is sharpened and four bished. 10 It is
sharpened to make a sore slaughter, it is fourbished that it may glitter. 11
And it is fourbished to give into the hands of the slayer. 28 For the slaughter
it is fourbished, to consume because of the glittering. 30 I will judge thee in
the land of thy nativity. 31 And I will power out mine indignation upon thee, I
will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hands
of brutish men, and skillful to destroy. Deuteronomy. 28.10.
A Nation of a fierce countenance which shall not regard the person of the old,
nor show favor to the young. Ezekiel. 21 32.
For, Thou shall be as fuel to the fire, thy blood shall be in the midst of
the Land.

Isa. 10.5,6.
Oh Assirian the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine
indignation. 6 I will send him against an hypocritical Nation And against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them down like mire in the streets. Ps. 149.8.
To bind their Kings with chains, and their nobles with links of iron. Hos.
4.1,2,3,9.
For the Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of the land, because
there is no truth nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. 2 By swearing,
and lying, and kiling and stealing and committing adultery, they break out,
and blood touches blood. 3. Therefore shall the land mourn, and all that
dwells therein shall anguish. 9 And there shall be like people like Priests,
and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them for their doings. Jer.
5.31.
The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and
my people loves to have it so? But what will ye do in the end thereof. Jer.
14.14.
The Prophets prophecy lies in my name, I send them not, they prophecy unto
you a false vision and devination and the deceit of their own heart, Jer.
7.8,9,10,11.
Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot profit. 9 Will ye steal, murder,
and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and walk after other Gods (for ye
cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24.) 10 And come and stand before me in
this house, which is called by my name, and say we are delivered to do all
these abominations. 11 Is this house which is called by my name, become a den
of thieves in your eyes, Behold, I have seen it says the Lord. Jer. 25.29.
Therefore I will call for a sword. Isa: 34.5.
My sword shall be hathed in Heaven, it shall come down upon the people of my
curse to judgment.

Isa. 17.10.14.
And because thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation, and have not been
mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore behold at eventide trouble, and
before the morning he is not, this is the portion of them that spoil us, and
the lot of them that rob us. Zeph. 13.13,
Their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation, they shall
also build houses and net inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards but not
drink the wine thereof. For Ier. 51.56.
The Lord God of recompenses shall surely requite.

Isa. 29.13,14,9,10.
Wherefore thus says the Lord, forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. 14
Therefore behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even
a mervelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

9 Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out and say, they are drunken but not
with wine, they stagger but not with strong drink. 10 For the Lord has poured
out upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, your
Priests and your Rulers has he covered. Tit. 3.3.
For they are foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures. living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another.

But if ye bite and devour one another, Take heed ye be not devoured one of
another, for thus says the Lord, I will call for a sword, and every man's sword
shall be against his brother.

For the sword shall devour from the one end of the land even unto the other
end of the land and no flesh shall have peace. Ja. 5.1,2,3,4,5.
Go to now ye rich men weep and houle for your miseries that shall come upon
you. 2 Your riches are corrupted, and your garments motheaten. 3 Your gould and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have heaped treasures together for
the last day. 4 Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your
fields which is of you kept by fraud, cries, and the cries -- are entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. 5 ye have lived on earth and been wanton, ye
have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter. Therefore, Ezekiel.
7.5,6,17,18,19.
Thus says the Lord an evil an only evil behold is come. 6 An end is come it
waits for thee, behold it is come. 17 Al hands shall be feeble, and all knees
shall be as weak as water. 18 They shall gird themselves with sackcloath,
horror shall cover them And shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon
all their heads 19 They shall cast their silver into the streets, and their
gold shall be removed, their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, they shall not satisfy their souls
nor fill their bowels, because it is the stumbling block of their iniquity.
Mat. 27.6.
Because it is the price of blood. Amos 2.6.
for they have sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
shoes. Pro. 1.19.
So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which take away the
lives of the owners thereof. Zep. 3.7.
I punished them but they rose early and corrupted all their doings 2 Kin.
17.17.
and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord. Ps. 62 4,9.
they delight in lies, they bless with their mouths but curse inwardly:
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; To be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter the^ vanity Romans 3.10,11,12
13,15,16,17,18.
As it is written there is none righteous no not one. 11 There is none that
seeks after God. 12 They are all gone out of the way, they are altogether
become unprofitable, there is none that does good no not one. 13. Their
throat is an open sepulcher with their tongues have they used deceit, the
poison of aspes is under their lips. 15 Their feet are swift to shed blood. 16
Destruction and misery are in their ways. 17 And the way of peace they have not
known. 18 There is no fear of God before their eyes. 1 Timothy 3.1,2,3,4,5.
For this know, that in the latter days perilous, times shall come. 2 For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous boasters, proud 3 Without
natural affection, Covenant-breakers, false accusers, incontinent fierce,
dispisers of those that are good. 4 Traitors, heady high minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God. 5 having a form of godliness but denying
the power there of Mat. 18.7.
For it must be that offenses come says our Savior, but woe unto them by whom
they come,

Mat. 23.13,14.
Therefore, Woe unto you scribes and pharisees hipocrites, for ye shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer
others, yea, them that are entering to go in. 4 Woe unto you scribes, pharisees,
hypocrites, for ye devour widows houses, and for pretense make long prayers,
therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation Ps. 10.7.
The Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man. Even so ye also outwardly
appear righteous unto men but within ye are full of hypocrisy, and iniquity.
Deuteronomy. 27.17,18,24.
Therefore cursed be he that removes his neighbors landmark cursed be he
that makes the blind to wander out of the way cursed be he that smites his
neighbor secretly, and all the people shall say Amen Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

John Downame.


