Several particulars showing the many great Conveniences or receiving the
Imposition or Excise at the Custom House, by way of Impost, upon all Goods and
Merchandise imported.
I. In reference to the State.
1. THe intricate and uncertain Accounts now made with Merchants and Tradesmen,
pretended by Shrinkage, Leakage, and decaying of Goods, in the way the Excise
is now in, will be prevented; as also the adventures that are run, and losses
often made by the obscurity of persons, and the difficulty of finding their
Goods, when once passed the Custom House, together with the length of time
before sale, until which Excise cannot be demanded, all which as it now
stands, can no ways be remedied.

2. The settling of that Revenue by way of Impost, so long as the necessity of
the Commonwealth shall require, is more agreeable to the minds of the people,
then by that distasteful name of Excise.

3. The Revenue would be more punctually received with the same hands, and at
the same charge, the Customs usually are, and that vast charge of many
thousands per annum now paid to the several Officers of the Excise, spared.

4. The many Exorbitances, and arbitrary proceedings committed and practiced by
the several Officers employed in that service, which has not a little
reflected upon the Parliament, to the great grief and unjust vexations both of
Merchants and Tradesmen, would be wholly taken away, viz. The stopping and
detaining of their Goods, after duty paid, upon slender surmises, and
frivolouss informations; Their often waitng and attending before they could
have any redress; the searching of their houses, waiting in their shops, and
no recompense given to any who have had their goods so seized, and detained,
though nothing has been made good against them; By all which, the Ancient and
most received Rights of the people, have not a little been infringed.

II. In reference to Merchants.
1. THereby they will be at liberty to remove, sell, or barter their goods or
any part of them, at all times and seasons as they please, which now they
cannot do.

2. When the Rates shall be settled, and time of payment fixed at the
Custom House, it will be the only means to prevent all those miscarriages and
inconveniences that happen both to Merchants and Tradesmen, after goods are
there cleared.

III. In reference to Inland Traders.
1. INland Traders will be free from Officers, tickets, fines, penalties, and
the like, as before is expressed.

2. They would also be at liberty after duty paid, to dispose of their Goods at
all times and seasons, as their occasions shall require, which now they cannot
do, the want of which is much prejudicial, burdensome, and very vexatious, to
all Tradesmen, to their great discouragement and loss of Trade.

3. Hereby will be prevented that great and intolerable evil, and ruining, both
to Merchants and Tradesmen, which they groan under, by reason that the Officers
of the Excise, under pretenses, and upon occasion, do make a deeper inspection
into all men's Trades, and thereby a very great advantage to themselves, both in
buying and selling, above any other; the Trader being forced to discover the
quality of his goods, the places where, and persons to whom he sells; and of
whom and at what prizes he buys, whereby the whole manner of their trades have
been discovered and taken up, by the Officers of the Excise, and others, who
before that time traded not at all; those who did, yet not in several of those
commodities they now trade in; to the very great prejudice of very many eminent
Tradesmen, that bear a very great share in the public charge.

4. Both Merchants and Tradesmen shall be free from that daily charge and
trouble, they are now at, in the sending for tickets, and Officers to the
Excise Office.

Object. And whereas some have objected, that if the Excise should be secured
at the Custom House, it will much exhaust the stock of the Merchant; and that
the Merchant will be in hazard, to make bad debts of the Excise, as well as of
the principal.

Answ. It is answered, the Merchant sells generally for ready money,
therefore the Excise will be paid unto him before it be due to be paid to the
State, and so the Merchant is freed from that hazard he pretends, when he
shall receive the Excise upon the sale of his goods; and the Inland trader
gives great credit, and usually sells at long time; So that it is the Inland
trader, that bears the burden of the Excise, and his stock is thereby
exhausted, and not the stock of the Merchant.

Reasons further humbly offered, showing that the inhaunsing of the Imposition
of Excise or new Impost for goods Imported, will be found (as is conceived) a
disadvantage to the State.
1. THe general experience of all times witness, that the higher the
Imposition is, the less is the receipt. For instance in Gold and Silver wire.
In Tobaccoes of all sorts, at the first settling of the Excise, in the years
1641. 1642. and 1643. The same instances are to be given in Ireland, Scotland,
and Holland, and upon Plate and other goods in the Spannish Dominions.

2. The higher the Imposition the l^sse is the consumtion; for it is the
cheapnesse of things that makes the expense; and proportionable to the vend of
commodities, is the increase 2r decrease of trade; and it is much better for the
State to receive 100000. pound per annum upon an account of Trade, to the value
of 2. Millions then of one, for the greater expense the greater your Trade, the
greater your Trade the more your Shipping the more your Shipping the more
employment for your people, and the greater your riches and strength.

3. The greater Imposition, the more ways and devises are used, and men's wits
heigthened and improved, every way to gain their goods without paying any
Imposition at all: neither is there a greater adventure run, considering the
profit, then is usual in all Trade.

4. When great Impositions are laid, great Bribes may be given, even such as
will countervaile the loss of places.

5. Impositions inhaunsing the prise of commodities, makes all Traders
unwilling, and most unable to have any store or stock of Commodities by them,
but they will only buy for necessity, or their present occasions; whereas
otherwise there would be a continual stock of Commodities throughout the
Commonwealth, and a constant and continual Trade and commerce throughout the
whole land.

6. Answerable to the Impositions upon, and obstructions in Trade is the decay
thereof; and the decay of Trade in a Commonwealth is the decay of it is chief
support.

7. Answerable to the Improvement of Trade in any place, is the improvement of
Land; the decay of Trade produces a necessary fall of Land.

8. The raising of necessary charges, for support of the State, by way of
excise, will not be found so equal, nor so easy and insensable as is
supposed; For the very account of that Imposition occasions the expense of many
1000. per annum, for defraying the charge thereof, besides the many pounds,
shllings, pence, exspended upon those in that service, by all who have to do
with them; and it is insensable only to him, (and that but for a time) who
accounts his expenses only by the gross; and it is not much better to loose a
man's purse being blindfold, then having his eyes open; neither can it be
supposed, but that every man tavable in the Commonwealth, had better pay 5.
pounds per quarter, then two shillings per diem.

9. Not so equal, for many poor people, having necessarily greater families
then the rich, nay there are more great families of the poor then the rich; so
that upon this account, the poor must pay more then the rich.

10. Not so equal, because no man hereby pays according to his estate, but
most according to their necessity; others according to their living and
deportments, the Nigardly and Covetous little or nothing, the Liberal free and
wisely generous a proportion accordingly.

11. Those numerous company of Officers employed about that receipt, like
droans living of the Commonwealth, would live and employ themselves to and for
the good and profit of it.

12. It Is conceived to be more then probable, that by easy, and light
Impositions upon, and Freedom in trade, this Commonwealth would thereby become
the greatest Magazine, for trade, of any place in this part of the World. Easy
Impositions inviting Merchants to Import themselves and goods, whereby a place
becomes a market for all sorts of commodities, and so begets a trade of
exportation again, besides an inland doing off what is imported; whereas, great
impositions discourage all Merchants from importing goods to that place;
because, they cannot expect sale for any considerable quantity of goods, in
respect of those underhand importations, constantly attending such impositions.

By all which it does appear, (as is conceived) that a moderate imposition upon
goods imported, and receiving the same at the Custom house, with convenient
time and allowance to the Merchant, will prove not only very dvantagious to
this State, in saving so vast a yearly charge, ascertaining and increasing that
Revenue, as also great ease and content both to Merchant and Tradesmen, but
very much tend to the advance and increase of Trade.

Which nevertheless they (as in duty bound) wholly submit to your great
wisdoms and care, to do therein as you shall find most conducing to the good
and welfare of this Commonwealth, These being humbly presented, not in the
least, from any unwillingnesse to bear ashare of such Impositions, as the
^ities of this S^ate shall require for support thereof, but only from those
due and hearty respects they bear unto the honor and esteem of this High
Court, and those earnest desires they have of the flourishing estate of this
Republic.


