DIALLING UNIVERSAL: Performed by an easy and most speedy way.

SHOWING How to describe the hour lines on all sorts of Planes whatsoever, and
in any Latitude.

Performed by certain Scales set on a small Portable Ruler.

By G. S. Practicioner in the Mathematics.

LONDON Printed by R. and W. Leybourn for Thomas Pierrepont at the Sign of the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, I here present to thy view a short Tract containing the
description and uses of certain Scales to be put on a small Ruler, serving for
the easy and speedy drawing of the Hour lines on all sorts of Planes, in what
Latitude soever, and howsoever situated.

The first Scale of Hours and the Scale of Latitudes, I acknowledge to be the
Invention of that famous Mathematician Mr. Samuel Foster, laid down in his book
of the uses of a Quadrant published Anno 1638. His Scale of Hours on the
Quadrant, being really divided only into Hours and half hours. But by
applying of the Thread and Bead, (by which means the hours are there found) the
Scale is divided into any other parts requisite. Now having perused the labors
of diverse Authors that have written on this Subject and finding none (in my
judgment) so easy, pleasant, and of so quick dispatch, for all Dialls with
Centers; I caused that Scale to be put on a Ruler for my own use, subdivided
into as many parts as the length of the Ruler would afford, which being exactly
done. I found that the several hours and parts might be taken off with the
Compasses from the Scale on the Ruler, with more ease and exactness then could
be done from the Quadrant, by the application of the Thread and Bead; which
whosoever shall carefully try both, will find to be true.

The other Scales on the Ruler, (by which are made all sorts of Polar Dialls
direct or declining, as also direct Meridian Dialls, together with far
Decliners, and generally all such as fall near the Pole, to be drawn without a
Center) are of my own framing; which although I esteem not worth publishing,
yet I am confident will yield some contentment, and give some satisfaction to
the ingenious; who will accept of my good will. Note that whereas in diverse of
the Chapters, I have set down short Tables, it was done only to show the
manner of the work, not that there is any need at all thereof, for having the
Inclination of the Meridians converted into time, you have sufficient
directions for setting off all the hours of any Dial; Note also that if your
Ruler shall be a foot in length, the first hour Scale may have every several
minute expressed on it, and the Polar Scales every fifth minute, and any Dial
may be drawn in half a sheet of ordinary paper. But if it be of the length in
the Book, any Dial may then he drawn in a quarter of a sheet of paper. I
conclude referring thee to the Book it self, which if it shall find acceptance
with thee in yielding thee in any kind the satisfctation expected I have my
ends and desires.

G. S.

The Contents.
Chap. 1 The Description of the Scales on the Ruler. Page 1 Chap. 2 How to draw
a Meridian line. Page 2 Chap. 3 How to find the Inclination of a Plane. Page 3
Chap. 4 How to find the Declination of a Plane. Page 4 Chap. 5 How to draw a
direct Polar Dial. Page 5 Chap. 6 How to draw an Erect Meridian Dial. Page 6
Chap. 7 How to draw an Horizontal Dial. Page 8 Chap. 8 How to draw an Erect
direct vertical. Page 10 Chap. 9 How to make a vertical inclining Dial. Page
11 Chap. 10 How to make an Aequinoctiall Dial. Page 12 Chap. 11 How to find
the height of the Pole above the Plane, etc. for Decliners and Declining
Inclining Planes, Geometrically, only by a line of Chords. Page 13 Chap. 12
How to make a vertical declining Dial. Page 17 Chap. 13 How to make a
vertical declining Dial, where the Evation is small. Page 19 Chap. 14 How to
make a Meridian Inclining Dial. Page 22 Chap. 15 How to make a Declining
Inclining Dial. Page 24 Chap. 16 How to make a Polar Declining Dial. Page 27
diagram An Advertisement to the Reader.
NOte that the Diagrams are all contracted, otherwise they would have taken up
a great deal of room to little purpose, for as they are, they give as much
light to the ingenious practicioner as if they had been drawn by the Scale
annexed, and every Diagram have filled a whole page or near upon, whereas now
it takes up but a small portion of a page.

And note that these Scales and all other Mathematical Instruments whatsoever,
are made and sold by Mr. Anthony Thompson, dwelling in Hosier lane near
Smithfield.

DIALLING:
CHAP. I. The Description of the Scales on the Ruler.
THe first Scale is a Scale of six hours, each hour divided into halves and
quarters of hours, being proper for Dials that have no declination: as the
Horizontal, the direct North or South, whether upright or inclining.

Moreover each hour is subdivided into as many unequal parts, as the length of
the Scale will permit, this Scale is of special use in describing all other
Dials that have Centers; where the Altitude of the Style above the Plain is not
less then 10 degrees; when that happens there are other Scales to perform it
with speed and exactness enough.

This Scale has the letters, (Hour,) at the beginning.

The second is a Scale of 90 degrees, answerable to the Scale of Hours, every
degree being also subdivided into as many parts as quantity will give leave.
This Scale is known by the letters (Incl.) at the beginning; Note that the
first and second Scales together show how many degrees and minutes of time are
contained in any number of degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial under 90 and
contra.

Example. Against 20 degrees on the second Scale; you shall find on the first
Scale 1 hour 20 minutes, and against 50 degrees on the second Scale, you shall
find 3 hours 20 minutes on the first Scale, and so of any other number what
ever, if carefully computed.

The third Scale is a Scale of Latitudes, known by the letters (Lat.) at the
beginning.

The fourth and fifth Scales are 2 Scales of hours of different lengths, either
of which serve to make all direct Meridian or Polar Dialls, also all Polar
Dialls that decline.

Both these Scales together serve for the speedy drawing the hour lines on all
sorts of Planes, where the height of the Style is but small, and the Center of
the Dial left out, these Scales are known by the letters Pol. at the beginning.

These are the chief Scales, there is also a Scale of Chords, whose use is
common.

CHAP. II. To draw a Meridian line on an Horizontal Plane.
diagram

WIth your line of chords describe the Circle ABCD, then holding up a thread and
plummet, so as the shadow of the thread may pass through the Center E, draw the
line of shadow DEB: Take then the Altitude of the Sun (or rather let another
take it at the same instant,) which done get the Suns Azimuth, which in this
Example shall be 50 degrees from South toward East, which 50 degrees. I take out
of the line of Chords, and set it from the point D, Southward to A, drawing the
line AEC for the Meridian line.

CHAP. III. To find the Inclination of a Plane.
THe Inclination of a Plane is the angle which it makes with the Horizon: Draw
first an Horizontal line as AB, diagram and cross it with the perpendicular
CD, then apply a Quadrant to the vertical line CD, on a Ruler as the Figure
directs you, and holding up a thread and plummet, so as that the plummet may
by means of the Ruler, play under the Center of the Quadrant, the thread passing
through the Center, observe the degrees cut in the limb, and count them from
that side of the Quadrant which is perpendicular to the plane, that shall be
the Inclination of the Plane, as the angle HFE: the Complement whereof EFG, is
the angle of Reclination of the Plane from the Zenith.

CHAP. IV. To find the Declination of a Plane.
THe Declination is always reckoned in the Horizon, and is the angle contained
between the line of East and West and the Horizontal line upon the Plane: Now
to get the Declination two observations are required, First, the Horizontal
distance of the Sun from the Pole of the Plane; Secondly, the Suns Altitude.

Draw first an Horizontal line, as the line I K in the figure of the last
Chapter, then apply thereto the side of a Quadran, holding it parallel to the
Horizon, then hold up a Thread and Plummet, so as the shadow of the Thread may
pass through the Center of the Quadrant, then observe the degrees cut off by
the Threeds shadow on the limb, and reckon them from that side of the
Quadrant, that is perpendicular to the Plane, as the angle L M N, that is the
Horizontal distance.

diagram

2 Secondly, take the Suns altitude, and find his Azimuth, these compared
together will help you to the declination, as may be plainly demo^strated by
this figure: describe the Circle A B C D: representing the Horizontal circle,
draw A E C for the Horizontal line of the Plane, then set off the Horizontal
distance L M N, which in this Example shall be 35 degrees: these I place from A
to F, then having taken the Suns altitude, I find the Azimuth from East toward
South to be 50 degrees, these I place from F the Suns place, to G Northward,
and draw the line G H through the Center, so shall G H be the true points of
East and West, and I K drawn at right angles to G H shall be the points of
North and South: Now the angle of declination is A E G, or K E M, which in this
Example is 16 degrees.

CHAP. V. To draw a direct Polar Dial.
A Direct Polar Plane is that which is parallel to the hour circle of 6. First,
draw the Horizontal line A B, with its parallel C D, then draw the
perpendicular E F, which shall serve for the substile and hour of 12, then
repair to either of your Scales known by the letters Pol. and fixing one foot
of your Compasses at the beginning of the said Scale, extend the other foot to
the hour of 1, set off that extent from E to 11, and from E to 1, as also from
diagram G both ways, on the line A B, and draw the hours of 11 and 1, parallel
to the substile E G F: then again extend your Compasses from the beginning of
the Scale to two hours, set off that extent from E to 10, and from E to 2, also
from G both ways, and draw the hours of 10 and 2: Then extend the Compasses
from the beginning of the Scale to 3, and set off that from E to 9, and from E
to 3, and draw the hours 9 and 3 parallel to the former: then extend the
Compasses from the beginning of the Scale to 4, and set off that from E to 8,
and from E to 4, also from G both ways, and draw the hours of 8 and 4. Lastly,
extend the Compasses from the beginning of the Scale to 5, and set it off from
E to 7, and from E to 5, also from G both ways, and draw the hours of 7 and 5.
So have you all the hours proper for this Plane.

The style may be a thin Plate of brass or Iron that must stand directly
perpendicular to the Plane, and in the substilar line or hour line of 12. The
length whereof must be the distance from the beginning of the Scale to the hour
of 3. This done, the Dial is finished.

CHAP. VI. To draw an erect Meridian Dial.
A Meridian Plane is that which is parallel to the circle of the hour of six,
having one face to the East, the other to the West, in each of them the style
and substile will be parallel to the Plane, and the hour lines parallel one to
the other, as in the direct Polar of the last Chapter, our example shall be of
a Meridian Dial, with the face to the East, in the Latitude of 51 d. 30 min.
and is thus described.

Draw first the Horizontal line A B, then with the Radius of your line of
Chords, one foot fixed in B, with the other draw the arch C D, and in the arch
C D, set off the height of the Equinoctial 38 d. 30 min. from C to D, and draw
the line B D E, then in some convenient place of the line B E, as at K, draw
the line G K F at right angles to the line E D B, so shall G F be the Substile
and hour of 6, then to E D B draw a parallel as I H, having so done work as in
the last Chapter was shown, by taking the distance from the beginning of either
of the Polar Scales to 1 hour, setting that extent from G to 5, and from G to
7, and on its parallel E B, from K, both ways, and draw the hours of 5 and 7
parallel to the substile and hour of 6, then take in your Compasses the
distance from the beginning of the Scale to 2 hours, and set it off from G to
4, and from G to 8, and also from K both ways, and draw the hours of 8 and 4,
parallel to the other, so you have no more hours to set off toward I, being 4
is the hour of Sun rising, but proceed to set off the rest of the hours toward
H, diagram as you did the other, taking in your Compasses, the distances from
the beginning of the Scale to 3, 4 and 5, setting each distance off
respectively from G toward H at 9, 10, and 11, and also from K toward B and
draw the, hours, of 9, 10, 11: and so you have all the hours proper for this
Dial.

The distance from the beginning of the Scale to the hour of 3, gives the
height of the Style which must stand directly over the Substile, making right
angles therewith, and may be made of a thin plate of Iron or Brass, or a pin
of either sharpened; whose extremity must give the shadow to the hour lines on
the Dial; Note that the making of the West Dial differs from this only in
its situation and changing the hours, this Dial looking to the East and the
other to the West, this serving from Sun rising to past 11, the other from
before 1 to Sunset.

Note if you turn the East Dyall drawn in paper from you, and look on the
backside, you shall there see the perfect form of the West Dial, only instead
of the hours 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, you must write 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

CHAP. VII. To draw an Horizontal Dial for the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min.
AN Horizontal Plane is that which is parallel to the Horizontal Circle of the
Sphere, to draw the hours proceed thus.

Draw a line at length as B A C, then repair to your Scale of Latitudes and
with one foot fixed at the beginning of the same Scale, extend the other to 51
degrees. 30 min. and set off that extent from A to B and from A to C, and draw the
lines A B, A C, then open your Compasses to the length of the whole Scale of
hours, or first Scale, and with that extent, one foot fixed in B, with the
other foot make an arch at D, then with the same extent, diagram one foot fixed
in C with the othercross that arch at D, and draw the lines B D and C D also
draw the line A D for the substile and hour of 12, thus done return to your
first Scale on your Ruler extending your Compasses from the beginning of that
Scale to 1 hour, and set off that extent from D to 1, and from D to 11, also
the same extent must be set from B to 5, and from C to 7. Then extend your
Compasses from the beginning of the said scale to 2, and set it off from D to
10, and from D to 2: also from B to 4, and from C to 8. Lastly, extend your
Compasses from the beginning of the said scale to 3, and set that off from D to
3, and from D to 9, so have you points for 12 hours and lines drawn from the
center A to each of these points shall be the hours required. Note that the
hours of 4 and 5 in the morning, and 7 and 8, in the evening are to be drawn
through the center, if you desire the halves and quarters, they are to be drawn
in all respects as the hours.

With your line of Chords make an angle of 51 degrees. 30 min. for the style or
cock of your dial, and set it over the substile A D, at right angles as the
angle E A D, in the Diagram, and the Dial is finished.

CHAP. VIII. To draw a Dial on an erect direct vertical Plane.
A Vertical Plane is that which is Parallel to the Prime Vertical Circle of the
Sphere, it has two faces one to the South, the other to the North: our example
shall be of a South Plane in the latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. The making of this
Dial differs little from the Horizontal only, you must take notice that this
Plane respects the South Pole, which Pole is elevated thereon 38 degrees. 30 min.
being the complement of the latitude, and so much you must take out of your
Scale of Latitudes, and set off from A to B, and from A to C, then take in your
Compasses the whole scale of hours or first scale, diagram and with that extent
one foot fixed in B with the other make an arch at D, again with the same
extent, one foot fixed in Cwith the other cross the arch at D, and draw the
lines B D and C D, also A D for the Substile and hour of 12. Finish the Dial
in all respects as you did the Horizontal; only observe that whereas in that
Dial the hours of 1, 2, 3, etc. were set off on the line B D, toward the left
hand, the same hours must in this Dial be set off on the line C D, toward
the right hand.

The Style E A D must contain an angle of 38 degrees. 30 min. and must stand
directly over the Substile A D.

For the North face, the Center must be below and the Style point upward. The
hours fit for that Plane are the hours of 4, 5, 6, 7, in the morning, and 5, 6,
7, 8, in the evening.

CHAP. IX. How to draw a vertical Inclining Dial.
IF the Inclination be toward the North part of the Horizon, you are to
subtract the Inclination out of the complement of the elevation, and the
remainer is the new Latitude.

Example. Of a South Dial in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. inclining
Northward 25 degrees. I deduct 25 out of 51.30, and there remains 13.30. the
elevation of the Pole above the Plane, having found the elevation of the Pole
above the Plane I proceed to make the Dial, as if it were an upright South
Dial, for the Latitude of 13 degrees. 30 min making A B and A C equal to 13.30
taken out of the line of Latitudes, following the rules of the last Chapter for
the rest of the work.

The Style must contain an Angle of 13.30 and must be set directly over the
Substile A D, and the Dial is finished.

But if the Inclination be toward the South part of the Horizon, then add the
Inclination to the Latitude and the sum is the elevation of the Pole above
the Plane, if the sum exceed 90, take it out of 180, and the remainer is the
elevation of the Pole above the Plane.

Example. In the Latitude of 51 d. 30. a Plane found to incline Southwards 15
degrees, I add 15 d. to 51. 30 the sum is 66.30 that is the elevation of the
Pole above the Plane, so observing the former directions you may proceed to
make the Dial as is before taught.

CHAP. X. How to draw an Equinoctial Dial.
AN Equinoctial Plane is that which is parallel to the Equinoctial Circle of
the Sphere: Make AB and AC of the former Diagrams, equal to the whole line of
Latitudes, and proceed as if you were to make an Horizontal Dial, and set up a
sharpened point in the Center of any convenient length.

But the best way to draw this Dial, being the hours are equidistant, is to
divide 360 by 24, the quotient is 15, so having with the Radius of your line of
Chords described a Circle and drawn the Diameter for the 2 hours of six, and
the perpendicular for the hour of 12, take 15 degrees out of your line of
Chords, and set it off from hour to hour, let this Dial contain as many
hours as the Horizontal and so numbered.

CHAP. XI. How to find the height of the Pole above the Plane, the distance of
the Substile from the Meridian, and the Inclination of Meridians, for upright
declining and Meridian inclining Dialls; as also what ever else is necessary to
be found for all other Dialls, hereafter treated of before the hour lines can
be drawn.
THe best and exactest way to find these, is by the Tables, or Canons of
Logarithms; but of that I will not touch in this small Treatise, but make use
of some Geometrical way whereof there are diverse, but the best and easiest in
my judgment (it requiring only a line of Chords,) is that of Mr. Stirrup,
which I here make use of (I hope without offense.

The first Example shall be of a Plane declining from South 28 degrees toward
the East: as by the first Diagram of this Chapter is Demonstrated as follows.

Describe a Quadrant as ABC: Set off the Latitude 51.30 from B to E, draw ED
parallel to AB: then take the distance DE with your Compasses, setting one foot
in A, with the other draw the Arch GHOR: then set off the declination 28, from
B to F, draw FA, cutting the Arch GR in the point H, diagram through which
point H draw the line SHN, so shall CN be the height of the Pole above the
Plane 33 d. 20, then take the distance HS, and set it off from D to K, and draw
the line AKL, so shall CL be the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

Then from the point L, draw LT cutting the arch GR in O; draw AOI: so shall CI
be the Inclination of Meridians 34 degrees. 12 minutes.

The second Example is of a Meridian Inclining Plane in the Latitude of 51 degrees.
30 min. inclining 40 degrees. diagram This work differs little from the former,
describe a Quadrant as ABC, set off the Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min. from C to E
draw ER parallel to AB, then with the distance ER raw the arch GH OD: then set
off the Inclination 40 from B to F, and ppraw AF, cutting the arch GOD in H,
then draw SHN: so shall CN be the elevation of the Pole above the Plane 36 degrees.
49 min. Then take the distance SH, and set it from R to K, draw AKL, so shall
CI, be the distance of the substile from the Meridian 38 degrees. 57 min. Lastly,
draw LT cutting the arch GD, in O draw AOI, so shall CI be the Inclination of
Meridians 53 degrees. 26 min.

The third Example is of a Declining Inclining Plane, in the Latitude of 51
degrees. 30 min. declining from South toward East 34, and Inclining to the Horizon
24 degrees. First draw the Quadrant ABC, set off the declination from C to E: draw
AE, diagram then set off the Inclination 24 from B to F: draw FZ parallel to
AC, then draw the arch GHI, cutting AE in H, through the point H, draw KL
cutting the arch CB in K, take the distance HL, and set it in the line FZ unto
O, and draw the line AOM, cutting the arch BC in M, from which point M draw MPN
parallel to AB, cutting the arch GI in P, through which point P draw APQ,
cutting the arch BC in Q, so shall the arch BK, be the Inclination of the Plane
to the Meridian 76 degrees. 51 min. and the arch BQ, the Meridians ascension 58
degrees. 22 min, or the arch of the Plane betwixt the Horizon and Meridian, and the
arch BM shall be the Elevation of the Meridian, or the arch of the Meridian
between the Horizon and the Plane 20 degrees. 16 min. Now if the Plane incline
toward the South add the elevation of the Meridian, to your Latitude, and the
Sum shall be the Position Latitude, or the arch of the Meridian betwixt the
Pole and the Plane: if the sum exceed 90, take it out of 180, and that which
remains shall be the Position Latitude: But if the Inclination shall be
Northward, then compare the Elevation of the Meridian with your Latitude, and
take the lesser out of the greater, so the difference shall be the Position
Latitude as in this example supposing the Inclination to be Northward, I take
20 degrees. 16 min. the elevation of the Meridian out of 51 degrees. 30 min. the
Latitude, and there remains 31 degrees 14 minutes for the Position latitude, or
the arch of the Meridian between the Pole and the Plane: This being done set 31
degees 14 minutes from B to T in the arch BC, and draw the line AT, then with
the distance KL upon the Center A describe the arch YMW cutting the line AT in
M through M draw RS. Parallel to AB cutting the arch BC in S, so shall BS be 30
d. 20. the height of the Pole above the Plane. Then lay your Rule upon the
point S, and the Center A, and where it shall cut the line KL there make a mark
as at V, through V draw the line Dunw cutting YW in the point n, and the arch
BC in w, so shall the arch B w be 7 degrees. 51 min. the distance of the Substile
from the Meridian. Lastly, through the point n draw YX parallel to AC, so shall
BX be 15 degrees. 17 min. the Inclination of Meridians.

CHAP. XII. How to draw the hours on an erect vertical declining Plane.
HAving by the last Chapter obtained those necessary requisites there mentioned
I now proceed to draw the hour lines on all thoses Planes treated of in that
Chapter, by our first Scale of Hours, as also all Polar declining Dials, and
all far declining vertical, by the Polar Scales. And first for the vertical
Decliner mentioned in the last Chapter declining from South toward East 28
degrees in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. Proceed thus: first, draw a line at
length as BAC, then considering that the height of the Pole above the Plane was
33 degrees. 20 min. I take 33 degrees. 20 min. out of the Scale of Latitudes, and set
it off from A to B, and from A to C, choosing A for the Center of the Dial. Then
take in your Compasses the whole first Scale, or Scale of Hours, and with one
foot fixed in B with the other make an arch at D, and with the same extent, one
foot fixed in C, with the other cross the arch at D, and draw the lines BD and
CD, as also the line AD for the Substile: Then having found the Inclination of
the Meridians to be 34 degrees. 12 min. I seek that in the second Scale known by
the Letters Ind. and just against it on the first Scale, I find two hours 17
min. then take off two hours 17 min. from that Scale, and set it from D to 12,
and from B to 6, then extend your Compasses from the beginning of the same
Scale too hours 17 and set that from D to 10, diagram and from B to 4, then
open your Compasses to 1 hour 17 of the same Scale and set it from D to 11, and
from B to 5, then open the Compasses to 3 hours, 17 min. and set it from D to
1, and from B to 7, then open the Compasses to 4 ho. 17, and set it from D to
2, and from B to 8, then lastly, open your Compasses to 5 hours 17 min. and
set it from D to 3, and from B to 9. So lines drawn from A to those points
shall be the hours proper for this Plane: if you please you may set off the
largest extents first, as 5 hours 17 min. and so go on closing of the Compasses
till you come to o hours 17 min. for D 10, and B 4. Note that the first Column
of the Table contains the hours and minutes that are to be taken in your
Compasses off of the first Scale, and set from D or B to their Ho. M. from D
toward C, from B toward D. 5. 17 D -- 3 And B -- 9 4. 17 D -- 2 And B -- 8 3.
17 D -- 1 And B -- 7 2. 17 D -- 12 And B -- 6 1. 17 D -- 11 And B -- 5 0. 17 D
-- 10 And B -- 4 respective hours on the Plane, contained in the second and
third Columns of the Table: consider also that the Inclination of Meridians;
being 34 d. 12 or 2 ho. 17 of time and the declination toward East, the
Substile falls between the hours of 9 and 10 in the morning, whereas if the
declination had been West the Substile would have fain betwixt the hours of 2
and 3 in the afternoon, and the hour of 12 would have been toward the left
hand of the Substile, whereas the declination being East, it stands on the
right hand of the Substile.

The style must have elevation 33.20. as the angle EAD, and must stand directly
over the Substile AD, and the Dial is finished. I have been more large in this
Chapter then I shall be in what shall follow, touching all other Dials with
Centers, by reason the drawing and setting off the hours is the same with the
work of this Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. To draw the hours on a far declining vertical Plane, by the 2
Polor Scales on the Ruler.
THose Planes whose declination, or declination and Inclination shall cause them
to fall near the Pole, so as that the hours can hardly be distinguished they
falling so near together, must have the Center left out and the Style
increased, and then the hours may be easily and speedily drawn by the
directions following.

The Example shall be of a vertical Dial declining East from South 80 d. By
the directions of the 11th. Chapter, I find the Inclination of Meridians to be
82 d. 8 the height of the Pole above the Plane 6 d. 12, and the distance of the
Substile from the Meridian 38 d. 5: Draw first the perpendicular GH, then set
off the Style and Substile according to their angles, and draw the pricked
lines GBA, for the Substile, and GIK for the Style: Then choose any point in the
Substile as A, through which point A, draw a line at length, making right
angles therewith as the line EAC, that done fix one foot diagram of your
Compasses at the beginning of your longest Polar Scale, and extend the other to
the hour of 3, set off this extent from A to C, and through the point C draw a
line Parallel to GIK, the style as the line CD. So shall CD be the style
increased then open your Compasses from the beginning of your second or lesser
Polar Seal to 3 hours, place one foot of the Compasses in the substile ABG,
carrying it along the line until the other point of the Compasses, may just
touch the line CD, and and there make a mark as at B, through which point B
draw a line at length perpendicular thereunto and parallel to the line EAC:
Then considering the Inclination of Meridians to be 82 degrees. 8 min. I find that
on the second Scale, and against it on the first Scale I find 5 hours 29 min.
by which it appears that the substile falls between the hours of 6 and 7 in
the morning. According to the Inclination of Meridians 5 hours 29. I proceed to
make a Table, and to set offt he hours accordingly as follows. I open my
Compasses to 0 hours, 29 min. of the greater Polar Scale, and set it off from A
to the hour of 7 in the line CAE, then I open the compasses to 1 hour 29
minutes of the same scale, and place it from A to 8, then I open the compasses
to two hours 29 min. and set it off from A to 9. then I take in my compasses 3
hours 29 min. and set it from A to 10. Lastly, I take in my Compasses, 4 d. 29
and set it from A to 11. Now having found the points for the hours on one side
of the substile from A toward E, I must do the like for the other side of the
substile: and considering that the first hour from the Substile from A toward
E from A toward C Ho. M H. on the Plane Ho. M. H. on the Plane. 0 29 A -- 7 0
31 A -- 6 1 29 A -- 8 1 31 A -- 5 2 29 A -- 9 2 31 A -- 4 3 29 A -- 10 3 31 A
-- 3 4 29 A -- 11 4 31 A -- 2 toward E, namely A 7, contains the distance of 0
hours 29, as by the Table appears, the complement thereof to 60 or 1 hour: is 0
ho. 31, as by the said Table appears, so I proceed to set off 0 ho. 31, taken
from the same Polar Scale; from A to the hour of 6, and the extent of the
compasses from 1 ho. 31; I set from A to 5, also 2 ho. 31, I set from A to 4.
and 3 hours 31 min. from A to 3, and lastly, the extent of the Compasses from
the beginning of the Scale to 4 hours 31 min. I set off from A to 2. And so I
have found points for all the hours of the Plane on the perpendicular CAE.

Now for the other line DIBF, you must set off the hours thereon taken out of
the lesser Polar Scale from B, according to the Table in all respects changing
only A for B: this done draw lines through the respective points in the lines
CAE and DBF, which shall be the hour lines of the Dial.

Note that a Dial of this kind is near as socn made as spoken of, The Style
must be a thin plate to stand directly over the Substile, as in the figure is
demonstrated by AB and CD.

CHAP. XIV. To draw the Hours on a Meridian Inclining Plane.
THose Planes whose Horizontal line is the same with the Meridian line, are
called Meridian Planes, as the direct East and West. But if they lean to the
Horizon they are called Incliners.

Those Planes may incline either to the East or West part of the Horizon, and
each of them has two faces, the upper toward the Zenith, the lower toward
the Nadir.

Having by the 11th. Chapter and second Diagram found the height of the Pole
above the Plane to be 36 d. 49, the Inclination of Meridians 53 degrees. 26 min.
and the diagram distance of the substile from the Meridian 38 d. 57. I proceed
to make the Dial thus. Draw the Horizontal line F AE, make A the center of the
Dial, then with the Radius of your line of Chords, draw an arch and set off the
distance of the Substile from the Meridian from F to G, and from the center
draw AGD for the Substile, again through the Center A, draw B C at right angles
to the Substile A D. Then make A B and A C equal to the height of the Style
taken ont of the line of Latitudes 36 d. 49, find then the from D toward C
from B toward D. Ho. Min. Ho. Plane. Hours on the Plane. 0. 34 D -- 3 And B --
9 1. 34 D -- 2 And B -- 8 2. 34 D -- 1 And B -- 7 3. 34 D -- 12 And B -- 6 4.
34 D -- 11 And B -- 5 5. 34 D -- 10 And B -- 4 Inclination of Meridians on the
second Scale, which is 53.26. and against it on the first Scale I find 3 ho.
34, which being taken out of the same Scale, and set from D and B gives points
for the hours of 12 and 6, the rest of the work differs nothing from the
directions of the twelfth Chapter: Draw lines from the Center A to each of
those points, and they shall be the hours for this Plane. The Style must stand
directly over the Snbstile AD and contain an angle of 36 d. 49 as the angle
EAD.

Take notice that when you are to draw any of the Dialls with Centers, let the
line BAC stand toward you, as if it were the Horizontal line, and the line AD
a Plumb line, and so you will set off the hours with more ease as the direct
vertical. Note that this Example is of a Meridian Plane inclining East, and
therefore the Substile must stand to the left hand of the Meridian or hour of
12.

CHAP. XV. To draw the Hour lines on a Declining, Inclining Plane.
A Plane that declines from the prime Vertical and Inclines to the Horizon, and
yet lies not even with the Poles of the World, is called a Declining Inclining
Plane.

Of these there are several sorts, for the Inclination being Northward, the
Plane may fall between the Horizon and the Pole, or between the Zenith and the
Pole.

Or the Inclination may be Southward, and may fall either below the
intersection of the Meridian, and the Equator, or above it: and each of these
have two faces, the upper toward the Zenith, and the lower toward the Naidir.

I take the Example of the 11th Chapter, according to the third Diagram of that
Chapter, being a Plane that declineth from the South toward the East 34
degrees, and Inclining to the Horizon 24 degrees, in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30
min. I found the height of the Pole above the Plane to be 30 degrees 20 min.
The arch of the Plane from the Horizon to the Meridian 58 degrees. 22 min. the
Inclination of Meridians 15 degrees. 17 min. and distance substile from the
Meridian 7 d. 51. this is all we need to know before we begin to make the Dial;
which is effected after this manner, draw first the horizontal line of OF, then
with the radius of your line of Chords draw the arch FH, diagram and set off the
Altitude of the Meridian 58 degrees. 22 min. from F to H. and the distance of the
substile from the Meridian 7 d. 51 min. from H to K: Let A be the center of the
Dial then draw the line AKD for the substile then draw BAC at right angles
thereto, and make AB and AC equal to the height of the Pole above the Plane 30
degrees. 20 min. taken out of the Scale of Latitudes, then set off the whole first
Scale or hour line from B and C to D. as has been before shown.

Then considering the Inclination of Meridians was 15 degrees. 17 min. I find it on
the second Scale, and against it on the first Scale, I find 1 hour 1 min. so I
set off the hours as has been formerly shown and this Table demonstrateth.

from D toward B from C toward D. Ho. Min. Hours on the Plane. 0. 1 D -- 11
And C -- 5 1. 1 D -- 12 And C -- 6 2. 1 D -- 1 And C -- 7 3. 1 D -- 2 And C --
8 4. 1 D -- 3 And C -- 9 5. 1 D -- 4 And C -- 10

The Style must contain an angle of 30 degrees. 20 min. as IAK in the Diagram to
stand directly over the Substile AD, and so the Dial is finished.

Now when you meet with Declining Inclining Planes you must consider which Pole
is elevated above your Plane and how to place the Meridian from the Horizontal
line, for upon the upper faces of all North Incliners, whose Meridians
Elevation is less then the Latitude of the Place, on the under faces of all
North Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation is greater then the Latitude of the
place, and on the upper faces of all South Incliners the North Pole is
elevated. And upon the under faces of all North Incliners, whose Meridians
Elevation is less then the Latitude of the place, on the upper faces of all
North Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation is greater then the Latitude of the
place, and on the under faces of all South Incliners the South Pole is elevated.

Now for placing the Meridian from the Horizontal line, upon the upper faces of
all South Incliners whose Meridians Elevation is greater than the complement of
Latitude, on the under faces of all South Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation
is less than the Latitudes, complement, on the under faces of all North
Incliners, whose Meridian Elevation is greater then the Latitudes of the place,
and on the upper faces of all North Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation is
less than the Latitude of the place the Meridian must be placed above the
Horizontal line as in our Example. Again, contrariwise for the upper faces of
all South Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation is less than the Latitudes
complement. On the under faces of all South Incliners, whose Meridans Elevation
is greater than the complement of Latitudes, on the under faces of all North
Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation is less than the Latitude of the place,
and on the upper faces of all North Incliners, whose Meridians Elevation is
greater then the Latitude of the place, the Meridian must be placed below the
Horizontal line. But if it be either the upper or under faces of a South
Inclining Plane, whose Meridians Elevation is greater than the Latitudes
complement, or either the upper or under faces of a North Inclining Plane,
whose Meridians Elevation is less than the Latitude of the place, that then
the Meridian must be placed from that end of the Horizontal line with the
Declination of the Plane but on all the other faces of these kinds of Planes,
the Meridian must be placed from that end of the Horizontal line, which is
contrary to the Declination of the Plane.

Note also that if the Inclination be Southward and the Elevation of the
Meridian, equal to the complement of your Latitude, then shall the Substile lie
square to the Meridian.

CHAP. XVI. To make a Dial on a Polar declining Plane.
THese Planes if the Inclination be Northward and the Elevation of the Meridian
equal to the Latitude of the Place then neither Pole is elevated above the
Plane, and therefore its a declining Polar.

diagram

Example. A Plane declining East from South 30 degrees. and inclining North 34 degrees.
30 min by the rules of the eleventh Chap. I find the distance of the Horizon
and Meridian to be 71 degrees. 53 min. which I set off from A to B in the arch AB,
and draw BD for the Substile. Then at right angles to the Substile, I draw the
lines FG and CE: Then considering the Inclination of Meridians to be 24 degrees. 19
min. I find it on the second Scale, and against it on the first Scale I find 1
ho. 37 min. Then having recourse to the Table, I set off the hours from K and
H, according to the directions of the 13 Chapter, for the far Decliner,
taking the several distances with my Compasses out of either of the Polar
Scales, and setting them off from K toward C or E, as the Table plainly
shows.

from K toward E, from K toward C. Ho. M. Ho. Plane Ho. M. Hours Plane. 0. 37
K 11 0. 23 K 10 1. 37 K 12 1. 23 K 9 2. 37 K 1 2. 23 K 8 3. 37 K 2 3. 23 K 7 4.
37 K 3 4. 23 K 6

The extent of the Compasses from the beginning of the Scale to the hour of 3
gives the height of the Style, which must be a plate of Iron or Brass, set up
just over the Substile HK, and the Dial is finished.

Some observations relating chiefly to the Dial of the 12 Chap. being a
vertical Decliner.
WHereas in the Diagram of the 12th Chapter the Substile stands square to the
Horizon, you see here how it ought to stand, that is to say the 12 of clock
hour must in this and all other vertical Decliners be the Plumb line as the
Diagram here shows.

diagram

Note that no hour lines are to be drawn beyond the line BC.

Note also that if you oil the Pattern of this Dial drawn in paper, it will
serve for 3 other Dialls that have the same Declination.

First, a Dial for the Southwest face of the Plane if you change the side, and
the numbers set to the hours, the Center of the Dial upwards and the Style and
Substile pointing downwards.

Secondly, a Dial for the Northwest face, if you turn the pattern upside down,
and changing the side taking the backside for the foreside, not altering the
hours the Style and Substile pointing upward.

Lastly, a Dial for the Northeast face, if you take the foreside only turning
it upside down, and altering the numbers set to the hours, the Style and
Substile pointing upward.

A Table showing the Latitude of the most principal Cities and Towns in England.
Name of the places. Latitude d. m. St. Albans 51 55 Barwick 55 49 Bedford 52
18 Bristol 51 32 Boston 53 2 Cambridge 52 17 Chester 53 20 Coventry 52 30
Chichester 50 56 Colchester 52 4 Darby 53 6 Exon 50 40 Grantham 52 58 Halifax
53 49 Hereford 52 14 Hull 53 50 Launston 50 41 London 51 32 Lancaster 54 8
Leicester 52 40 Lincoln 53 15 Newcastle 54 58 Northampton 52 18 Oxford 51 54
Shrewsbury 52 48 Warwick 52 25 Winchester 51 10 Worcester 52 20 Yarmouth 52 45
York 54 0

FINIS.

