SCHISM DISPACH'T OR A REIOYNDER TO THE REPLIES OF Dr HAMMOND AND THE Ld OF
DERRY.

IN MALA CAVSA NON possunt aliter; at malam causam quis coegit eos habere?

Aug.

M.DC.LVII.

TO THE INDIFFERENT READER.
I Present thee here with a full view of Errour's utmost, and of the Method it
must necessarily take in it is Progress. First, weaknesses of reasoning and
insincerity must endeavor to establish the groundles Fabric; which once
discoverd, there is no way left but to fall into worse Paralogisms and
Contradictions, and more open and inexcusable Falsifications. This is my charge
in general against my two Adversaries; The Roll of their many faults in
particular may be collected out of the Index. If I have wrong fully imposed
any thing on them, let me sink in thy esteem; if justly, let them. I court no
favor from thee but this that thou would not give credit to this Reioynder
of mine, read alone, but in company still of their Replies: sometimes also upon
occasion reflecting back on Dr Hammonds Book of Schism, my Ld of Derry's just
Vindication of the Church of England, and Schism Di^arm'd: Consider, I put thee
upon neither an unjust, unprofitable, unecessary not too troublesome a Method.
Not unjust, since this gives thee a fair opportunity to balance equally in thy
thoughts what both allege. Not unprofitable, since these two first Books of
theirs being cried up for the best pieces which have come forth in these late
days upon so concerning a subject, nothing can more largely contribute to thy
Soul's repose than to be satisfactorily conuinc't whether they stand or fall.
Not unnecessary; because without Method no secure satisfaction can be had;
there being so many by-ways incident to obstinate and disingenuous maintainers
of their tenet, as of omitting to Answer things important, wauing the true
point controverted, enlarging upon unconcerning passages, misrepresenting the
true state of the Question* Testimonies, and one another words, etc. That,
without a ioynt-perusall of both party's writings, it is impossible to receive
any rational satisfaction; nor, indeed, any at all without a confident
reliance upon the private Writer's word or Authority, than which kind of
partiality nothing has more endamag'd rational Soul's. Nor yet is this Method
too troublesome; since, by seeing so numerous and such gross faults truly made
good to be in these their writings, thou may justly hold thy self excused
from reading the rest of their past or future works till they clear these their
best to be both convincing and true dealing; Which, unles they perform
effectively, I must challenge thy judgment and thy sincerity neither to give
them asse^t nor credit.

I confess, indeed, that, while I entreat thee to make use of this Method, I
have a private end of mine own; knowing nothing could do me more particular
Right than this. Many sober and candid persons reading Schism Disarmed (not
considering that what is spoken in opposition to truth must necessarily be
nonsense, and easy to be shown such if the Discoverer of it understands his
own Grounds, be true to his cause, and will speak out) apprehended it
impossible a Bishop and a Doctor, persons of so high repute for learning,
should be obnoxious all over to such innumerable faults and such incredible
weaknesses; and rather looked upon it as a piece of Wit, framing an Idea, as it
were, of what humane frailty could possibly be subject to, than that it was so
indeed: Till, coming to compare it with it is Adversary-Books and scanning one
in order to the other, they remained, as on the one side perfectly satisfied,
so, on the other, extremely astonished at the weakness of Error. I know good
Natures are loath to think men to be Monsters, that is, sencelesly irrational
or voluntarily insincere: But, I hope I shall gain so far upon their reasons
without wronging their good Natures, (for I concieve reason to be their best
and only Nature) as to consider that in what we oppose one another, we
contradict one another, and the one part only of the Contradiction can be
Truth; wherefore the other part must necessarily be Falsehood, that is,
nonsense. He then whose task it is to oppose the true side, must unavoidably
talk nonsense if he oppose it directly; or else he must prevaricate from his
Duty in opposing something else in stead of it, and so be very impertinent; or
bring against it mediums or Arguments which concern it not but look another
way, and so become extremely weak: Or, lastly, if he brings any necessary and
enforcing Argument, which admitted would destroy the true position, it must
infallibly (since one Truth cannot quarrel with another) be a mere pretense
or a Falsification, and so render the alledger insincere. Wherefore, since they
and I, in what we oppose one another, maintain contradictory position, whereof
one side and one only, must necessarily be Right, it is impossible but that
one of us must either mistake in opposing the true point, and so manage our
Discourse w^akly; or wilfully neglect it and so play the Fool maliciously; or
go about to oppose it with a real Truth, and so talk nonsense; or, lastly,
bring against it a fictitiously pretended Truth, and so prove a Falsifier; and
this, in every step of our Process. To these faults then, I say, one of us must
necessarily remain obnoxious, and that continually; which of us it is, is left,
Reader, to thy judgment; only be so sincere as to give it due information in
examining both together. To this end I have for the most part quoted the page
and very line of Dr Hammond; the other is so divided into short Sections, to
which mine are correspondent, that there needed no such exactnes.

One request more I have to offer thee that thou would observe by the way as
thou read, the different Genius of my two Adversaries. The former would make
a show of saying something by laboring with a multitude of little petty
divisions, frequent intermixtures of Greek phrases and citations, smooth and
plausible language, and the like quaint and pretty flourishes; whereas, indeed,
he never says any thing severely to the purpose, nor ever speaks home; but
his Discourse is made up of such indifferent terms, so far from immediate, his
Testimonies for the most part so totally unconcerning the Question, or, at
least, so easily appliable to another sense, which yet he presses not close to
the point but leaves them still in their pure neutrality, that even the
quickest eye stands in need of a Tube Optic to see from the Premises to the
conclusion, or from the Argument to the Question. Or rather, indeed, it would
puzzle a good Logician, who understands how necessary connection there ought to
be between the conclusion and Premises, to pick an Argument out of the whole
Book; his notions are so dishevelled and loosely scattered about after a mere
orationall and declamatory fashion. The latter is more candid and speaks plain,
and so falls into more direct Contradictions, which he bolts out confidently.
The one is of a wary nature and endeavors to cloak them that they may not show
their faces; the other is more down Right, puts a good countenance on them and
bids them out face the world. The one makes his advantage from niaisery and
shyness, the other from boldness. The ones way of writing is properly characterd
to be shuffling, and packing the cards beneath the table; the other's playing
foul above board. Lastly, the one raises mists all over, and would steal common
sense from a man, as it were, in the dusky twilight; the other will needs rob
you of it at noonday.

Nor do I intend by this frank censure to derogate from the just opinion of
learning due to them; I doubt not but they are men of much reading: Only I
contend that their manner of Schollar-ship is an Historical and Verbal kind
of Learning, and improperly called such, since to be learned is to know, which
none can do except those who have undeniable Grounds and can proceed with
evident consequence upon those Grounds* Either side may talk rhetorically, cite
a Testimony, and by quibbling in the words show it plausibly sounding to his
sense, but to speak consequently and convincingly belongs only to them who
have Grounds, that is Truth on their side, since there can be no true Grounds
nor solid reason for an Error. Whence again since one of us must have Truth,
and but one of us can have it, it is manifest one of us only can have Grounds,
or Discourse consequently, the other must shuffle, falsify or talk verbally. At
whose door the guilt lies is not my part to decide, but is wholly submitted to
the Tribunal of the rightly informed Reader; whose pardon I humbly beg for
using the same words so often, as nonsense, shuffling, weakness, etc. The
frequent repetition of such unsavory Tautologies sounded no less ungrateful to
my ears, being really much ashamed to name so often what they so often did. But
I desire it may be considered I was here to speak Truth not to vary phrases;
and, both for this, as also for the seeming harshnes of my Expressions, I crave
leave to pose the Disliker with this Dilemma; that, since it was my task to be
their accuser where I found them reproovable and Accusers are to call crimes by
their own names, either they misdeseru'd or not; If not, I am willing to
bearthe censure of having added Passion to Calumny; but if they were indeed
thus blamable, then 'twas a rational carriage in order to maintain Truth to
call their faults by their proper names how often soever they committed them.
Nor are my Reprehensions (frequent indeed, but never without just occasion nor
over proportioned to the degree of their faultines) at all intended to vent my
anger toward the persons, but only to breed in the Reader a due reflection on
their faults: And, if this be ill Nature, I must avow it, that I hate a
Contradiction with all my heart; resenting it as a far greater injury that any
man should go about to disorder my Soul by imposing upon it a Falsehood or
Contradiction with stratagems and tricks (especially in matters so concerning)
than if they should break my head or even endanger my life by betraying me
into an ambush; and, I conceive that any one, who knows and prizes his Soul,
will be of my temper. I cannot but impute it to Art not to Vice that excellent
Musicians whose ears are inured to the smoothest and best-proportion'd strokes,
should not endure to hear harsh Discords without some impatience: Neither in
making my self the parallel to such skillful Artists do I arrogate more to my
self than only this that I have had the happiness to light on an excellent
Master of reason, who is able to tune the thoughts of a rational Soul to the
perfectest harmony; and that it pleased God to give me such an unprejudiced
sincerity and such a competent degree of capacity as would permit and enable
me to understand Truths, in themselves as evident as that two and three make
five, when the terms were clearly proposed in an orderly connection, and the
meanings or notions made plain by Definitions.

May I entreat this fair opinion from the Protestant Reader that he make not
my smartnes against mine Adversaries an Argument that I am a Lover of
Dissension or a Desirer to keep the Discord still on foot between us. I protest
with all sincerity there neither is nor can be any man living who more
cordially longs for or shall more industriously (to his power) endeavor an
Union between all those who lay claim to Christ's name than my self, as those
who know my heart best can testify; and that I would willingly consecrate all
my studies, sacrifice all my interest, nay even my life it self, to such an
happy end. But, on the other side, since an Uncertainty in the Rule and Root of
faith is diametrically opposite to an Union in Faith (for how shall rational
Soul's center when they know not where to meet, nor have Grounds to bind them
to a ioynt-assent, as without Evidence of Authority there can be none) hence I
shall hope to have deserved well from all rational Lovers of Union in
impugning vigorously and disgracing this tenet of Uncertainty, the Seed of all
Heresies, Schisms and Dissension, and the Bane of Union; which pestilent
doctrine has got such root in our poor country by two or three plausible pens,
that as well Religion as Philosophy amongst many excellent Wits is reduced to
mere Skepticism. For this end I have, upon all fitting occasions throughout
this whole Treatise, inculcated a certainty in the said Rule of faith and an
Evidence of that certainty; to fix by those many little dints a strong
impression in the Reader's mind that such a thing there is, to be found by
those who with a just and impartial diligence seek it. And, if any in this so
noble an enquiry will venture to take my word (and I have this advantage that I
speak by experience) I shall send them no long journey but only address their
study to those two little Treatises of Rushworth's Dialogues and the Apology
for Tradition. This Principle then being such that, it once established all the
rest will infallibly follow, and without it no Ground of agreement can possibly
be expected, I was obliged even out of my love to Union to maintain it
inviolable by all means which Truth could justify to be lawful, and by
consequence what ever is held upon that Rule, as is the substance of the
Authority I defend. In other points, where the certainty of the Rule and Root
of faith is not concerned, the Protestants shall find me always proceed with
the greatest condescendence and moderation that Prudence and Charity can
dictate to the most indifferent Mind.

As for my smiling upon occasion at my Adversary's toys and affected
weaknesses, let the Reader fancy thoroughly my circumstances by perusing both
Books together, and he shall see clearly it had been most improper to return
those passages any other Answer: Or, if there be any so wedded to a severer
humor that they will not allow circumstances their due, but think that such
kind of carriage is not to be used at all in Controversies about Faith, I
shall send them to Tertullian, the rigidest and severest in points of this
Nature among all the Ancients, for better information. If you find (says he,
writing against the Adversaries of faith) in my Book some passages which move
one to Laughter, it is because the matter it self occasions it. There are many
things which deserve to be thus mocked at, lest by combating them seriously
you should signify they are of weight. Nothing is more due to Vanity than
Laughter; and this carriage is proper to Truth, to whom it belongs to laugh,
because she is naturally pleasant; and to exult over her Enemies, because she
is secure of the victory. Care, indeed, is to be taken lest the mirth be base
and unworthy of Truth; but, otherwise, when one can fittingly make advantage by
it, it is a Duty to use it. Thus he. To which I shall only add these few
words of S. Austin, whose Spirit, though all composed of charity and sweetness,
breaks out into this smart demand. Who is so bold as to say that Truth should
come forth unarmed when it combats falsehood, and that it is lawful for the
Enemies of Religion to fright the faithful with great words and inveigle their
Fancies with witty conciets, but that Catholics ought to write in a dull and
drowsy style, fit for nothing but to make the Readers fall asleep.

This is all I have to apologize for, except only for the long delay of this
Rejoinder; the reason whereof is too well known to have been it is miscarriage a
twelve-moneth ago and the difficulties since in bringing it to light in a
foreign country. Which also pleads for an excuse of it is many lapses in
spelling and other frequent little mistakes, occasioned by the Composer's being
a perfect stranger to our language. The grosser faults shall be noted in the
Errata at the end, which I desire the Reader to correct ere he address himself
to peruse the Book, in regard one of mine Adversaries did me so little Justice
as to cavil heretofore at a mistake of the Printer's in Schism Disarmed,
though it were rectified very carefully in the Errata. This done, I leave the
indifferent Reader to the fruit of his own Industry, and to that success which
the force of Truth is wont to effect in an impartial and sincere Mind.

SCHISM DISPATCHED. FIRST PART.
Containing some Preparatory grounds decisive of the whole Controversy* and a
refute of Dr. Hammonds Defense of his first three Chapters.
Sect. I.
The occasion of the Disarmers writing, and his writing in such a manner. Dr.
Hammonds weakness in imputing contumeliousnes.
WHat Mr. Hammond professed of himself, that his chief design is to enjoy calm
and peaceful thoughts, and to retire from polemicall engagements, is no less
the wish of his friendly Disarmor; who had permitted him to enjoy his Halcyon
sollitarinesse, and to ^leep securely in a whole skin had not himself ounded
the Allarm and made the Onset; of which, though the latter were very feeble,
yet the former being full of noise in the mouths of all the Docteurs friends,
it awakened him from his quiet silence into a necessary resistance.

He saw the most in violable, the most long^settled, the most sacred, and most
universally^acknowledged Government the sun ever beheld, despited and wronged:
he saw, by consequence, the eternal and infaillible rule of faith, in which
was fundamentally interessed the salvation of mankind, broken and disannulled,
by the rejecting that Government which it recommended to us, as the Safeguard
of our Faith: he saw his dearest Mother the holy Catholic Church Christ's
sacred Spouse, by relation to wihch only he could hope for any title to
salvation, abused and vilify'd: he saw his dear Countrymen run distractedly
into an hundred sorts of Sects, all springing originally from that grand one of
the schismatic Protestant Congregation: he observed how the Protestant
party, though of late not reprehended much by Catholic writers (hoping their
own vexatious divisions would at length give them understanding) were yet so
unseasonably clamorous, as then most to plead their innocence when their fault
of Schim was most palpable, and God's severe correction of it most visible upon
them: Lastly, he took particular notice how one Dr. Hammond, a private man, had
bent his weak utmost to continue and propagate that Schism, so uniuersally
destructive to Government, Faith, God's Church, his Country; and perceiving by
the cry of ^is followers that his Book was likely to contribute much to this
great harm, he thought these motives sufficient prouocations to make the
confutation of that Treatise the prentisage of his endeavors in Controversy.

Rational therefore and convenient was the Disarmers determination to write,
and to write against Dr. Hammond. The manner then of his writing comes next to
be examined, which will not down with the Doctors stomach, (and indeed it is
no wonder if those who are resolved not to mend do not love to be reprehended;)
whereupon he has by self imagined applications of some Texts, voted here poor
S. W. whom he says ( page 2.) he has taken in the flagrant fact of abusing
him, to be in reality no Christian, a detestable person, under the censures of
the Church, nay ipso jure, (says he) excommunicate; in a special sort one of
the (...), unritghteous, and without repentance incapable of going to heaven;
and lastly* to be none of those Saints who, clave non errante, (says the Dr.)
shall judge the world. A sad case that no punishment less then Hell must be
poor S. W's doom, because he laid open the weakness of Dr. Hommonds defense of
a pernicious cause, after the manner that such a a defense deserved And I
wonder he had no more Charity then not tho be afraid lest he should drive S. W.
into despair of his salvation, by denouncing and preaching to him such horrid
judgments for writing against the Saints, and using (as, page 3. Mr. Hammond
says) that very dialect which the obstinate Jews used toward the true
Prophets of God.

But first he does me right in acknowledging that it was not I who gave him his
Bill of Fare, to which I may with truth add, that I not so much as knew of it:
Yet he thinks he has got a notable advantage against me, from my own
confession, that my blows were rude, and mine Adversary civil where as, I used
both those phrases as an objection of the Readers, as is most palpable; and had
I used them, the rudeness of blows argues not that they were not just, since
none doubts, but Malefactors are very rudely, yet most justly whipped; and the
courteous epithet of civil, denied not but the oil in his tongue was
accompanied with venom in his heart, and so made it more necessary to discover
that, whose only advantage it was, to lurk undiscoverable under the smooth
outsde of a fair-languag'd courtesy. The twitchings by the beard (which he
reiterates to make his Reader smile,) is indeed something too rude a carriage
if understood in the downright sense as he seems to take it; but since I
spoke-it only in an Allegery, and in order to his wearing a vizard which I
plucked off, let him but acknowledge that I found him attired in such a mask
(to which the other words related) and I am contented to be thou^t so
unreasonably uncivil as to pluck it off so rudely.

Next, with what Logic does he huddle together those testimonies out of
Scripture for S. W's pasport to Hell, unless he could evidence that they were
particularly appliable to him? Are words, which in their own nature found even
contumeliously, so perfectly damnable that no circumstance can render them
inculpable; or at least venial, if not necessary, or convenient? for the Dr.
maintains the general Thesis in such a manner, as if one taken in such a
flagrant fact, is long ago condemned to hell and disinherited from his right to
heaven. p. 2. and 3. What becomes then of good S. John Baptist, who called the
illprepared Jews a generation of vipers? what of S. Paul who ( Acts 13. 8.)
called Elymas, son of the devil, full of all treaechery and deceit, enemy of
all justice, etc. What of our Savior, who called Herod, Fox, the prophaners of
the Temple, Thieves, the Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites? And, to come nearer
our present circumstances, what will become of Blessed S. Polycarp, (disciple
to S. John the Evangelist, the tenderest recommender of Charity to his
disciples of all the Apostles) who yet meeting with an heretic, who began
complementally to insinuate into acquaintance with nonn agnoscis nos? Do not
you know us? rejected his courtesy with this rude language, Agnosco
primogenitum Di boli, yes, I know thee to be the first begotten of the devil.
What of S. Jude, who calls heretics clouds without water, autumnal trees,
twice dead, rooted out, waves of the raging sea foaming out their own
confusion. Lastly, to come yet nearer home, what shall we think of Gods Church,
whose custom it ever was to anathematis and curse all heretics, and of S.
Paul who bids anathema even to an Angel from heaven, if he should preach false
doctrine? I ask now, are not all these expressions, revileing, contumelious,
rude, and (which the Doctor most resents) beard-twitching language, if taken
in themselves? Must then all this good company be deemed detestable,
unrighteous, excommunicate, and blindly packed all away to hell together, for
revilers, contumelious, etc. because they gave such hard language? The texts
alleged by Mr. H. are very general, laying about them blindly and
indifferently at Friends and Foes; and he allows them here no exception at
all. Or, if he does, as I hope he will rather then involve such persons in his
uniuersall censure; then the reason why he exempts these must be, because the
words, though taken in their own indifferency without any application, are most
highly contumelious, yet, spoken to such persons as heretics, men publicly
noxious, the common good concernd' made the private person's repute not
considerable: and so (the misdesert of the persons justifying the truth of the
words) they sounded now a laudable and necessary zeal, which in other
circumstances had been contumely and inte^perate passion.

Whence follows, first, that I am not excommunicate* or in the state of
damnation, for having used contumelious words, since the use of them, if taken
simply in it self, is not impious, as has beenshown: but for having used them
against Dr. H. Unhappy I who was not aware how sacred a person my adversary
was, ere I undertook to deal with him! Next, it follows that, if Dr. H.
evidence not his cause to be no heresy, and himself no maintainer of it, all
those former harsh expressious used against heretics are his due, and without
scruple of sin, might be given him by S. W. who had undertaken as a Catholic
writer to lay open his faultiness. Let any man but read the Doctors first
chapter of Schism, and take notice what harsh-sounding characters the Fathers
give to that vice; and then let him tell me what a public propagatour of Schim
may deserve. Wherefore, unless he makes his evidence good, S. W. may also
justly retort upon him the charge of contumeliousnesse; since he has no where
in his whole Book used toward him such rude expressions, as the Dr. has in
his first chapter by his censorious self-explication of Scripture loaded upon
him, of detestable, impious, etc only Mr. Hammond calumniates in a preaching
manner, and out of Scripture, which makes the well-couch'd contumely less
discernable. Thirdly, it were very easy for S. W. using the Doctors method,
to gather out of Scripture all the vigorous words and severe execrations
against the wicked; and then, by his own voluntary explication and application,
clap them all upon the Dr.: as for example, that of Curse ye Meroz, etc. and
then say that by Meroz is meant such as Mr. H. who writes against God's Church.
This, I say, were as easy for the Disarmer: But he cannot but hate that in
himself, which he nauseates at in another: He knows very well, and hopes the
world, now grown wiser, plainly discerns it almost as impossible certainly to
demonstrate truth by clashing together mere wordish testimonies; as to strike
fire by the weak collision of two pieces of Wax, which easily yield at every
stroke: and therefore makes account it is his greatest misfortune to tamper
with an Adversary who trades in wares of no higher value, then only, Reusner
like, in fragments picked out of several Authors, and then stitched together
by voluntary transitions into a book.

What is hitherto said is only to show, that every using of language, even in
its own nature contumelious, is fat from being a sin; and therefore that S. W.
may yet (by God's grace) hope to escape hell fire* unless the Dr. can evidence
that his cause is neither Heresy nor Schism; since, if it be, it remained
very lawful for him to treat the public propagatour of it according to his
desert, as has been shown. But S. W. disclaims, in behalf of his book, any such
language toward Dr. H. A contumely (I conceive) notes some personal and
moral fault in another: did I note any in him? Indeed, as a writer; he was
mine and the Churches Adversary; and as such it is most irrational I should
spare him, when I saw my advantage. Do Duellers (if their quarrel be serious)
use to spare their enemy, and not hurt him in that place where they see him
unguarded? It were madness then to expect, that, where my adversary writ
insincerely, I should not show him insincere; where blasphemously, blasphemous;
where weakly, weak; where ridiculously, ridiculous, Upon such advantage offered
I ought to have had no courtesy for him; unless I would prevaricate from my
task, and betray the cause I had undertaken to defend, by a complemental
connivence. If then I might upon his desert give him those characters, I hope
it is necessarily consequent that words must be allowed me to express them;
nor ought the lawful help of Rhetoric be interdicted me, to express them
home. Now, if all art of Rhetoric gives it, that ridiculous things ought to be
expressed ironically, let Dr. H. blame the art so unfriendly to him, and his own
weakness which entitled him to such expressions; not S. W. who did but as
art, nature, and reason required. If any yet object that I was still excessive
in the manner of those expressions; I answer that I shall bewilling to confess
the fault, unless I manifested him equally excessive in the manner of
deserving them: otherwise, as long as the proportion holds, I shall in reason
account my self blameless.

As a writer then against God's Church, D. H. ought in reason to expect no
mercy at S. W's hands, but rigorous justice only: nor is this by consequence
contumeliousnesse, but the proper treaty which reason grants, religion
avoucheth, and the circumstances make necessary. Now that all the pretended
revilings of S. W. are no other the Dr. shall. inform the Reader, complaining
here page 2. that the Publisher of the book has solemny annexed a list of the
contumelies, three and thirty picz'd out by specialty, etc. since then these,
as he says, are the speci all or chief contumelies, not to trouble the Reader
with the whole Roll, we will only take notice of the first of them, which is
this; How the Dr. of. Divinity has forgot his accidence. This is the first of
those special contumelies, which Dr. H. here compares to Goliah's cursing of
David; to Rabshakeh's reproaches; to the king of Moab's language against Israel.
This is that in the flagiant fact of which (as he expresses it) being taken,
the Apostle has therefore long ago pronounced sentence against me, that no
Christian must eat with me, hence it is that I have only the name, not the
reality of a Christian, am a detestable person, ipso jure excommunicated in a
special manner one of the (...) (as he pedantizes it) so as unreformed (that
is, without repentance) I shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, and do but
flatter and deceive my self if I hope I may; and lastly, am none of those
Saints who (clave non errante) shall judge the word. Thus are poor Catholics
poasted to hell by couples (for I suppose the Romish Factour must bear me
company) without bale or mainprise, for manifesting that Dr. H. had forgot his
Accidence. You wits of the Universities beware and take example by the fatal
Catastrophe of S. W. when you write or dispute do not accuse your Adversary of
inconsequence in his argument, mistakes in criticizing, sol^ecismes, or the
like; you see upon how ticklish a point your salvation stands; if you do, the
Apostle has pronounced long ago that no man may eat with you, hence you are
specially contumelious, excommunicated, no Christians, detestable, in special
sort unrighteous, and do but flatter your selves, if you hope to go to heaven
without true and hearty repentance, as Dr. H. has evidently proved out of
Scripture.

The rest of those special contumelies (as he calls them) are deductions from
his own erroneous reasoning, or interpreting Scripture, from his self
contradictions, his mistakes, etc. and therefore being only aimed at his Book?
orat Himself as the Writer of it, were necessary to be taken notice of by his
Disarmer; and consequently not falling under the notion of contumelies, nor
deserving so many censures in Greek. If Mr. H. yet kindly complain, that my
words were too harsh; my answer is, the very names we give to great faults are
harsh words, nor can they possibly be other wise; so as he must either suppose
me so supine as not to take notice of his faultiness, or else I must suppose
him more innocent, (that is, deny mine own eyes:) and then, winking at his
gross and pernicious errors, substitute courtesy to zeal, and instead of
confuting, fall to complement. Now how can any man in reason imagine I should
not mention his greatest faults, that is, not use harsh words? For either Dr.
H. knew of them, or not: if not, it was his interest and my charity to let him
know them; which, I think, cannot be done without naming them: If he knew of
them, and yet writ them, it was a more necessary charity, and more concerning
the public, and dearest interest of men's salvations (waving all private
respect to the person) to let all men know his false dealing, that they might
beware of him, as of a wolf in sheeps clothing. Let himself choose which side he
pleases, I shall hold my self sufficiently cleared by either. Nay, rather I
have reason to make a counter-complaint of the Dr. for, I no where in my whole
Book, branded him with the appelation of a detestable person, which this
pattern of piety gives me: though my pretense might avouch-it, being to defend
the rights of the Church I live in: whereas his intemperance proceeds from a
vindication of his private self from the contumelies (forsooth) he has
received; and to aggravate his fault the more, he cannot be content to use his
own words to express his gravity affecting passion; but, to make his railing
more authoritative (as one said of a precise puritanical Dame, that she never
cudgeld her Maid but in Scripture Phrase) so St. Paul must needs prophecy long
ago of my Excommunication, be revived to pronounce it in Dr. H's name, and for
solemnity sake, in Greek too: Yet after the Dr. has been so hihg in the Pulpit
against contumelies, he is become himself so mean an Auditor, as to accuse me
flatly of falsifications, (with what reason shall be seen hereafter) calumnies
certainly, if not avouch'd; yet all sounds zeal in him, which in another would
be plain contumely: Should we desire St. Paul now to Excommunicate Dr. H. he
would presently silence-us, by assuring'us, that St. Paul never meant harm to
him, but to S. W. only, so secure a thing it is to be a dexterous Scripturist.

Sect. 2.
That the certainty of Faith (and that only) justly grounds zeal; and obliges
the Propugner of that Faith to an impartial plainness with its Adversary, as
taken-under that notion,
THese ordinary Considerations, and obvious to common sense, I have offered to
the Reader, to let him see this manner of Writing in confuting such Authors, is
very rational, if the cause deserves any zeal, and the truth of the thing makes
good what is said. One reason more I shall add, which I recommend to the
attentive consideration of the Reader, it being indeed the fundamental ground
why such a treaty should be necessary in controversies about Faith, against the
deemed adversaries thereof. And this is no other than the certainty of Faith it
self. But lest the Dr. should mistake me (as his custom is) to beg the
question, by supposing our Faith certain, I profess my self only to mean at
present a deemed, or believed certainty of Faith in him who is to maintain it:
Now whoever holds his Faith and its ground certain (as Catholics do) is
obliged, eo ipso, to hold for certain likewise, that the Government recommended
to him by the same Rule of Faith is to be submitted to, and by consequence,
that the rejecting it is Schism; whence follows, that he must hold also for
certain, that the Propagatour of that Tenet is a Ringleader of Schismatics,
publicly pernicious, and one who by his poisonous Writings infects the souls
of men with as heinous a vice as ever entitled any to damnation. Neither can
he hold him otherwise, unless he will hold the ground of his own Faith
uncertain, and call into question the substance of all his hope, that he may
instead thereof entertain charitable thoughts of the impugner of it.

Now then let us consider what carriage is due toward a private person, held
for certain to be one who endeavors to draw souls to hell by his Writings and
Authority, from him who holds him so, nor can hold him otherwise, unless he
will hold the grounds of his own Faith doubtful; ought not this Catholic
Writer, if he has any zeal for his Faith, or care of his Conscience (which
obliges him in charity to prevent so great mischief) to use the means and ways
which wit and art can invent, to confute and discredit that man's harmful
sophistry, and disparage his authority, as fat as truth can justify his words?
ought he not to trample down all tenderness which his good nature would
suggest, neglect all considerations of respect, all condescensions of civility,
to lay him open plainly, and palpably to be what he is, that is, ridiculous,
nonsensical, weak, blasphemous, or whatever other Epithet the defense of so bad
a cause makes so bad a writer deserve: why should he make scruple (going upon
those grounds that his Faith is most certain, and the former sequel no less)
to give him the same language, if he be found to deserve it, as St. Jude gave
the Adversaries of Faith in his days, as the Fathers gave Porphyrius
afterward; nay more, if he sees he can make him justly ridiculous, why should
he not express himself ironically too in order to his nonsense, as well as
Elias might scoff at the Priests of Baal? In a word, whatever can conduce to
the justly disgracing him, as the Defender of a certainly deemed-pernicious
cause, might lawfully, nay in Charity ought have been used to undeceive his
adherentes, and preserve others from a certainly-beleeved danger, and that the
greatest of dangers, eternal damnation.

Hence sollows, that though S, W. may perhaps be blamed for holding his Faith
certain, yet he is inculpable for proceeding consequently to the former Tenet,
that is in treating Dr. H. as a pernicious destroyer of souls, since (as has
been proved) he cannot think him otherwise, unless he either doubt of his own
Faith, or renounce the light of his Reason, which taught him to deduce thence
by evident consequence that such he was, and as such to be treated. He who
holds ill principles, is blameable indeed in that regard, but yet he is worthy
of praise and commendations for proceeding consequently upon them, since to
deduce consequences aright, is very laudable.

As for the culpablenesse which may accrue by holding his Faith certain, to
clear himseif to rational persons (for wordish and merely testimony-men are not
capable of reason) he fears not to profess, that he makes account he has as
perfect evidence, or more than he has for any thing in nature, that Truths of
no less concernment then Eternity, written in the hearts of so many as may in
a just estimate make up the account of mankind, in such a powerful manner, and
with such incompatable motives as the Apostles writ them being so conformable
to nature, not merely speculative, but each of them visibile, and daily
practical, could never dye or decay out of the hearts of Christians, in any
age. Nor has he less evidence, that consequently (Scripture and its
interpretation being subject to misprision, as far as they depend not upon
this, and are regula^ed by it) Universal Tradition is the only certain and
absolute rule of Faith; whence follows, that both they who build upon any other
ground, have only opinion to found their faith, for those points which they
receive nor from tradition; as also, that that Church who relies upon universal
Tradition for each point of Faith, erres in none, not can err so long as the
sticks close to so safe a Principle. Now then, finding no Church do this but
the Roman-Catholike (for neither Greeks, nor Protestants, nor any else
pretended to have received ever from their immediate Fore fathers those points
of Faith in which they differ from her) doubt not to account Her that only
Church which has the true motive, ground, and rule of Faith (since probability
cannot be that Rule) and consequently which has true Faith, and is a true
Church: Hence I am obliged to esteem all other Congregations which have broken
from that onely-certain Rule, or her Government recommended by the same Rule,
Schismatical and Heretical; hence I conclude her Infallible, because I make
account I can demonstrate, that the principle upon which only she relies is
impossible to fail, Hence, Iastly, that I may come home to my intent, I account
my faith certain, and the propagator of the contrary certainly pernicious to
men's souls; and therefore that it was both his desert and my obligation, not to
let slip any possible advantage, which might with Truth damnify his cause, and
him as-the maintainer of it.

Now, that we may turn over the leaf, as certainty that faith is true is a
sufficient ground to beget a just zeal in its propugners against its
adversaries, so a professed fallibitily and uncertainty is uterly insufficient
for that end, and unable to interest conscience in its defense. For how should
conscience be inreressed to defend positions held upon no better ground, with
any eagerness, unless reason be interessed first? and how can reason be
obliged to the serious, and vigorous patronage of what it felf knows certainly
that it knows not whether it be true or no? See but how the working of Nature
in all men gives testimony to this Truth! If we hear one obstinately affirm and
stand to a thing which we know certainly is otherwise, though the matter it
self be but of trivial concernment, even Nature seems to stir us up in
behalf of Truth to a just resentment, and hardly can we refrain from giving a
sharp reprehension, if the person be underus, or some expression of-dislike, if
this peremptory wronger of truth exceed our jurisdiction. So on the other side
if we be uncertain whether the thing be so or no, we find, it quite abates that
keenness of opposition, neither will any one unless very peevish and weak,
engage passion to quarrel about a conjecture, or if it so happen sometimes, as
when probablists dispute vehemently, yet their heat springs not from the
natural love of truth inbred in their souls, but because their honor,
interest, or other convenience is concerned in the goodsuccesse of the
disputation.

Hence it follows, that as Catholics go not consequently to their grounds,
unless they defend with an eagerness and zeal proportionable to the
concernment of the thing, their Faith, which they hold most certain and
infallible; so Protestants who confess their Faith fallible, that is, such as
may possibly by otherwise for any thing they know, are obliged by their very
grounds not to take it much ill at any that impugn it, nor express any great
zeal in behalf of it; or if they do, then, their grounds not requiring it, all
their heat and earnestness must manifestly arise from some passion or
interest. They ought therefore to defend their problematicall Faith, as men
defend paradoxes, calmly, civilly, and moderately; and make conscience of being
discourteous to their opposer, since for any thing they kno^ he may possibly be
in the right. In a word, their whole way of controversy, ought in reason to be
managed as an exercise of wit; since it consists only in this, who can most
dexterously and artificially criticize upon words, and be most quick and ready
to produce out of his storehouse either topicall reasons, or testimonies
(gleaned from all places and Authors) as shall seem most pat for the present
occasion. And this is the reason why they desire no more, but that Catholic
writers should treat them with a lukewarm courtesy, and by a respectfull
behavior toward them, as leanerd men, see, mingly leave them some appearance
that their Faith is probable, and then they think themselves safe, and are very
well appayed, whereas it belongs to a Catholic Author, who holds his Faith
certain to manifest the contrary to be perfectly absurd, and nonsense; and
since the knowledge of this must, in his grounds, be held so necessary for the
salvation of mankind, he ought in plain terms let men know it is such, and give
it home the Character it deserves; otherwise by his timorousness he
prevaricates from his grounds, and by his fearful mincing his expressions when
Truth will-bear him out in them, and the weight of the cause exacts them, he
breeds a just apprehension in his readers that the contrary (else why should he
proceed so reservedly) may have some degree of probability, which perhaps is
enough for his Adversary, but assuredly betrays his own cause.

I know my adversary will think he has gained much by my forwardness in this
last paragraph, and others also may perhaps judge that I have put my self upon
the geatest disadvantage imaginable by professing voluntarily that it is my
obligation to show his writings nonsense or impossible to be true; whereas a
good prohabity that they are true will serve his turn* but, both the necessity
of my Cause obliges me to it, which must leave them void of all probability,
whom a probability will content and also the evident Truth of it emboldens m^e
to affirm this, and not to think that in so affirming I have said too much, or
been too liberal to my Adversary. Wherefore as if I were to dispute upon the
ground of my Faith (which yet is not the proper task for our party who stand
upon possession) I doubt not with Gods help to leave no room for a probability
to the contrary, in the judgment of a prudent and disinteressed person; so I
shall not fear to affirm that all the testimonies in Dr. Hammonds book, though
they were twenty times more, and twenty times seemingly more express, bear not
the weight of a probability, if compared to that world of witnesses in te
Catholic Church they left, all attesting that the very points which the
reformers relinquisht had been delivered by their Forefathers, as delivered to
them by theirs etc. And this so expressly, amply, and clearly, as leaves no
place for criticisms, several explications, with all the train of other
circumstances, which mere words seldom or never want, rendering them obnoxious
to a thousand ambiguities: join then, I say, that vast, and clear testimony to
this argument, drawn from reason, that, as it is impossible they who lived ten
years before H. the eight should so conspire to deceive those who lived in his
days, in things visibile and practical (such are the points of our Faith) as
to say they received them from their Forefathers as received from theirs, and
yet no most palpable evidence remain of this most palpable and evidently,
prevayling even to gull the whole world to their faces in a business importing
their eternal bliss; so likewise that the same impossibility holds in each
ten years ascending upwards till the Apostles time, and by consequence, that
the Faith delivered of late was the Faith delivered then. Ioyn I say these two
together, and I doubt not to affirm that it is most perfect nonsense, to think
all the testimonies in Dr. Hs. book (subject to a thousand Grammatical,
Philological, Sophistical, Historical and Logical difficulties) can bear so
much as a show of probability, if compared to that clear evidence of reason,
and that ample one of universal testification which shines in the other.
However it may happen, that some one or more testimonies of his may make the
contrary seem probable to such as either never heard of, or nor well
penetrated, or do not consider the grounds of Universal Tradition; as a straw
may incline a balance, if nothing be put in the counterpoise.

Neither let my Adversary object, I intend to evade answering his Testimonies
by this discourse: they shall have from me the return due from an Answerer;
that is, to show them unable to conclude against this vast Authority of
Universal Tradition; for he may know we hold our Faith and Government upon no
other tenor. So as still the mea sure of their force must be according to the
degree in which they invalidate this tenor of ours built upon both a long
possession, and such an universal* and clear testification. Only I desire the
Reader to take notice hence, what a pitiful task it is to stand answering a
wordish book, which can bear no weight with any prudent man who considers the
incomparable force of Universal Tradition, our only tenor: but I am
necessitated to it by the weakness of many, whose wit never carried them
farther than to hear a sermon, or to read a testimony; and therefore they never
reflected what small merit of assent can be pretended to by words of men dead
long ago, left to be tossed by our various expositions and criticisms, and liable
to a thousand evasions, against the clear sense written in the hearts of
mankind with most powerful motives, and to be propagated truly to their
posterity under penalty of eternal damnation to them and theirs. Few there are
I say who have refined their understanding to this degree of discerningness
though I perceive, to my great comfort, that the best sort of wits begin to
own their reason, and bring it home to it self, rather than suffer it to wander
in a pathlesse wilderness of words, and think it an endeavor more worthy a
rational soul to weave well compacted Treatises by evident connection of terms,
than fruitlesly to stand picking thrums-ends out of overworn garments; and when
they have done, scarce know what color they are of, or how to knit them
handsomely together without the motley of nonsense.

Thus much to give account of my obligation not to favor Mr. H. while he
impugnes that Faith which I esteem most certain, and most concerning. Now, for
his person, as it comes to me under any other notion, than of a writer against
God's Church, I profess with all sincerity to honor and love it in the measure
which reason requires. As a member of the civil commonwealth I live in, I bear
him a civil respect; I hear he is much a Gentleman and very courteous: in
return to which, if it be my good fortune to meet him, I shall be as ready to
serve him in what may not concern my cause, and do him as much civility, as I
would to most Gentlemen in England. According to the degree of scholarship I
find in him, I shall heartily allow him a proportionable honor, and shall not
envy it him, though mine Adversary, even in his absence, amongst mine own
Friends. I value-him for his skill in Greek, a language I much love my self,
and think it a great ornament to a scholar, if he know how to use it
seasonably, and not wantonly show it upon all, or rather no occasion; in which
Mr. H. has very mvch diminish't himself, giving his Readers a fair title to
suspect him either of too much vanity in that, or emptiness in other
knowledges. I applaud his unwearied industry, half of which employed in a
rational way by some strong brain, might be the happy Mother of many rare
productions. His looking into such variety of Authors deserves also it is
commendation; since testimonies have their degree of probation allowed them by
their Governesse Reason; that is, according to the degree of knowledge (or
Authority subsequent to it) found in the Testifier, and the clearness from
ambiguity found in the words alleged: nay rather I should esteem him more for
this than all the rest, were this way of testimonies in it self much estimable,
since his chief and almost only talent lies in this; which furnishes him with
sufficient store of such declamatory proofs, and enables him to bring some kind
of testimony against any thing that can be opposed, as the nature of such
slight quotation-argumenrs uses to be; for indeed what so absurd, but a
testimony may be produced, even from the best Authors, seeminly favoring it,
as we experience daily in Scripture? Lastly and more especially, I acknowledge
I am much his for the sakes of some Friends common to him and me; which (as no
man with more veneration honors that s^cred relation of minds, than my self)
does in a manner mediately ally me to him, and makes me desirous to flatter my
self, that the agreeing in a third, should make us not disagree amongst our
selves. All these motives give him no mean place in my thoughts, and esteem:
yet all these temporal considerations vanish, and he straight becomes again
indifferent to me, when a quarrel about Eternity of mankind's bliss or misery
is to be controverted between us; and my deemed certainty of my Cause, which
concludes him by consequence certainly pernicious, obliges me in Conscience to
confute, nay even disgrace him, as far as he shall be found the promoter of a
pestilent and soul-ruining Tenet. Although I must confess withal, I am sorty,
that by is own fault he occasioned this conscientious engagement in me; for had
there been no infection spread, there had needed no Antidote.

What I have said here was to satisfy some whom I found much mistaken in the
manner how Controversies ought to be treated by a Catholic; not considering
that Courtesy is a virtue only in fit circumstances, otherwise but an
impertinent flattery or affectation, and in a serious controversy about faith,
whose both Concernment and Certainty justify zeal, and make it necessary, as
improper, as for soldiers who are to try the field about their Kings and
Countries interests, to hold their sword in one-hand, and hat in the other;
complement, and kiss their hands to one another, instead of striking, or by
any unnatural mixture of both make a gallant show of a mock fight, preferring
the care of court esy before the loss of their Cause. For the satisfaction of
these I have Apologiz'd thus far, not in relation to Mr. H. The proper way to
answer his weak proofs out of Scripture here, were to gather by the help of an
honest Concordance all the harsh words in the Scriptures spoken by our Savior
or his Saints, and apply them voluntarily against him, as he has done against
me; at which if he repine, then to ask, why my interpretation should not be as
valid as his. And with good-reason too, should I daing him only a reply in
this method, for why should not an answer of any thing serve to a
quodlibeticall objection?

Sect. 3.
How unfortunate and weak Dr. H. is, in quoting S. Hierome against the Disarmer
for writing plainly His crafty and discourteous Calumny.
AFter the testimonies from Scripture blindly levelled at S. W. follows in the
sixth Paragraph, that it was a deviation from art to treat him thus unkindly (to
which I have answered above) and that S. Hierome notes it as a great error in
Helvidius, that he took railing for eloquence. Wherefore since Mr. H. chooses S.
Hierome for his Patron against S. W. in this point of the manner of writing
controversy, let us stand to his ward and example: and see how he treated
Vigilantius, Dr. Hs. and the Protestants Forefather in the point of denying
veneration to Holy Relics; and wether he stood upon courtesy, when he made
account he had a just occasion to show his zeal. In his Epistle to Riparius,
the first he writ against Vigilantius, he has these words: O praecidendam
ling^am, etc. O tongue worthy to be cut out by Physicians, or rather, oh
frantic head to be cured by them, etc. Ego vidi hoc aliquando portentum; I
once saw this prodigious monster. Tacita me forsan cogitatione repre hendas,
etc. Perhaps thou may reprehend me in thy silent thought, why I inveigh
against one absent: I confesto thee my passion, I cannot hear so great
sacrilege with patience. For I have read of the lance of Phinees, the austere
rigor of Elias, the zeal of Simon of Cananee, the severity of Peter killing
Ananias and Sapphira, the constancy of Paul, who condemned to eternal
blindness Elymas the Sorcerer, resisting the ways of our Lord. Piety in Gods
behalf is not cruelty. Nor by consequence is zeal in behalf of Faith railing;
if that Faith be held to have certain grounds; which only can justify zeal,
and make it discreet. But to proceed.

His second Epistle against Vigilantius begins thus. Multa in orb monstra etc
Many monsters have been begotten in the world: we read in Esaias of Centaurs
and Sirens, Screech-owls and Onocrotals: Job describes Leviathan and Behemoth
in mystical language: the fables of the Poets tell of Cerberus, and the
Stymphals, and the Erymanthian Boar, of the Nemean Lion, of Chimera, ad
many-headed Hydra: Virgil describes Cacus; Spain has brought to light
three-shap't Geryon; France only had no Monsters. Suddenly there arose
Vigilantius, or more truly Dormitantius, who with an unclean spirit fights
against the spirit of Christ, and denies that the sepulchers of the martyrs are
to be venerated. Insanum caput! mad or frantic fellow! Sanctas reliquias
Andreae, Lucae and Timothei, apud quas Daemones rugiunt, and inhabitatores
Vigilantij illorum se sentire praesentiam confitentur, The holy relics of
Andrew, Luke and Timothy, at which the Devils roar, and the possessours of
Vigilantius confess that they feel their presence. Tu vigilans dormis, and
dormiens scribis: Thou sleep waking, and writest sleeping. De barathro
pectoris tui coenosam spurcitiam evomens; vomiting dirty filth from the hell of
thy breast. Lingua viperea! Viperine tongue! Spiritus isle immundus, qui haec
te cogit scr^bere, saepe hoc vilissimo tortus est pulvere, immo hodieque
torquetur; and qui iu te plagas dissimula^, in aliis confitetur: That unclean
spirit which compells thee to write these things, has oftentimes been tortured
with this contemptible dust ( meaning the Holy Relics, which Vigilantius
styled thus) yea and is now adays still tortured; and he who in thee
dissembles his wounds, confesses them in others.

But let us come to the Treatise our Adversary cites, and see how roughly S.
Hierome handles Helvidius; whom Dr. H. would have him accuse in the same
treatise of the self-same fault. Sed^ne te quasi lubricus anguis evolvas,
testimoniorum stringendus es vinculis, ne quer^lus sibiles; but lest, like a
stippery snake, thou disentangle thy self, thou must be bound with the cords of
testimonies, that thou may not querulously hiss: Imperitissime hominum!
siliest of men! Nobilis es factus in scelere, Thou art ennobled and made famous
by thy wickedness. Quamvis sis hebes, dicere non a^debis; although thou be
dull or blockish, yet thou dare not affirm it. Risimus in te proverbinm,
Camelum vidimus saltantem: We have laughed at the old proverb in thee, We have
seen a dancing Camel* etc. Where we see.

First, that if S. Hierome's verdict expressed in his own manifold example be
allowable, whom Dr. H has chosen for Vmpire in his matter, it is very lawful
and fitting to give the Adversaries of Faith their full desert in controversies
concerning Faith, and not to spare them as long as the truth of their
faultiness can justify the rigorous expressions. Neither let Dr. H. objet that
I beg the question, in supposing him an Adversary of the true faith: for to put
the matter indifferently, and so as may please even the Protestants them
selves, either Dr. H's cause is false, and then it is laudable to use zeal
against him, who perniciously endeavors to mantain a falsehood; or else it is
true, and then he deserves as great a reprehension who abuses his cause by
going about to defend it by such wilful falsifications, and so many frauds and
weaknesses, as he has been discovered. Whence it appears that the indifferent
Reader is not to consider at all, whether the expressions sound harshly or no,
but whether they be true or no; for if they be, then that person will be found
in reason to deserve reprehension, be the cause he defends true or false, if he
defend it either senselesly or insincerely.

Secondly, these harsh expressions of S. Hieromes being due to Dr. H's
forefather Vigilantius, for denying veneration to holy Relics, are due
likewise upon that only score to Dr. H. and the Protestant writers, who deny
the same Point: what then may we imagine the Protestants deserve for filling up
the measure of their forefathers sins, by denying the only certain Rule of
Faith, Universal Tradition, the former government of God's Church, almost all
the Sacraments, and many other most important points besides, and of much
greater concernment than is this of venerating holy Relics?

Thirdly, the Reader shall find no where in Schism Disarmed such harsh language
given to Dr. H. or which (if taken in it is own nature (sounds so contumeliously
as this of S. Hieromes against Vigilantius is; frantic fellow, monster,
prodigious monster* possessed with the Devil, possessed with an unclean Spirit,
snake, famous for wickedness, blockhead, etc. My harshest words in comparison
of these are moderate and civil* mine are smiling Ironies, his are stern and
bitter Sarcasmes, and if I whipped Dr. H. gently with rods, S. Hierome wihpt his
forefather Vigilantius with Scorpions. Whence follows that I am to be thank't
by Dr. H. for my moderation, not excommunicated for my excess in reprehending
him, since all those more severe expressions far out-vying mine, were his due
as he is in the same fault with Vigilantius, besides what accrues to him out of
later titles; and this by the judgment of S. Hierome, the very Author he
quotes for himself in this point.

Fourthly, what a miserable weakness is it to quote this Father against me for
using harsh language, who himself uses far harsher? which evidences that if
this Fathers authority and example be of weight in this point, as Dr. H. grants
by bringing him against me for that purpose, then the roughness of the
language is not railing or reprehensible, if taken alone or abstracted from the
cause (since Dr. H. will not say that this holy Father thought that manner of
language railing or reprehensible in himself) which shows that Dr. H's first
Chapter, fighting against the words as abstracted from the cause, as much
accuses S. Hierome as me; nay much more, as his words expressed more fully his
justly-caused zeal, than my more moderate pen did.

Fifthly, abstracting from the cause, and impugning the manner of expression
only, as Dr. H. does, who sees not that the Heretic Vigilantius might with
the same reason as he, have entitled the first Chapter of his Reply to S.
Hierome in the like manner as he did, to wit thus, Of Hieroms style and
contumelies: The Scriptures, sentence on (...); the Character belonging
thereto? Then in the Chapter it self have called S Hierome's plain discovery of
his faults, scoffs and contumelies, have told him that he had just title to
the scorners chair, that his writing against him, was like Goliahs cursing of
David, Rabshakels reproaches against Israel, that the Apostle had long ago
pronounced sentence against him, that none should eat with him, that he was in
reality no Christian, a detestable person, fallen under the censures of the
Church, ipso jure excommunicate, in a special sort one of the (...),
unrighteous, that he shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, that this was
the very Dialect which the Jews used toward the true Prophets of God, that it
is against the practice of S. Michael and against the spirit of weeknesse,
peace and long-suffering, etc. As if every heretic, nay every malefactor in
the world, could not say the same to their just reprehenders and punishers: or
as if peace and long-suffering were to be used at all times, even when we see
we suffer divine Truth to be injurd, and souls run headlong and blind to Hell
after such blind guides. Every one, Mr. H. can preach patience, peace and long
suffering, quote scripture, intermix Greek words pedantically; but none can
speak sense but they who have truth on their side. It must be judged then by
the strength of the reasons you bring to clear your selves from schism, whether
you deserved those reprehensions from your Adversary or no, and not from what
your quodlibeticall vein can preach to us. And till you bring evident ones, I
shall ever think that S. Hierome (your own Authors here) preached as good
doctrine as you in a place lately cited, when he told us with many instances
that non est crudelitas pro Deo pietas.

Sixthly, what is it to me that S. Hierome noted it as an error in Helvidius,
that he took railing for eloquence, unless he can prove that I took it so too?
He knows I pretend that justice, truth, and the necessity of my cause,
warranted, nay obliged me to be so plain with him. I pretend no Eloquence in an
ordinary controversy; neither did I think that confuting Dr. H. would be such a
rare business, that it would be worth the pains of a rhetorical filing.

Lastly, to show more and more the weakness of this Dr. S. Hieromes words of
Helvidius are these; loquacitatem facundiam existimat, he thinks babbling to be
eloquence. But the good Dr. whom any semblance of a testimony contents,
construes loquacitas (wordishness) to be railing; as if empty pulpit-beatres,
who talk two hours without a word of solidnesse, were therefore all railers. I
doubt that ere we come to an end of this Treatise, Loquacity, that is,
voluntary talking wordishly without a syllable of sense, will be so perfectly
shown to be D. H's proper and peculiar fault, that his own words will evince it
without the help of Saint Hierome.

And thus has Dr. H. sped in quoting this holy, learned, and truly zealous
Father for the Patron of his affected courte^y and civility; and a pattren for
S. W. to follow in writing Controversies about Faith.

I once hoped Mr. H. and I should have parted very good Friends from this first
Section, notwithstanding the contumelies which, contrary to his own grounds, he
has heaped upon me in it. But he has so purposely counterfeited a mistake,
that he might by that means fix a ^ly c^^umny upon a worthy person, that
Charity and pity must both be summoned up to pardon him in it* I had upon
occasion of the Evidence of our Churches Infallibility in my Schim Disaerm'd
page 20. told him, he might to his amazement see it in that incomparable
Treatise of Rushworth's Dialogues, vindicated from all possible confute by that
excellent Apology for it, writ by the learned pen of Mr Thomas White. What does
Mr. H? he tells us that S. W. says, his arrows are beyond all possible
confute; meaning that S. W. the Author of Schism Disarmed, was the same with
the Author of the Apology for Tradition) though I am certainly informed that
he knows S. W. to be another person) and reports again afterward the same
phrase to the same purpose. Now by this one project he gains two advantages:
First he honors himself with making the world believe he had so worthy an
Adversary as the Author of that Apology: next, when he has done this, he
dishonours his pretended Adversary, as the vainest person in the world, by
intimating that himself in Schism Disa^m'd gave himself such an high character.
Whereas first, I assure Dr. H. it is in vain to hope for such an honor as is
an Answer from that miracle of with and learning* it is worthy him to write
grounds, not to stand replying upon mere words; to answer such weak skirmishers
is a task more proper for one of the meanest and youngest of his scholars, a
very slender participation of his solid knowledge renders one able to encounter
with the Apuleian bladders of aerie testimonies, the victory over which can
only entitle one to Domitian's triumph, and need more the Flyflap of a
Dictionary, or turning over leaves to combat them, then the acuter and stronger
sword of reason. As for the second, which is the sly calumny of that worthy
person's feigned self-praise, built only on Mr. H's wilful mistake, I fear
the intimater of it will lose much credit by so ignoble a detraction of such a
person; since his profoundest humility, of equal depth with his knowledge,
secures him as much from desiring praise, as his known worth from needing it;
every one freely yielding him those excellent commendations, which his
Detractours will needs have him, for want of good neighbors, give himself.

He tells us in the close, that Divines are allowed to have skill in Symptoms.
What Symptoms are these, and of what? that the profusest la^ghter is the worst
indication of the affections of the spleen, quoting Irenaeus and Galen. I ask,
suppose Irenaeus had also said that a gravely-affected melancholy,
extraordinarily representing sanctity and piety, and a professing an earnest
desire to speak the full truth of God (Answer p. 18.) and yet in the mean time
falsifying most palpably, purposely, and inexcusably, is the worst indication
of a pharisaicall hypocrisy; were not this more competible to Mr. H. then the
other is to me? I hope then he is answered, at least in as good a manner as
such toys deserve. And ere I come to finish this Treatise, I flatter my self,
that even Dr. H's own Friend^ will acknowledge that such is his carriage, and
manner of writing, unless a strong prepossession of partiality have blinded
them, and shut the eyes both of their mind and body; since to make good this my
charge against him, little more then the common use of the latter is exacted of
the Reader.

Sect. 4.
Dr. H's methodicall Charity, represented in his totally mistaking the common
sense of a plain Epistle to the Reader: with a second sly Calumny of the same
strain, and other weaknesses.
HIs railing against me in the first section, which he calls his ( Answ. p. 5.)
obligation of Charity, brings him methodically (for all is Charity and method
in him) to andeavour my conviction, by examining the account I gave of the
rudeness of my blows; which though sufficiently cleared already, yet I think
my self obliged to my cause, to take notice of this methodicall charity and
convincing reason that the Reader may see what weak Patrons Schism has; and
that if Mr. H. be most grievously mistaken in a plain Epistle to the Reader,
there is little hopes of his hitting right in higher matters afterward, and so
S. W, must utterly despair of ever being convinced by his methodicall Charity.

In my Epistle to the Reader, to render him account why the civility of mine
adversary should not hinder me from giving him his own, if the care of an
eternal good injured by him, interessed my zeal to lay him open, I proposed
these two parallel questions. How would you take it if one should spit in your
face, and justify the affront because his breath is sweet? or what would you
say to him that ruins your estate by Perjury, and defends himself, that he
held up his hands and eyes to heaven, and swore demurely? Whatever answer you
give, I am confident it will perfectly clear my behavior toward the Dr. with
whom I should have very little contention, were the difference between us in
any thing of less concernment than Eternity Where any man, that is not more
then half-asseep, may see the meaning is plainly this; that as the alleging
that the breath is sweet justifies not the affront of spitting in ones face,
nor the pretense of swearing demurely, the wrong of ruining ones estate by
perjury: so neither does Dr. H's civility in his former Treatise of Schism,
justify or excuse him for abusively treating matters of such concernments as
Eternity, nor consequently could his courteous style oblige S. W. to treat him
tenderly and favorably, whom the weightiest and worthiest Cause had more
prowerfully pre-obliged to lay him open plainly.

This being then most evidently the sense of that place, let us see whether Dr.
H's wits were well awake, or his charity very methodicall, when he answered
them. He neither goes about to grant or deny the invalidity of those pretended
excuses: which only was to be done: but instead thereof makes a piece of a
sermon to you, very Christianly telling you how you ought to behave your self,
in case you receive a private affront, and then being got into the Commonplace
of suffering injuries patiently, he runs division upon that ground, with Greek
and testimonies, telling us that we must turn the other cheek to him that
strikes us on the right, that we must pray forthem that despitefully use us,
fraternally admonish, etc. and then lays it to S. W's conscience. In return I
appeal to his Conscience, and reason both, whether all this be any thing to
this question, whether the sweetness of the breath justify the affront of
spitting in ones face, or civil language sufficiently excuse pernicious
doctrine.

His answer to the second is yet more pleasant. For instead of telling us
whether swearing demurely be any excuse for perjury, so as to secure it from
the punishment or treaty which otherwise might justly be given it, he tells us
in good sober sadness, that a man may use all lawful means to defend his
estate and discover perjury, and blames me for accusing him of perjurious
tampering; and that I might as truly have said that he offered sacrifice to
Idols, consulted with Necromencers, etc. which superadds to the former error,
that he mistakes the comparison or similitude, for the thing it is brought to
parallel or resemble; and by his own litterall acception of it, will needs
accuse him self of perjury whether S. W. will or no. And are not these pretty
mistakes?

Yet these are not all, there is yet another behind greater than all the rest,
if that may be called a mistake which sprung from the Will, and can hardly be
fathered upon the weakest Understanding: I made it my only plea to the Reader
for some blows of mine, which he might apprehend too rude, that our
controversy was about things concerning men's eternal salvation; and therefore
the Reader knowing that I (as all Catholics do) hold my Faith certain, he had
no reason to expect I should favor an Opponent in an act of such a nature, as
is publicly harmfull to men's souls; hence I ended my first paragraph, that I
would have very little contention with him, were the difference between us in
any thing of less concernment than Eternity; and the whole second paragraph
proceeds upon the same ground. Now the Dr. in his Answer, where he pretends my
conviction, takes no notice of my plea, but leaves out the end of the first
paragraph now cited, to which the two parallel questions related, and to which
they ought to be applied; transferring the matter from the public injury to
men's souls, to the case of a private injury of one single Christian to
another: whereas our question is not whether if one strike one on the right
cheek, according to Christ's law, he must turn the other; but whether if a man
be certainly held to have ruined some souls eternally, Christ bids us let him
mine more; or whether, if the wolf worry some sheep, the shepherd ought to
give him more? if not, then whether courtesy ought to have place toward such a
destroyer of souls in those very writings with which he endeavors it, or
rather whether it be not an obligation to show it home what he is, as far as
his faultiness makes good the truth of the words? This answer of his therefore
is either totally impertinent to my question; or else the application of it
must force this inference; Christ bid us turn the left cheek to him that
strikes us on the right, therefore if a perverter of souls carry one to hell,
resist him not, but let him carry more; or if a robber climb in to the fold,
and kill one sheep, a good Christian ought in conscience rather than be
discourteous yield him another. Is not this strange Logic? but that which
follows will in part justify it.

Is it possible one should trip so often in running over a little leaf of paper
almost as intelligible as legible? Yet we have not done so: follows in the
Dr's Aswer p. 7. If he mark, his style which was robust in the mention of
perjury, is grown much fainter, when he comes to the (...) pretends to no more
than perverse meaning and abusiue treating matters of Religion, etc. Where you
see Mr. H. makes account that the abusive treating matters of Religion, which
is able to plunge millions of souls into eternal damnation, is of less moment
then perjury against one's temporal estate: though one who had never read Dr.
H. would surely think that the charge of abusive treating matters of religion,
being a business entrenching upon eternity, is much more robust, (as he calls
it) than that of ruining a temporal estate by perjury; since I think there is
no good Christian but holds the eternal loss of one soul redeemed with
Christ's most precious blood, is of more worth than all the temporal riches
this world can boast of. Is this man fit to have the charge of souls, who
professes to set more by his temporal than their eternal felicity? yet this is
the method of Charity he promised us in the beginning of this Section. It seems
that in this book also his old misfortune pursues him, that he is there most
preposterous still in his discourse, where he pretends to be most methodical.
See Schism Disarmed, page 229. 230.

Answ. p. 7. His last complaint against me is, that it is in S. W. a
transgression of the rules of Art as well as Justice, no other than the meanest
begging the question, to suppose that guil^ which he was to prove, to assume so
early in the Epistle to the Reader what he must (but has not yet so much as
attempted to) demonstrate. Where note first that Dr. H. would have us believe,
he made account that the Epistle to the Reader is to be writ by the Author
before he writes the book; though other men use to make it their last task:
next, he pretends that S. W. who was to answer his book, ought to prove and
demonstrate, that is, oppose and object: which are two very good counterfeited
and affected mistakes; for I should be loath to wrong his judgment so much as
to think he meant them seriously. These two artless suppositions without doubt
proceeded from the same method he promised us in the beginning of the Section.

The Reader may perceive by this what a pitiful spectacle Dr. H. would be, if
S. W. should take the pains to dissect his book, and show how all the Anatomy
of his reason is composed of such weaknesses; every Section being very pregnant
and full of them: but they are in these books swelled to such a formidable
number, that they both deter him from that less necessary task, and he
fears also lest they might cloy the Reader with their too-Comick relation.

His third Section maintains, his self-bred persuasion that ( Answ. p. 8.) the
Author of the Epistle from Bruxells was the Penman of at least the first part
of Schism Disarmed; and his first argument to prove it, is the kindness Schism
Disarmed shows to that Epistle, affording it a very large Encomium, which he
here puts down. So that first Schism Disarmed must be supposed to be writ by
the Author of the Apology for Tradition because he finds there the said
Apology highly commended; and then straight he concludes from the same argument
that the Epistle from Bruxells is the same Author's also, and these positions
must only hang together by the necess^ty of that worthy person's praising
himself. If this be not to profess courtesy openly, and yet s^ily to practice
the height of discourtesy, I profess myself much to seek in understanding the
notions of either. But why is he imagined the Penman of but at least the first
part of Schism Disarmed? Is not Schism Disarmed all the same style, or is it at
all like the style of the Catholic Gentleman's Letter? Sure, no man who ever
understood what a style meant can conjecture either, unless he had wifully a
mind to calumniate without any ground of reason.

His second argument to prove the Author of both Treatises the same, is the
affinity between them; so that all Aristotelians and Aristotle, all Platonists
and Plato must be concluded to be one and the same Author, because of the
affinity between their writings, I conceived the grounds of that Epistle so
well laid, that I could not in reason recede from them, and lay others of mine
own; nor did I disown, but rather express my beholdingness to it, and shall
endeavor to requite the favor by vindicating it from his Reply as far as it
concerns us jointly: nor am I much afraid that Dr. H. tells us here, it is
certain that he has made a reply to it all; knowing well how many books are
called Replies and Answers, which yet need never answer to those names. The
deaf Country-maid who being ask't which was the way to London, replied, a poak
full of plums, gave an answer; but it is another question whether that answer
were either pertinent or satisfactory. As for the Author of that Epistle, he
needs trouble himself no further: it was writ by one of M. H's old
acquaintance, who was willing to honor his book of Schism, by showing that he
thought it worth the least strictures of his learned pen.

The Reply to the Catholic Gentleman consisted of 165. pages, this Answer to
Schism Disarmed of 303. yet this latter ( Answer* p. 9.) he calls an Appendix
to the former, and gleaning after the rake: as if Appendixes used to be twice
as big as the principal; or that husbandmen used to rake armefulls, and leave
cart-loads to be gleaned. However he shall see, I hope, ere we come to an end
of this Treatise of mine, how ill he has husbanded his reason, both in taking
and gleaning. His complaint, that I took no notice of his Reply in my book,
objecting that I had time to have done so, and that he cannot apprehend my
retirement or employment so strict, as not to hear of it, is only his
mis-apprehension; since I assure him Schism Disarmed was out of my hands, long
ere his Reply to the Catholic Gentleman came abroad; nor was I in such
circumstances as to see his Reply, till my own was already printed, as all who
are acquainted with me and my occasions can testify: so thar Mr. H. should not
have concluded I had time to have taken notice of it without certainty of the
thing; and may learn hence how many things may be true, which he cannot
apprehend. He shall never find me unwilling to take notice of any thing he
writes in favor of his cause; if I conceive it likely to endamage the dear
souls of my Brethren and Countrymen.

Sect. 5.
Some previous Grounds proposed, concluding rationally the whole Controversy.
BEfore we come to close seriously with Mr. H. because the sum of his art
consists in blundering the plainest truths with multitudes of wordish evasions,
I thought fitting to lay down in most manifest and evident terms some Grounds
which were most pertinent to our future discourse, and some deductions emergent
thence; by the bare position and explication of which, I doubt not to gain so
far upon the rational Reader, that he shall confess he sees the question truly
stated, and according to plain reason resolved: and if he carries these notions
along with him with cautious and diligent reflection, he shall find no
difficulty in any main point which concerns this present Controversy.

The first Ground then shall be this, that The first pretenders to reform in
the point of the Popes Authority in England, found England actually subject to
that Authority in Ecclesiastical matters. This Ground carries it is Evidence in
it is own terms; since they could not be truly called the first Reformers from
it, unless before, that Authority had been there acknowledged. Neither matters
it when and by whom this Reformation begun, since still the Ground now laid
stands firm; for the very word Reformation (which they pretend) argues that
tenet was held before Hence all the evasions in Dr. H. are concluded vain; who,
when we plead that the Pope was found in possession of this Authority in
England, flies off presently, and denies it, saying he had no title to such an
Authority there: whereas when we maintain his possession, we pretend not yet a
Right (which is our inference thence) but that actually England was under such
an Authority, and acknowledged it; whether it were rightly pretended or
injustly remains to be inferred: which the Dr. mistaking, and not
distinguishing between possession and right, says we beg the question; when we
only take what is evident, that he was in possession, and thence infer a
right, until the contrary be proved.

The second Ground is, that This Authority actually over England, and
acknowledged there, was acknowledged likewise to be that of the Head of the
Universal Church, and not of a Patriarchate only* This Ground is no less
evident than the former, by our adversaries confession; since this is the
Authority they impugn as unlawful, and from which they reformed; which last
word implies the actual acknowledgment that Authority had before. Hence Mr. H's
digression, to show that Kings could erect and translate Patriarchates, was
perfectly frivolous, as far as concerns this purpose: for whether they can
change Patriarchates or no is impertinent, when we are questioning an Authority
above Patriarchs and pretended to be constituted by Christ himself.

The third Ground is, that This Papal Authority actually over the
Ecclesiastical affairs in England was held then as of Christ's Institution,
and to have been derived to the Pope, as he was Successor to S. Peter. The
truth of this appears by the known confession of the then Roman Church, and the
self-same Controversy perpetually continued till this day.

The fourth Ground is that This actual power the Pope then had in England, had
been of long continuance, and settled in an ancient Possession. This is evinced
both from our Adversaries grant, the evidence of the fact it self, and even by
the carriage of S. Aust in the Monk, and the Abbot of Bangor, expressed in that
counterfeited testimony alleged by Dr. H. whence we see it was the doctrine S.
Austin taught the Saxons.

The fifth Ground shall be, that No Possession ought to be disturbed without
sufficient motives and reasons: and consequently it self is a title, till those
reasons invalidate it, and show it null. This is evident first by Nature's
Principles, which tell us there is no new cause requisite for things to remain
as they are; whereas, on the other side, nothing can be changed, without some
cause actually working, and of force proportionable to the weight and
settledness of the thing to be moved. Secondly by Morals, which teach us that
man's understanding cannot be changed from any opinion or belief, without
motives; ought not, without sufficient ones; and consequently needs no new
motive to continue it in any former assent, besides the foregoing Causes which
put it there. Thirdly, we find that Politics give testimony to, or rather
stand upon this Ground; assuring us when any Government is quietly settled, it
ought so to stand till sufficient motives, and reasons in Policy, that is a
greater common good, urge a change. And if Possession were held no title, then
the Welshmen might still pretend to command England, and each line or race,
which preceded and was outed, quarrel with any subsequent one though never so
long settled, and so no certain right at all would be found of any possession
in the World, till we come to Adam's time. Fourthly, as for the particular Laws
of our Country, they clearly agree in the same favor for Possession. I shall
only instance in one common case. If I convey Black^cre to I. S. for the life
of I. N. and after wards I. S. die, in this case, because I cannot enter against
mine own Grant, and all the world else have equal title, whoever first enters
into the land is adjudged the true and rightful Owner of it during the life of
I. N. and that by the sole title of Occupancy, as they call it, which they
wholly ground upon this known reason, that in equality of pretensions
Possession still casts the balance. Nay such regards is given by our Law to
Possession, that were the right of a former Title never so evident, yet a
certain time of peaceable Possession undisturbed by the contrary claim, would
absolutely bar it. And here I should take my self obliged to ask my Adversary's
pardon, for using such words as a Dr. of Divinity is not presumed to be
acquainted with, did not his own Example at least excuse, if not provoke my
imitation. Thus much of the force of Possession in general, without descending
to the nature of ours in particular, that is, of such a Possession as is justly
presumable to have come from Christ.

Hence follows, that, since Possession of Authority must stand till sufficient
Reasons be alleged that it was unjust, those Motives and Reasons ought to be
weighed, whether they be sufficient or no, ere the Authority can be rejected:
wherefore since the relinquishing any Authority actually in power before, makes
a material breach from that Government; the deciding the question only stands
in examining those Reasons which oppose its lawfulness, since the sufficiency
of them cleares the breakers, the insufficiency condemns them, and in our case
makes the material Schism formal. Let the Reader then judge how little advised
Dr. H. was in stating the question rightly and clearly ( of Schism page 10.)
where he tells us that the motives are not worth he eding in this controversy,
but only the truth of the matter of fact. For the matter of fact, to wit, that
there was then an actual Government, and that they broke from it, being evident
to all the world, and confessed by themselves; if there be no reasons to be
examined, he is convinced by his own words to be a Schismatic, so flatly and
palpably, that it is left impossible for him even to pretend a defense.

The sixth Ground shall be, that Such a Possession as that of the Pope's
Authority in England was held, ought not to be changed or rejected upon any
lesser motives or reasons, than rigorous and most manifest Evidence that it was
usurped. The reasons for this are fetched by parity from that which went before
and only the proportions added. For in moving a Body in nature, the force of
the cause must be proportioned to the gravity, settledness, and other
extrinsecal impediments of the Body to be moved, otherwise nothing is done. In
morals, the motives of dissent ought to be more powerful than those for the
former continuance in assent, otherwise a soul as a soul (thas is, as rational)
is not, or ought not to be moved: and so in the rest. Now that nothing less
than Evidence, rigorously and perfectly such, can justify a rejecting of that
Authority, is thus showed. That Authority was held as of Faith, and to have
been constituted by Christ's own mouth; it had been acknowledgedly accounted
for such by multitudes of pious and learned men for many ages before, and in
all Christian Countries of the Communion of the Roman Church, whereof England
was one. It claimed Universal Tradition for it is tenor, an Authority held of
great efficacy by our very Adversaries: the rejecting it, if groundless, was
known to be an heinous Schism, and to unknit the whole frame of the Church's
present Government; which by consequence must render it in an high degree
damnable to those who should go about to violate it.

Now then let us consider whether a Reason in it is own nature probable (for
except rigorous Evidence no reason can be more) and no way in it is self
obliging the Understanding to assent, be a sufficient and secure motive to
reject an Authority of so long continuance, held sacred, and of Christ's
Institution, of such importance to the peace of the Church, in rejecting which
if one happen to mistake, he is liable to the horrid vice of Schism, and it is
condign punishment, eternal damnation. It must then be most pe^fect
demonstrative Evidence, such as forces the understanding to assent, which can
in common prudence engage a man to hazard his salvation by renouncing that
Authority. Let Dr. H. then remember that they must be such kind of Evidences
which can serve his turn; not any ordinary, common slight testimony-proofs,
which for the most part arrive not to the pitch of a poor probability in them
selves, but compared to the tenor of our Government, Universal Tradition,
vanish into air; or, which is less, into nothing.

To make this yet clearer, let us suppose (as it happens in our case) that they
who began to reform in this point first, and to deny the lawfulness of this
Authority, were bred up formerly in a contrary belief, ortherwise they must
have received it from their Fathers, which would quite spoil the supposition of
being the first Reformers: Neither is it likely that multitudes began to think
or speak against it all in one instant, but either one or some few chief, who
propagated it by suggesting it to the rest. Now then let us consider what
motives are sufficient to oblige these men to this new-begun disbelief and
disobedience, so as to absolve them even in common prudence from a most
self-conceited pride, and desperate precipitancy.

In prejudice of them is objected, that heretofore they held that form of
Government as of Faith, and acknowledged to receive it upon the same sole
certain Rule of Faith which assured them that Christ was God: the whole Church
they left had confessedly for some ages held the same, so that it was now found
in quiet Possession. If they were learned, they could not but in some measure
penetrare the force of Universal Tradition, which stood against them in this
point* since orall Tradition) of which we speak (was pleaded by Catholics for
this point, but never so much as pretented by the separaters against it;
because Reformation in a point of Faith, and Tradition of it destroy one the
other. In a word, should all these most ponderous Considerations be waved, and
only the Authority of the Church they left considered, it is impossible they
should reform, unless they should conclude millions of Doctors which had been
in the Church, many of them reverenced even yet by the Protestants for their
admirable learning, to be ignorant in comparison of themselves; or else all
insincere, and to have wronged their Conscience in holding and teaching against
their knowledge.

Now let any ingenuous person consider whether such a strange self-extolling
judgment, and condemning others, ought in reason be made by a few men against
the aforesaid most important motives, without a most undeniable and open
Evidence, able to demonstrate palpably and convincingly that this pretended
Government was unjust and usurped. And if the first Reformers could have no
just and lawful, that is, evident Ground to begin their disobedience to that
Government, neither can their Proselytes and Successors the Protestanrs have
any pretense for continuing it; since in matters belonging to Eternity, whose
nature is unchangeable by the occurrence of humane circumstances, none can
lawfully adhere to that which could never lawfully be begun: Neither are there
any proofs against that Authority producible now, which were not producible
then.

The seventh ground is, that No Evidence can possibly be given by the
Protestants obliging the understanding to believe that this Authority was
usurped. This is proved by the case of the first Reformers now explicated,
whose words could not in any reason be imagined evident against such an
universal Verdict of the whole Church they left, and particularly of all the
learned men in it, incomparably and confessedly more numerous, and as knowing
as any have been since. Yet we shall further evince it thus. They pretend not
to any evidence from natural Principles concluding demonstratively that the
former Government was usurped* nor yet from oral Tradition, since their
immediate Forefathers delivered them other doctrine, else the Reformation could
never have begun, against our common Supposition. Their Grounds then must be
testimonial proofs from Scriptures, Fathers, or Councils. But since these are
most manifestly liable to be interpreted diverse ways (as appears de facto) no
sufficient assurance can be pretended hence, without evidencing either more
skill to fetch out their certain sense, or more sincerity to acknowledge what
they knew, than was found in the Church they left: a task I am persuaded few
will undertake, I am confident none can perform; since all the world knows,
that the vast number of eminent and learned Doctors we have had in the process
of so many ages, and extent of so many Countries, were persons not meanly
vers't in Scriptures, Fathers and Councills, and yet held all these most
consonant^to the Catholic doctrine, though the polemical vein of the Schools,
which left nothing not thoroughly ventilated, gave them ample occasion to look
into them. Add to this, that our late Doctors and Controvertists have not
feared nor neglected to answer all those testimonies, and produce a far greater
number out of all the said Authorities; nor have they behaved themselves so in
those conflicts, that the indifferent part of the world have held them
non-sensical, which surely they would, had they deemed the other a perfect and
rigorous Evidence.

From hence follows, that, though they may blunder and make a show with
testimonies, yet in reality they can never produce sufficient, that is evident
reasons thence, for rejecting a Government qualified with so many circumstances
to confirm and establish it. Though I must confess, if they could demonstrate
by evident and unavoidable connection of terms from some undeniable authority
that this Government was unjust, their Understandings would in that case be
obliged to assent to that inference: But this is not to be hoped, as long as
diverse words have diverse significations, as diverse Sentences by reference to
diverse others put on different faces, or by relation to several circumstances
in history give us occasion to raise several conjectures. Again, if Evidence
were easily producible from such kind of wordish testimonies, yet they would
still be as far to seek for an Authority whence to allege those testimonies,
comparable to that of the Church they left; since they can never even pretend
to show any company of men so incomparably numerous, so unquestionably learned,
holding certainly, as of Faith, and as received from the Apostles, that
Government which they impugned, and this so constantly for so many hundred
years, so unanimously and universally in so many Countries where knowledge most
flourish't, testifying the same also in their General Councels: all which by
their own aknowlegedment was found in the Church they left.

The eihtgh Ground is, that The proofs alleged by Protestants against us bear
not even the weight of a probability to any prudent man who penetrates and
considers the contrary motives. For the proofs they allege are testimonies,
that is words capable of diverse senses, as they shall be diversely played upon
by wits, Scholars, and Critics; and it is by experience found that generally
speaking, their party and ours give several meanings to all the Testimonies
controverted between us. Now it is manifest, that computing the vastnefs of the
times and places in which our Profession has born sway, we have had near a
thousand Doctors for one of the Protestants; who, though they ever highly
venerated, and were well versed in all the Ancient Fathers and Counsels, yet
expressed no difficulty in those proofs, but on the contrary made certain account
that all Antiquity was for them. Thus much for their knowledge.

Neither ought their sincerity run in a less proportion than their number,
unless, the contrary could be evidently manifested, which I hear not to be
pretended; since they are held by our very Adversaries, and their acts declare
them to have been pious in other respects, and, on the other side, considering
the corruptness of our nature, the prejudice ought rather to stand on the part
of the disobeyers, than of the obeyers of any Government. Since then no great
difficulty can be made but that we have had a thousand knowing men for one, and
no certainty manifested, nor possible to be manifested, that they were
unconscientious, we have had in all moral estimation a thousand to one in the
means of understanding aright these testimonial proofs; and then I take not
that to have any moral probability which has a thousand to one against it.

But I stand not much upon this, having a far better game to play; I mean the
force of Tradition, which is fortified which such and so many invincible
reasons, that to lay them out at large, and as they deserve, were to transcribe
the Dialogues of Rusworth, the rich Storehouse of them: to them I refer the
Reader for as ample as satisfaction as even Skepticism can desire, and only
make use at present of this Consideration; that if it be impossible that all
the now-Fathers of Families in the Catholic Church, dispersed in so many
nations, should conspire to tell this palpablely to their Children, that twenty
years ago such a thing (visible and practical as all points of Faith are) was
held in that Church, if no such thing had been, and that consequently the same
impossibility holds in each twenty years upwards till the Apostles, by the
same reason by which it holds in the last twenty; then it follows evidently,
that what was told us to have been held twenty years ago, was held ever, in
case the Church held nothing but upon this Ground, that so she received or had
been taught by the immediately-foregoing Faithful: for as long as she pretends
only to this Ground, the difficulty is equal in each twenty years, that is,
there is an equal impossibility they should conspire to this palpable lie. Now
that they ever held to this Ground, (that is, to the having received it from
their Ancestors,) is manifested by as great an Evidence. For since they now
hold this Ground, if at any time they had taken it up, they must either have
counterfeited that they had received it from their Ancestors, or no. The
former relapses into the abovesaid impossibility; or rather greater, that they
should conspire to tell a lie in the only Ground of their Faith, and yet hold
(as they did) their Faith built upon that Ground to be truth: the latter
position must discredit it self in the very terms, which imply a perfect
contradiction, for it is as much as to say, nothing is to be held as certainty
of Faith, but what has descended to us from our Forefathers; and yet the only
Rule which tells us certainly there is any thing of Faith, is newly invented.
Wherefore, unless this chain of Tradition be shown to have been weak in some
link or other, the case between us is this; whether twenty testimonies liable
to many exceptions, and testified by experience to be disputable between us,
can bear the force even of a probability against the universal acknowledgment
and testification of millions and millions in any one age, in a thing visible
and practical: To omit that we are far from being destitute of testimonies to
counterpoise, nay incomparably over poise theirs. By this Ground, and the
reason for it, the Reader may judge what weak and trivial proofs the best of
Protestant Authors are able to produce against the clear Verdict of Tradition,
asserted to be infallible by the strongest supports of Authority and reason.

To stop the way against the voluntary mistakes of mine Adversary, I declare my
self to speak here not of written Tradition to be sought for in the Scriptures
and Fathers, which lies open to so many Cavils and exceptions; but of oral
Tradition, which (supposing the motives with which it was founded, and the
charge with which it was recommended by the Apostles) carries in it is own
force, as applied to the nature of mankind, an infallible certainty of it is
lineal and never-to-be-interrupted perpetuity, as Rushworth's Dialogues clearly
demonstrate,

Sect. 6.
The Continuation of the same Grounds.
THe ninth Ground is, that, The Catholic Church and her Champions ought in
reason to stand upon Possession. This is already manifested from the fifth
Ground, since Possession is of it is self a title, till sufficient motives be
produced to evidence it an usurpation; as has there been shown. By this
appears the injustice of the Protestants, who would have it thought reasonable,
that we should seem to quit our best tenor, Possession attested by Tradition,
and fall upon the troublesome and laborious method of citing Authors, in which
they will accept of none but whom they list; and, after all our pains and
quotations, directly refuse to stand to their judgment: as may be seen in the
Protestant's Apology; in which by the Protestant's own confessions the Fathers
held those opinions, which they object to us for errors.

The tenth Ground is, that, In our Controversies about Religion, reason
requires that we should sustain the part of the Defendant, they of the
Opponent. This is already sufficiently proved, since we ought to stand upon the
title of Possession, as a Ground beyond all arguments, until it be convinced
to be malae fidei, which is impossible; they, to produce sufficient arguments
that it was unjust: that is, they must oppose or object, we defend; they ought
to argue, we to answer. Hence appears how meanly skilled Dr. H. is in the art
of disputing, complaining many times in his last Book that I bring no
Testimonies out of Antiquity, and that I do not prove things in my Schism
Disarmed; whereas that Treatise being designed for an Answer to his Book of
Schism, had no obligation to prove my tenet, but only to show that his
arguments were unconclusive. Hence also is discovered how manifestly weak and
ridiculous Mr. H. was in the second part of the most substantial Chapter of his
book of Schism, where hemakes account he has evidence S. Peter had not the
Keys given him particularly, by solving our places of Scripture for that
tenet: where (besides other faults in that process, which Schism Disarmed told
him of,) he commits three absurditi^^. First, in putting himself upon the side
of the Defendant; whereas he ought and pretended to evidence, that is, to prove.
Secondly, by imagining that the solving an Argument is an Evidence for the
contrary; whereas the force of such a solution is terminated only in showing
that illation weak, but leaves it ind^fferent whether the thing in it self be
so or no, or evidently deducible from some other Argument. Thirdly, he falsely
supposes that we build our Faith upon those places of the written words, as
explicable by wit, not by Tradition, and the practice of our Church, whereas we
only own the delivery from father to son as the Ground of all our belif, and
make this the only Rule by which to explicate Scripture. However some Doctors
of ours undetrake sometimes ex superabundanti to argue ad hominem, and show our
advantage over them, even in that which they most pretend to.

I know Mr. H. will object that all this time I have pleaded for him, whiles I
went about to strengthen the title of Possession; since they are at present in
actual Possession of their Independency from the Pope: and therefore that in
all the consequences following thence I have but plowed his ground with mine
own heifer. But the Reader may please to consider, that, though I spoke before
of Possession in general and abstractedly, yet, in descending to particular
sorts of Possessions, we must take along with us those particular circumstances
which necessarily accompany them, and design them to be such. Since then it
were unworthy the wisdom of the Eternal Father, that our Blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, coming to plant a Church, should not provide for it is Being and Peace,
which confist in Order and Government; it follows that Christ instituted the
Government of the Church. In our case then the Possession of Government must be
such a Possession, as may be presumable to have come from Christ's time; not of
such an one, as every one knows when it began. Since then it is agreed upon by
all sides, that this present possession the Protestants now have of their
Independency was begun lately, it is impossible to presume it to be that which
was instituted by Christ, unless they evidence the long settled possession of
that Authority they renounced to have been an usurpation; and, on the contrary,
unless they evidence this, that Possession is justly presumable to have come
from Christ's time, the maintainers and claimers of it making this their main
tenor, that truly it came from Christ. Now then seeing we hear no news from
any good hand, nor manifest tokens of the beginning of this universal and proud
Usurpation, which could not in reason but draw after it a train of more visible
consequences, and be accompanied with a multitude of more palpable
circumstances than the renouncing it in England, which yet is most notorious to
the whole world; again, since the disagreement of their own Authors about the
time of it evidently shows that the pretended invasion of this Authority is not
evident; hence, both for these and other reasons also, such a Possession as
this, is of it is self, and in it is own nature capable of pleading to have been
derived from Christ, that is, to be that Possession which we speak of: whereas
the other is discountenanced by it is confessed and known original, which makes it
not capable of it self to pretend that Christ instituted it, unless it be
helped out with the additional proof, that it had been expulsed from an
ancienter Possession by this usurpation of the Pope. So that, to say the truth,
this present Possession of theirs makes nothing at all for their purpose, since
it is no ways valid, but in vertute of their evidences that the same Possession
had been ancie^tly settled in a long peace before our pretended invasion: and if
they can evidence this, and that we usurped, then it is needless, and vain to
plead present Possession at all; since that Possession which is evidenced to
have been before ours, is questionless that which was settled by Christ. In a
word, though in humane affairs where Prescription has force, we use to call^t
Possession, when one has enjoyed any thing for some certain time; yet in
things of divine Institution, against which no prescription pleads, he only
can pretend possession of any thing who can stand upon it that he had it nearer
Christ's time: and by consequence, he who shall be found to have begun it
later, unless he can evidence that he was driven out from an ancienter
Possession, is not, for the present having such a thing or Power, to be styled
a Possessour; but an Usurper, an intruder, an invader, disobedient, rebellious,
and (in our case) Schismatical.

I am not ignorant that Dr. H. rawly affirms that the Pope's Authority began
in Phocas his time, but I hope no Reader that cares much for his salvation, will
take his word for honest, till he show undeniable and evident matters of fact,
concerning the beginning, progress, Authors, abetters, opposers, of that newly
introduc't Government of Head of the Church, the writers that time for it, or
against it, the changes it made in the face of the Ecclesiastical State, and
the temporal also, with whose interest the other must needs be enlinsk't, and
what consequences followed upon those changes; together with all the
circumstances which affect visible and extern actions. Otherwise, against the
sense of so many Nations in the Church they left, the force of Tradition and so
many unlikelihoods prejudicing it, to tell us only a crude Story that is was
so, or putting us off with three or four quotations in Greek to no purpose, or
imagining some chimerical possibilities how it might have been done, hardly
consisting with the nature of mankind, is an Answer unworthy a man, much more a
Doctor; and to say that it crep't in invisibily and unobserved, as dreams do
into men's heads when they are asleep, is the part of some dreaming dull head,
who never looked into the actions and nature of man, or compared them with the
motives which should work upon them.

The eleventh Ground is, that Historical proofs which manifest only Fact, do
not necessarily conclude a Rig^t. This is evident; First, because testimonies
conclude no more than then express: but they express only the Fact: therefore
they conclude only that the Fact was such a person's, not that the Right was
his. Secondly, because no matter of Fact which concerns the execution of any
business is such, but it may be performed by another who has no proper Rigth,
but borrows it from the delegation of some other, to whom it properly belongs;
as we see in Viceroys. Thirdly, because in a process of fifteen or sixteen
hundred years it cannot be imagined but there should happen some matters of
Fact either out of ambition, inter, est, ignorance, or tyranny, against the
most inviolable Right in the world; nay even sometimes out of too much zeal and
piety, great men, if they have not discretion proportionable, will be meddling
with things which do not concern them as we see by daily experience. Now a
testimony of a matter of Fact can never conclude any thing, unless it be first
manifested that that Act our when he proceeded to action was bassed with none
of these, but governed himself by pure Reason; that is, unless it be manifested
that he had Right: and if testimonies can be produced expressing that he had
Right, it was needless to stand alleging those which expressed only Fact.
Frivolous therefore it is to bring historical proofs of Fact upon the stage, in
a dispute about Right; since, taken alone, they make only a dumb show, and can
act no part in that Controversy: for the very alleging that some of these
faults might intervene, disables such premises from inferring a Right. Neither
ought Mr. H. (which, I suppose for want of Logic, or forgetfulness how men use
to dispute, he is ever apt to do) exact of the Defendant a reason of his denial
in particular: but it is his part to prove that none of these defects could
happen, otherwise his Premises of Fact hang together with his Conclusion of
Right by no necessity of consequence. Let the Reader then take notice by this
plain information of reason, how senselesly Dr. H. behaved himself in the
business of erecting and translating Patriarchates, and in many other places,
where from some particular matters of Fact he would needs conclude a Right.

The twelfth Ground is, that The acceptance of the secular powers, and their
command to the people, are necessary to the due and fitting execution of the
Churches Laws; whence follows not that the Princes made those Laws by their
own Authority, but that they obeyed and executed what the Church had ordered:
For unless the Church's Ordinances should be put into temporal laws, which
oblige to their observance by aw and fear of punishment, they could hardly ever
find an universal reception; since otherwise refractory and turbulent Spirits,
who cared not much for their obligation in confcience, might at pleasure
reject, disobey, and reclame against them: which would both injure the
Authority of the Church, and scandalize the community of the Faithful. This
therefore being of such an absolute convenience for the Church, we need not
wonder that the temporal power (of Christians) should put the Church's orders
into temporal Laws, and execute their performance; nor consequently can
testimonies of such execution and laws, prejudice the Pope' s Right, since
Catholic Governors do the self same at present, (as far as concerns this
point) which was done then.

The thirteenth Ground is, that It is granted by Catholics, that Kings may
exercise some Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by the concession of the Church, and
yet not prejudice thereby the Pope's Universal Pastourship. This is most
visible from the unanimous acknowledgment of all Catholic Authors, and
verifyed by diverse practical instances. Hence it is evident that Dr. H. must
either manifest likewise, that the lawfulness of those matters of Fact related
of Kings was not originiz'd from the Church's precedent orders, or else he
concludes nothing at all against us. Here I desire the Reader and Mr. H. may
jointly take notice, that the testimonies himself alleges from the Church in
her Councils, granting this to the Secular power, is a strong prejudice against
their self-and-proper Right; as also, that he has not so much as attempted to
produce one Testimony, of any Authority, expressing it to be the Right of the
secular Magistrate, independent of the Church.

The fourteenth and last Ground is, that In case Scbism should invade a whole
Country, it could not be expected to have happened otherwise than D H. (of
Schism c.) has described. For it is to be expected that the secular power
should be for it, and so use means to make the Clergy and Universities assent
to his novelty: otherwise had either the Temporal Government awed them, the
Pastors of souls consented to inform the people right, or the Universities
(the Seminaries of learning) conspired to write against that innovation, in all
likehood it would have given a stop to it is proceeding, at least have hindered
it is universal invasion. Hence follows that Dr. H's narrative discourse of his
Schism has nothing in it to bewonder us; but rather, that it is as plain and
particular a confession of the Fact, as any penitent malefactor could make
when he is about to suffer. For, that a Nation may fall into Schism, none
doubts; as little, that it should fall into it by those very means, and the
same degrees which he there lays down. Nay more, himself disgraces his own
Narration by confessing (p. 136.) that the Clergy were inclined to subscribe by
the fear of a praemunire: and the question about the Pope's Right in England
being debated in the Universities, he says only p. 135. that it was generally
defined in the negative; (that is when the King's party prevailed) yet he omits
that the Kings lust first moved him to think of Schismatizing, and his final
repentance of that Act; which show that the first spring which moved the whole
Engine was not purity of conscience, but the impurest and basest of passions.

The positions, which I have laid dow for Grounds to our future discourse,
will of themselves lay open the whole case clearly to the ordinary Readers; and
inform the more prudent ones, that nothing is or can be said by Dr H. of a
force and clearness comparable to that of our Possession, and that of oral
Tradition, which we ever ^laim'd for our Tenor; from which also they
disclaimed, when they reformed in this point of the Pope's Supremacy. So that
little more remains to be performed, but to manifest his shallow weaknesses, and
trivial impertinences; which I should willingly omit, if the greatest part of
Readers would be as willing to think a book fully answered, when substantial
points are shown to be nothing, as they are to catch at the shadow of words as
matters of importance, and so imagine nothing done, till they also be replied
upon. Nor do I fear this task, though ungrateful in it is self and less
necessary, will be void of fruit, specially to Mr. H's Friends, who may see by
this Answer of mine, how bad that cause must be, which can cast so
understanding a man, as some of them imagine him, upon such non sense,
weaknesses of reasoning, voluntary mistakes, falsifications, denying his own
words, and many other ridiculous shifts, as shall be seen most amply in the
process of this Treatise.

Sect. 7.
Dr. H's accurate mistake of every line of the Introduction to Schism Disarmed;
and his wilful avoiding to answer the true import of it.
Mr. H's reason which was gravelled in understanding the plain words in my
Epistle to the Reader (as has been shown) has no better fortune in confuting
my Introduction. I expressed in the beginning of it, that It bred in me at first
some admiration why the Protestants should now print books by pairs to defend
themselves from Schism, who heretofore more willingly skirmish't in particular
Controversies, than bid battle to the main Body of the Church, etc. Upon which
Dr. H. not aware that upon every new occurrence, or effect, the admirative
faculty first plays it is parts, and stirs up the reason to disquisitiveness
for the cause of it (such reflections ly much out of the way of one who gleans
testimonies (will not give me leave something to admire at first, till I had
found the reason, at an occurrence evidently new, that is, their writing at
this time books by pairs to clear them selves from Schism; but is pleased to
turn my ordinary, easy, moderate words of some admiration at first, into those
loud phrase (p. 12. l. 19.) of great, unheard of news and prodigy, putting news
and prodigy in different letters, that himself might be thought an Oedipus, who
had unriddled my imagined aenigma. But since any thing which is uncouth and
disorderly justly stirs up admiration, what necessity is there that Dr. H.
and his Friends should hap to do all things so orderly, wisely, and reasonably,
that poor S. W. (whom he confesses here p. 10. l. 36 not to have been of his
Council in his designment) might not be allowed to have some admiration at
first, at their mysterious imprudence.

But he will needs undertake to allay my admiration (though I was much better
satisfied with my own reason there given) by telling me, it was seasonable
charity to undeceive weak seducible Christians, because the Romish Missaries by
pretense of their Schism, endeavored to defame them out of a persecuted
profession. Where first I assure him, that many of those who have of late
become Catholics, are as great Scholars and wits as have been left behind, and
so more likely to have been reduced by reason, than seduced by the industry of
others working upon their weakness: the weak seducihle Souls of the former
Protestants are either turned Quakers, or such like kind of things; those who
have run back to the lap of their Mother the Holy Catholic Church, are such as
are neither easily deceivable by our Missaries, nor possibly undeceivable by
Dr. H. multitudes of them being such as might wi^h far better reason be wished
to have the Answering of Dr. H. in my stead, than be feared to be mo'vd by his
reasons to renounce their own. Nor needed they be tempted by others; their own
reason, if disinteressed, could not but inform them that that Religion was not
true, that Church but counterfeit, whose grounds were rotten, and whose Fates
depended upon the Temporal Power.

Nor has the other part of that poor sentence escaped better from his
artificial mistakes. I only affirmed, that they heretofore seemed more willing
to skirmish in particular controversies, than bid battle to the main body of
the Church: which he misunderstands, as if I had said that no Protestants ever
writ against the Authority of our Church, and then impugnes his own mistake,
fathered upon S. W. very strongly by nominating some few books upon that
subject; (Ans. p. 11. l. 2.) pitying himself that he should (...) set to
prove, what none said but himself: and truly I pity him too. But are not there
near an hundred times that number, who have skirmish't against us in particular
Controversies? I hope then this will serve to justify those moderate words of
mine, that they seemed more willing to that task. Yet he triumphs over me,
saying that it is much juster matter of wonder to him, that S. W. should set
out so unauspiciously, as to begin with an observation founded in a visible
contrariety to a plain matter of Fact, that every man that thinks of must
discern to be so. Thus does he trample down and then strut over S. W. at the
first onset; so potent still and victorious is he, when he fights against his
own Chimaera's. I am persuaded a little sooth-saying will serve the Reader to
determine who began the more inauspiciously, and at whose door the sinister
bird croak't.

Yet though (says he) those words had been true, that formerly the Protestants
were more willing to skirmish in pa^^icular Controversies, yet (Dr. H. tells
us) it were obvious to every man what might now suggest the change of that
course: and what obvious reason might this be but that, after particular
Controversies were competently debated, to set the* Axe to the root of the
tree, and stock up Rome's universal Pastourship and infallibility? Where he
sees not that the question remains still to be ask't, why the competent
debating of particular Controversies should just then end, and the propter time
then begin for the Protestants to stock up Rome, when themselves had never a
leg left them to stand on; and why they should hope then rather to get the
upper hand, when they ly flat along themselves, as if Antaeus-like they were
stronger by falling.

Again, had many been induced by reason to return to the Catholic Church, yet
I cannot understang why the Protestants zeal should think it more seasonable to
write Books by pairs against us, than against their other Desertours; since
they who have gone from them into other Sects are above an hundred for one in
comparison of the Catholic Converts; so that had not S. W. found out a reason,
to rid himself of his some admiration, he might still have remained in it for
any thing M. H. has produced.

Upon occasion of my saying, that it was more seasonable to denounce to those
Sects the unreasonableness of their Schism, than plead the reasonableness of
their own; he voluntarily mistakes my words, as if I meant that he had
confess't it Schism, and then gone about to plead the reasonableness of it:
whereas I only intended (as is evident) that he went about to plead the
reasonableness of that which I (who am the Defendant) do, and must hold for
Schism, and consequently may nominate it so, that is of his breaking from our
Church's Government. Yet for this I have lost my credit, this being another
(...) (as he tells the Reader, if he can understand Greek) what trust is due to
S. W. in his affirmations. Should he make use of the same method, and every
time I name them Schismatics, or their sect Schism, feign that I say they call
themselves so, he might by this art make S. W. a monstrous liar, if the Reader
were so monstrously silly as to believe him.

In the next place, I must needs (Answ. p. 13.) misunderstand the nature, and
aim of the Church's censures, because I tell them, They should rather
threaten their Desertours with the spiritual Rod of Excommunication, than cry
so loud, Not guilty, when the lash has been so long upon their own shoulders;
since he says, a Schism armed with mig^t is not either in prudence or charity
to be contended with. Whereas I pretend not that they ought to execute the
punishments subsequent to Excommunication, but to separate themselves (had they
any Grounds to make it good that they were God's Church) from Schismatics, and
avoid their Communion in Etern actions belonging to God's worship, as God's
Church ever accustomed; not ^caring to denounce and preach to them in plain
terms that they are Schismatics, and cut off from the Church. Neither is this
against Charity, since, (Schism being such an heinous and damnable sin) Charity
avouches, nay makes it an obligation to manifest Schismatics to be such; that
they who have fallen may apprehend the s^d state they are in, and thence take
occasion to arise, and they who stand may beware of falling into that dangerous
gulf, which once opened the earth to swallow Core Dathan, and Abiron. Nor is it
against prudence, since every one knows the permitting the weaker sort to
commun^cate with enemies in those very circumstances which may endanger them,
is the only way to ruin any Government either Spiritual or Temporal.

At least why should they not dare (had they Grounds to bear them out) to do
the same as the Catholics did, during the time of their greatest persecution
under the Protestant Government; that is, let them be known to be Schismatics,
and make the people abstain in divine matters from their contagious Communion.
But the confessed uncertainty of their Faith makes them squeamish to assume to
themselves any such Authority, and therefore they are forced by their very
Grounds, when their Secular Power is gone, to turn discipline into courtesy in
matters of Government, as they do in controversy turn zeal into civility and
complement. When he talks here piously of the Romanists sanguin try method,
sure he has forgotten that ever Priests were hanged, drawn, and quartered for
their Faith at Tiburn, and all over England, in the time of their cruel Reign;
or, if he remembers it, he thinks to make us amends by preaching, like a Saint,
of their meekness, of edification, and the more tragically-pittifull
expressions of lamenting the ruptures of the Christian world (which themselves
have made) with rivers of tears of blood. Answ. p. 13.

The next Section begins with the rehearsal of my reason, why no colorable
pretense can be alleged by the Protestants why they left us, but the same will
hold as firm for the other Sects why they left them; which I expressed thus: For
that we pressed them to believe false fundamentals Dr. H. and his Friends will
not say, since they acknowledge ours a true Church, which is inconsistent with
such a lapse. They were therefore in their opinion things tolerable which were
urged upon them; and, if not in the same rank, yet more deserving the Church
should command their observance, than Copes, or Surplices, or the book of
Common Prayer, the allowance whereof they pressed upon their Quondam brethen.
Which words though as moderately and modestly expressing the matter as could be
invented, yet the Reader shall see what a character the Doctors peevish zeal
has set upon them; to wit, that (Answ. p. 14.) there are in them too many
variations from the Rules of sober discourse, so many indications of S. W. his
temper, that it will not be easy to enumerate them.

It shall be seen presently whether the Doctors Discourse or mine went a
rambling when we writ. The tenor of my Argument ad hominem, was this: The
falsities which you pretend we pressed upon you, were either acknowledged by you
to have been fundamental, or not-fundamental, that is, tolerable: that you
acknowledged them fundamental you will not say, since falsity in a fundamental
ruins the essence of a Church, which yet you grant ours to have; therefore
they were according to you not-fundamental or tolerable; yet such kind of
not-fundamental points as were more importing to be pressed upon you by us, than
Copes or Surplices, which you pressed upon them: therefore you can allege no
reason why you left us, but they may allege the same or a greater why they
left you. This evidently is the sense of my words to any man who can understand
common reason; and the answer to them ought to be a manifesting-some solid
motive why they left us, which the other Sects cannot with better right defend
themselves with, why they left the Protestants. Let us hear now whether the
Doctors discoursive power were sober, when he reeled into such an answer.

First, he wilfully puts a wrong meaning upon those words false Fundamentals,
as if by them I meant things which we only, not they, hold for Fundamentals;
and then overthrows me most powerfully by showing (as he easily might) that he
and his Friends say not but that we pressed them to believe false Fundamentals,
in this sense, that is such things as we held Fundamentals: whereas it is plain
by my arguing ad hominem all the way, as also by those words ( they will not
say; they acknowledge ours a true Church; in their opinion, etc.) that I meant
such points as they accounted Fundamentals. And when he has thus voluntarily
mistaken me, he tails against me that I affirm things without the least shadow
and ground of truth, and that I play foul play. The Reader will quickly discern
how meanly Dr. H. is skilled in the game of reason; though in that of
citations, where he can both shuffle and cut, that is, both allege and
explicate them, with Id ests, as he pleases, he can pack the cards handsomely,
and show more crafty tricks than ever did Hocus Pocus. And if any after all
this can think I have wronged Mr. H. in affirming he is a weak reasoner,
himself shall ber ample testimony to this truth in the following Paragraph.

He slily touches at my true meaning of Fundamentals there, and tells us that
false Fundamentals is a contradiction in adjecto. Grant it, who ever affirmed
that Fundamentals could be false? my words were only that Dr. H. and his
Friends would not say that our Church pressed them to believe false Fundamentals.
Is it any wrong to them, or foul play in S. W. to affirm that Dr. H. and his
Friends will not speak a contradiction? Himself (such is his humility) says it
is; affirming here, that when S. W. undertakes for him and his Friends, that
they will not say that the Romanists have pressed them to believe false
Fundamentals, his words are not intelligible sense (for the following words, or
else they have no degree of truth in them relate to the other acception of
Fundamental already sopoken of) so that according to Dr. H. it is not
intelligible sense to undertake for him and his Friends, that they should not
speak contradictions. Is this a sober discourse, which falls reelingly to the
Ground of it self, when none pushes it? or was it a friendly part to involve
his Friends in his own wise predicament?

And now can any man imagine, that when I said Dr. H. and his Friends
acknowledge ours a true Church, there should be any difficulty in the sense of
those words, or that I should impose upon them that they held our Church not to
have erred? yet this Doctor, who always stumbles most in the plainest way,
will needs quibble in the word true, and S. W. must bear the blame for grossly
equivocating: whereas the sense was obvious enough to every child, as the words
before cited will inform the Reader, that I meant them of the true nature of a
Church; which since they acknowledged ours to have, I argued hence, that they
must not say we held false Fundamentals, that is, such as they account
Fundamentals: for since a Church cannot be a Church, but by Fundamental points
of Faith, and Faith must not be false, it follows that a falsehood in
Fundamental destroys the very Being of a Church. This being so, I shall beg
Dr. H's pardon if I catechize him a little in point of reason (in which his
Cause makes him a mere Cathecumenus) and ask him how he can hold ours to have
even the true nature of a Church, since he hold that which she esteems as her
Fundamental of Fundamentals, and that upon which as her sole certain Ground she
builds all her Faith, to wit her infallible Authority, to be false and
erroneous? If the sole Authority upon which immeditately she builds all Faith,
be a ruinous falsehood, she can have no true Faith of any Article, and
consequently can have no Faith at all, nor be a true Church, since a Church
cannot survive the destruction of Faith. But their ambition to honor their
Nag's-head Bishops with the shadow of a Mission from our Church, makes them
kindly speak non sense to do her a seeming courtesy for their own interest. I
know he tells us here in general terms (Answ. p. 15.) that she is not
unchurch't, because she holds the true Foundation laid by Christ, but offends
by enlarging and superadding; but he must show why the Catholics, who hold no
point of Faith, but solely upon their Church's infallibility, if thar Ground
be false (that is be none) as he says, can hold any thing at all as of Faith,
that is, have any Faith at all: at least how they can have Certainty of any
point of Faith, or the written word of God, if the sole-certain Rule of Faith,
by which only they are assured of all those, were taken sometimes in a lie; to
wit while it recommended to them those superadditions they account false,
received in the same tenor as the rest from the hands of our immediate
Forefathers.

But let us follow Dr. H. who goes jogging forward, but still rides (as his ill
fortune is) beside the saddle To points which they accounted fundamental, I
counterpos'd tolerable ones, that is such as they esteemed not-fundamental,
which I therefore called tolerable, because they account these neither to touch
the Foundation of Faith, as building or destroying; such as he acknowledged in
the foregoing Paragraph our pretended super additions to be, saying that the
dross does not annibilate the Gold. It being therefore plain that falsehoods
which are not in fundamentals, and so unconsistent with the essence of a
Church, must be in things not-fundamental, and therefore consistent with the
nature of a Church, that is tolerable, if taken in themselves; he neglects to
take notice of them as they are in themselves, (that is such, as their
admission ruins not Faith, nor the essence of a Church) and says the pressing
them upon them is intolerable, and not admittable without hypocrisy, or sin
against conscience; and why? because they believe them not I ask, had they a
demonstration they were false? if so, then let them produce it, and if it bear
test, I shall grant them innocent; if not, then since nothing else can oblige
the Vnd^rstanding but the foresaid Evidence, their pretended obligation in
Conscience to disaccept them is convinced to spring from weakness of passion,
not from force of reason.

I added, that those points more deserved the Church should command their
observance, than Copes or Surplices, etc. And though Mr. H. knows very well,
that one of those points was the fundamental Ground of all Faith in the Church
they left, and Copes etc. but things indifferent, yet by a cheap supposal that
all is false which we hold, he can deny that they are more deserving our Church
should command their observance: and so carries the cause clear. He adds Answ.
p. 16. that they weightier the importance of the things commanded is, the more
intolerahle is the pressure of imposing them: and makes disobedience greater in
things indifferent. Whereas surely the Governors are more highly obliged to
command the observance of that on which they hold Faith to be built, than all
the rest put together. Is it a greater obstinacy to deny a Governor taxes,
than to rebel absolutely against him? the Doctor's Logic says it is; since
obstinacy, according to him, is greater in resisting commands in things
ind^fferent. Especially if the Rebel please to pretend, that the urging his
submission to that Authority is an intolerable pressure, Mr. H. here acquits
him without more ado. But to return; since it was our Church's greater
obligation to command their observance of those points, and the holding of such
points was not deemed then by them destructive to Faith, but on the other side
known by reason of their pretended importance to be in an high degree damnable
to themselves and others, if they hap't to be mistaken, no less than most
palpable and noonday evidence can excuse them in common prudence from a most
desperate madness, and headlong disobedience; but the least shadow of a
testimony-proof is a meridian Sun to Dr. H. and gives as clear an evidence as
his understanding, darkened by passion, is willing to admit.

Thus much to show the particular miscarriarges of Dr. H. in every Paragraph of
his answer to my Introduction: there remains still the Fundamental one, that
he has said nothing at all to the point of reason in it, but only mistaken
each particular line of it. I alleged as my reason why they dealt not
seriously against their own Desertours, because no colorable pretense could
possibly be alleged by the Protestants why they left us, but the very same
would hold as firm for the other Sects why they left them. This proved ad
hominem thus; because the Protestants acknowledge the points denied by both to
be tolerable, that is such as could consist with Faith and a Church; but, with
this disadvantage on the Protestants side, that the points they denied being of
more importance, more deserved our Church should command their observance. Now
every one sees that the proper Answer to his Discourse is to specialize some
plea for themselves, which will not as well excuse their Desertours: The Doctor
alleges none, nor goes about to allege any; but as if he were dividing his
Text, plays upon my words in particular, neglecting the import of them
altogether.

He says indeed it is against their conscience to admit those other super
additionary points; the same say the Puritans, of Copes, Surplices, and Organs.
The Doctor will object that they are indifferent, and stight matters, and
therefore it is a greater disobedience not to admit them; they will answer that
Surplices are rags of Rome, that Organs are Babylonish Bagpipes, and all the
rest scandalous, and superstitious inventions: Still they are equal in their
pleas Nay, if a Socinian deny Christ to be God, and pretend, as doubtless he
will, with as much seriouness as Mr. H. that he cannot but sin against
Conscience, if he think otherwise, and therefore it is tyranny to press it upon
him, the Church may not oblige him to believe that Christ is God; Dr. H. has
pleaded his cause jointly with his own, that is, has said no more in his own
excuse than the Socinian may for his. Again, if Dr. H or his Church press upon
the Socinian the belief of Christ's Divinity upon this ground, that it is a
point of most weighty importance; he presently answers the Doctor with his own
words, that the weightier the importance of the things commanded are, the more
intolerable is the pressure of imposing them. And so in stead of impugning, Dr.
H. has made good S. W's words, that they can allege no colorable pretense
which may not be alleged by the other Sects.

What if we should add that the Church they left had been in long possession
of the belief of Infallibility, and so proceeded upon these Grounds that her
Faith was certain when she pressed those points upon them; but they confess their
unce^t^in, and could proceed upon no better then probable Grounds when they
pressed any thing upon their Desertours? is there not a palbable difference put
between the pretended Authorities of imposing points to be held, in us and
them? and a greater danger of disaccepting ours in them, than theirs in the
Puritans? If they erred, only a confessed probability stood against them, which
gave them just license to dissent, if they had a probable reason that the
admission of those points was bad; since nothing but absolute Evidence
pretended could even pretend to oblige their Understandings to assent to them:
if you erred, a pre acknowledged Infallibility strengthened by a long
Possession, asserted by the attestation of Tradition, and many other motives
stood against you, so that nothing but most palpable, undeniable, and rigorous
Evidence could possibly disoblige your first Reformers from their ancient
belief, or oblige them to this new one. If the Puritans erred, since they were
only ornaments and Rituals they refused to admit, the utmost harm which could
accrue by their non-admission of them was terminated in the want of exren
decency only, and held by the very Authority which imposed them, to be but
indifferent, and far from being essentially-destructive to a Church. But if you
or your first Reformes chanced to err, (which the bare probability of your
Faith confess't by your selves, in this case makes more than likely (then your
contrary position ruined all Faith and Government, since the Church you
disobeyed held no other Ground of Faith or Church Government, save only those
you re^ected and disacknowledg'd, to wit, her own Infallibility, and the Popes
Authority. Again, if you happened to be in the wrong, and that indeed there was
no other, either Church Government, or Ground of Faith, than these; then how
wickeldy desperate to your own souls, and universally destructive to all
mankind, and their means of attaining eternal bliss, must your disclaiming and
publicly, renouncing both these be? none of which can be objected to the
Puritanes by you. So evidently true were my words, that no colorable pretense
can possibly be alleged by the Protestants why they left us, but the same will
hold as firm, nay much firmer, for other Sects why they left them.Yet I doubt
not but the Doctor will after all this (as he does here (Answ. p. 16.) applaud
his own victory with a triumphant Epiphonema, and say that S. W. his probations
are beyond all measure improbable, when himself had not said a word to the
intent of the discourse, but only played mistakingly and non-sensically upon
some particular words: Yet when he has done, like a tender hearted man, he
pittyes himself again, that he should so unnecessarily insist upon it Truly so
do I pity him, or any man else who takes much pains to no purpose; though I
pity more the Reader, who can imagine any credence is to be given to so weak a
Writer.

He ends his Answer to my Introduction with telling the Reader, that I have
with no show of Justice suggested his tediousness in things acknowledged.
Whereas almost all his first Chapter, and third, together with those where he
proves the Pope not Head of the Church, from the title of converting England,
or Concession of our Kings, as also almost all his narrative Confession of his
Schism, with many other scattered discourses, are things acknowledged by both
parties, and were very tedious and dull to me. What he adds, that he will not
disturb me when I speak truth, unless he shall discern some part of his arguing
concerned, is a very pretty jest; intimating that he stands in preparation of
mind to oppose even Truth it self, if it stand in his way, or his arguing be
concerned in it, and not vindicated in his former Reply. A sincere person!
Hour, let him only grant that what he vindicates not, but leaves untouched,
is Truth, and we shall without difficulty strike up a bargain.

Sect. 8.
How Dr. H. prevaricates from the Question by stating it wrong. His powerful
way of arguing by Ifs, and how he defends himself for mincing the Fathers words
THe Fathers alleged by Mr. H. attested that no just cause could be given of
Schism; whence he inferres ( of Schism, p. 10.) that the causes and motives of
Schism are not worth producing, or heeding in this controversy. The Catholic
Gentleman and S. W. both expressed their dislike of this inference; the Doctor
pretends to vindicate the (...) of it, as he pedantically calls it, and
referres me to his Reply for his reasons: to which I shall both give a
solution, and at once lay open the nature of S^hism, and the manner in which
they ought to controvert it, I mean as far as it can have any show of bearing
controversy.

Schism then (which we jointly acknowledge a vice of the first magnitude) if
taken in it is primary signification, to which our circumstances determine it,
includes for it is genus or material part a division, or act of dividing; the
specifical difference gives it a reference to the Ecclesiastical Government
instituted by Christ. Now our great Masters of Moral Divinity assure us, that
no action is in it self good or bad, but as it conduces to or averts from the
attaining one's last end; since all things else have the nature of means only
in order to the attainment of that, and consequently the esteem of their
goodness or badness is built upon their alliance to that order. Whence follows
that there is no action in the world, not killing one's own Son, nor dividing
from any Government whatsoever, in it self so bad, but might be done, could
there be assigned motives and reasons, truly representing it better to attempt
it. Now our all-wise God has ordered things so providently for the peace and
good of his Church, that it is impossible any cause or motive can be truly
imagined sufficient to justify the rejecting it is Government; since neither any
private injury is comparable to such an universal good, nor can it happen that
any miscarriage can be so public as to force it is renouncing: for seeing our
B. Savior made but one Church, and that to continue for ever, if any cause
were sufficient to break from that one Church, there would be a just and
sufficient cause to be of no Church, which is against the Protestants own
tenet, and makes them so desirous to pretend a descent from ours. Wherefore it
remains impossible, that those who acknowledge the Church's Government to have
bin instituted by Christ, should pretend to any just cause to separate from it,
but they ought to behave themselves passively, in case of an injury received,
not actively renouncing that Government, or erecting another against it.

Notwithstanding all this yet it may happen sometimes that (as no Authority is
or can be so sacred and inviolable, but passion can make men dislike it) some
company of men may disacknowledge the Authority instituted by Christ, to have
come from him, alleging for the reason and motive of their renouncing it, that
it is an usurpation, which they also pretend to prove by arguments drawn either
from Reason or Testimonies. Now these men's plea might take place, if it were
possible they should produce absolute evidence, and such as in it is own force
obliges the understanding to assent, notwithstanding the contrary motives which
retard it: and without pretending such a rigorous Evidence, it were madness to
hazard an error in abusiness of such main concernment both to the Church,
mankind, and their own Souls, as it would necessarily be, if that fact of
theirs happened to be Schismatical.

Now then let us see, whether my Adversaries inference be good, that, because
Schism can have no just causes for it is parents, therefore Dr. H. in treating a
Controversy of Schism, ought not to heed or produce the causes or motives of
it. Indeed if he would grant himself and his Friends to be Schismatics; then
it were to no purpose for him to allege causes and motives, since all men know
that no just cause can be possibly alleged for Schism: but if he does an
external act which has the resemblance or show of Schism, and nevertheless
will defend himself to be no Schismatic, he must give account why he does that
action, and show that that action is not truly Schism; which cannot be done
without discussing reasons and motives, if common practice teach us any thing.
Will any man endeavor to turn one out of possession lawfully, without a plea,
or produce a plea without either any motive or reason in it? Justly therefore
did the Catholic Gentleman affirm it to be a pure contradiction: for that a
confessed breach under debate should be concluded to have no just causes, that is
to be indeed Schismatical; or, to have just causes, that is to be a self
enfranchisment, without producing and examining any causes, is a perfect
implicancy.

Nor will his instance ( Reply p. 5. 6.) of a seditious person or Rebel,
secure him at all: for as it is true that if it be known that he confesses
himself a Rebel, there is no pleading of causes, (as Dr. H. well says) to
justify his Rebellion; yet as long as he pretends to be no Rebel, so long he is
obliged to bring motives and reasons why his action of rising against the
Government is not Rebellion, though it be accused and seem to be such.

Now if Dr. H. has not forgot the title of his book, it is a Defense of the
Church of England against the Exceptions of the Romanists, to wit, those by
which they charge her of Schism, that is, their accusing her that this action
of Separation from the Church of Rome is Schismatical; so that the whole scope
and work of his book must be, to plead those motives and reasons which may seem
to traverse that accusation, and show that this action of the Church of England
makes not her Schismatical nor her Sons Schismatics. And how this can stand
without producing motives, or is not as plain a contradiction as ens and non
ens, I confess is beyond my understanding.

In his eighteenth p. he cunningly forges a false state of the question in
these words, that it is a matter in question between the Romanists and us,
whether the Bishop of Rome had before and at the time of the Reformation any
supreme legal power here, I willingly acknowledge. By which he would persuade
the Reader, that he had condescended to a state of the question pretended by
us: which is absolutely false; for we state the question thus; That, there
being at that time an external confessed Government derived and in actual
possession time out of mind, (abstracting from whether it be internally legal
or no) whether the pretended Reformers either did then or can now show
sufficient reasons of the substracting themselves from obedience to it. This is
our state of the question, which has it is whole force (as the Reader may see)
in the acknowledged external possession. Now Dr. H. would make his Reader
believe that the state of the question does wholly abstract from the external
possession, and purely debate the internal right, as if it hung hovering
indifferently in the air to be now first determined, without taking notice of
the stability and force our tenet had from the long possession. And this
handsome trick he gentilely put's upon his Readers by those three sly words, I
willingly acknowledge.

Having thus mistaken voluntarily the state of the question, consequently he
imposes upon me that I said, none doubts of the Bishop of Rome's supreme legal
power over the Church of England at the time of the Reformation; and then
confutes me most palpably with telling me that they doubt it, or make a
question of it. Can any man in reason imagine I was ignorant that such was their
tenet, since I impugn it in this present controversy, as Schismatical? yet Dr.
H's great reach of wit can by the way, and within a Parenthesis, make such a
dolt of S. W. His proof from my words is better then the supposi^ion it self: I
said, our Church could cast them out, and deny them communion, if they be found
to deserve it, being then her Subjects and Children. Actually they were under
her at that time: if then they could allege just (that is) evident reasons why
they thought her Government an usurpation, then they did not deserve it, and so
she could not excommunicate them; if they did not, and yet would subtract
themselves from her obedience, then they deserved it, and were justly
excommunicated. Can any man doubt of this, or impose such a piece of known
nonsense (as his former deduction out of it is) upon another, unless possess't
with Dr. H's want of ingenuity? yet this he repeats again, p. 21. and calls his
own straining at a gnat, my swallowing down the question at one haust.

Now let us examine my words which breed his scruple: they are these, as cited
in the Marge by himself. That our Church could cast you out, if you be found to
deserve it, being then her Subjects and Children none doubts. Here I ask,
first, whether he can show that I speak of any interior or legal Authority;
which if he cannot, it is a plain imposture to father upon me the word legal, as
he does in this place. Secondly, I demand whether any Protestant or Dr. H.
himself doubts whether there was an extern, apparent, and acknowledged
Authority, the which for being such was to be obeyed until it was disproved, in
the Church of Rome over the pretended Reformers. This being acknowledged, I ask
what it is he excepts against. That such an Authority could not proceed against
her esteemed Subjects, if they deserved it; for this is all my words signified,
and is so plain of it self, that no man that has any common sense can make
difficulty of it.

He tells us p. 19. that the questions is equally and indifferently whether
they or the Romanists be guilty of Schism, including also the remorseless
Governors in the Romish See. Where he quite mistakes the business: his meaning
(as I perceive by his whole procedure, and particularly p. 22. where he says,
that the Pope ought to clear his title to his pretended power) is, that we
should be mutually counter-opponent, and counter-defendants, and each produce
proofs, ere we can claim any thing. But he is in a great error: we need no new
proofs to convince the lawfulness of our Authority; our plea is provided to our
hand before they opposed us, and started the question Possession is all the
proofs we need bring, and such a possession as had to strengthen it an
universal belief that it came from Christ's time, grounded upon the certainty
of Oral Tradition; so that we made no question of it (it was a point of our
Faith) and therefore need produce no proofs for our affirmative: whereas they,
who first questioned this before-unquestionable, and re^ected this
before-received Authority, must bring reasons why they did so, and proofs why
they deemed it usurped. The question therefore in this pre^ent debate devolves
to this; whether the proofs Dr. H. produces be convincingly evident against a
possession so qualified, as is before declared: if they fall short of that
force, eo ipso he and his Friends are concluded Schismatics, for relinquishing
without just motives an Authority, whose possession is justly presumable to
have come from Christ; if they be perfect Evidences, then they are excusable,
and in their excusableness is terminated the controversy in hand, if we may
trust the title of his book, which is A Defense against the except^on, of the
Romanists, or his own stating the quest^on, of Schism, p. 11. from which he
here prevaricates, p. 19.

What follows further, out of their excusableness, against us, that is, whether
we were unjust, usupers, tyrannical, etc. is another question; for which sequel
I would not contend with them, if the premises could be possibly evinced.
However, if we usurped, it was not lately, but a thousand years ago: But that
our Church shall in that case be schismatical, (as he here says) that
expression comes out from the mouths and pens of his Friends so weakly and
faintly, (the light of nature and common language of mankind checking them,
that the whole is not said to be broken from a part, but a part from the whole)
that he must have recourse to the universal obligation of Charity to pretend us
such: for we can never be ^hown even in his supposed case Schismatical against
Government or Unity in the Church, if no such Unity can be found, as it cannot
in that mould he has cast Christianity in, by making each Church (...),
Independent, or self-govern'd; since there can be no division made, where the
things are already many.

After his pretended indifferency of the question, he tells us, that it must
not be begged on either side, and hereafter he complains of me grievously for
the same fault I am sorry to see M. H. so ignorant in Logic, that he mistakes
the most ordinary things in disputing. Let him know then that a Defendant, as a
Defendant, cannot be said to beg the question; since it is his office to hold
his tenet, which is the thing in controversy, and stick close by it; whatever
prejudices or impossibilities are objected, to deny them co^sequent from it,
granting those things which he takes to be consistent with it, denying those
which he deems inconsistent, unless it be an open evidence; if an ambiguity
occur, to distinguish the double sense, and show again which part of the
distinction is consistent with it, which otherwise: in all which it is manifest
he supposes the truth of the question, and holds fast to it, nor ought he let
go that hold til he be non-plust, and the dispute at an end. My part then being
the Defendant's (as has been proved out of the tenth Ground) the Reader may
see with how much Logic D. H. complains of me all over, for only holding my
tenet; which he calls begging the question. For, however he may pretend to the
name of a Defender, yet, since his party begun first to oppose, that is, to
object and argue against ours, who at that time quietly held their tenet, it is
clear he is in no other sense a Defendant, than as one who maintains his first
objected Syllogism with a second, may be said to defend it; which is very
improper and abusive of the right notion. Whereas we, who started not the
dispute nor begun the opposition, but sat still, have yet a just title to
continue in that our posture of defense, till the Evidence of their Arguments
drive us out of it.

His next complaint is against the Governors in the Romish See, who (if you
will trust him) without all cause deny Communion without remorse or relenting,
not only to them, but to many other Churches east and west, north and south,
in all parts of the habitable word. And was not this ever the constant practice
of God's Church, to Excommunicate all those who renounced either the
Government, or any other point of Faith received from their Forefathers; that
is, all Schismatics and Heretics; and never to readmit them till they
repented their lapse, and did fruits worthy of penance? I grant therefore that
the Romish Governors inherit the remorslesness of the foregoing Church, so
that if any be found misdeserving in the same manner, in what part soever of
the habitable world they live, whether East, West, North, or South, all is one
to her; or how many soever they be, Arians, Socinians, Eutychians, Nestorians,
Carpocratians, Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants; etc. she values not their
number, nor yet their situation: if they grow scabb'd with self opinionated
novelties, or disobedience, they must be separated from the sounder flock; nor
ever be readmitted, till their repentance has wrought their cure.

His fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth Paragraphs, which follow, lay down for their
foundation a very excellent principle, introduc'^ with an If; as, If the Church
of England (p. 19. l. 22.) be really (...); If the Bishop of Rome (p. 20. l.
1.) had really no more power and Authority over this Church, than the Bishop of
Antioch over Cyprus, that is none at all; In case the Bishop of Rome (p. 21. l.
16.) have no legal Authority over us, etc. and upon this he runs on very
confidently a whole leaf and an half, concluding most evidently whatever he
pleases in prejudice of the Pope, none daring to stop his career, or deny his
consequences, so great virtue there is in the particle If: only we may take
leave to propose a parallel to it, that as he who intends to dine on larks, and
prepares all things necessary, whithout any greater security than, If the s^y
should fall, may in all likelihood miss his meal; so in greater probability
must Dr. H. fail of his conclusion, which relies upon a conditional If,
grounded only in his own fancy.

He expresses p. 22. much Charity toward the humble members of the Papacy who
pray for the peace of the Caetholick Church. But if he would consider how little
they think of his Church, under that notion, he would con them little thanks for
their prayers. They never intended to pray for the peaceful a biding of the
Protestants where they are, but rather for that salutiferous trouble of
compunction and sorrow of heart, for their disobedience, and pervicacious
obstinacy. Yet he will needs be beholding to them for praying for the
Protestant Churches peace with the rest, and in courteous requital retains the
favorable opinion of Salvation attainable amognst them. But cannot absolve from
the guilt of the most culpable Schism the setters up, and maintainers of the
partition wall betwixt us. The Pope, Cardinals, and all the Clergy must bea^ S.
W. company to Hell, that is decreed; S. Paul has (doubt less) long a go
pronounced sentence against them also.

He would clear himself in the next place for mincing the Father's words. S.
Austin affirmed, non esse quicquam gravius Schismate; he rendered it, scarce
any so great. Now S. W. knowing how willing he was to seek evasions to palliate
Schism by pretense of some greater sin (as he does most amply, of Schism, cap.
2. part. 8.) and therefore not willing to grant him any the least startinhole,
expressed by the way his dislike of his mincing the absolute not, with scarce.
But as Mr. H's good fortune would have it, his Genius led him into this
profitable mistake, as to translate gravius, so great; and by the jumbling of
these two together he has compounded an excuse, alleging that scarce any is
so great, is fully as much (or more comprehensive) than none greater. Whereas
first it is manifest that non esse quicquam gravius, is most obviously and
easily rendered, there is nothing greater: and if a qualifying expression be
made use of in stead of an absolute one, S W. had good reason to be jealous of
it, specially coming from Dr. H. Next the reasons he alleges to make good the
equivalence of the sense, that there may possibly be many crimes as great,
though no one were supposed greater, is false; Moral Science assuring us that
no two kinds of vices are equal Thirdly, if Dr. H. please to rub up afresh his
forgotten Logic, he will find that with S. Austin's proposition, that none is
greater, it cannot stand that one is greater, since they are contradictories;
but with his proposition, that scarce any is so great, it vell stands, that
one, or some few, may be greater: Therefore it is manifest that he minced S.
Austin. Lastly, whereas he says he assumed not to affirm more than his
Authorities did induce, that there was none greater, is the strangest lapse of
all: before he only minced the words non est quicquam gravius, now they have
totally lost their signification; since he tells us his Authorities did not
induce that there was none greater; which is directly contrary to the words
cited. This is the result of Dr. H's deliberate thoughts, applied to remedy his
Disarmer's too great have: Me thinks another man in another cause might have
done better ex tempore.

I took notice by the way, with a glance of a parenthesis, that he mitigated S.
Irenaeus his words, Nulla ab eis tanta fieri potest correptio, quanta est
schismatis pernicies, by rendering the absolute tenor of them, Nulla potest,
etc. by the softer language of, It is very hard if not impossible, to receive
such an injury from the Governors, etc. To clear himself, he asks me first why
I took no notice of his ill rendering Schismatis pernicies. I answer, that it is
not necessary to score up all his faults; it suffices to note what I conceived
most needful. Next, he excuses himself by telling us that he set down the
Latin punctually, and so left it not possible to impose on any that understood
that. I answer, that my intent in noting it was, that he should not even impose
on those who understand English only, and make up the greater part of Readers,
Thirdly, he says he was careful not to go beyond the limits of the
testimonies. I grant it, and only find fault that he was over-carefull, so as
to fall short of their just sense. Fourthly, he tells us that (...), both in
Scripture and other Authors, is rendered hard or difficult. Which evasion is
nothing, unless he had this testimony out of Irenaeus in Greek, as his words
seem willing underhand to make the Reader believe: which if he have, I am sure
he has seen more than other men, though very curious, could ever hear of.

These are his evasions: let us see what plain reason will say against them: It
is very hard, if not impossible, to receive such an injury sufficient to excuse
Schism, evidently is consistent with this sense, that, it is doubtful whether
some few injuries may not be sufficient for that end; and then if the some of
these last words do not mitigate the absolute, nulla potest, there can be
none, I confess I have lost my reason. To omit that the sense of his
translation or paraphrase few or none, etc. leaves room for the reasonableness
of Schism, since it admits a possibility for Schism, in case of some injury
received, to be excusable. In a word, I only affirmed ( Schism Disarmed, p.
3.) that he seemed something chary in those expressions, which I am sure the
Reader will think I have made good; himself acknowledging here (p. 24. l. 11.)
that his expression was cautious, and the fact of mincing the words being
evident: As for his intention, if the Reader will believe him, he assures him (
Answ. p. 18.) it was out of tenderness to us; so that we must bear the blame of
his feeble paraphrase, and be beholding to him to boot. Timeo Danaos, and dona
ferentes. Howsoever, since it was our fortune to have the intention of a
courtesy thrust upon us, we thank him for it, but request him to do us no more
such favors for the future, as to mince the Fathers words for our sakes; they
will earn a return of greater gratitude from his own cause, which stands in
need of such kindnesses.

My third whisper (as he calls it) which he will needs have speak aloud to his
discredit, is that he rendered S. Austin's words a communione orbis terrarum,
from the Universal or truly Catholic Church of Christ; as if he were afraid
lest God's Church might perhaps be thought untruly Catholic. Of which he says
the reasons is visible, because the Church of Rome is by her Advocates styled
the Catholic Church. But do not others call her so besides her own Advocates?
do not even our very enemies (forced thereunto by custom, which makes words
proper) give us that appellation, unless design cross their free and natural
expression? Ask in London where a Catholic lives, and see whether they will
show you the house of a Roman Catholic, or no. Should a Pursuivant meet Dr. H.
and ask him if he were a Catholic, I doubt not but his answer would be
negative, unless design against us made him deliver himself otherwise. Since
then we only have nomen Catholicum obtentum and possessum, which S. Austin
(contra Epist. Fund. cap. 4.) holds to be a note of the Church, it is a wrong
to that holy Doctor, to put upon him in your translation the unnecessary
addition of truly, to Catholic; seeing that according to him, no Church can be
universally called such, which is not truly such. The sum then of Dr. H's
supererogating truly, is; that though all the world in their free expressions
call us only Catholics, (that is, sons of the Catholic Church) yet all speak
untruly, but himself and a few of his brethren; who also speak truly only
then, when it is their turn to dispute against us. Yet he tells us, if we will
believe him, that certainly our Church is not such in the notion S. Austin
speaks: though if we should ask him what ground he has for his certainty, he
must answer that he has none that is certain, but only a probability; for I
conceive he has no better ground for that than he has for his Faith.

Thus Dr. H. ends his defense from my three Whispers, as he calls them, though
I hope by this time they speak loud and plain enough to every Reader that he
was too chary in his expressions, which was all I objected. In the close he
pleases to honor me, by making me Confessor of his secretest and deepest
reservation: but truly (though I pretend not to so high an office) unless he
comes with hearty sorrow for these faults without cloaking them, and gives me
good hopes of his future amendment, he is never likely to obtain absolution.

The Catholic Gentleman noted by the way, that Dr. H. slightly past over the
distinction between Heresy and Schism, which was necessary to be expressed in
that place, where the matter of the futurework was to be determined, that is,
what Schism he was chiefly to treat of. Now in this Book entitled their defense
he ought to state the matter so, as to treat of that chiefly which is chiefly
objected: wherefore since he cannot but know that a Schism coming from an
Heresy is that which is more charged upon them, both as greater crime, and as
the cause and origin of the other Schism of only disobedience, he ought to
have premised this, and let his Reader have known that all Heresy is Schism; at
least in a place where he purposely treats of the notion of Schism, it was
fitting to treat it abstractedly from the heretical one, and that of bare
disobedience, (both which are objected, though the former much more) and not
speak of it as distinguished from heresy, as professedly here he does, of
Schism chap. 2. par. 1. so laying wrong grounds to his future discourse, by
omitting and excluding from it the principal Schism objected, and so treating
Schism maimedly, or rather only one branch of it. Now his first excuse why he
past it over so sl^ghtly (only naming the word distinguished, yet treating no
distinction there,) is that he meddled not with it at all, Reply p. 8. l. ^0.
as if this made not the fault greater, not to meddle with that which was in a
manner soley important in that place, and most pertinent to his ensuing
T^eatise. His next is, that his method led him to it, to treat of it, Chap. 8.
whereat 'ts evidently most impertinent and unmethodical to treat of Schism
against Faith under the head of Schism against mutual Charity: and besides,
method gives, that we must put the definitions before we treat of the
particularities. I am sorry to see that his confusion for method's sake, the
nonsense of his first book is entailed upon these also; and that that Dish in
the Stationers bill of fare must be cook't up again here by Mr. H. to give the
Reader a second surfeit.

Sect. 9.
How Dr. H. defends his famous Criticism about the Hith pael-like verb (...)
with ten several mistakes of his Accidence.
HIs second Section presents us with the first Dish in the Stationer's bill of
fare, served up to the table covered; but with so many pitiful evasions, and
mistakes, as may serve perhaps to give the Reader a banquet of mirth. But I
shall treat it seriously.

His first mistake is general, and slips over the whole question. Our
controversy is whether either (...) or (...) have a reciprocal signification
upon a Grammatical account, from the notation of the form and termination of
the word, as he declares himsel ( of Shism, p. 13.) to mean of (...) at least:
now he, to evade, quite forsakes his formely-declared intent, and recurres for
his refuge to the sense of the word taken from the thing signified, and affix't
to it by Ecclesiastical use, or present circumstances, not to what the word in
it self requires, nor to what it is beholden to Grammar for.

His second mistake (which I pardoned him before) is that (...) comes from the
active (...), since Grammarians use to derive that verbal from the second
person of the preterperfect tense passive.

His third mistake (or rather voluntary evasion) is, that, whereas he was
accused for misunderstanding the nature of a Conjugation, in saying that a
Greek passive for want of conjugations was designed to supply another
signification, he flies off, and says he meant it of such as the Hebrew
Grammars call thus: as if he should say that Greek verbs want Hebrew
Conjugations. To omit that the Conjugations in Hebrew are improperly called
such, shall be shown presently.

His fourth mistake is, that he makes account it is a propriety to express
Conjugations to be flexions and variations both of the signification and first
syllable, as the Hebrew calls Conjugations: for to state the matter
indifferently (though the contrary use of the word, in both Latin and Greek,
out-sound, and so make improper the different use of it in Hebrew) let us
abstract from all the three, nay from all languages, and upon Grammatical
principles put a difference between Voices and Conjugations, no other can be
imagined than this, that a Voice relates to the signification, a Conjugation to
a diversity in some letter or syllable. This being so, that expression is
proper which signifyes each in it is own propriety and distinction, not both at
once, blended in a confusion. Improperly therefore in Hebrew are they called
Conjugations; and more properly did S. W. affirm that in Hebrew, Voices and
Coniugations were jumbled, as the Doctor's words now cited justify.

His fifth mistake is, that the Printer's evident error in putting eight votes
for eight voices, is the unconceivable lapse (as he alls it) of S. W. whereas
no man that was no better than half blind, could possibly fall into such a
toyish piece of oversight, since the wrong word votes is put once only, but
the right word voices twice, so immediately next it, that it could not possibly
leave it undiscovered; to wit, three lines before it, and again three lines
after it. Yet this hard riddle has cost the good Doctor a great deal of
pains, for he tells us here ( Answ. p. 27.) he cannot by any enquiry discover
that any Grammariam has styled them eight votes. What a wise task it was to
consult all the multitude of Grammars extant for such a trifle, which was just
at his nose? and what a miserable life does he lead in turning over leaves
daily to so little purpose? But every thing delights most in it is own Element.

His sixth mistake is, his denial that there are more Conjugations in the
Greek, than in the Hebrew. Now in Hebrew none imagine more than eight, and this
forgetful Adversary of mine was fit to defend in the foregoing page that there
might be but four; whereas honest Cambden will inform him that in Greek,
Conjugationes (...) sunt tredecim, sex barytonorum, tres contractorum, quatuor
Verborum in (...): now in our Country thirteen are more than eight; but Dr. H.
thinks otherwise. His reason why they are more properly such in Hebrew, because
there the variation is both in the signification and the first syllable is
already shown to be the reason why they are improperly called Conjugations, and
rather Voices; which is yet made plainer by that which follows in the Doctor (
Answ. p. 27. 28.) that one and the same Verb goes through all the Coniugations
in Hebrew. For since it was never pretended that the word Conjugation is
improperly termed such in Latin and Greek, where it is distinguished from a
Voice, and yet in both those languages no verb runs through all the
Conjugations, but through Voices only; it is manifest that, if theirs be
proper, the notion of Conjugation in Hebrew is improper.

His seventh mistake is ( Answ. p. 28.) that all neutropassives are of the
active voice; of which he is so confident, that he tells me every Schoolboy
knows it: sure these Schoolboys must have Dr. H. for their Schoolmaster. I am
sure Will. Lilly would have whipped his Scholars for being ignorant of their As
in praesenti, had they affirmed it; where they might have read, and Dr. H. too,
the Rule, Neutropassivum sic praeteritum sibi format, etc. instancing in
Gaudeo, fido, audeo, fio, soleo, moereo, which if he account actives from their
manner of flection, (besides his old error in the nature of a voice) he may
take notice that their preterperfect, from which more tenses are formed than
from the present, is altogether passive; if from their sense, let him tell me
what Gaudeor, fior, etc. would signify if made passives.

His eighth mistake is that sto partakes not of a passive sense: it must have
then, according to him, a sense perfectly and totally active; (for no Latin
Verbs can have any sense but what is either Active or Passive or compounded of
these, except some few which signify Being) if so, then seeing it ends in o^,
why should it not be an active forming a passive in or; for so Mr. Lilly
teaches his boys, that if it cannot take r it is no active. If he replies, that
it signifies in the manner of an action, yet not transitively as actives, but
immanently, or as received in the agent, (as in reality it does) then he again
makes it partake of a passive sense, since to signify an action as received in
the agent, is to signify an action mixed with a passion, for that reception is
such. In a word, those Verbs which signify action (or in manner of an action)
of one thing upon another, are actives; those that signify the reception of it
in the other, are passives, and formed of these actives; those that signify an
action (or in manner of an action) of the same thing upon it self, partake of
both, and are neuters; and hence they may be rendered either actively, or
passively, I stand, or, I am standing, I run, or, I am running, etc. though the
difference and degrees of expressing this reciprocalness be more visible in
some, than in others, according as their significatum is either a
properly-called action including motion, or else the manner only of signifying
imitates the perfecter active.

Pardon me, Reader, it is for Dr. H's sake, not thine, that I make this
Grammatical lecture, who in his former book-had only forgot his Accidence, but
in this seems absolutely to have renounced it. Yet these are the exceptions
which, in defiance of all Grammar, he takes against me, and then triumphantly
insult's, and would make the Reader believe that he omits to enumerate others
the like (weightier you may be sure) partly to preserve his graty, partly
because it were unreconcileable with common Compassion. Well; S W. may have
many Adversaries, but never shall he meet with so tenderhearted a man, who is
mightily afraid to hurt him, when he never comes near touching him. If he drew
any blood, I am sure poor Priscian, Lilly and Cambden felt the smart.

His ninth mistake (which he calls his answer to my principal scruple, but
indeed is his own principal error) is his instancing in (...), for parallels
of (...), and to be of the nature of Hithpael. I answer, not only these he
alleges, but also that the second persons of the imperative mood in all Verbs
signifying an action indifferently performable by himself or another, may by
the circumstances come to signify an action upon himself; yet this is not to be
of the nature of Hith-pael, which has this always of its own Grammatical
force, without being beholding to circumstances. Again, the nature of Hith pael
is to signify expressly as much as two words in Latin or Greek, as I instanced
in Schism Disarmed, and so is perfectly and essentially reciprocal; these
pretended parallels come from perfect actives, which signify no more
reciprocalness than amo and cognosco, if taken in themselves, and abstracted
from circumstances. But his main error is, that he runs to the quality of the
thing signified, from the quality of the word upon the account of the
Grammatical notation: which was the sole design of this Critical discourse, and
formerly his intent, till he was frighted from it. I grant therefore that the
Ecclesiastical use and S. Jude rightly take a Schismatic for one who (...),
divides himself from the Church; but can he show me that the Church or S. Jude
or any, except himself, tell us that this kind of reciprocal signification
accrues to that word by any Grammatical observation from the passive (...); or
that taken in it is own nature it is not indifferent to signify, I am cut by
another, as, by my self, till some circumstance determine it? or can any show,
that (...) (and so of the rest) is in it is own passive nature of any farther
signification, than barely I am saved, leaving it to be determined by other
words, whether by my self, or some other; that is having of it self no
reciprocal sense? Unless he can show this, still the Doctor of Divinity has
forgot his Accidence, and the first Dish in the bill of Fare (should I suffer
it) would be put again upon record: but I will chide the liquorish Stationer,
and bid him have some mercy on Dr. H. who has so much Compassion upon S. W.

His tenth mistake ( Answ. p. 29.) spent in sounding my Deep subtlety (as he
calls it) is much-what of the same strain. The word Schismatic in the
Ecclesiastical use has for it is total signification one who is divided
voluntarily (by himself) from the Church; and consequently (...), if the
circumstances apply it is native indifferency to that kind of sense, must
signify) I am divided voluntarily (or by my self) from the Church. Now to speak
of the word it self, it neither signifies I am divided voluntarily, nor yet, I
am divided from another thing, ((...) signifies that) much less, I am divided
by my self from the Church; but the circumstances or use give all these, and
make the acception of the word such: for a breach from the Church being
inexcusable, that is sinful, must be voluntary; and because in all divisions
when one part bears a small proportion to the other, that part is said to be
divided from it, therefore to schismatize is to divide himself voluntarily from
the Church. All this the use of the word yields; and had Dr. H. only stood to
this, he had found no opposition from S. W. but saved his credit at least for
Grammatical skill: but because he would deduce it by criticizing Grammatically,
I would let him see what consequence followed of it; to wit, that since (...)
was (as he said) of the nature of Hith-pael, and signified reciprocal action on
himself, himself, the Schismatic, is the thing divided; now the said (...)
being a Verb simple, and wanting an (...) to make it signify a dividing from
another, in Dr. H's critical rigor it must make the poor Schismatic be cut in
two: and I much fear that all the Grammatical plaster Dr., H's art can make,
will not cover much less cure the wound himself would needs give himself, by
meddling too much with those edged tools of Criticisms.

Not to charge him with more mistakes, (ten are enough for him to fall into
about one word) I would know why he left my ^nth page unanswered, which most
concerned the point. To which had he applied his mistaking faculty, I doubt not
but we might have had a douzen, if not thirteen for good measure.

Thus much of Dr. H's Hith-pael like Verb (...) and his eagle-ey'd Criticism
upon it, which will make his fame long-lived amongst all future Grammarians.
What follow in the next Paragraph, granting his clients to be Schismatics, if
I can prove their voluntary recession from us, is already proved by his own
clear confession, Schism Disarmed, p. 279. where the Reader may see it
manifested plainly; my patience is not transcription-proof (like Dr. H's) to
stand repeating it here. But I know he will deny his words in one place or the
other, as he does more than once in this Treatise of his second thoughts.

He told us, chap. 2. p. 3. that Governors, being men, may possibly err, and
excommunicate the innocent; I answered, that unless he could evidence an
immunity from error in the Governed, as well as pretend a liableness in the
Governors, the opinion of right ought to stand on the Governors side, and
that a probable motive could not sufficiently warrant the Subjects to revolt;
giving my reasons for it. Now the proper reply to the import of my Answer had
been to stand stoutly to it, that their motives for renouncing that Authority
were in their own nature more than probable, and concluded demonstratively that
it was an usurpation. But he is horribly afraid of answering positively to that
point: when any Reason appears, he either leaps out of the lists all
afrighted, or else hides himself in words. His Answer is, ( Answ. p. 30.) that
this cannot be appliable to the business without begging the principal
question. So that I must be the opponent, that is concluded, let reason and art
say what they will. I ask, was not my answer pertinent to his words, the
Governors might err, which was my only business at that time? If so, then it
was most absurd in him to ramble from one end of the Controversy to the other,
with his voluntary and crude affirmations, that the Pope in King Henry's time
was not de jure, in Q. Elizabeth's neither de iure nor de facto Governor. May
not any Rebel say the same, pretend no Right in the Governor, and say truly,
that he was not actually and de facto under him, when he had renounced his
Authority, and raised an Army against him? He tells us moreover upon his honest
word, if we will believe him, that the King and Bishops here had the supreme
power under Christ, to reject the Pope's Authority; that the Pope's power was
usurped, etc. and then hiding his head under these thin leaves, he concludes
himself perfectly safe till we make it appear that we were Governors, and they
faulty. So that by the Doctor's Logic, a boy, though undoubtedly held the son
of such a Father, may not be whip't by him for disobedience, as long as the boy
can call his mother whore, and deny himself to be his Son; unless the Father
make it first appear that he is his Child. Till you first renounced the
Authority of our Supreme Governor (let it be when it will) you were under him,
and held his Children and Subjects; your disobedience is most notorious, and
confessed and that not a mere disacceptance of his commands, but disallowance of
his Authority: yet as long as you can deny it, and say the Roman-Church (your
then-Mother) was a strumpet, and had erred in Faith, she may not punish nor
excommunicate you, without first making it appear you are her Children. A solid
piece of reason!

Observe, Reader, that Dr. H. in all these raw affirmations of his, that not
begged the question a jot, although he be the opponent; it is his privilege to
say what he will, every one knows it is his humor. In a word, let him either
show that his reasons for renouncing that Authority are above all degrees of
probability, which was the proper answer, or else let him confess (as he must)
that he is evidently a Schismatic in rejecting an Authority for so many Ages
acknowledged certain, upon slight and fantastical Grounds.

One piece of wit I must not omit, because I have heard more than one of Dr.
H's Friends misled by it. The Doctor affirms here ( Answ p. 30. l. 14.) that
the Pope's Authority was first cast off by Papists. It Is strange, that the same
men who nominate us Papists for only acknowledging the Pop's Authority, should
call them also Papists who disacknowledge it. But perhaps he means they were
Roman Catholics; if so, then let me ask, does he mean that they were of our
Profession ere they renounced it? so was every one that turned Knave or Rebel,
an honest man and true Subject formely, else he had never turned so, but ever
been so: must then Knaves and Rebels impute knavery and rebellion to honest men
and true Subjects, and say, it was they who first began those Vices? or does he
mean perhaps that they remained Catholics after the renouncing it? If his
mistake be there, he may right it by taking notice, that such a renouncing is
an Act of Schism involving heresy, by corenouncing the Rule of Faith. After
this renouncing therefore, they were Schismatics, and Heretics, not
Catholics, and whatever tenets they may be pretended to retain still, were not
now Faith but Opinion only; the sole certain Ground of Faith, Oral Tradition,
being abandoned and rejected: unless the Doctor will say that they had yet
Catholic Faith in them, who denied all the ground of Catholic Faith; and then
indeed I shall not refuse to give them leave to hold them without Ground, and
rank them in Dr. H's Predicament of Probablists.

Sect. 10.
Dr. H's plea of a weak conscience common to the Prostants and any malefactor.
Thirteen shameful and wilful weaknesses in answering Mr. Knot's position that
we may lawful'y forsake the Church's Communion, if she be not infallible.
Mr. H. begins his third Section very angrily, calling mine (p. 31.) a perfect
Romane-combate with a Wind-mil of my own erecting, toward which he never
contributed the least stone or timber. But what if I show the Doctor, that he
has contributed great millstones and huge logges toward the making this
Windmill of his?

My affirmation was that ( Schism Disarmed, p. 14.) he had got a new cloak for
his Schism, the pretense of a weak conscience, citing for it his excusing
words, that they could not subseribe to things which their conscience tells
them is false, and that it is hard to say a man can lawfully subscribe in that
case, though the truth be on the Church's side. Hence I deduced some
consequence, how his doctrine excused those malefactors and their three
pretended Schismatics. In answer he calls this a manifest perversion of his
most innocent expressions, because afterward he says, that such a
weak-conscienc't erroneous man is in several respects crimtnous, etc. I reply,
I do not forbid him to speak contradictions; for I perceive by his little
amendment he is not likely to take my friendly counsel: but let us see what
those places which I related to there in the Doctor gave me occasion to say,
and what they contributed toward this Windmill.

His first contribution is, that there is nothing alleged by him, where he
pretends conscience in not obeying us, but the very same will much better serve
any malefactor; so that his words may become their plea, and consequently,
unless he gave us some distinctive sign of the goodness of his conscience above
theirs, his words are justly appliable to plead their cause.

His second is, that whereas only rigorous and convincing Evidence can excuse
such a disobedience, and he pretends none, I ought to think his conscience
erroneous, and that for pleading for it, he pleads for erroneous Consciences;
and may by the same resons plead for the other malefactors.

His third contribution is, that since on the one side he tells us it is hard
to affirm that a man in an error may lawfully subscribe, and on the other,
leaves no Grounds to convince him rationally (for how can any man pretend to
convince him, or he rationally assent to be convinced by an Authority which
tells him it may be mistaken?) this weak-conscienc'd man may consequently have
a rational Ground to remain in his false opinion, at least cannot be obliged to
contrary belief, but thanks Dr. H. heartily for pleading for his lawful
continuance in his beloved error. Or if he be scrupulous of his error, and
Dr. H. afford him no perfectly-certain grounds to right it, but that (as he
says here, and his Grounds make good) he is sure to sin which way soever he
turns; it is likely Mr. H's good doctrine may make the poor fellow come straight
home from the Probability-lecture, and take a rope and hang himself. This
indeed were no great favor to a weak conscience.

His fourth contribution, ( cap. 7. par. 9.) is his position of the error (in
some case) on the Church's side in some places in this Chapter; which very
thing favors the self-conceit of every proud fellow, and gives him a fine
pretense to think his erroneousness lawful in disobeying that Authority, which
could not oblige him in reason to believe what herself knew not, but might be
mistaken and err in. Nay more, he very putting the Error on the Church's
side takes away all obligation to believe her; and by consequence justifyes all
erroneous consciences. Thus is the Windmill finished at Dr. H's proper cost
and charges, although he says he contributed not the least stone or timber: so
truly liberal and noble he is, that after such profuseness, he will not own nor
acknowledge his bounty to his very Adversaries.

Next to these faults which Dr. H. has committed in pleading for a weak
conscience, follows his sin of omission, I mean his neglect to answer my
seventeenth and eighteenth pages, which obliged him to speak out, and say
either I or no, to two points which are horrible Bull-beggers to him,
wheresoever he meets them. The first is, whether all assent of the
Understanding which comes not from perfect and demonstrative Evidence, springs
not from passion and vice: The second, whether he and his Friends have such
Evidence, that our Church erred, in delivering as of Faith, that the Pope, as
Successor of S. Peter, was Head of the Church. These two points I made account
were the two main hinges, on which that door turns which must shut them out of,
or keep them in the Church; and therefore expected (not that he should produce
his Evidence here, but) that he should have given some answer either
affirmative or negative to them. But Grounds are very perilous edged tools to
meddle with, and cut the throat of error at one slash; which costs much
hacking and hewing when a Controversy is managed by debating particularities.
Again, the nature of Grounds is to entrench so near upon the first principles,
and their terms are for the most part so unquestionably evident, that they
leave no elbow-room for a shuffler to bestir his mock-reason in; which in
particulars (not so capable of scientifical proofs) especially in
testimony-skirmishe, seldom or never want. And therefore Dr. H. who is of that
Generation of Controvertists, and very prudent in it, dit wisely omit to meddle
with these points; though in that place he had ample occasion to treat of them.

But to proceed; Mr. Knot had affirmed, that we may forsake the Church's
Communion in case she be fallible and subject to error. Dr. H. inferred hence,
( of Schism p. 20.) that it was lawful (if this were true) to forsake
Communion of all but Angels and Saints and God in heaven: his reason was,
because only they were infallible and impeccable. To maintain the infallible
certainty of Faith against this man, who would bring all to probability, I gave
some instances, to let him understand, that Infallibility in men on earth was
not so impossible a matter as he fancies: Glancing also at his addition of
Impeccable, since the controversy there being about our tenet, which is
Infallibility, the mingling it with Impeccability was a tacit calumny,
intimating to the weaker Readers that this was also out tenet, or part of it.
To these Dr H. pretends an answer, but so full of contradictions both to
himself and common sense, that it would be tedious to enumerate them.

It were not amiss first to put down our plain tenet, which (as far as it
concerns this present controversy) is this, That since it is unworthy the
Wisdom and Goodness of Almighty God, who sent his Son to save mankind, not to
first lay, and then leave efficacious means for that end; which means
(considering the nature of mankind to which they were to be applied) are no
other than efficacious motives, and efficacioully proposed, to make him forsake
temporary and fleeting Goods, and embrace Intellectual and Eternal ones, (his
only Felicity,) with which the affections to the former are inconsistent:
again, since these motives cannot be efficaciously proposed to the Universality
of mankind, unless Faith, the doctrine of them, be certain: hence to ascertain
Faith, Christ gave testimony to his doctrine by doing such prodigious miracles
as no man did before; and when he left us, unless he had left also some means
to propose certainly those motives to future mankind, his coming had been in a
manner void, for as much as concerned posterity; and the rational and convincing
certainty of his doctrine (and by consequence the efficacy of it) had been
terminated in those few which himself by his preaching and miracles converted.
Hence it was necessary the Apostles should also ascertain his and their
doctrine by the extraordinary testification of miracles. The multitudes of
believers increasing, the ordinary and common working of miracles began to
cease; and controversies beginning to rise between those who pretended to the
Law of Christ, the consent of Christians in all Nations was now sufficient to
convince that that was Christ's doctrine and true, which the Apostles
Successors told them they had received from the Apostles themselves. For it
was not possible so many, dispers't in several Nations, should conspire to a
palpablely, in a visible, practical and known thing, concerning their eternal
Interest. They had nothing else now to do, but to attest what they had
received: Christ being unanimously acknowledged a perfect Law giver, there
needed no new revelations to patch and mend his noway-defective doctrine. The
Company of Believers multiplying daily and spreading, this attestation
increased still, and grew incomparable stronger, and the impossibility of
either voluntarily lying, or involuntarily mistaking, became every day greater
and greater.

In this universal delivery from hand to hand, called Tradition (or, to avoid
equivocation, Oral Tradition) we place the impossibility of the Church's
conspiring to err in attesting things most palpable and most important; which
we call her Infallibility Upon this we receive God's written word; hence we
hold our Faith infallibly-certain; that is, so true, as it cannot but be true,
as far as concerns that Christ and his Apostles taught such doctrine: hence
lastly, to come nearer home, we hold for certain and of Faith that S. Peter is
Chief of the Apostles, and the Pope his Successor, and that the renouncers of
his Authority are Heretics and Schismatics, since this solecertain Rule of
all Faith, Oral Tradition, now shown to be infallible, recommended it to us as
delivered from immediate Forefathers, as from theirs, and so upwards time out
of mind: which Rule the first Reformers in this point most manifestly
renounced, when they renounced that Authority. For they could not have been the
first Reformers, had they found it delivered by Oral Tradition.

By this is shown first in what we place the Infallibility of the Church: not
in the bare words of a few particular men, but in the manifest and ample
attestation of such a multitude as cannot possibly conspire to tell a lie, to
wit, in attesting only that Christ's doctrine, which is of a most concerning
nature and of a most visible quality, was taught to a world of Children by a
world of Forefathers. This clear and short explication of our tenet premised,
let us see how weakly Dr. H. has proceeded in this dangerous point.

His first weakness is, that he thinks Mr. Knot's saying very strange, that, we
might forsake the Church^'s Communion in case she were fallible. Whereas
nothing can be more rational and solid than that position. For why may not we
forsake the Church's Communion, if she has no power to bind to unity in Faith
which makes us one of hers? and how can she have any power to bind us to unity
in Faith, unless she be altogether certain first her self of that to which she
would oblige others, that is, unless she be infallible in teaching attested
truths? To answer (as he does, Reply, p. 13.) she may oblige others to
believe, though fallible, as long as she is not actually in error, is the
greatest piece of folly imaginable, for still the question recurres, Is she
infallibly certain that she is not actually in error? if she be, she is again
Infallible, if not, she cannot impose any obligation of belief. Hence Dr. H.
may see, that unless there he some company of men on earth infallible, it is
impossible there should be an obligation to Unity in Faith: nay there can be no
positive obligation to hold any point of Faith at all, unless they conspire to
do so and hang together by hap-hazzard; that is, be no Body of men, but a
company of good fellows met together by chance; and consequently there can be
no Church or Commonwealth of Believers, much less a lasting one, without this
Infallibility.

Note that the obligation here spoken of is not an obligation to act or comport
ones self exteriourly, as in temporal Commonwealths; but to hold and believe;
and consequently man's nature being Reason, nothing but an Authority built on
evidence of inerrability can rationally oblige men to assent upon that
Authority. So that Mr. Knot and I shall very readily grant all Mr. H's
consequence ( Answ. p. 32.) that if there be no infallible Church, there would
be no possibility for any on earth to be guilty of the sin of Schism.

His second weakness is, that in excusing himself for adding impeccable, he
thinks to evade, by telling us (p. 32) that he conceived humane nature to be in
it self equally liable to sin and error, and so no more infallible than
impeccable. Suppose it were, (which yet is not granted) what follows for his
advantage thence, unless he could manifest that all men might fall at once into
any one self-same kind of sin? Are there causes laid in the world, or can there
be, (considering the nature of a world) able to make all men conspire to cut
their own throats to morrow? if not, then in case this should happen, there
would be an effect without a cause, that is there would follow a Contradiction:
which being impossible, it must follow likewise, that it is impossible they
should be all peccable in that kind, and consequently, the Doctor may learn
that a multitude of men may be also impeccable in some kind of sin. Now to
parallel this with Infallibility, as held by us: we doubt not but of this
multitude called the Church, some may be fallible in one thing, some in
another; but that all should conspire either to mistake or delude, so as to
tell so damnable and palpable a ly, as that they had been thus tauhgt by their
Ancestour, if they had not, is the Impossible of Impossibles; nay equally
impossible as for Nature to fail in the propagation of any entire species; as
for all the houses in the world to be set on fire to morrow, or for all men to
die in their sleep this night; none of which can be done without destroying
nature, whose causes are placed necessarily in several circumstances, and so
work with variety. Yet Dr. H. tells us, ( Answ. p. 33.) that his words are as
evident a truth as could have been mentioned by him: and truly I think the
Reader will believe him ere we come to the end of this book. But I have.

His third weakness is, that whereas we place this Infallibility in a Church,
that is, in a multitude of Believers, he tells us, (p. 33. and 35) the Pope,
the Bishop of Ephesus, Loadicea, etc. and many other Governors have fallen
into error: but can he show me that all the Governors of the Church, or half
of them have erred, or indeed can possibly err in attesting as aforesaid? If
not, let him acknowledge how weak a Scripturist he is, in giving it such an
Interpretation as impossible to be true, whiles ( Answ. p. 35.) he makes the
Text I am with you always, even to the end of the world, because secondarily
spoken to the succeding Governors, to stand with their errableness.

Hi fourth weakness is, that like those who are making a pitiful excuse for a
bad cause, his unfledged discourse sticks between the teeth of a parenthesis,
and dates not come out plain. His words are (after he had told us, p. 33) the
Pope and any other single man in the world might err as well as sin;) that in
proportion any multitude or assembly might (the major, and so prevalent part of
them) consent in an error, as well as in a vice. I ask, can that whole
multitude consent in a palpable error in things visible, or no? If they can,
what means that grumbling parenthesis of the mayor part, and to what end or
purpose was it brought, since all might err? If they cannot all err in such a
case, but the major part only, then there can be some company on earth
Infallible, (to wit that whole multitude) which is the thing in question. How
much more credit were it to lose a bad cause by speaking out heartily, than to
strive to maintain it by such pitiful shifts?

His fifth weakness is, that whereas he affirmed only Saints and Angels in
heaven, and God to be infallible, and I instanced ( Schism Disarmed, p. 19.) in
some on earth, to wit the Apostles; whom I alleged to have been infallible in
penning the sacred writ, and preaching the Gospel: He answers, ( Answ. p. 33.)
that sure they are comprehended in the number of Saints in beaven, for there
undoubtedly they are Tell me seriously, good Reader, and without smiling, is
not Dr. H. worthy to be reckoned the eighth wiseman; who, when I ask him
concerning men doing offices in their lifetime here on earth, tells me that
they are now, or were aftervards Saints in heaven?

His sixth weakness is, his second answer to the same instance of mine, to wit,
that it is most true that they were assisted by Christ, so as they did not, nor
could err in penning the sacred writ, and preaching the Gospel That is, he
grants my instance brought against him to be true, and himself to be in an
error, when he said that none but those in heaven were infallible: For sure if
those could not err (as he grants) in doing these offices performed by them
while they were on earth, then some men on earth may be Infallible in some
thing, to wit in things necessary for the Salvation of mankind; which is all we
demand, and as much as we profess.

His seventh, eighth, and ninth weaknesses are, that after he had thus granted
all that was pretended, to wit their Infallibleness in those two sorts of
actions; (because he would be sure to say something to every thing, though to
never so little purpose, as his custom is) he adds first, that they were not
infallible in all sorts of things. What man in his wits ever pretended it or
imagined, but that the Apostles might count money wrong, or be mistaken in
knowing what a clock it was? Was ever such frivolous stuff heard of? Next he
tells us that as they were men on earth, they were fallible. What a mysterious
piece of sense is here? He has already confuted himself by granting that when
they were men on earth, they were Infallible, which was solely pretended; and
now that he may seem to impugn us, he tacitly counterfeits us to hold that
their Infallibility proceeds as from it is formal reason, not from the
assistance of the holy Ghost, but from their being men on earth, and by
consequence that each man on earth is infallible; since a quatenus ad omne
valet consequentia, Thirdly, whereas my words which ( Answ. p. 34.) he makes
head against, are only of those two said acts, in which he at length grants
they were infallibly assisted by the confirmation of the holy Ghost; he rakes
up all the Apostles faults and failings before the holy Ghosts descent, and
thinks to elude my words and delude his Reader by these more than childish
evasions.

His tenth weakness is, that he extends (p. 34.) by a voluntary mistake
(because he would still have something to say) Mr. Knot's words, that the
Church was infallible and not subject to error, to signify, that it shall
undoubtedly be preserved from falling into error, and that not only from this
or that sort of error, but indefinitely from all: As if the controversy
between Mr. Knot and him were not only about Infallibility in delivering
matters of Faith. Is not this a sincere man, who would make persons wiser than
himself, seem so imprudent as to think the Church Infallible in judging whether
the Circle can be squared, whether Sprights walk in S. Faiths under Paul's, or
whether a goose-py or a shoulder of mutton be the better dish? By Dr. H's
Logic it must be out tenet, that the Holy Ghost whispers the Church in the
ear, to speak truth in all these and millions of other such unnecessary
fooleries; and all this absurdity must light upon us, only from this, because
Mr. Knot and S. W. said the Church is infallible and not subject to error,
when the discourse was about matters of Faith necessary for the salvation of
mankind. The like non sense shuts up his eleventh Paragraph as the result of
the discourse before it; so again in the twelfth and fourteenth the same
mistaking weakness is that which gives all the strength to the discourse: and
it is worth the Readers notice, that he never impugnes our tenet of
Infallibility, but by such kind of forgery.

His eleventh weakness is, his shuffling in his eleventh Paragraph, where after
he had told us very truly, that the Apostles had agreed on all things needful
for the Church, and deposited them in each Church, as their Rule of Faith; when
he drew near the point in question, to wit, whether the depositary (or Church)
was infallible and could not err in delivering the right depositum, or whether
she might perhaps deliver a wrong one; he flies off, and tells us ( Ans. p.
35.) if they would adhere to that, there needed no sitperadded Infallibility to
things unnecessary. Did ever Mr. Knot or I talk of Infallibility in things
unnecessary? or is this the point disputed between Catholics and Protestants?
Good Mr. H. speak out, and tell us whether the depositary can mistake or no in
delivering needful points: if she can, where is the certainty of our Faith? if
she cannot, then some company of men on earth are infallible in delivering
things necessary for Salvation; which is the point in Controversy.

His twelfth weakness is, that in going about to show how he can be infallibly
certain of the books of Scripture, he unawares recurres to our Rule of Faith,
though he never intends to stand to it; affirming here ( Answ. p. 36.) that the
testimony of others founded in their several sensations being faithfully
conveyed to us by undeniable Tradition, are as unquestionably certain as if we
had seen them ourselves, that is, as he intimates before (l. 3.) infallible;
instancing, that of this sort is the tradition of the universal primitive
Church, etc. Where first, if this be true, I have gained my intent; which was
to show against him, that some company of men might be infallible in attesting
things of Faith, though not in all things, as he calumniates us to hold. Next,
if the Tradition of the Primitive Church be infallible, for the reason given, I
ask why the succeeding Church should not enjoy the same privilege; since the
doctrine of Fore fathers being visible and practical, and so founded in the
several sensations of the children, they can by witnessing transmit it to their
posterity, asun questionably truly, as if the Grandchildren had seen what was
held and practiced in the Grandfathers time. Nay, unless he grant this, he
has done nothing, that is, he has not shown that he has any certainty of the
books of Scripture: for if the Tradition in the primitive Church only be
infallible, I may be mistaken in believing the succeeding Tradition in this
point, since that may deceive me, for any thing I know; if the after Tradition
also was Infallible, then we conquer without dispute in this and all other
Controversies about Faith, since we were found adhering to this universal
testification of all our Forefathers, whereas they renounced it when they
renounced the Authority it recommended, and ran to other Grounds, private
interpretations of Scripture, and odd scraps of misunderstood testimonies, and
still are glad to sow together these thin figge-leaves to cover the nakedness
of their deformed Schism.

His thirteenth weakness is, that in testifying, as abovesaid, he says the
Church is not considered as a society of believers endowed with any inerrable
privilege, but as a number of witnesses, etc. As if they did not first believe
it themselves, ere they could conspire to deliver it to their Children for
true; or as if the same persons may both be Believers in respect of their
Progenitors, and Witnesses in respect of their posterity. No wiser is his
assertion that nothing is here contested from the Authority of their judgments.
For if he means, the points which they contest are not founded on their
judgments, it is most certainly true; since (speaking of points of Faith) they
are truths revealed by God, not productions of men's heads. But if he means,
their judgments went not along with their contestations, but while they
testified to have received them from their Ancestors, they spoke contrary to
their judgment; then they all conspired to tell a ly to their posterity in
things of Faith, which is impossible.

The fourteenth Paragraph runs partly upon the same affected mistake of
Infallibility. I asked him (to put in him some apprehension that a company of
men on earth might be Infallible, which he denied) if all the Protestants could
be fallible in witnessing whether twenty years ago there were Protestant
Bishops or no. First he will neither say, I, nor no to the point; only he
says, ( Answ. p. 37.) he believes not they can probably mistake in that thing;
Next he tells us this is no proof that they are any way infallible in all
matters of fact, without all possible mixture of error. Is it possible Mr. H.
should think his Reader so silly, as to take such ridiculous tergiversations
for a sufficient Answer? My question was whether they could err, and conspire
to tell an open ly in a thing visible as the Sun at noonday? and Dr. H. first
shuffles at that, and then counterfeits that I pretend them Infallible in all
matters of Fact whatsoever; as in ghessing what past in the late Kings privy
Council while he was living, or whether Bevis of Hampton fought with a Dragon
or no.

Dear Reader, I must address a line or two to thee, and desire thee if thou
be Dr. H's Friend, to ask him whether it be the Catholics tenet, that the
Church is infallible in matters of Faith only, or in all things indefinitely;
as in knowing the height and number of the Stars, what weather it shall be
every day next year, etc. if he cannot show the latter to be the tenet of our
Church, then a^k him from S. W. whether he has either shame or conscience in
him to evade answering the point by imposing upon our Church a counterfeit
tenet, and which himself knows to be such, and then making it the but of his
ayre-beating impugnation, repeating it so often (though once were enough to
move a blush, had not custom taken away sense) that I am confident any candid
Reader will nauseate and be offended at so odious a piece of fundamental
insincerity. His other weaknesses mingled with this, especially his skipping
aside from the question to the fallibility of private men, shuffling about for
excuses, in stead of answering, I or no, with other sleights already laid
open, make up a mess of most excellent nonsense, called, in another phrase,
Dr. H's third Section.

Sect. 11.
What miserable work Dr. H. makes with that plain proposition: A Church that is
fallible, and knows not whether it lies or no in any proposition, cannot have
Power to bind any to believe her.
MY fourth Section touched at three points, ( Schism Disarmed p. 21.) the
ground of Unity in a Church, the groundlesness of Schism, and of Mr. H's manner
of arguing to clear himself of the latter: inserting also some part of the
Catholic Gentleman's letter, which tended to those purposes. The first I
showed to consist in the Infallibility of that Authority, which justly pretends
to oblige the assent of others to her proposals. Hence follows the second, that
no Schismatical Congregation, that acknowledges it self fallible, can with any
face pretend to impose an obligation of belief; nor yet excuse it self for
breaking from acknowledged Antiquity or possession, upon fallible, that is,
probable Grounds. The third was, that since the Schism we object to the
Protestants is charged by us to be such as involves heresy, and by consequence
the renouncing our Rule of Faith, it was the weakest piece of reason that ever
was reasoned by a Doctor of Divinity, to make the sum and ground of all his
Answer, the denying the said Rule of Faith, (our Church's Infallibility) which
was in effect to confess the Fact, and to prove he is no Schismatic, because
he is an Heretic and Schismatic both.

For answer to these three points he referres me to his Reply cap. 2 Sect. 3.
In return to which, as far as has not already been answered, I shall give
these satisfactory reflections upon the main points; not attending him in each
Paragraph, in many of which the insipid Crambe of his own self sayings is
boiled over and over. But first he sends three or four whifflers upon the stage
to trifle it, ere the tragedy of Faith and it is certainty begins.

His first trifle is, that the Catholic Gentleman calls that Mr. Knot's
concession, which is his Conclusion from that Concession. A sore quarrel! as if
he who granted the premises, and made the inference himself, must not also
grant the Conclusion; if so, then his Conclusion is his Concession as well as
the premises.

His second trifle is, that Reply p. 14. he pretends, all that was by him taken
notice of, was the consequence between the Premises and that Conclusion, which
naturally inferred a third thing, that it was unlawful to forsake the Communion
of any fallible Church; and the Catholic Gentleman's impugning his admiration
at it, and confirming this main point of the Controversy, he calls a
digression; whereas it is a pure shuffling in him to avoid this Question, which
is fundamental, and solely important to this present Controversy, concerning
the lawfulness or unlawfulness of separating from the true Church, upon
pretense of being bound by her to equivocate or ly.

His third trifle is, that he tells us ( Repl. p. 14.) he may certainly affirm
how this Thesis of ours [ A Church that is fallible and knows not whether it
lies or no in any proposition, cannot have power to bind any to believe what
she says,] is no infallible truth nor deduced from any infallible principle;
whereas it is as evident a principle as any in nature, that no man can in
reason oblige another to hold what himself knows not: as also that he cannot be
said truly to know that, in which he knows and confesses he may be mistaken. To
this the Shuffler says nothing.

His fourth trifle is, when we speak of obligation of belief, to slip the
point, and talk of obligation to act or obey; telling us wisely here, that A
Prince can command obedience though he be not infallible. Is it possible Mr. H.
must be continually obliged by his cause to such affected insincerity, as still
to counterfeit the mistake of the question? The same he repeats again p. 16.
and says the Governors thus oblige inferiors to obedience by force of the
Apostles (...); whereas the question is, whether the Apostles, who held that
without Faith (that is, without truth) it is impossible to please God, ever
commanded us to believe that Congregation, which (being fallible) might for any
thing it or we know lead us into damnable errors. I know that a probability of
the thing in it self can oblige a man to act; as a sudden Alarm of the enemies
probable approach ought in prudence to rouse a General to provide for
resistance; but nothing except evidence can move to assent, nor can any pretend
lawfully and rationally to oblige to it, but they who have Evidence that they
cannot be mistaken in what they would bind others to believe. See the judicious
and learned Preface to Rusworth's Dialogues, where this point is largely
handled and fully cleared.

These trifles having thus played their parts and whiffled a while, out step
the main bangers, and lay about them at Faith, it is certainty, Church, and all
whatsoever can make us rationally Christians.

First, the former Thesis, that a Church which is fallible, and knows not
whether it lies or no in any proposition, cannot have power to bind any to
believe what it says, which stood firm enough in it is own plain terms, is by
Mr H's art made straddle four several ways, so to dispose it to a downfall; and
drawn and quartered with unheard of tortures, because it will not confess a
falsehood, of which it was not conscious. The four distracted limbs of it,
which are to be anatomized particularly, are here put down by Mr. H. (p. 15.)
1. What is meant by [can ly.] 2. By knowing or not knowing whether it lie or
no. 3 By Power to bind. 4. By Belief. An ordinary Reader that meant honestly
would think these words very easy: but that is their fault to be too easy; they
must be blunder'd and made harder, otherwise the Reader would find no
difficulty to assent to them.

But is not this merciless rigor? The first and second ought not to have been
torn from one another, being the same; for if the Church can lie hic and nunc
in such a proposition attested by her, and has no infallible certainty she
does not, then it follows that she does lie for any thing she knows.

The same cruelty is shown in dismembring and taking asunder that one notion of
[ power of binding to belief] which was the whole import of the controversy and
in treating the notion of power to bind, apart from that other of Belief: By
this shameful and unconscionable craft, avoiding the whole question, and
applying the words, power to bind (which now had got loose of belief) to
obligation to render exterior obedience p. 16.

In his paraphrase upon the words [ can lie] he has one passage worth all his
Friends especial attention; which is, that after he had enumerated all the
means he could imagine to secure a Church from error, he confesses, ( Rep. p.
15. and 16.) that that Church is yet fallible, may affirm and teach false, Id
est (says he) it is naturally possible it may, but it is not strongly probable
it will. Then it seems after all this ado (for any thing he has said) it is
still indifferently and equally probable that it does err, though not strongly
probable it will; that is, the Faith of that Church, and all that adhere to it,
hang in equal scales whether it be true or no: and this solid piece of sense is
produced by Dr. H. in a discourse about a Church's power to bind to belief.
Take notice, Reader, how shufflingly the Doctor behaves himself in saying, it
is naturally possible that Church may err, providing himself an evasion
beforehand in the word ( naturally) against any encounter. This man has
forsworn ever being positive with his Reader: Ask him whether supernaturally
(or by means of supernatural assistance) it be or be not impossible she should
err; if not, what meant the word naturally, since he knows we hold, the
Church is supernaturally infallible? if it be, to what end, after reckoning up
also there supernatural means of confirming her against erring, did he tell us
in the close with an Id est, that she is naturally fallible?

As for the Church's knowledge whether it err or no, he says, ( Rep. p. 16.)
it may signify no more than a full persuasion and belief, cui non subest
dubium, where in they neither doubt, nor apprehend reason of doubting, that
what they define is truth; though for knowledge properly so called, or
assurance, cui non potest subesse falsum, it may not have attained, or pretend
to have attained to it. Where first, to omit his declining a positive answer,
whether the Church be Infallible or no, with may not have attained, etc. it is
the most perfect piece of perniciousness that ever was crowded into so narrow a
room, destroying at once all Faith, and Ground of Faith, and making the Church
no certainer of her Faith than Jews, Turks, and Heathens of theirs* For if the
Church's knowledge whether she erreor no means that she has only a full
persuasion, cui non subest dubium; Turks, Heathens and Jews have that, are
fully persuaded and have no doubt* but their Faith is true, and so Mr. H. has
brought Christianity to a fair pass, by his Rule of Faith. Again, passion and
vice can breed in men a full persuasion that an error is true, and such a
persuasion as shall take away actual doubt; nay the more passion a man is in,
the less still he doubts. Is this a congruous explication of a Church's
knowledge, which leaves it indifferent whether she be rationally and
virtuously, or passionately and viciously thus fully persuaded?

Lastly, if the Church's knowledge whether she err or no, be only an
assurance cui potest subesse falsum, why may not there subesse dubium; that is,
if it may be false, why may not she doubt of it, or indeed why should not she
be bound to doubt of it? Falsehood in things concerning Eternity is a dangerous
rock, and ought to breed caution, (which goes ever accompanied with doubt)
where the security is not perfect: now how can the knowledge that it may be
otherwise found a secutity that the thing is so; that is, is not otherwise? or
what hinders her from doubting, if she sees she may be wrong? If Mr. H. reply
that the Church was surprised, or had not so much wit as to raise the
difficulty, then indeed she may thank her circumstances, or her doltishness,
not her Grounds, for that her groundless assurance. For otherwise, should she
call her thoughs to account, and ask herself this question, Why do I assent
with a full persuasion to such a thing which I see may be otherwise? she must,
if she understand the nature of a soul and morality, acknowledge it was passion
and vice, not evidence of reason which made her assent; and consequently hold
her self obliged to retract that assent, and leave off to hold any point of
Christian doctrine, nay even that Christ is God, without a perpetual doubt and
fear that the contrary may be true. So perfectly weak and fundamentally
pestilent is this explication of a Churches knowledge by a persuasion, cui non
subest dubium, yet cui potest subesse fals^m; that is, of which the person
doubts not, although the thing in it self may be false. But this keeps perfect
decorum with his former assertion, that it is not strongly (that is, it may be
equally) probable that a Church will err, though she have used all means
imaginable to secure her self from error.

After his false explication of Power to bind already spoken of, which he turns
to an obligation to act and obey exteriourly; he adds, as if the obligation to
Belief were collateral only to our purpose, that there may farther be meant by
those words,) he ought to have said, there must be only meant by them) a
general obligation to believe what is with due grounds of conviction proposed.
But how a Church uncertain of what herself holds can duly propose Grounds able
to convince rationally or that a confessed and known fallibility in the proposer
is sufficient in it self to make such a ground, he shall never show, unless he
can show reason to be nonsense, and nonsense Reason; though he can talk
finely, and shuffle about in general terms.

I am confident the Reader will think, that the former words in that
proposition are very ill handled by Dr. H. but the last word [ Believing] comes
not off so well: Death is too good for it, nothing but annihilation and total
destroying it is essence must be it is merciless doom. His explication of it
comes to this, ( Reply p. 16.) that they who are so wise as to search, must
consent according to the Grounds proposed as most palpable; that is, they must
believe themselves. I ask are they bound or no to believe the Church, when they
have but probability to the contrary? if not, where is their submission of
their judgments, where is their believing the Church? unless they be willing
to submit their private opinions to her Authority, how can they be said to
believe her at all? Is there any easier deference than to for go a probability
upon her contrary affirmation? Or, if he say they may have rigorous and
convincing Evidence against her* that is* if he grant Infallible Certainty in
Faith can be had, then why should Dr. H. take this from the Church, and give it
to a private fellow? As yet therefore we have found Belief, by his explication,
to signify in reality no belief of the Church at all: let us proceed.

He tells us next, that when the person is not competent to search Grounds,
then ( Repl. p. 17.) Belief may signify, a believing so far, as not to
disbelieve. Was ever such an explication heard of? Good Reader, if thou be
Dr. H's Friend, trust nothing but thine own eyes in such an incredible piece of
fledge heresy and Atheism in the shell; let nothing but thine own eyes satisfy
there, that it is possible for one who has the title of Doctor of Divinity to
print and set forth a position so full fraught with absurdities of the
seventeens.

Let us count them by the poll. First, if the measure of that belief to which
the Church can oblige the ruder sort, be only to believe so far as not to
disbelieve, then in reality she can oblige them to believe nothing at all, but
only to remain in an indifferency of Skepticism: for he who doubts of all
things, or halts between two opinions, believes so far as not to disbelieve;
since not holding the contrary to any thing, he positively disbelieves nothing.

Secondly, an Heathen who never heard of Christ, believes so far as not to
disbelieve; for how can he be said to disbelieve a thing of which he never
heard? So that Dr. H's Church can only oblige her Subjects to be as good
believers or Christians, as Heathens are; but to proceed.

Thirdly, to believe so far as not to disbelive, signifies in plain terms to
belive nothing at all; for he puts it not to signify a believing so far as to
believe, but a believing so far as not disbelieve; that is, he exacts no belief
for the point, provided there be no disbelief against it. So that as before, p.
16. he made the knowledge of a Church that she defined truly, to be no more
than a not doubting of it, which can proceed from ignorance as well as
knowledge: so here Belief must pretended capable to bear the sense of
not-believing; provided that the not-believing be not a positive disbelief of
this, or belief of the contrary.

Fourthly, I would gladly know of Mr. H. why the same Authority which has power
to bind one not to disbelieve, may not also oblige to believe: if she can
propose evident and convincing reasons to her Children that she cannot err,
then she may without dispute oblige me to the latter; for such motives are in
their own nature able to convince the understanding, and unless she can propose
such, by what ground can she withhold me from disbelieving, or holding the
contrary? Unless perhaps the Doctor pretend to show, that the probable reasons
for her fallibility and Infallibility be so justly and equally poised in the
Sceptick balance, that none can say whether the pound of rushes in the one
end, or the pound of strawes in the other be the weightier ware, or better
worth three-halfepence.

These explications with their wise appurtenances thus premised, Dr. H. knits
them up in these two propositions, p. 17.

1. A Congregation that is fallible and has no knowledge or assurance (cui non
potest subesse falsum) that it is not deceived in any particular proposition,
may yet have authority to make decisions, and require inferiors so far to
acquiesce to their determinations, as not to disquiet the peace of the Church
with their contrary opinions. ( that is, no to believe at all, but only to
behave themselves quietly.) 2. But for any absolute Infallible belief or
consent, That, no Church which is not it self absolutely infallible, and which
does not infallibly know that it is infallible, has power to require of any.

Where the first proposition is certainly false, if the subject be certain,
that that is false which his fallible Church proposes to him, and that it is a
point which concerns salvation not to err in: and senseless, if (as Dr. H.
seems to suppose it may be (the inferiors assent is no way required; for, how
can a speculative point be decided authoritatively, if the inferior be no way
bound to assent, but to acquiesce only?

The second proposition is the granting that very point, against which he
pretended to make head, to the resolution also of which his former discourse
has not in the least sort contributed. So perfectly needless and to no
imaginable purpose, but only to shuffle words together on any fashion, is his
elaborate nonsense.

Note Reader, that in his first proposition he puts not Belief at all, (which
yet is the only matter in question) but in the latter only; nor dares he
trust it abroad there, but well guarded with absolute and Infallible: But I
fear not his big words. Let him know, our tenet is, that our Church has power
to oblige, not to an hovering conditional belief, but to an absolute and
infallible one: nor do we fear to affirm, that the Faithful in the Catholic
Church have infallible certainty of their Faith, though they cannot explicate
it, or give a Logical account of their own thoughts.

It were not amiss here to let the Reader see upon this occasion, what Dr. H's
manner of answering is: of which his whole book is full; but one example once
put, will make the Reader easily find it is fellows. The question is, whether
obligation to belief can be without Infallibility: He quibbles upon each word,
as if he would do strange things against it, and makes up, by his explications,
this worthy proposition; that a Church, which it is (p. 16. l. 1.) not strongly
probable that it will err, and (p. 16. l. 8) properly speaking knows not
whether it err or no, may (p. 16. l. 16.) yet oblige men to obedience, and
(them that cannot search) to believe (not positively and indeed, as the Reader
must conceive) but only so far as not to disbelieve; that is, that her self
knowing nothing properly or positively, can by consequence oblige none to
believe any thing properly and positively, but to obey only. Is not this a
fine upshot of such an elaborate answer? And when he has done this, then he
adds another proposition, Parag 22. which confesses all that he stumbled at
before, and which only was in question. Let us put a parallel to his manner of
discourse. Suppose one should affirm, that a whole Apple is bigger than a half;
and maintain it, because Totum est majus part, A whole is greater then a part;
Dr. H's manner of answering would work upon it in this sort. First, the word [
whole] may signify a whole Mole hill, or a whole Mountain, a whole web of
cloth, or a whole thread. Next, the word majus, or greater, may signify greater
in longitude, in latitudine, or in profundity. Lastly, the word pars, may
signify part of a Mole hill part of a Mountain, part of a web, etc. This done,
he would join these together, which are not the things in question, (as he did
in the former of his two proposition) and tell us, that speaking of a Molehill
and a Mountain, it is certain, that part of a Mountain may not be greater than a
whole Molehill, and so likewise part of the web of cloth to wit, a whole
thread, may not be greater in longitude than the whole web. Then coming to the
question, add a parallel to his second proposition, and conclude in these
words; But as for an Apple and it is part, speaking of the quantity belonging to
a body, that is profundity or bulk, it is granted that the whole Apple is
greater than the half one: which might as well have been granted at first, and
have excused all this trifling.

Sect. 12.
What the Power of binding to Belief consists in, and how rationally our
Church, how irrationally the Protestants pretend to such a Power: together with
a Godly and edifying Sermon of Mr. H's according to his Doctrine when he
disputes against us.
IT were not amiss here, to clear this important point the better, to lay open
in brief what is this Power in the Church to bind her Sons to belief, and in
what it consists. For I doubt not but Mr. H. wonders, and many judicious
Protestant Readers may perhaps remain sollicitous to imagine, how and in what
manner there can be any power to force and command the Soul to an interior
belief or assent. But I hope this short hint will make them see that this power
is founded upon free and rational Grounds, not a tyrannical bare command of
any authority whatsoever. It is confessed then, that as a body cannot be moved
locally, but after a corporeal and quantitative manner, as is it is nature; so
neither can a soul, which is of it is nature rational, be moved to assent, but
by resons and motives, (whether true or false) and were it moved otherwise, it
were not moved as a thing of such a nature, that is, it would not be a rational
soul. Now since pure Reason consists in inferring a connection of two things or
notions, because of their joint connection with a third in the premises, and
this also an immediate one (for a connection which is not immediate is in
reality none at all, at least to the Understanding, since in that case it sees
it not) it follows, that the Soul is never moved out of pure Reason to any
assent, but by such an immediate connection seen, that is, by Evidence, and
consequently all assents which have not this original, spring from impurity of
passion, that is, from vice Wherefore since it is impossible, God, who is
Essential Sanctity, should command a vice, it follows, that as on the one side
either he has left no power to oblige to assent, or if he have, it must be
founded in Evidence, so on the other, if there be any authority on earth which
can evidence her Certainty of what she says, that Authority has power to
oblige others in virtue of the said Evidence to assent to what she shall
affirm, that is, to oblige them to belief: for this is no harder a treaty, than
to bind them to that to which their own nature had bound them beforehand, that
is, to assent upon Evidence.

To apply this then to the point in hand. The Church obliges her Children to
rest and continue in her belief, by the same motive by which she could oblige
them when they were out of her, to assent to her doctrine, so far as concerns
it is having been taught by Christ and his Apostles. This motive is the proposal
of her own Authority, or of millions and millions of Fathers in the Catholic
Church, all conspiring to witness that those points of doctrine (things visible
and most concerning) were received from their Ancestors, as from their, and so
ascending upwards, as from Christ. The virtue by which this Authority or
incomparable multitude of witnesses claims to be a motive, and to have power to
convince the Understanding and so oblige to assent to their word, that is, to
believe, is the Evidence of the treble-twisted Impossibility, that this
Authority either would conspire in any age to attest so notorious an untruth,
and so pernicious to their own, and their Children's eternal bliss; or, that
they could either err, or mistake in things so visible, or even contrive a
conspiracy to embrace any one error, considering the several Countries in
which they lived dispers't, and consequently their several natures,
obligations, inclinations, interest, and other manifoldly-varying
circumstances; or, lastly, if they would and could, (that is, did) attest, and
so introduce an error, that it should not be most visible and palpable in most
undeniable and manifest circumstances to the whole world, being a change of
things openly-evident in manifest and universal practice before, and in a
matter of highest concernment. These impossibilities of erring in delivering
any point of Faith, render that Congregation evidently infallible which sticks
close to this Rule, of delivering only what she received as thus attested: The
Evidence of her Infallibility obliges a rational nature to assent upon such an
Authority, that is, to believe; and consequently her Power to oblige Belief is
as firm as this Truth, that Evidence obliges the Understanding to assent, which
is reduced into this first principle, that Idem est idem sibi ipsi, or that
Reason is Reason; since the act of Reason adhering to truth, is nothing else
but an assent sprung from Evidence.

From this short discourse follows first, that our Churches Binding her
children to belief is evidently natural, just, charitable, rational and
necessary; since she obliges them upon no other Ground than that which in it is
own force had pre-obliged their nature to assent, to wit, Evidence.

Secondly, that no man can revolt from the Faith of such an Authority to any
other, but through the highest degree of vice and passion; since they would be
found in this case to assent to another, not only without Evidence, but
against it.

Thirdly, that therefore the Governors of the Church who proceed according to
this power, may justly punish and excommunicate those who recede from her
Belief founded in her Authority thus evidenced; since this recession must
spring from vice, or a disordered affection in the will; and vice all the world
allows may be punished.

Fourthly, that no tyranny can possibly be imputed to our Church, as long as
she proceeds upon such Grounds; since she only governs men according to their
nature or Reason.

Fifthly, that they who adhere to any other fallible Congregation upon only
probable, that is, inevident Grounds, against her Authority thus evidenced,
being therefore (as has been shown) in the highest degree vicious and
passionate, if they prove obstinate in it, ought upon necessity to be
Excommunicated, cast out of the Church, and separated from the Congregation of
the Faithful. Reason showing plainly, if no good can be done for their
obstinate Souls, order is to be taken that they do no hurt to the Souls of
others.

Sixthly, that all who forsake this infallible attestation of the Church they
were in, called Oral Tradition, (as did the Protestants in all points wherein
they differ from us) deserve this Excommunication; since they left a
pre-acknowledged Evidence, and began to dogmatize upon acknowledged
probabilities only; that is, left proceeding to assent in that manner which
was acknowledgedly rational, connatural and virtuous, and beginning to proceed
in such a manner as is necessarily irrational unnatural, and vicious.

Seventhly, it follows, that a Congregation which is fallible cannot, without
the greatest impudence in the world, pretend to oblige rational Souls to assent
upon her Authority; since, if she sees she may be in the wrong hic and nunc in
such a point, she can have no Evidence that she is not actually deceived in it,
and so wanting Evidence to make good her Authority, she wants whatsoever can
oblige a rational Soul to assent upon her Authority.

Eighthly, it follows hence, that not only the Independents, Presbyterians,
etc. may justly refuse to hear the Protestant Church, which acknowledges her
self fallible, but that they sin if they should hear her; since in that case
they would be found to assent to an Authority, without evidence of the veracity
of that Authority.

Ninthly, it follows, that the Protestant Church acknowledging her self
fallible (and the like may be said of all fallible Congregations) cannot even
oblige the Independents, Presbyterians, etc to behave themselves quietly within
their Church, and submit to their Government. For in case that fallible
Congregation oblige her Children to a subscription or declaration of their
assent to her doctrine, it were a vice either to assent without Evidence of
authority, which is wanting to a fallible Church; or, subscribe without a real
inward assent, as the Doctor himself confesses: they may then resist such a
command of that Church, and express themselves contrary and disobedient.

Nay more, if that Congregation be fallible, it may possibly be in a damnable
error, and some one or more, may happen to see evidently that it is in such an
error; and many of ordinary capacity rationally doubt what the others see: now
in that case, why may not the former make account it is their obligation to
oppose that Church, and let men see their soul-endangering error, may maintain
a party against her, and defy her as one who would bring Souls to Hell by her
doctrine? As also, why may not the latter (rather than hazard the accepting a
damnable error) adhere to this company of Revolters, at least stand neutral
between the Church and them?

Again, since it has been shown they may renounce the Faith of a fallible
Church, why may they not renounce her Government? since her Faith must needs be
as sacred as her Government which depends on Faith, and is subordinate to it;
Government being chiefly to maintain Faith, and such actions as proceed from
Faith. Neither is it lawful yet to revolt against temporal Magistrates upon
the score of their fallibility, in case they oblige their Subjects only to act
or obey according to the civil State, because that is a Government grounded
only upon natural reason, instituted for natural ends, and plainly evident it
must be obeyed; unavoydable inconveniences following upon disobedience, which
force us to confess, there is no safety for our lives or estates, without this
Obedience.

Tenthly, it follows, that Dr. H's denying any company of men on earth to be
Infallible, and by consequence, to have power to bind to belief, is most
exquisitely pernicious, destroying at once all belief, and leaving no
obligation in the world, nay making it a sin to believe any Article of the
Christian Faith. For since neither Scripture nor the doctrine of the Primitive
Church (acknowledged by Dr. H. to have been built upon an Infallible Tradition)
can be evidenced to us, but by some Authority faithfully conveying it down ever
since that time; if this Authority cannot be evidenced to be infallible, no man
is bound in reason to assent or believe either Scripture to be God's word, or
the Doctrine to be Christ's, upon her Authority; since there wants Evidence of
that Authority's veracity, which can only oblige to assent: nay more, he must
needs sin in precipitating his assent without Evidence to ground it on.

Eleventhly, Dr. H. ( Answ. p. 36.) in another place grants that this universal
attestation (in which we found the Church's Infallibility and all these
deductions) makes one as certain of a thing, as if he had seen it with his own
eyes; and again confesses himself Infallibly certain of what he has seen with
his own eyes: which is as much as we either say or desire. Wherefore, the good
Doctor does a^ once both confirm us, and contradict himself.

Lastly, it follows, that it is the height of frivolousness, for D. H. even to
pretend excuse from obligation to believe our Church, and assent to the
doctrine of his own, without most undeniable and rigorous Evidence both for the
errableness of ours, and the inerrableness of the Protestants Church.

By these brief deductions from that one evident Ground of the infallibility of
Universal Attestation, the prudent Reader will plainly see, how consequently
the Catholic Church proceeds to the grounds of Nature and Reason, and how
inconsequently to both the Protestant Churches must necessarily go, when they
would oblige either to Government, or Faith: Since Certainty and Evidence once
renounced, there remains nothing to move the Understanding to assent
rationally; nor any thing to move it at all but passion, disordered affections,
fear, or Interest.

Many paradoxes seem very plausible and pretty, while they are dressed up in
involving terms, which hide their deformity; yet brought to Grounds and to
Practice, show manifestly their shame. The former (to wit Grounds) confute them
by showing them contradictory; the latter (that is, Practice) confounds them by
showing them absurd. How implicatory Mr. H's doctrine of no power to bind to
belief is, and how inconsistent with Christian Faith, has already been
manifested by bringing it to Grounds; how absurd it is, will quickly be
discerned by reducing it into practice. Let us imagine then that the Bells chime
merrily to morning prayer, and that the whole town rings with the fame and
noise that Dr. H. reputed the most learned of all the Protestant party (who
quite confuted the Pope, and cut off the neck of Rome at one blow, in a book of
Schism, and has lately, with a great deal of Greek, lopt off and seared the
Hydra-head from ever growing more, in his Answer to Schism Disarmed) would give
them a gallant Sermon Whereupon, a great confluence of people coming together
to receive edification, after a dirge sung in Hopkins rhyme very pitifully in
memory of the deceased Book of Common Prayer, up steps Dr. H. repeats his Text,
and falls to his Harangue: In which let us imagine that he exhorts them to
renounce all the affections they have to all that is dear to them in this
world, and place them upon a future state of eternal bliss, promised by Christ
to all that serve him; in particular, let us imagine, he earnestly exhorts them
with the Apostle, to stand fast in the Faith, and to hold even an Angel from
Heaven accursed, if he taught the contrary; nay telling them they ought to lose
theirs and their Childrens whole estates, and lay down a thousand lives, rather
than for-goe their Faith. This done, let us suppose him to draw toward a
period, and conclude (according to his doctrine, when he disputes against us)
in this manner: To all, this, dearly beloved, I exhort you earnestly in the
Lord; yet notwithstanding, that I may speak heartily and ingenuously, and tell
you the plain literal truth of our tenet, neither I, nor the Church of
England, whose judgment I follow, are infallibly certain of this doctrine which
I bid you thus believe and adhere to. Our ( p. 15. l. 37. 38.) Church, I
confess, is fallible, it may affirm and teach false, both in Christ's doctrine,
and also in ( p. 23. l. 38 etc. etc. p. 24. l. 3.) saying which is true
Scripture, and which the true sense of it; and consequently, I may perhaps have
told you a fine tale all this while, with never a word of truth in it: but
comfort your selves, beloved, for though it may be equally and indifferently
probable it erres, yet it is not strongly probable that it will ( p. 16. l. 1.)
Wherefore, dearly beloved Brethren, have a full persuasion I bese^ch you (as (
p 16 l. 6. 7.) our Church has) that what she defines is the truth, when she
defines against the Socinians that Christ is God; although, ( p. 16. l. 8.)
properly speaking, she has no certainty that he is so. The Governors of our
Church may indeed lead you into damnable errors, being not infallible in
Faith, yet you must obey them ( p. 16. l. 16.) by force of the Apostl's (...);
( here the good-women are all-to-bewonder'd, and bless themselves monstrously
at the learned sound of the two Greek words) at least ( p. 17. l. 3.) believe
them so far as not to disbelieve them. For mistake me not, beloved, I mean no
more than thus, when I bid you stand fast in the Faith; hang in suspense, dear
brethren, hang in a pious suspense, and believe it no improbable opinion that
Christ is God, and that there is such a felicity as heaven: at least
(whatsoever you think in your heart) yet ( p. 17. l. 25.) quietly acquiesce to
the determinations of our Mother the Church of England, so far as not disquiet
the peace of our Sion: although you should perhaps see that this Church did
Idolatrously err in making a man a God, and so give God's honor to a
Creature, yet I beseech you, good brethren, acquiesce very quietly and
peaceably; and although you could evidence that she was in damnable errors,
and that she carried Souls quietly and peaceably to Hell, for want of some to
resist and oppose her, yet let them go to Hell by millions for want of true
Faith; still enjoy you quietly your opinion, without opposing the Church,
though th^s pernicious.

Were not this a wise and edifying Sermon? and enough to make his Auditors
pluck him out of the Pulpit, if they believed him not; or, if they believed
him, to return home Scepticks or Atheists? Yet how perfectly, chiefly in
express terms, partly in necessary Consequences, it is his, his own words have
already manifest^d: for the famous Explications lately spoken of, he applies
here to his Church, parag. 23. and his Rule of Faith must be either certain,
and so make all points of Faith certain and infallible truths; or if it be
uncertain, nothing that is built upon it can be certainer than it self, and by
consequence, Christ's Godhead must be uncertain also, and so there can be no
power or motive to oblige men to believe it more than the rest.

Sect. 13.
The four main Advantages of the Catholic Church wilfully misrepresented. The
Disproportion of Dr. H's parallelling the Certainty of the Protestant's Faith
to that of K H. the eighth's being King of England.
THe Cath. Gentl. mentioned, on the by, four advantages our Church had over any
other, viz. Antiquity, Possession, Persuasion of Infallibility, and Pledges
which Christ left to his Church for motives of Union Speaking of the last of
these, Dr. H. tells us here, ( Repl. p. 19.) it is in vain to speak of motives
to return to our. Communion, to them who have not voluntarily separated, and
cannot be admitted to union but upon conditions, which, without dissembling and
lying, they cannot undergo. As for the latter part of this excuse, truly, if
motives of union be vain things to be proposed to them, to bring them to Union,
I must confess I know not what will be likely to do it. They pretend to think
our doctrine erroneous, our Church fallible, to which therefore they deem it
dissimulation and lying to subscribe: what remains then to inform them right,
but to propose reasons and motives that that doctrine was true, that Church
infallible; and that therefore they might lawfully subscribe with a secure
conscience? But Dr. H. will not hear of motives or reasons for Union, but
says, it is in vain to speak of them: that is, he professes to renounce his
Reason, rather than forgoethe obstinacy of his Schismatical humor: yet he
says here, that this evasion is necessarily the concluding this Controversy:
But why a probability to the contrary should be sufficient to oblige his reason
to that his persuasion or assurance, so as there may not subesse dubium against
our rule of Faith, acknowledged infallible ( Answ. p. 36.) at unawares by
himself, that he will never be either able or willing to show. And so for the
former pretense, to wit that they separated not voluntarily, it has already
been shown ( Schism Disarmed, p. 279.) to be a most shameless untruth; that, by
their own occasion, they had voluntarily renounced our Government, Rule of
Faith and doctrines; and that there wanted only the punishment for their
former voluntary faults, to wit, the Church's Excommunication, warning the
faithful to avoid their company. So that Dr. H's plea is no other, than as if a
Rebel should renounce both the Government and Laws of the Land and, being
out-lawed and cut off from the Communion of the good Subjects for these faults,
should lay all the blame on the Governors and Judges, saying, no sedition nor
division was made in the Commonwealth, till they outlawed him and his
adherents, and warned the good Subjects to live apart from them.

As for those pledges left by Christ to his Church for motives of union, which
the Cath. Gent. made one of our advantages, they are these: The submitting to
the Government of one Head and Pastor; the agreeing in one Rule of Faith, to
which all our private opinions and debates give place as to an infallible Law,
to decide al quarrels about Faith; the multitudes of visible exterior
practices, both in several Sacraments, and also divine Service performed with
such magnificence of Ceremonies, lastly and most especially, the coadunation of
all the members of the Church in eating that heavenly food, believed by us to
be the true and real Body of our Blessed Lord and Savior. All these and some
others are so many ties and tokens, which make the Sons of the Catholic Church
take one another for Fellows and Brothers, that is, they are unto them so many
motives of Union: In all which he is blind, who sees not that our Church has a
most visible advantage over all other. Yet Dr. H. assures us that it is in vain
to speak of those to him; and why? because his passion and disordered
affections or Interest have so thoroughly persuaded him, both without and
against Evidence, and two or three odd testimonies, with an Id est in the end
of them, without ever considering the impossibility that Universal Attestation
should err, have bred a kind of assurance in him, cui non subest dubium (which
is all he requires for his own or his Church's certainty of Faith, Rep. p.
16.) that he professes himself incapable to hear motives and reasons, and that
it is in vain to speak of them to him.

What was meant by the two Advantages, of Antiquity and Possession, was
sufficiently explicated by the Cath. Gentl. in these words; such Antiquity or
Possession, without dispute or contraction from the Adversary, as no King can
show for his Crown, and much less any person or persons for any other thing.
Now what more manifest, than that we enjoy this acknowledgment of our
Adversaries, to have that this Antiquity and Possession for many ages; and
that this acknowledgment is a particular advantage to us, since the Protestants
have none such from our party, but were ever charged by us of novelty, and a
late upstart original, and that in this very point in debate between us? This
being plainly there expressed by the Catholic Gentleman to be his meaning, Dr.
H. first ( p. 20.) shuffles off to Fraternal Communion: next, of a Divine
turned Lawyer, he cites as an affirmation of the Doctors, presumi malam fidem
ex antiquiori Adversarij possessione; which applied means thus much, that, they
being more anciently in possession, it is to be presumed that we usurped: So
that, till he evidence that they were more anciently in possession, his law
availes him nothing. In the mean time, let him consider our two advantage; to
wit, that we had a Possession acknowledged before this present possession of
theirs; whereas their pretended possession before ours is in question and
controvertible: for, Mr. H. will not say, that he knows the contrary better
than his Church does her Faith, which, at best, he confessed before had but
probability of her not erring: now then, that which is a probability only, is
in it is own nature liable to dispute, and controvertible; since it may perhaps
be shown false to morrow. Their possession then, pretended to have been before
ours, is not only disacknowledg'd by us, but also in it is own nature subject
to dispute: ours before theirs, acknowledged, and not capable of dispute. The
other advantage we have is, that the pretended usurpation of the Pope, being of
a Supremacy over the whole Church and all the Bishops in it, must needs in all
reason be most visible to the eyes of the whole world: now, since it is
certain, they could never evidence it thus visible, (as appears by their
diversities of opinions about it is introduction, to be seen in the Catalogue of
Protestancy) that is, they know not when it came in; consequently, this
consideration affords a certain prejudice against their former possession, and
the pretense of the Pope's Usurpation. For certainly, that Authority which
could not be usurped but most visibly, and yet the usurpation is not most
visible, was not usurped at all, but was ever. Wherefore our possession and
Authority is justly presumable to have been continued ever since Christ's time;
since the beginning of our Faith could never be clearly manifested, as many
Protestant Authors beyond exception confess, and only some of them, driven to
that desperate task by our arguments, blindly pretend the contrary: whereas
their bearing sway in this corner of the world is of confessed and known
original, which differences us from them by a most manifest advantage.

The persuasion of Infallibility (our fourth advantage ( p. 21.) there
mentioned) must necessarily be mistaken and wrong apprehended as well as it is
fellows: that is now grown ordinary with Mr. H. and so we must not wonder at it
I have already shown, that this persuasion is the only means to oblige the
Subjects of any Church to Unity of Belief; nay, that there can be no
rational^ty to any belief at all, where this persuasion of the Church's
Infallibility is not found: which being found in no Congregation but that of
the Catholic Church, she has consequently an infinite advantage above all
others in the notion ad nature of a Church, which is to be a conserver of
Faith; or rather indeed, it follows hence most evidently, that none other can
have the true nature of a Church but her self. Now Dr. H. in stead of telling
us I, or no, whether this Persuasion be of such a force as is pretended, in
order to the Unity of the Faithful, flies off and says, this can have no
influence upon them; though it be the only thing which gives fundamentally
Being to a Church, as has been shown: telling us moreover, for our further
certainty, that he is sure the Protestants are not so persuaded, nor ever had
co^vincing Grounds represented to persuade them of it; referring me to a book
of his own, called The View of Infallibility. In answer, I refer him to
Rushworth's Dialogues, and assure him that, if he be not blinded with prejudice
or interest, he may see it there shown as perfectly as that two and three are
five: And as for his Book, I find no such worthy stuff in these, as can invite
me to think an hour well spent in perusing that Brother of theirs.

After this, going about to vindicate the uncertainty on the Protestant's side,
he runs ( p. 21. 22.) again to their full or verily-persuasion; but never tells
us whether this full persuasion of theirs sprung from the light of pure Reason,
that is, Evidence; or from passion, interest and ignorance; adding a parallel,
of believing that King Henry the eighth was King of this Nation: the reasons
whereof notwithstanding he accounts fallible, because the testimonies of mere
men. Whereas I account it most evident and demonstrable; and promise him to
have acquitted himself better than ever Protestant did yet, if he can show me
the thousandth part of this Certainty, (which he puts here for a parallel of
the Protestant's Uncertainty,) for any point in which they differ from us, that
is, for any point which they have not received as handed down by Tradition or
Attestation of Fore fathers. For, never let him expect to make a rational man
believe, that scruing or misunderstanding an odd line or two, gleaned for the
nonce out of Scripture or and old Author, can by any multiplication arrive to
the clearness of the former ample, undeniable, uncontrollable Verdict of
witnesses, that King H. the eighth vas King of this Nation: much less to that
of our Rule of Faith, being an attestion of things infinitely more importing,
which a multitude incomparably more numerous had seen visible in practice;
besides other assistant motives implanted by the Apostles (the Holy Ghost
especially cooperating) in the hearts of the first faithful, and still
continued to this day; which strengthen man's nature to the impossibility of
erring in such an Attestation. This vast advantage has our Rule of Faith over
this instance of K. H's reign here: yet I doubt not to affirm, that the
testification of the latter renders it demonstrable; which I thus show.

This undoubted and never yet-denyed persuasion, that K. H. the eighth reigned
here, imprinted in the hearts of all in England, not only attested by all
Fathers in that Nation, but even by innumerable multitudes in other Countries,
(his foul acts making him famous,) this persuasion, I say, is an Effect, and
consequently sprung from some Cause: but no Cause can be imaginable in reason
able either to breed this strong persuasion in such a world of knowing persons,
nor bribe so many attesters to a conspiracy of witnessing such a visible thing,
except the Being of King H. and of his Reign: therefore he was, or did reign
here; otherwise, this persuasion and attestation had been effects without
causes, or (which is all one) without proportionable causes; which being
evidently impossible, it is also evident and demonstrable that he did rule in
England. Now, whoever should go about to answer the major by putting some
Cause as possible to be in it self proportionable, and so able to produce this
strange Effect, besides the Existence of K. H. the eighth; the very position
would disgrace it self and the Author, when the proportions of it is efficacity
came to be scanned and applied to the Universal and strange Effect spoken of.

Again, should a man consider this ample and uncontrolled attestation of it,
and all the other motives which infer it; as King H's Wives, Alliances abroad,
Wars, Acts of Parliaments, Ambassadors in all parts, Descent, Apostatizing,
together with the infinite multitude of Conveyances, Bonds, Judgments,
Foundations, and innumerable such other things relating to such and such a year
of his Reign; and, after all these fully considered, should notwithstanding
seriously express his doubt, that he could not believe there was ever any such
man: would not all that heard him, justly think him a mad man? If so, then
surely he must have renounced no less than rigorous Evidence and Demonstration,
(the only perfect light of Reason) who can deserve justly such a censure. It
was therefore rigorously evident and demonstrable, that King H. the eighth was.

Thirdly, if it be not evident and demonstrable, the contrary may possibly be
such, (for one side must needs be true and so, all truths being connected, in
it'ts own nature demonstrable:) but it is evidently impossible the contrary
should be demonstrable, or the motives for it showed not-concluding; therefore
they concluded demonstrably. The minor is proved clearly: for, first, it is not
against any natural Science, and consequently not possibly disprovable by
natural reason; nor yet by any Authority; for, in our case, there is an
Attestation for it, uncontrolled by any, either orally or by writing: Wherefore
there is left no means possible to go about to confute it, or evidence the
contrary; it self therefore is most perfectly and most strongly evident and
demonstrable, nay impossible to be deemed or pretended to be shown otherwise.
Bring not then, Mr. H. this infallibly-and demonstrably-grounded instance, for
a parallel of your vertible and Windmill uncertainty; till you can show you
can produce the million'th part of that Evidence and certainty: but rather be
ashamed to pretend to make head against our Rule of Faith, (which is of an
attesting Authority incomparably more numerous, more clear, and more strongly
supported by all kind of imaginable assisting circumstances, than was that now
explicated) with obscure or misinterpreted scraps of dead Authors cast into
what mold you please by Id est's, self-explications, and voluntary deductions,
according to the easily-bending nature of words. That is, blush to have
renounced your Reason, in renouncing Evidence of Authority; to follow
unreasonableness, in assenting upon ambiguous probabilities.

After this, to clear himself from denying Infallibility, which denial was
charged, and has been shown to take away all belief and ground of Belief; he
tells us, (page 23.) It is evident, that belief is no more than consent to the
truth of any thing, and the grounds of belief, such arguments as are sufficient
to exclude doubting, to induce conviction and persuasion. But sure Mr. H.
forgets what he is about: for to divine belief, which is commanded by God
himself, and so cannot be sinful, not every consent ought to serve, but a
rational one, nor any conviction, but such an one as is rational, that is,
grounded upon Evidence of that Authorities veracity, in that which she proposes
to be believed: which how it can stand with her fallibility in the same point,
is past Dr. H's skill to make good, since if it be once known that she can err
in it, it can never be shown that's he does not, there being no certainer
Authority than her self to testify certainly when she hits, and when she
fails: for I hope Dr. H. will not say it must be Scripture, without an
Interpreter of Scripture, and, if so, who a more certain Interpreter than her
self? If he say, she must compare her self with other Church's, he not only
grants each may err, but even, ( Repl. p. 15. l. 32.) after recourse had to
the said means, he only puts here, page 16. l. 1. that it is not strongly
probable that such a Church will err: so that if she can err, she does err,
for any thing any body knows.

What follows is only a trifling defense of himself for his bad disputing. He
was accused by us of a Schism twisted with Heresy: he defended himself, by
alleging that he held not our Church Infallible, which he knows we charge upon
the deniers as the heresy of heresies. Now his excuse for this Logic is, that
he put ( Repl. p. 24.) only a fiction of case: but it is plain he relies upon
that fiction as on a real Ground, saying there expressly ( of Schism, p 28.
29.) that he needs give no more distinct answer than this, first, that they not
holding the Church of Rome infallible, may be allowed to make some
suppositions, etc. Again, he says he makes but one, but yet he there puts down
four: so that the difficulty is only this, to determine in whether place he
deserves most to be trusted, or which of them is the child of his second
thoughts. Lastly, he imposes falsely upon the Cath. Gentl. ( Repl. p. 26.) that
he requires him at the begenning of the dispute to grant the (Chvrch of Rome
infallible. Whereas we only mind him, that since he is accused of a Schism
linked with Heresy, he ought to show that his motives bear the weight of a
perfect Evidence, notwithstanding the counterpoise of our Rule of Faith, the
Church's Infallibility, and not suppose this first, and then run a Voluntary
upon what he had granted himself gratis.

Thus I have given an answer to Dr. H's third Section of his second Chapter, to
which he referred me: In which I confess to have been larger than the rigor of
answering required: but the point of Power to oblige Belief was, as I
conceived, very important, and well worth clearing; neither do I remember to
have read it in any other place fetched from it is first Grounds, that so I might
refer the Reader thither. I have also vindicated the Cath Gentl. something more
particularly than I proposed to my self at first, or than was my obligation;
which was only this, to clear those passages in him which vere coincident with
mine. Hereafter I fear the apprehension of my future prolixity will not let me
exceed my first-intended limits.

SECT. 14.
How Dr. H. defends the sufficiency of his Division, charged to want the three
most principal sorts of Schism, and solely important to the Controversy.
THe third Chapter in his Reply begins with curing his Division of Schism,
which was shown by the Cath. Gentl. to want two of it is best limbs, and those
too most useful in this present controversy (that, to wit, of Schism from the
whole Church, and from Authority of Councils) and also by S. W. to be
pitifully maimed of the third, which was against subjection to some one
Superior. His skill employed in plastering it comes to this, that all Schism
is either in inferiors against Superiors, or in equals against equals (Rep.
p. 28.) He should have said against some one Superior, in the singular; for
his Discourse in his book of Schism never looked further; which occasioned the
Cath. Gentleman's calling it Monarchical.

His first excuse for his first fault is, that it is strange to think, that
that man who breaks from the whole Church was not comprised in either member of
his division, when certainly he is guilty of both. This it is to forget one's
Logic: for, let the man be where he will, our question is of the sin, Schism
against the whole Church; which is therefore not comprised in any one head,
because it is in an higher nature sinful, and so exceeds it. Sacrilege and
Patricide, according to the common notions, are found indeed in every simple
theft and murder: but according to their specifical differences, by which they
are distinguished from them, they exceed them, and so are not comprised in
them. This Particularity then, and Specialty of schismatical guilt, in breaking
from the whole Church, makes a man in a higher and more special manner faulty.
And this is the reason why we require, that the Specialty of this Schism should
(as it ought (be taken notice of, by ranking it in a Special head; which was
omitted by Mr. H. who talked only of the petty Schisms against some one
particular Superior, not against all in collection, nor against the whole
Church. And here when he is challenged of it, in stead of showing us that this
greater sin is comprised in one of those lesser heads, he privaricates from the
question which is about the sin, and talks of the man; who is comprised in his
Division, for having done another sin, less than this, and not for having done
this.

His second excuse, or rather his continuation of the former, is the saddest
piece of Logic that ever was read, and begins at the wrong end. He is accused
of omitting Schism against the whole Church, and pretends he treated it as
involved in another, to wit in Schism against some particular Governor, and
Schism against Charity to our Equals; which he proves in these words, ( Repl.
p. 28.) For how can one separate from the whole Church, unless he separate both
from his Superiors and equals too? which indeed had been to some purpose, in
case he had treated of Schism against the whole Church, and omitted Schism
against some particular Superior, or against Equals, Otherwise, for this
purpose in hand, he must argue in a quite contrary manner, and put it thus; How
can one separate from a particular Superior, or from his Equals, but he must
in so doing separate from the whole Catholic Church? and then the wise
argument had evidently bewrayed it is weakness. In a word, either he means by
Superiors, some of them only, and then he runs over boots into a
Contradiction, to get out of a less fault, in which he stood wet-shod; for some
of them, cannot be a^^, or the whole Church: or if, by Superiors, he means
all; then let him show me, that, in his Book of Schism, he has treated of that
which is against all the Superiors of the Church, in any collective sense; if
not, then let him confess, without more shuffling, that he treated not of
Schism against the whole Church.

As for his omitting Schism against the Authority of Councils, he endeavors to
clear it, first, by seeming to doubt whether Councils have any Authority. Durum
telum necessitas: in another occasion I doubt not but he would extol to the
skies those Councils which deposed a Pope; though now, because he had granted
them no Authority, in omitting Schism against them, he can shuffle up and down
at a cheap rate ( Repl. p. 29. l. 27.) with, If Councils have any Authority;
for he is sure, no man can possibly oppose him as long as he says nothing
positively, but keeps himself within the powerful spell of an If.

But let us see what follows, if Mr. H. pleases to grant Councils any
Authority: then he tells us, that this Authority will certainly be reducible to
paternal power; meaning, of a Priest, Bishop, Metropolitan, etc. and this both
in Provincial, National, and General Councils. The reason he assigns for his
evasion comes to this, that the of fence against the whole was consequently an
offense against any one there residing. True; but must the offense against some
one Governor (of which only he treated) be necessarily an offense against
them all, or against the whole Council? otherwise what will it avail him; who
is not charged with omitting Schism against any particular Governor, after
having put that which is against the whole Church, or the collection of many;
but, quite contrary, which putting down only the Schisms against particular
Governors, and omitting that which was against them as collected in a Council?
Did ever man's Reason run counter in this manner, or his insincerity so
resolutely persist never to acknowledge any lapse? that, whereas it is as
evident as noonday, that one may dissent from any one Bishop, in his grounds,
and yet consent to the rest; still he will needs prove the contrary, and that
the disobedience to some one sort of paternal Governor, is the disobedience to
all.

Again, though a Bishop have a kind of paternal Authority over a Priest, a
Metropolitan over a Bishop, etc. and so the disobedience of these Inferiors
would be against Paternal power (as Dr. H. calls his first Head:) yet what
Paternal power has a Company of Bishops over a single Bishop; or a Council,
consisting of three Patriarchs and five hundred Bishops, over one single
Patriarch? It is evident then, that should this Patriarch rebel against the
common decrees of all the rest, he could not be called a Schismatic against
Paternal power; and so, according to Dr. H's division, would be no Schismatic
at all: since there is no Authority there which could be said to be Paternal in
respect of him, himself being coequally high, that is, placed in the top of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy with the rest of the other Patriarchs, and a Father in
an Ecclesiastical sense over all the rest. Their power therefore over him
consists in the collective force of so many united; which makes them
considerable in respect of him, as a whole compared to a part. Now then, since
Dr. H cannot even pretend to have treated of a Schism against any collective
power, but against an Authority consisting in higher rank or degree only; it is
most evident to the most ordinary Understanding, that he omitted Schism against
Authority of Councils.

After all this ado he confesses here, ( Rep. p. 30.) that he treated not
specially of Schism against General Councils; that is, he confesses his
Division of Schism insufficient; which was only objected. No, I had forgot; he
only goes about to give reasons, why he did not treat it more specially: by
which pretty expression the good Reader is to be made believe, that he had
treated of it specially, and only omitted to handle it more specially;
whereas, he purposely and professedly waved the handling it at all in this
Controversy; as is to be seen, Of Schism, p. 60. Ad now, (so exquisite is his
shuffling art) after he had labored to produce proofs, that he did treat of
Schism against Councils, he brings his excuses why he did not do it, ibid.
First because Councils were remedies of Schism. But since they remedied them
authoritatively, and with such an Authority as, in comparison of any one degree
of power by him treated, was as it were of an Universal in respect of a
particular: the Schism against them was by consequence proportionably (or
rather improportionably) greater; and so deserved in all right an eminent place
of it is own in his division. Next, because they are extraordinary and not
standing Iudicatures. I answer, they are likewise of an extraordinary
Authority, as has been shown; and therefore could not merit to be slighted by
him. His third is, because this was not a constant sort of Schism, but upon
accidental emergencies. That is, his treatise of Schism does not absolutely
forbid a man to be a Schismatic in an higher sort of Schism, so it happen upon
occasion; but takes care first and more specially that he be not a Schismatic
in one of those constant sorts of Schism, though it be of far less guilt. His
fourth excuse (as I reckon them) is, because they are now morally impossible to
be had. Very good: his Church is accused by us of Shism against General
Councils already past; and Dr. H. in this book entitled their Defense,
therefore treats not particularly of Schism against them, because they are
morally impossible to be had at present, and for the future: though, toward
the end of the world he thinks it probable there may be one: Of which
divination of his I can give no better reason than this, that Antichrist, who
is to be then the Universal secular Governor, and by consequence, according to
Mr. H's, grounds, the Head of God's Church, or Supreme in Ecclesiastical
affairs, will do Christianity that favor as to gather a General Council.
This, I say, if any, must be his meaning: for the reason given by him here, why
they are now morally impossible to be had, is, because the Christian world is
under so many Empires; and when they are likely to be united into one toward
the end of the world, unless it be under Antichrist, I confess my self unable
to prognosticate.

His last excuse is, ( Repl. p. 31. l. 2.) because the Principal sort of
Schism, charged by the Romanists, is the casting out the Bishop of Rome. I
answer, that we charge not the Protestant with a simple Schism, but a
decompound one, involving also heresy in each of it is parts. First, with a
Schism from the whole Church, in renouncing the Rule and Root of all our Faith,
Universal Oral Tradition of immediate Forefathers, and by consequence,
separating themselves from the whole Body of the Faithful, as Faithful: next,
with renouncing the Authority of Councils, proceeding upon this Ground in
declaring things of Faith: and lastly, with not only disobeying, but
disacknowleding the Authority of the Pope, recommended to us by both the
former. And it seems strange that Mr. H. should go about to clear the
sufficiency of his division, by recurring to our charging or not charging of
Schism: whereas he has not taken notice of any of these three Schisms charged
against him; but only of petty ones against the Paternal power of a Bishop,
Patriarch, etc. which may be consistent with a guiltlesness from the other
three principal ones. He promised us in his Answer, p. 8. 9. that he had
rescued the Catholic Gentleman's letter from the strangling in the birth by
the Printer's miscarriages; yet gives it here a privy courteous-discourteous
pinch, by putting the Printer's mistake of conciliatory for conciliary, to be
the Cath. Gentl. pleasure to call it so, page 31. l. 10. 11. This done, he
objects, that this conciliary Authority cannot with any propriety be said to be
in the dispersion of the Churches. Nor did the Cath. Gentl. say it was properly
so called: it suffices us if it be equivalent, as doubtless it is. For a
private Bishop or Patriarch is no otherwise a Schismatic against them gathered
together, than in dissenting from the joynt-expression of their votes: if then
their votes be sufficiently expressed and testified, either by communicatory
letters, or some other equally-certain way; while they live dispersed; why
should not the opposing his consent of theirs be equally a Schism, as when they
are united?

But Schism against this Authority of theirs Mr. H. says, ( parag. ult.) is
most properly comprised under the Head of Communion Fraternal, treated by him
Chap. 8. 9. 10. and there called Schism against mutual Charity. Not considering
that in the Church there must be unity in the Understandings of the Faithful in
a general rule of Faith, as well as of their Wills in mutual Charity; the
former also of which belongs to them more particularly as they are Sons of the
Church, that is, Faithful: and consequently, there may be several breaches of
those two Unities; so that certainly he must be a very proper man in the art of
method, who can think that a Schism or breach of the former, is most properly
comprised (as he says here) under that latter: yet this method Dr. H. will
vindicate, as indeed he may do any thing after his manner. See his confusion
for method sake, Schism Disarmed, p. 230.

To these former objections now rehearsed, he at least pretends an Answer, such
as it is; but to other exceptions sufficiently laid home to him, Schism
Disarmed, p. 32. 33. he thought it safest to give none at all. He was asked
there, (and I ask him here again) why he omitted Schism against the Head of
God's Church? He cannot avoid by saying, that this is not charged upon them, it
being, as he here confesses, the principal Schism objected, p. 31. l. 2. 3.
Will he say it is an usurpation? Let him hold a while, till he has proved it,
and in the mean time let him tell us how heinous a Schism it is, to renounce it
without legitimate proof.

Secondly, he was ask't, why, to state things indifferently, he treated not of
Schism against the Head of the Church, as abstracted from an Ecclesiastical
Governor, (the Pope) and a Secular Magistrate, (the King, Emperor, etc.) for
sure the disobeying or renouncing this Head, must needs be a greater Schism
than that which is against those reckoned up by him, who are all under this
Head.

Lastly, he was ask't, why he treated not at least of Schism against the
Secular-Ecclesiastical Head, King, Emperor, etc. and let us know what kind of
Schismatics we are, for renouncing his Authority in Ecclesiastical matters?
His jurisdiction, according to Mr. H. is supreme in such affairs: since then,
the disobeying or rejecting any Authority takes it is measure of faultiness from
the excellency of the Authority it opposes, he ought to have let us know that
we were supremely and in the highest manner Schismatics, for denying the
King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But alas! this aerie Supremacy of Kings in
sacred matters is such an addle piece of Ecclesiastical Authority, that though
they pretend it, to avoid the Pope's Jurisdiction, yet (as it appears) they
decline to own it themselves as much as they can, upon occasions; lest, coming
to a controversial discussion, it bewray it is weakness by the absurdity of some
necessary consequence or other issuing from it. Justly therefore did Sch^sm
Disarmed, casting up the account of Mr. H's Division of Schism, (p. 34.) charge
him to have omitted the three principal Schisms against Government, and those
not only principal in themselves, but also solely importing the present
controversy: and only mentioning those which were not objected, and so nothing
at all concerning the question.

Sect. 15.
With what success Dr. H. goes about to retrench the Roman Patriarchy, and to
vindicate Ruffinus.
THe next question which comes to be discussed, is, of the extent of the Roman
Patriarchy: which the Cath. Gentl. showed Dr. H. willing to limit, from a word
in Ruffinus, so that it should not be extended to all Italy.

That this is the question, is evident, both by bringing Ruffinus his testimony
upon the stage, who acknowledg'dly spoke of Patriarchal Jurisdiction; as also
by Dr. H's words in his Reply p. 33. l. 2. and again, p. 34. l 4. 5.

To avoid the Doctors blundring art, in which he is very exquisite always, but
in handling this question has excelled himself: we will clear the way toward
the deciding it, by premising these few notes.

First, it is agreed upon between us, that the Metropolitical power is distinct
from the Patriarchal, and ( of Schism p. 54. l. 19. 20. and p. 56. l. 5. 6. 7.)
of a less Authority and extent.

Next, it is affirmed by Dr. H. of Schism p. 55. that the Authority of the
Bishop was correspondent to the Defensor Civitatis; that of the Archbishop or
Metropolitan, to the President of every Province; that of a Patriarch, to the
Li^utenant or Vicarius; and in general, that the Ecclesiastical Order followed
the Political. This I only take notice of as an affirmation of his, not
granting it to be universally true; nor does he prove it was so, otherwise than
by Origen's saying, It is fit it should be so. For, the Councils of
Constantinople and Chalcedon, where this was determined, were held long after
this Order in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions in Constantine's time, of which
he speaks here; and so their testimonies rather prejudice it, than prove it:
for had it been so universally practiced before, what need was there of
ordering it by following Councils*

These things being so (as is most evident and undeniable) let us see how
incomparably Dr. H. blunders in this question.

His first and fundamental blundering is, that he would conclude against the
extent of the Patriarchal power, by impugning the farther extent of he
Metropolitical: whose Authority notwithstanding he acknowledged higher, his
Jurisdiction larger; as the second note shows. Now, that he indeed impugned a
Metropolitical power only in stead of a Patriarchal, is manifested; both
because he impugnes this latter in the 17. parag. ordained to treat of
Metropolitical power only, (his treating of Primates and Patriarchs not
beginning till parag. 21.) as is most visible to the Reader's eyes, which Dr.
H. would yet delude; as also because himself confesses it, of Schism, p. 50. l.
18 19. So that he would conclude against the Patriarchal power, which himself
granted to extend to many Provinces, ( of Schism, p. 56. l. 6.) by arguing
against Metropolitical, which himself granted to extend but to one ( of Schism,
p. 55. l. 22. 23. and 26.); and so infer the no-farther extent of the former,
out of the no-farther extent of the latter, after he had acknowledged the
former of much farther extent than the latter was Is not this a most shameful
and unconscionable slight, to mingle and jumble two Authorities together for
his own ends, in that very Chapter where he pretended to treat of them
distinctly?

His next manifold blundering is, to bring testimonies, which he tells the
Reader here, ( Rep. p. 32. 33.) manifestly distinguished the Province of the
Bishop of Rome, from the Province of Italy; which (he assures us) could not
have had truth in them, if the Province of the Patriarch of Rome extended to
all Italy: and yet not one word is found in any of the testimonies making
mention of the Patriarchy, nor yet of the Province of the Bishop of Rome at
all: nay the three first only mention the City of Rome.

The first is this, as cited by himself; ( Rep p. 33.) (...), etc. Let the
house be delivered to those to whom the Bishop through Italy, and the City of
Rome should decree it. The second, (...), etc. The holy Synod assembled from
Rome, and Spain, France and Italy The third, four hundred Bishops, both from
great Rome, and from all Italy and Calabria. Now suppose, insisting on the
Grounds of mine own cause, I should only reply that they mentioned Rome in
particular for eminency of Authority, not contradistinction of it; were it not
a thousand times more likely on my side, there being no City particularized but
this in the testimonies? for all the rest are Regions or Provinces. Again, were
the testimonies most express for the Roman Province; yet if Mr. H. meant
honestly, that is, to speak of the Metropolitical Jurisdiction only (as he
pretended, and as the place properly required,) then what had he concluded?
since the proving the Metropolical Jurisdiction less than all Italy, proves not
that the Patriarchal reached not much farther. But, to come home to the
testimonies, that the Reader may see what a strong disputant Dr. H. is in his
own way: I would gladly ask, who told him that the City of Rome ((...), and
(...), The City, and, Great Rome, as it is in the testimonies) must needs
signify so manifestly the whole Province of Rome? So that, if he infer a
Contradistinction, and so a limitation of Jurisdiction from these words; he
must conclude that neither the Metropolitical nor Patriarchal Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome reached beyond it is own walls: which being acknowledg'dly
impossible, it is impossible these testimonies should mean a distinction of the
Bishop of Rome's Authority from Italy, but an Eminency of his Dignity, which
occasioned his particular mentioning. Thus, the very testimonies which he
produced against us, will needs speak for us, notwithstanding his prompting
them to the contrary.

The fourth Testimony ( ex provincia Italiae, Civitate Mediolanensi, ex Vrbe
Roma, quod Sylvester Episcopus misit ex Provincia Romana, Civitate Portuensi,
etc. is indeed a fit testimony for Dr. H. to blunder in, being not intelligible
in the Latin, and (as he cannot but know) very corrupt: especially being held
for such in naming the Bishops which met there. And were it beyond exception,
yet is it very explicable to mean the Pop'es Metropolitical Jurisdiction, never
so much as naming his Patriarchal.

His third blundering is his self-contradiction; a necessary evil accompanying
always the defense of a bad cause. All his endeavors hitherto had been bent to
limit the Pope's Patriarchy to a particular Province of Italy; building still
all the way upon the necessity that the Ecclesiastical Order should follow the
Political: yet, treating of Primates and Patriarchs, (of Schism, p. 54.) he
gives such doctrine as, upon the same grounds, must needs conclude that the
said Patriarchy did extend to all Italy. He tells us there, that Constantine
the great instituted four Praefecti Praetorio; two in the East, as many in the
West: of the Western, one at Rome, another at Triers. Now then, let the
Ecclesiastical Order (as Mr. H. will have it) follow the Political; and we must
have some Ecclesiastical Governor at Rome of equally-extended and
correspondent Authority to the Praefectus Praetorio at Rome, that is, to all
Italy at least: This could not be (as he confesses) Metropolitical Authority in
the Bishop of Rome; therefore a Patriarchal one. The Pope's Patriarchy then
even according to his own Grounds, included all Italy; nay all the West, except
that part which the pretended Patriarch of France must be imagined upon the
same Grounds to have had. And since the Prefect at Triers was called ( of
Schism, p. 54.) Praefectus Praetorio Galliarum, (as Dr. H. confesses;)
consequently to his Grounds, it must follow, that the Ecclesiastical power
corresponding to this Political must have only France under him; the other at
Rome, all the West besides. So that at unawares, though he will not grant his
Patriarchy to extend to the whole West, which is his due; yet Mr. H's own
grounds grant the Pope all but France, which is ten times more than the
Suburbicarian Province, his former too niggardly allowance. If he reply that
the Patriarchal power corresponds to the Vicarij only, and not to that of the
Praefecti Praetorio: then, besides that all his Grounds of the necessary
proportion of the Ecclesiastical to the Secular power totter, which hold not in
the main subordinate Magistrate, to wit the Praefectus Praetorio, to whom he
will have no Ecclesiastical dignity correspond; besides this, I say, his
foresaid testimony of Origin cited for him, Reply 14. is absolutely against
him. So sad a piece of Scholarship it is to cite Testimonies without first
laying Grounds, which only can make testimonies hang together. Out of which it
is evident, that all the strength of his pretended limitation of the Pope's
Patriarchy, is finally reduced to that Authority from Ruffinus.

Now then as for Ruffinus his testimony, saying that the Bishop of Rome was by
the Nicene Canon authorized, Suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum sollicitudinem gerere,
this being the main business which occasioned this debate, and gave birth to
this imagined limitation of the Pope's Patriarchate, we shall take a little
pains to fetch it from it is first Grounds, by showing the sense of that Canon:
by which will be seen how great a knave this Paraphrast was whom Dr. H.
pretends to vindicate. The words of the Council, upon which this Interpreter
works are these: (...). To which I cannot imagine a sense more proper than this,
that the Bishops of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis should be subject to the
Patriarch of Alexandria, because the Pope had used to hold them for so. The
reason of my conjecture is, because the word (...), quandoquidem, manifests
that the words following are the reason of the Decree precedent. This being so,
who sees not how pitifully this discourse hangs together, that those Bishops
shall be under the Patriarch of Alexandria, seeing the Pope has under him I
cannot tell what or whom? whereas (however our Adversaries may pretend the
material sense of one of the parts false, yet) themselves must confess, that
there is no difficulty in the formal coherence of the whole, if it be supposed
to signify thus, That he shall have those for his Subjects, because the Pope is
accustomed to hold them for such or to judge it so.

This is yet more confirmed, because in both Languages it is evident that the
Latin Hoc and the Greek (...) cannot possibly refer any thing, but the thing
decreed; to wit, that the Bishops named should be subject to the Patriarch of
Alexandria. This explication holding, (and hold it must till Mr. H. can show me
a better, that, is, another which shall agree better with the words, and make
better sense; which will be never) two things follow for us: First, that it was
the Pope's custom to handle and judge matters belonging to the Patriarchy of
Alexandria: Next, that the Council governed it self in this important matter by
the custom of the Bishop of Rome: Both which infer, in all probability, his
higher Authority, and make for us, though intended otherwise.

Some Interpreters indeed are of opinion that this Canon was intended to order
the Jurisdiction of the Patriarchs: but this is a perfect Chimerical
imagination, originiz'd from the inve^tion of those whose hatred against the
Church of Rome, occasioned by their own guilt, made them willing to say any
thing in prejudice of Her, though without all Ground either in the letter of
the Canon (as has been shown) or in the history of the Councils: for, nothing
is more evident in this latter, than that there was treated in the cause of
Meletius Bishop of Licopolis ^n Egypt, who refused to be subject to the
Patriarch of Alexandria; and therefore that Canon chiefly touches that
Patriarchy, of which also the particulars are there specified: nothing being
ordered there concerning either Antio^h or the West, but that their privileges
(that is, what by custom they had gotten) should he conserved and continued;
(...). These things standing thus, no man, unless driven by the desperate
condition of his cause to catch at any thing, can gather any such sense out of
the words of the Canon.

Notwithstanding, it is granted that Schismatics commonly make this
Interpretation of it: whose opinions were they any thing prejudicial to our
Cause, (as they are not, but most weak, being of Adversaries;) yet they are
made incomparably weaker by having Ruffinus for their Patron and first Founder
of this Interpretation: Who also (to come nearer our question) proceeding upon
this former conceit, added the word Suburbicarias, without all Ground or show
of Ground; whether out of silliness and ignorance of propriety of Speech,
meaning to signify by that word all the Western Churches under the Empire of
the City of Rome, (whose subjection to the Pope his eyes testified and other
Schismatics confess;) or out of knavery and malice, it is uncertain: This, by
the way, is certain, that an irregular proceeding and miscarriage, sprung from
both, may justly be expected from Ruffinus.

But, because this language of mine against this Paraphrast may be imagined to
have sprung from passion, by Dr. H. and some of his particular Friends; who,
proceeding upon their Ground of uncertainty and indifferency of Religion, have
got a conceit that the preserving of courtesy is more worth than the preserving
of souls from eternal damnation; and that, though one who does such a mischief
be a knave and a fool both, yet he cannot without incivility and scurrility be
shown plainly to be either: again, because Mr. H. is such a veneratour of
Antiquity, that he deemes any testimony, nay any one obscure word of any either
old-knave or old-fool (provided he lived but in the ancient times) very
competent to found his Religion on, and worthy his vindication, so it seem for
his purpose: we will see whether the character given Ruffinus by other Authors
beyond all exception be more moderate than S. W's, and what unanswerable
prejudices are producible against this Paraphrast and his testification, which
Dr. H. here undertakes to vindicate.

First S. Hierom tells us, ( contra Ruff. Apol. 2.) that Ruffinus was
excommunicated and cauteriz'd for heresy, to wit, Origenism and Pelagianism,
and that by Pope Anastasius, as appears both by the letter of the said Pope to
John Bishop of Jerusalem, as also by the same S. Hierom, (ibid) upbraiding
him, that he so fled the judgment of the City of Rome, that he rather those to
abide the siege of the Barbarians (to wit, in Aquil^ia, besieged by Alaricus,
whither Ruffinus had retired himself) than the sentence of a peaceable Town.
And again, in the same book, speaking of Ruffinus his Confession of his Faith,
which he feigned to have been approved by the Bishop of Italy, he asks him how
Italy should approve that which Rome had rejected, and how the Bishops should
receive that which the Apostolic See had condemned? Add to these (which makes
his prejudice most notorious, and so his testimony most invalid) that he writ
his History after the entrance of Alaricus into Italy: that is, under the
Popedom of Innocentius, Successor of Anastasius: and so had as much reason to
write in prejudice of that See, as an incorrigible and obstinate Heretic could
have: having been excommunicated by the same See before he writ. Hence it is
that he never meets with any occasion to speak of the Pope and Church of Rome,
but he spits his venom, as may appear Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 5. cap 24.
where, speaking of Pope Victor, he adds of his own, in one place, one whole
line, in another two in his prejudice. Is not this then a fit Authou^ to be
first alleged, afterward vindicated by his fellow-brother and Friend Dr. H.
who, for no less guilt, stands excommunicated by the same Church? Thus much for
his passion and prejudice, which make his knavery very credible: now.

Secondly, as for his doltish ignorance, he was the Monster of that and all
future ages for eminency in that talent. Some instances of it may be; that he (
in hist. Eccles. Eusebius. l. 1. c. 1.) makes of James Bishop of Jerusalem, James
Bishop of the Apostles; of the Greek word (...), which signifies Happy, a Saint
by name Macarius; of Eusebius of Pamphilus, Heretic and Arian, Pamphilus
Catholic and Martyr; of Xystus, Pythagorian and Pagan Philosopher, Xystus Pope
and Martyr; of Chorepiscopus (spoken of by the eighth Canon of the Council of
Nice) the vacant place of a Bishop: and such innumerable others; that St.
Hierom (ibid.) affirmed him to be so unskilful in either language, that he was
taken for a Greek by the Latins, and for a Latin by the Grecians. Must not he
be a very wise man, who sticks not, first to build upon, next to vindicate so
wise an Authority?

Yet knavery and folly are less intolerable, if practiced modestly and warily:
but temerity and audacity are the gallantry of Ruffinus his former faults; he
practices them when and where he pleases; and so his testimony becomes more
perfectly fit for Dr. H's cause. S. Hierom (ibid.) challenges him, that he knew
in his conscience, how he added, detracted, and changed things as he listed.
Erasmus, in his Preface upon S. Hilary, says that Ruffinus took to himself,
not the liberty of an Interpreter, but the license of a Contaminatour of other
men's writings. And ( Annot. in Chron. Eusebius. anno MMLXV.) Scaliger notes it to
be his custom to omit, pervert and change the texts, as he pleased. Lastly, if
Dr. H. yet makes account he can vindicate the sufficiency of Ruffinus his
Authority against so many opposers; I will add for an upshot the words of
their most famed Daille, (against whom I am sure he will not take up cudgels;
being a person so highly commended by the Lords Falkland, and Dighy,) who ( l.
2. c. 4.) characters Ruffinus to be, an arrant wooden statue, a pitiful
thing, one that had scar^e any reason in what he said, and yet much less
dexterity in defending himself. Let the Reader judge then how desperate that
cause must be, which drives it is Patrons to rely upon such a barbarous,
heretical, malicious, and silly fellow's Authority; who wanted both ordinary
learning, and common honesty, the only things which can give him any Authority
at all; and this in the judgment of persons beyond all exception either of
ignorance or prejudice.

This miserable and ruinous testimony, upon which yet our Adversaries build so
much, being resolved into the rubbish of Ruffinus his defects; it would not be
much amiss to try whether our testimonies for the Pope's Patriarchy over all
the West be established upon better Authority, than this which gave the ground
of retrenching it to Ruffinus his followers. St. Basil, speaking ( Basil.
Epist. 10.) of him as Patriarch, calls him The Coryphaeus (or Head) of the
Western Churches. S. Hierom makes account that, ( Hier. ad Marc. Presb. Celed.
Epist. 77.) to be condemned with Pope Damasus and with the West, is the
self-same thing. But, because the testimony of Adversaries is freest from
favor and partiality; the satisfaction given by such is much more ample and
valid. To these therefore let us have recourse; I mean the Greek Schismatics:
who, though the competition between the Eastern and Western Church provoked
them to retrench the Pope's Patriarchat as much as they could possibly justify;
yet they freely and ingenuously grant, that it contained anciently all the
Provinces of Italy, Spain, France, Germany, England, Illyricum Occidentale,
under which were understood Dalmatia, Hungary, and other neighboring Provinces.

Our first Testimony shall be that of Nilus, Archbishop of Thessalonica (de
prim Pap.) in that very book in which he disputes against the Latins. (...).
The Canon of the Council of Nice thinks fit that the rules of the Fathers be
confirmed, who have distributed to every Church their Privileges; to wit, that
some Nations be under the Bishop of Alexandria, others under the Bishop of
Antioch, etc. and to the Bishop of Rome the same is given, to wit, that he
govern the Occidental Nations.

The second shall be of Zonaras, a Greek Schismatic and Commentatour, living
long before Nilus; who, in his exposition of the sixth Canon of the Council of
Nice, (the same to which Ruffinus added his conceit of Suburbicarian, and
thence gave occasion to his imagined limitation of the Pope's Patriarchy,
before spoken of (has these words: (...), etc. The Council ordaines that the
Bishop of Alexandria have the superintendency of Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis,
(...): as the ancient custom had given to the Bishop of Rome, to grovern the
Provinces of the West.

The third testimony shall be of the same Zonaras, (in Council. Sard. Can. 5^)
which proceeds farther and grants him, over and above all the Provinces of the
Western Empire, almost all those Provinces of the Eastern also which lay
westwardly. (...). To the Roman Church (says he, writing his Comment upon the
fifth Canon of the Council of Sardica) were then subject all the Western
Churches, to wit, those of Macedonia, Thessalia, Illyricum, Epirus, which were
afterward subjected to the Church of Constantinople. Here thou see, Reader,
three testimonies, in themselves most ample and express, of Authors beyond all
pretense of partiality toward us; whose interest and passion ought rather have
obliged them to detract than superadde to the Pope's Jurisdiction. Not were
they less secure from opinion of ignorance; the quality of Archbishop in one of
them, and of professed Writers for the Greeks in both, rendering them not liable
either to exception of supineness, or want of knowledge. Judge then again, how
bad that cause must be, which can oblige men, rational enough in other
businesses, to refuse assent to a Verdict thus qualified, and adhere to a bare
word, capable of a different (and so unprejudicial) signification, as coming
from an Author so intolerably barbarous as this Ruffinus has been shown: or,
if meant in that stricter signification, can yet claim no credit; as being
only his word who has been manifested, by witnesses beyond exception, to have
lost his indifferency, sincerity, nay all shame and honesty together with his
Faith.

I hope the Candid Reader will gather what stuff is to be expected from that
Treatise, de Suburbicariis regionibus, which Dr. H. ( Repl. p. 35.) is pleased
to call a Tract, and afford it the Epithet of learned: and how wise or sincere
a person Lescaserius is, though styled here by Dr. H. most Excellent, who
undertakes to vindicate this Ruffinus; but, with such weak arguments, as, were
it not out of my way to confute that Treatise, I would undertake to manifest
they neither argue too much learning, nor any excellency at all in the study of
Antiquity in that point; unless that excellency were corrupted by a passionate
insincerity: though I know any thing is excellent which makes excellently well
for Dr. H's purpose, or does any excellent prejudice to Rome.

Sect. 16.
Dr. H's fruitless endeavors to prove the Pope (as he calls it) no Summum
Genus, from the pretended denial of Appeals, and the denial of Names or
Titles, as also how weakly he argues against that demonstrably-evident
Authority.
THe Pope's Patriarchy being thus limited to little more than nothing, his chief
Pastourship must in the next place be totally annihilated: against which Mr. H.
(as the nature of Schism requires) has so much the greater spite, by how much
it is higher in Authority than the Patriarchy. This he does de professo
afterward: here, on the by only, ( of Schism p. 59) telling us, that there
was none over the Patriarchs but the Emperor only; which he proved, because
they use to gather Councils. His Disarmer broke the reeds of the testimonies he
produced, by showing them unable to conclude, unless they prove that the
Emperor did it without the Pope's signifying such their desires to them; next,
that if they did it without this, they did it lawfully; and lastly, that, were
both proved, it was not necessarily consequent, that the Pope had therefore no
Authority over the Church, since there might be other Acts of Universal
Authority besides gathering of Councils.

For answer, Dr. H. refers me to his Reply, p. 38. where nothing at all is
found to strengthen the two former weaknesses of his consequences: nor yet
indeed the latter, since he does not undertake to show that there can be no
other Acts of supreme Authority besides gathering of Councils; which if there
can, then those Acts can denominate the Pope Head of the Church,
notwithstanding the defect in the nor performance of the other; and, by
consequence, his argument of not being Head of the Church, from not gathering
Councils, is at an end.

Yet something he pretends here, to make good this latter defect; to wit, that
this Authority of Convoking Councils is inseparable from the supreme power, is
most characteristical of it, etc. Whereas indeed this Convoking of Councils is
no ordinary Act of any standing Jurisdiction or Government, but an
extraordinary affair, springing from some necessity or extremity; and so, the
necessity pressing, may be performed by him or them who can best provide for
that extremity: Which, if other circumstances agree, is most fitting to be
ordered by the Pope, whose universal superintendency qualifies him for both
care and knowledge of the Church's wants. But if Mr. H. means it is
inseparable, so that it cannot be done without the Pope's express and actual
orders, or undertaken by any but the Pope himself; he is in a great mistake:
For, it is very well known that in diverse cases it is otherwise. As, suppose
the Sea be vacant, or the Pope himself be unsound in Faith, be distracted, or
kept in close prison; or in case there be an Antipope which makes the title
dubious, etc. In which cases the Cardinals have power to call a Council, or the
Bishops to assemble themselves. And, in general, whenever there is an
extremity damageable to the public, nor possible to be remedied by him to whom
that duty most fittingly (and so, rightfully) belongs; any one that has
sufficient power and skill, let him be Patriarch, Bishop, Prince, or private
man, not only may, but ought apply both, as much as in him lies, to prevent
the harm of the public. It Is evident then that the notion of the actual power
to gather General Councils, is not the very notion of the Pope's Authority, nor
(as Mr. H. expresses it) Characteristical of it, or inseparable from it; since
it has been shown, that the one can be without the other.

To this proof from gathering Councils, he proceeds to allege some
Testimonies, ( Reply p. 39) that there was not anciently, (besides the Prince
or Emperor) any Supreme, or (as the Doctor strangely expresses it) any summum
genus, and that the Bishop of Rome was not this summum genus. It is a pleasant
thing when those men will be nibbling at wit, who never knew how to manage the
knack. Would not Supreme Bishop or Governor have served, without being thus
unfortunately witty in calling it a Summum genus? and then to tell us, that a
particular man is not a Summum genus. When we learned Logic, we were told that
a Summum genus was perfectly and actually included in every Individual
contained under it: I hope the Pope's power is not found, on this fashion, in
every Priest. But let us take a view of his testimonies; which are reduced to
two heads: to wit, those which would prove the Pope no Summum genus, from the
denial of Appeals to him; and those which would conclude him no Summum genus,
from titles and names denied him.

Those concerning Appeals which must manifest the individual person of the
Pope to be no Summum genus, are, First, from the Milevitan Council, (Repl. p.
39. and 40.) forbidding that Priests should appeal to any foreign power, but
only to the African Councils or their own Primates: Secondly, from the Nicen,
Can. 5. ordaining, that they who were excommunicated by some should not be
received by others: The third, from the Synodical Epistle of the African
Council to Pope Caelestine, in these words, We entreat you that, for the
future, you will not easily admit those who are Excommunicated by us, etc. To
these he adds a fourth, from the 34. Apostolic Canon, that the Bishops of
every Nation must know him that is first among them, and account him their Head.

I answer, that, as for the three first in general, they only forbid the
Appeals of Priests from their Bishops, etc. but leave it indifferent whether
the Bishops, Archbishops, nay Primates themselves may appeal to the Pope:
which we make account is a far greater honor to the Pope, than the deciding
the inferior Controversies concerning Priests. So that these testimonies
argues no more against the Pope's Authority, than it would against the Supreme
power of any Prince or secular Magistrate, if the Laws of the Land should
forbid Thieves, Robbers, and such inferiors Delinquents, after their
condemnation by the Judges and other inferior Officers, to appeal to him. Who
sees not that there could never be any Government, or Justice done, if every
Priest, though found never so guilty at home by his own immediate Governors,
should have liberty granted him to appeal to the Supreme: living, perhaps, in
another Country far distant, not skilled in the immediate circumstances, which
give the best light to judge of a cause: but receiving his information from
letters, perhaps partial, or from hearsay ever uncertain? Again, who sees not
that such an easy admittance of every ordinary Delinquent's Appeal is both most
cumbersom, nay impossible, to be performed by the Supreme, and very derogatory
to the esteem and Authority of Inferior Officers, without the Conservation of
which all Government and Common-good goes to wrack? Justly then did the Church,
in the Nicen Council and elsewhere, for these and many other reasons, ordain,
that Priests should make no farther Appeal than to domestic Judges, the Pope
himself being present and consenting to it, yet without detriment to his
Authority: since this eases him of cumber, not discredits his power; for it
denies not the Appeals even of Archbishops and Patriarchs to him: unless Mr.
H. will say, that every consenting upon rational Grounds not to execute
Authory, is to disannul and abolish quite that whole Authority; for he ayms at
no less in this worthy Discourse of his upon the said Citations.

And this may suffize in answer to his three first Testimonies as also to the
first of these three in particular; to wit, that they forbid him not to execute
an higher strain of power in receiving Appeals of Bishops: and as for the
making it unlawful for inferior Delinquents to appeal to him, it can only
infer necessarily the unfitness that the Pope should execute that Authority,
not the want of Authority it self.

The second Testimony, that they which are excommunicated by some, shall not be
received by others, is the only place in this Section most likely to infer the
Doctor's Conclusion, that the Popes is not Supreme: which indeed it does most
amply, if taken in it is whole latitude and extent; but withal the Doctor must
confess that, if it be taken so, it utterly destroys all Government, and his
former testimony from the Milevitan Council to boot. For, if those words be
universally true, then it is unlawful for a Priest to appeal from his Bishop to
an Archbishop, Primate, or Provincial Council (granted in the said testimony;)
which takes away all Authority in a Superior over the Acts and Decrees of an
Inferior, and by consequence all Government. Now then, since the said
testimony (which indeed was meant of the Appeals of Priests, and so is already
answerd'd) cannot serve him, unless taken in it is full extent; nor can it be
taken so whitout subverting all Ground of Government: it follows, that it
cannot serve him at all, nor prejudice us. Again, since it cannot be taken as
denying Appeals from Subordinate to Superior Governors universally: Mr. H's
grounds must make it conclude against us, by making it signify a denial of
Appeals to Coequals in Authority only. Wherefore, all it is force is built on
this supposition, that the Pope is not Superior, but coequal only to a
Patriarch: so that his Argument is epitomized into this pithy piece of sense,
as true as the first Principles (which he must suppose to make this proof
valid;) that the Pope not being Head of the Church, is not Head of the Church;
and then all is clearly evidenced.

The third testimony, We entreat you that you would not easily admit those to
your Communion who are excommunicated by us, is so far from gainsaying the
Pope's power, that the very expressions of which it is framed are rather so
many acknowlegdments of it: being only a request, not that he would not
receive their Appeals or admit them at all, much less that he could not, but
only that he would not admit them easily, that is, without due and mature
examination of the cause. Now who sees not that an humble desire, that he would
not do it easily, intimates or supposes he had a power to do it absolutely?
This is confirmed by their subjoyning, as the reason of their request, not
because the Pope had no power to admit others, but because the Council of Nice
had so decreed: knowing that it was a strong motive for them, and an obligation
in the Supreme Governor to conserve the Laws of the Church inviolate; unless
Evidence, that in these Circumstances it crossed the common good, licenc't him to
use his extraordinary Authority in that Extremity, and to proceed now, not upon
Laws, but upon the dictates of Nature, the Ground and Rule of all Laws. So
perfectly innocent to our cause are all the testimonies of weight alleged by
Mr. H. against it; if they be left to themselves, and not inspired with malice
by the bad meaning he will needs instill into them, against their own good
nature.

The fourth testimony is still like Dr. H. as he maintains a bad cause; that is,
incomparably weak and short of concluding any thing. It Is this, that the
Bishops of every Nation must account the Primate their Head. What then? is not
a Parish Priest Head of a Parish, a Bishop Head of his Diocese, an Archbishop
Head of his Archbishopric; as well as a Primate Head of his Primacy? Does it
then follow, from a Bishops being Head of the Priests in his Diocese, that
there is no degree of Authority Superior to his? yet this, applied to a
Primate, is all Dr. H's argument to prove none higher than he. But, it is
pretty to observe in what strange words he couches his inference from hence;
which (says he, Repl. p. 40.) sure infers, that the Bishop of Rome is not the
one only Head of all Bishops. Observe that canting phrase, one only Head, etc
His intent here manifestly was to show no degree of Authority Superior to
Patriarchs: to prove this he alleges this testimony now agitated; and then,
because he saw it would not carry home to the mark be aimed it at, he infers
warily, that the Pope is not the one only Head of all Bishops. By which
expression he prepares an evasion beforehand, when the inconsequence of his
discourse from the said testimony shall be ob^ected; or else would persuade the
unwary Reader, that we hold the Pope so Head of the the Church, as that we
admit not Primates to be Head of the Bishops under them: Whereas our tenet is,
that as Primates are immediate Heads of the Metropolitans, so the Pope is Head
or Superior over Primates; and by consequence Supreme over the whole Church:
yet so Supreme, as he leaves to Subordinate Governors their Headship inviolate
over their proper Inferiors.

Thus much to his Testimonies concerning Appeals, His other manner of arguing
against the Pop'es Supremacy or his being a summum genus is, from names and
titles denied him. The first testimony is from Decret. part. 1. did. 99. cap.
3. that Primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, vel summus
Sacerdos; that the Bishop of the first Seat ought not to be called Prince of
the Priests, or Supreme Priest ( which the African Council confirms with, aut
aliquid eiusmodi;) sed tantum primae seeds Episcopus, The second is from the
same place, cap. 4. Nec ^^iam Romanus Pontifex universalis est appellandus. The
third, from the Epistle of Pope Pelagius, Nullus Patriarcharum Vniversalitatis
vocabulo unquam utatur, etc. No Patriarch must use the title of Universal; for
if one Patriarch be called Universal, the name of Patriarch is taken from all
the rest. The fourth is, their threadbare and often answered testimony of Saint
Gregory, refusing the title of Universal Bishop.

But, first, these testimonies come short of what they are intended for, in
this, that none speaks of the right of Jurisdiction, but only of names and
titles; as appears by the words, appelletur, appellandus, Vniversalitatis
vocabulo, superbae appellationis verbum, in the testimonies: which denote no
exception against any Authority, but against the titular expression of it
only, which sounded proudly, and seemed inconvenient and new at that time.

Secondly, it is a great weakness in understanding the nature of words, not to
advert that the vogue of the world altering from plainess to complementalness,
as it does still daily, the same word may be used without fear of pride at one
time, which could not at another; nay the same thing may be fitly signified by
some word, at some time, which cannot be signified by the same at another: as
for example, Tyrannus once was proper for a King, ruling according to law and
right; which now is not competent but to him who rules arbitrarily against
both; or rather indeed, once it signified a power, now it signifies a vice.

Thirdly, this seems to have been the case of our word Vniversalis Papa, at
least in S. Gregory's time; when that expression, if taken in a due sense,
sem'd tolerable, both by the example given in the Council of Chalcedon in order
to Pope Leo, and also by Eulogius Patriarch of Alexundria's letter, giving it
to Pope Gregory: but 'twas refused by that prudent and humble Pope, because the
proud Patriarch of Constantinople usurped it in an illegitimate and intolerable
sense.

Fourthly, the sense of that title in the testimonies objected being evidently
this, that none could be Patriarchs but himself; as appears by Pope Pelagius
his Epistle cited here by Gratian, quia si unus Patriarcharum Vniversalis
dicatur, Patriarcharum nomen caeteris derogatur; and the like in S. Gregory's
expression to Eulogius, when he refused it: this, I say, being evident; and it
being on the other side no less evident that our tenet concerning the Pope's
Authority is not, that it is of such a nature as debars others subordinate
degrees, and, in particular, Patriarchs and Bishops, to be truly what they are
called; it is likewise evident, that our meaning, when we apply it to the Pope,
is different quite from the signification the objectors take it in. Now that
the Pope's Authority, as held by Catholics, hinders not others to remain still
Patriarchs, is most plain: For, we grant him only such an higher degree of
power over Patriarchs, as an Archbishop has over a Bishop; from which
superiory over them it follows that he is Supreme in God's Church. As then, the
placing an Archbishop over Bishops does not un-bishop them; so neither does
the exalting the Pope's Anthority above Pa^^iarchal destroy the notion of a
Patriarch: but each of them retains their complete limits of Power in the
Church, notwithstanding their subordination to their Superior: and
consequently, the testimonies are not a jot to the Doctor's purpose; since they
declare themselves to mean one thing, and he brings them to denote a quite
different matter.

Fifthly, had not the Testimonies declared themselves to mean otherwise than we
do, yet (to show more the miserable weakness of this testimony-gleaner) it were
no such great wonder that S. Gregory (such was his humility) should deny to
accept what was due to him. A plain instance of this may be found. 4. Epist.
31. where he denies himself even to be a Priest.

Sixthly, whoever reads his Epistles sent throughout the whole Church, it is
impossible but he should see that, however he denied the word of Universal
Bishop, which sounded then proudly, yet he both practiced and challenged the
thing it self, that is, the Papal Jurisdiction, which we now mean by that word;
notwithstanding his profound humility, which made him never desire to stand
upon his power, but when it was necessary. A perfect instance of this is found,
7 Epist. 65. Ind. 2. where he says, Si qua culpa, etc. If there be any fault
or crime found in Bishops, that every Bishop is subject to the Apostolical See;
but when their fault does not exact it, (that is, make it necessary for him to
use his Authority). that then, upon the account of humility, all were his
Equals. See also l. 7. Epist. 64. where he puts it as undoubted, that the
Church of Constantinople is subject to the Apostolical See; and this to be
acknowledged by the Emperor and by the Bishop of Constantinople himself. See
another most express Testimony to the same purpose, lib. 5. Epist 24. to
Marinianus Bishop of Ravenna.

Seventhly, those words, Ne^ eti^m Romanus Pontifex Vniversalis est
appellandus, are not found either in the Council of Ca^^hage it self, or in the
ancient Copies, but are Gratian's addition only: wherefore they are to be
understood in the sense wherein Pope Pelagius took them; whose Epistle he cites
to make good those words.

Eighthly, equivalent terms to what we mean by those words were far more
anciently given to the Bishop of Rome Zephyrinus by Te^tullian, lib. 1. de
pudicitia; where de calls him Pontifex maximus and Episcopus Episcoporum.

Ninthly, and lastly, to put this whole business out of doubt, Dr. H's own dear
Friend, Balsamon, a Greek Schismatic, confesses (and surely he knew as well as
Dr. H.) that that Title was forbidden, to take away the Arrogance of Names; and
that for that reason many Patriarchs did style themselves (...), vile and base.
See Bals. in Conc. Carth. 3. Cant. 42. Where, though he mingles something of
his own Schism, yet thus far is clear for me, that the name or title was only
treated there, nor the thing or Jurisdiction; about which our controversy
being, Dr. H. ought to have brought testimonies impugning it, not a bare name
only.

Calculate these manifold weaknesses, kind Reader, with thy understanding; and
then tell me, if it must not be a most desperately* weak cause which can drive
it is Patrons to cast their strongest hopes upon such testimonies, which (to
omit other frailties) declare themselves and are confessed by our bitterest
Adversaries not to mean the thing or Jurisdiction, (the only matter in
debate,) but the Phrase of titular appellation only: which shows plainly, that
the Objecter's intent was to bring the question of the solid power and
Authority, into the Logomachy and wordskirmish of an aerie title. So that Dr.
H. pays his Reader with the same coin, as that hungry fellow did; who, having
satisfied himself with the smell of the Cook's meat, paid his exacting host
with the sound of the money in stead of the substan^e.

But now, it being firmly settled by the former frothy Argument, that the Pope
had anciently no Universal Authority; he proceeds to show when this strange
Usurpation empowered it self over the whole Church. And this he does from
Paulus Diaconus, de gestis Romanorum, l. 18. who (as he pretends) tells us,
that Boniface the third, with much ado, obtained an Edict of Phocas the
Emperor to that purpose. Where, if he means that the name and title, before
forbidden, were then first allowed by him; what follows against us, who
maintain a real Power, not a verbal title? But, if he means that the Supreme
Jurisdiction over the whole Church was then given by Phocas: then, besides that
this Jurisdiction we dispute of is over Kings and Emperors, as well as others,
in Ecclesiastical matters, and so not likely to be given by Phocas the
Emperor; we must be put to imagine (which will cost us no less then perfect
madness, ^re we shall be able to do it,) upon the blind and bare affirmation
of an obscure Sentence, that an Universal Government in Ecclesiastical matters
over the whole Christian world could be introduc't (nay held o^ Faith, and to
have come from Christ) without any visible effects of siding, opposing,
deprecating, submitting, complaints, applauses, on the one side and the other;
together with change of Ecclesiastical Laws, and the temporal also as concerned
in the Ecclesiastical, and millions of other particular changes included in,
and dependent on these general ones; no effect of it at all being notorius, but
only a testimony, (or perhaps two) in a rumour-grounded History-book. If the
Doctor would persuade us, that the Supreme Jurisdiction of Rome was then
introduc't, let him show effects proportionable to such a novelty of usurpation
in things of highest concernment; that is, such effects as in all reason were
likely to issue out of that cause put: or otherwise, rational Readers must in
all reason have leave to think, that he speaks against all reason. And let him
never hope to persuade any man that has an ounce of brains in his head, though
he bring twenty testimonies more valid than this, that an Universal
Jurisdiction in highest matters could creep into the world with pantofles of
matt on, without discovering it self in multitudes of circumstances
proportionable to its visibleness and weightiness: that is, let him not hope to
gul men of reason with words, to deny the light of their reason, demonstrative
Evidence. Demonstrative, I say; for I account it as great and firm a
Demonstration as any in nature, that it is impossible it should come in
unattended by universal and visible changes over the face of the whole
Christian world: which I thus show in brief.

The cause was put; to wit, a novelty in the highest degree of Government, and
in highest matters. The matter to work on was put; to wit, rational Souls or
men's minds, because of their diverse dispositions apt to be wrought upon
diversely; that is, to be stirred up to diverse Thoughts, to diverse Passions the
result of those thoughts, and diverse outward Expressions the effects of those
passions: and all this according to the weight and moment of the cause, which
was of the highest nature imaginable. Lastly, the cause was applied to the
matter: for it is equally impossible, that an universal Government should be
brough in, and all not know of it, as that is should at once be and not-be;
since it cannot be introduc't universally, without signifying at least to the
Subjects either by writing or other carriage, that their obedience is expected.
This being so, it is as evident and demonstrable that universal, most visible,
and mighty commotions and changes must accompagny such a novelty of Rome's
usurpation, as that the effect must necessarily be, when the cause is actually
causing: which none ever denied, or can, without denying the first principles.
Now, add to this, that the Protestant Authors themselves are in twenty minds
about the times that this change came in, and that their best Authors beyond
exception (of which I remember Doctor Whittaker is one) confess in express
terms, that the time of the Roman Church's change cannot easily be told, and
that they cannot tell by whom nor at what time the Enemy did sow the Papist's
doctrine, (as may be seen in the Catalogue of Protestancy, where they are
cited:) add this I say, and it follows, that no such visible effects of it is
introducing can be shown at all; and consequently, that it was never
introduc't. Which as it immoveably strength^ns our title of possession,
rendering it such as is not only justly presumable, but necessarily
demonstrable, to have come from Christ: so it will also let the rational
Protestant Readers see plainly what it is to which their wisest Doctors would
persuade them; to wit, to renounce the clear, solid, and certain light of
reason, demonstrative Evidence, to follow the obscure, uncertain, and wordish
dictionary stuff of every trifling, controvertible, or (at best) waxen-natur'd
Testimony. Yet the Doctor's own words are but these; that Boniface the third,
with much ado, obtained of Phocas the Emperor an Edict for the Primacy and
Universal Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome: See Paulus Diac. de gestis Romans
l. 18 which still is an argument that till then it had no foundation. Where
first is to be noted that, of his own good will, the Doctor puts in those
words, with much ado; whereas the Author only says, rogante Papa, the Pope
entreating it. Secondly, that whereas the Author says, Caput esse omnium
Ecclesiarum, in his book de gestis Longobardorum, l. 4. c. 37. (which Book
without controversy is his and plainly says, that the Emperor defined that
the Roman Church was the Head of all Churches;) our Doctor dissembles this, and
follows a text out of de gestis Roman. which book is doubted of by learned men
to be none of his, and by the very phrase seems to be a corruption of the
other, and that ut esset, is put for esse; it being an odd piece of Latin to
say, Statuit sedem Romanam ut esset caput, whereas a Latinist would have said
statuit, seeds ut esset. Wherefore, it is evident that the Doctor's great
bragging that the Story is known to all, is resolved into the corruption of an
unauthentick text. Which is most evident by the words following in both places
of the said Author, Quia Ecclesia Constantinopolitana primam se omnium
Ecclesiarum scribebat: which bears no sense, if the Decree gave the
Jurisdiction; but an excellent one, if the decree only defined it against the
wrongful challenge of the Constantinopolitan Church. Wherefore you see that the
Doctors Inference, which yet is an argument that til then it had no foundation,
is so wretched, that the contrary ought to be deduced, tha it is an argument,
the Authority which Phocas defined to be his, had been his before. And thus
much in refutation of Dr. H's Defense of his three first Chapters.

SECOND PART.
Containing a Refute of Dr. H's first fundamental Exception against the Pope's
Authority from the pretended limitation of S. Peter's Provinces.
Sect. 1.
Dr. H's prelusory toys answered. No obligation for Catholics to produce
Evidence. The infinite Advantages our true Possession has, and the perfect
nullity of their vainly-pretended one; together with a most rare sample of his
manner of arguing.
Dr. H. in his answer, p. 38. puts a distinction of his own endeavors;
affirming that he had fully answered my fourth Section, and only saying that
he had answered the following ones. Among these which are answered only, my
sixth Section is one, which he pretends to have given Satisfaction to, Reply c.
3. sect. 2. and 4. where not a word is found in reference to that, but to my
first only, of which he was pleased to make two. This done, he proceeds, upon
this mistake of his own and the Printer's mis-ciphering it, to call my sixth
the seventh; and to be witty against me in his dry way, telling the Reader (as
if he would let him see that S. W. could not reckon as far as eight) that I
have another seventh Section: though both the Errata at the end corrected that
small lapse of the Printer, the titles of the Sections in the beginning of the
book might have cleared Mr. H's head in that point, and the first Section
immediately going before would have told him (had not he been pleased to
mistake it, and divide it into two) that the following ought to be the sixth.
But nothing could secure. S. W. from the melancholy cavilling humor of his
Adversary: who is so terrible, that the Printer's least oversight, and his own
mistake must occasion a dry adnimadversion against S. W. and yet the jest is,
he pretends nothing but courtesy and civility; and persuades many of his
passionate adherents, that he practices both in his writings.

For answer then to my first seventh Section (according to Dr. H. but in
reality the sixth) he refers me to his Reply c. 4. sect. 1 where he answers all
but the ridiculous colors, (as he says, Answ. p. 38.) which indeed I must say
were very ridiculous, as who ever reads Schism Disarmed, p. 41. or his own book
p. 68. may easily see: where, after he had spoken of and acknowledged King
Henry the eighth's casting out the Pope's Authority, it follows in his own
words, thus; ( of Schism, p. 68.) First they (the Romanists) must manifest the
matter of fact, that thus it was in England: 2. the consequence of that fact,
that it were Schism, supposing those Successors of S. Peter were thus set over
all Christians by Christ: that is, we must be put first to prove a thing which
himself and all the world acknowledges, to wit, that King H. the eighth denied
the Pope's Supremacy, next, that what God bid us do is to be done, and that
the Authority instituted by Christ is to be obe'yd. Dr H. is therefore can-did
when he acknowledges here that these passages are ridiculous; very unconsonant
to himself, when he denies there is the least cause or ground for it in his
Tract, whereas his own express words, now cited, manifest^^^ and lastly,
extraordinarily reserved, in giving no other answer than this bare denial of
his own express words. But, being taken tardy in his Divisionary art, in which
it is his common custom to talk quodlibetically; he thought it the wiser way
to put up what is past with patience, than by defending it give occasion for
more mirth.

But, to come to the point: That which was objected to him by me and the Cath.
Gent. was this, That he expected Catholics should produce Evidences and proofs
for the Pope's Authority in England; which task we disclaimed to belong to us,
who stood upon possession, (and such a possession as no King can show for his
Crown) any more, than it does to an Emperor or any long and-quietly-possest
Governor, to evidence to a known Rebel and actual Renouncer of his Authority,
that his title to the Kingdom is just, ere he can either account him or punish
him as rebellious.

In answer, Dr. H. Repl. p. 44. first denies that he required in the Place
there agitated (that is, in the beginning of his fourth Chapter of Schism) any
such thing of the Catholics, as to prove their pretensions: ^ut his own
express words, of Schism, p. 66. 67. check his bad memory; which are these, Our
method now leads us to enquire impartially what evidences are producible
against the Church of England, whereby it may be thought liable to this guilt
of Schism. Whence he proceeds to examine our Evidences, and to solve them:
which is manifestly to put himself upon the part of the Respondent, the
Catholic on the part of the Opponent; that is, to make us bring proofs, and
seem to renounce the claim of our so-qualify'd a possession by condescending to
dispute it. Whereas we are in all reason to stick to it till it be sufficiently
disproved, which cannot be done otherwise than by rigorous Evidence, as has
been shown; not to dispute it as a thing dubious: since it is evident we had the
possession, and such a possession as could give us a title. This therefore we
ought to plead, not to relinquish this firm ground, and to fall to quibble with
him in wordish testimonies.

To omit, that the evidences he produces in our name are none of ours. For, the
only evidence we produce, when we please to oppose, is the evidence of the
Infallibility of Universal Tradition or Attestation of Forefathers, which we
build upon both for that and other points of Faith: nor do we build upon
Scripture at all, but as interpreted by the practice of the Church and the
Tradition now spoken of. Wherefore, since Dr. H. neither mentions, produces,
nor solves those, that is, neither the certainty of Universal Attestation, nor
the testimonies of Scripture as explicable by the received doctrine of
Ancestors (which latter must be done by showing that the doctrine of the
Church, thus attested and received, gives them not this explication;) it is
evident that he has not so much as mentioned, much less produced, or solved
our Evidences.

Our Doctors indeed, as private Writers, undertake sometimes, ex
superabundanti, to discourse from Scripture upon other Grounds, as Grammar,
History, propriety of language, etc. to show, ad hominem, our advantage over
the Protestants even in their own (and to them the only) way: but,
Interpretations of Scripture thus grounded are not those upon which we rely for
this, or any other point of our Faith. So that Dr. H. by putting upon us
wrong-pretended Evidences, brings all the question, as is custom is, to a
word-skirmish; where he is sure men may fight like Andabatae in the dark, and
so he may hap to escape knocks: whereas, in the other way of Evident reason, he
is sure to meet with enough. At least, in that case, the controversy being
only managed by wit, and carried on his side who can be readiest in
explicating and referring one place to another, with other like inventions; it
may be his good fortune to light on such a doltish Adversary, that the Doctor
may make his ayre-connected discourse more plausible than the others, which is
all he cares for: This being a defense and ground enough for his fallible, that
is probable, Faith.

Dr. H. defends himself, by saying ( p. 44. (he meant only that Catholics
bring Christ's donation to S. Peter for an Argument of the Pope's Supremacy;
instancing against the Cath. Gent. in his own confession, that Catholics rely
on that donation as the Foundation or cornerstone of the whole build^ng. By
which one may see that the Doctor knows not or will not know the difference
between a Title and an Argument. Christ's donation to S. Peter is our title,
our manner of trnour, by which we hold the Pope his Successor, Head pastor;
not our argument to infer that he is so. It Is part of our Tenet, and the thing
which we hold upon possession, to be disproved by them or (if we see it
fitting) to be proved by us: not our argument or proof against them, to
maintain it or conclude it so, As a title then we rely and build upon it, not
produce it as a proof to conclude any thing from it. And indeed I wonder any
man of reason should imagine we did so: since (if he be a Scholar) he cannot but
know that we see how, to the Protestants, the supposed proof would be as
deniable and in it is self as obscure, as the thing he imagins we would prove by
it or infer from it: which he knows every child can tell is against the nature
of a medium or argument. Yet poor Catholic Writers, from whom Dr. H. has got
all the learning, must be imagined unacquainted with that trivial toy belonging
to the A, B C, of Logic.

Next he goes about to prove our tenor of possession null: which he does most
exquisitely, by telling us ( Reply, p. 45.) that now they are in possession,
and consequently, by the force of the Catholics argument, all arguments
deducible from thence are lost to him, the prescription being now on the
Protestant's side as before on the Catholics. Where, first he manifestly
calumniates the Catholic tenet, calling it prescription: whereas prescription
is a title to get a right in that which was known to be none of his before;
which is contrary to the profession of Catholics, who maintain their
possession to have been ever from the beginning; and never to have belonged to
any before: so that this is a trick of a cunning shuffling gamester, by
changing the name to alter the state of the whole question. But, to proceed
with his argument against our possession, which he pursues in these words, And
there is nothing left the Romanists to plead, but the original right on this
side against the violence of the succeding possession. Well done Doctor, still;
it is the luck of your Arguments against us, that they are most proper and
exquisite pleas for all malefactors. Pray lend me your reasons a while, and
you shall see what work they will make in the world in a short time. Put case
then, that a company of Thieves enter into another man's house, and turning
him, his Wife and Family out of doors, resolve to settle and nest themselves
there: and, knowing the Law will call them to account for turning an inhabitant
out of his possession, they hire Dr. H. (of Divine, turned Lawyer) to plead for
them. The honest Inhabitant pleads possession. Dr. H. replies, that at this
time he has no possession, but has lost it and all arguments deducible from
thence; and that he has nothing now left him to plead, but the original right
against the violence of a succeeding possession: especially, if the intruding
crew have been in it any long time, (though the manner of their violent
usurpation were never so visible and notorious) then Dr. H. pleads prescription
in his Clients behalf, and exacts of the honest man to show his original right;
which he (his Ancestors having enjoyed it time out of mind) not being able to
manifest, the poor fellow loses his house, and the picaros carry the cause by
the virtue of Dr. H's argument against the possession of Catholics.

The same reason would do the same service to any Queen that cuts a purse, or
any Knave that takes a cloak: they are at present, (as Dr. H. tells us) in
possession, and the right owner must lose Cloak and Purse both, according to
these new Laws, unless they can prove their original right, and show how they
came by them: That is, they who are innocent must be treated as if they were
guilty, and forced to give account how they came by what they formerly-quietly
enjoyed; and the guilty must be treated like innocent persons, and stand secure
upon their possession.

To this miserable pass would the world be brought, if men should treat one
another as the Protestants treat us in this point; and if they were no more
sincere and careful to look well to their estates, than they are to look to
the Grounds of their Faith and their eternal Salvation. The eager adhesion to
the former makes them account this treaty foul play, if their temporal
livelihoods be concerned; which their negligence of eternal happiness, more
obscurely and far-off proposed, makes them willing to think very fair in their
debates about Eternity with us.

To make this clearer, and withal to show how parallel Dr. H's Possession is
to the former unjust ones, and how unapt to parallel, much less to out-vy and
disannul ours, as he would have it, we will put them in the balance of reason,
and let sincerity hold the scales: premising first, that we both hold, at least
Dr. H. grants ( Repl. p. 46. l. 13.) in one place (and that the more express,
of the two contradictory ones,) that prescription, in divine and Ecclesiastical
things, is of no force: which makes his pretended hundred years in it self
useless for any thing in this controversy; it being a Government instituted as
inviolable by our Savior, not alterable or alienable by humane circumstances:
which appears to be granted by us both, because they pretend to prove the
King's, supremacy and the equality of the Apostles from Scripture; we (when we
see it fitting) the contrary. This presupposed, let us compare our Possession
to their present pretended one. Ours is acknowledgedly ancient; theirs late and
upstart. Ours is such as no visible Effects proportionable to it is weight can
be shown, that is, such immediate changes in the world as may justly make it
supposed an Usurpation; theirs, manifest in such visible and violent immediate
effects, and such consequences of millions of changes, as render it a palpable
Usurpation. Hence ours is obscure in it is original, and at most but
controvertible that it ever begun: theirs, beyond all controversy, new, and of
a late original. Practical effects clad in all their circumstances yet remain
in the world, to attest their thrusting us out of possession: no such effects
alleged of our thrusting them or any else out, except two or three impertinent
conjectures, the like whereof may be drawn for any absurdity: and consequently,
it is much more impossible we should ever have usurped, than that William the
Conqueror should have empowered himself over England, without other manifest
immediate effects or signs of his newly-introduc't supreme Government there,
than that there are two or three dark sentences in the Apocalypse, which
abstracting from antecedents and consequents, may be applied to it. The whole
world agrees of the time and circumstances of their possession's beginning: of
ours our very Adversaries doubt, and are in several minds. Hence ours can
justly claim to have come from Christ; that is, to be indeed a Possession, and
the sole possession in the matter we speak of: their present pretended
possession is impossible to be presumed for such, since every one knows when it
began. Wherefore our Possession is so qualified, that, of it self, it can
ground a claim, that it came from the Fountain head of all Ecclesiastical
power, Christ Jesus; not needing the assistance of another former possession to
patch it up: since, no interruption of it being known, it is justly presumed to
have descended from Christ, without interruption, the same it is now. Their
present Possession cannot of it self even pretend to have come from Christ at
all; since it begun lately and, if taken alone, reaches not nor can pretend to
reach to the time in which Christ lived, but needs to be piec'd with a former
imaginary possession antecedent to our pretented usurpation: Wherefore, this
present state of theirs is not capable of any plea of possession at all; not
consequently is it at all a truly-nam'd possession, in any other sense than as
the having any thing, however it is come by, is called a possession. Again, the
Pope's possession in England was a quiet one, without any else pretending it
but himself, in opposition to him: Theirs was never quietly enjoyed at all;
Catholic Writers in their learned Controtroversies ever pleading the Pope's
lawful title, and showing theirs an unlawful and rebellious usurpation: Even
this present book I now write attests that the debate is yet on foot, and the
pleas so strong on our side, as I dare promise my self so much fruit of my
endeavors, that no man living will say they have carried the cause and enjoy
it quietly.

Lastly, (not to mention the clear advantages it has from the testimony of all
Antiquity) our Possession is demonstrated, by the force of Universal
Attestation, (acknowledged by our present Adversary, at unawares, Infallible)
to have come from Christ; at least they must confess that men not meanly
learned pretend this, have attempted it, and answered the objections produced
against it by best Protestant wits and strongest Champions. Our Possession then
has for it is coming from Christ rigorous Evidence, so held by us; at least,
(as our Adversaries themselves must grant) pretense of Evidence as yet
uncontrolled by their party: Whereas the pretended possession they enjoy at
present is evidently the contrary; to wit, not come from Christ, but begun
either in King Henry's or Q. Elizabeth's days; nor is it capable at all of
pretending Evidence for it is coming from Christ, seeing it has Evidence
against it is coming from Christ. Now then* Prescription here being of no force,
their present pretended possession is no better than it was after their first
three days; and our Possession so well qualified, theirs so ill, in order to
the present matter in hand, as appers by these Parallels: it follows plainly,
that they can have no better a plea from their present possession, than the
housebreaker, rober, or cutpurse, from the present possession (that is,
having) of the things which they lately purloin'd or unjustly took away. It is
Dr. H. then, who ( Repl, p. 45.) would give leave to every man to catch and
hold what he can; not we, who would only have every man hold (till rigorous
Evidence be brought against his right) those things of which he was found in
immemorial, quiet and, in many other respects, so well qualified a Possession.

By this the Candid Reader, who pleases to scan over the former parallels, will
discover how weak that cause must be, which drives it is Defender to such
incomparable absurdities, as to tell us that our possession and all the
arguments deducible thence are now lost to us, because of their succeding
possession: so making their counterfeit possession (which indeed signifyes the
bare having a thing) preponderate ours, which has been shown to excel it in
such manifold advantages. The charitable non sense that follows I shall not
think worth confuting; after I have laid open our force of possession, which
frees us in reason from the task of arguing, pleading, or opposing; and their
no- possession, which obliges them to produce Evidences of our pretended
usurpation, and not to expect them from us: This being all that was common to
me and the Cath. Gentl. and so all that belonged to me to vindicate. Nor indeed
was it needful for any to add any thing more in answer to this Section. What
follows is such pitiful stuff, as would under-value the worth of a piece of
paper to vouchsafe it a confute: yet it deserves mentioning as a pattern of Dr.
H's wit, and solid manner of argu^ng against the Romanists.

First, although he knows, and all the world acknowledges, they cast a Papal
Authority out of England, and not Patriarchal only: yet his dinstinguishing
art must needs be brought in to blunder, as his custom is, with an If; (p. 46.
47.) If the Pope pretend only to be a Primate or Patriarch, etc. What If he
be? why then he quotes himself to have done strange things against him in his
book of Schism; where he tells us he has evidenced, etc. and sufficiently
justified their carriage against him: So strongly he disputes against us, and
we must believe him; and there ends the left leg of his trifling distinction.
Next follows the right, and steps in halting with another If: But If the Pope's
pretensions be higher, even for the Supremacy it self, etc. as every one knows
it was, and consequently his former words were most frivolous. Now let us see
what ground this foot of the distinction stands on. It follows (says he) that,
first, I may surely say they were neverbonae fidei possessores of that; and
secondly, that the King, by being so is supreme, etc. So that first he
overthrew us only with his own supposition, that the Popes neither exercised
nor claimed any power here more than Patriarchal: next, by his own self-conceit
that he had tickled him in that point in his evidencing book of Schism: and
thirdly, if the Pope pretends to any Supremacy, he confutes him most powerfully
by only telling him, that he may surely say he has none. And indeed it is most
true; for nothings is more sure, than that Dr. H. may surely say voluntarily
what he lists, without either sense or reason: his common custom has now made
it his proper privilege.

But now comes the last onset, which massacres all out arguments and Grounds at
once, threatening to remove all appearance of reason from this whole exception:
which he does 1. by telling us, it is manifest that when they cast the Pope out,
they had reasons for it. 2. that he must have leave to suppose those reasons
were convincing. Truly, so he shall have leave to suppose what he pleases; so
he will give his Readers likewise leave to suppose him most weak, and his cause
most pitiful, which must be maintained by such weak shifts as the begging
leave to suppose that all is true which the Patron of it shall please to say.
This done, he quotes a book of the ringleaders of his own Schism, reprinted
(as he brags) by one Goldastus (a French Huguenot) under the title of Opus
Eximium: then he modestly commends to us again his own Book of Schism; and so
concludes, that he hopes it will suffice. Thus has Dr. H. removed all
appearance of our reasons, by the necessity of his having leave to suppose that
theirs were convincing, and the quoting a book of his own Folks, which another
of the same leaven calls an excellent work. Weighty proofs against us without
doubt!

But, because we have opened these Evidences of his too much; we will fold them
up into Logical form, and there leave them. The Doctor disputes thus, The Pope
being only a Patriarch, I have sufficiently justified what was done here in my
evidencing book of Schism; therefore he has no such Authority here: The
antecedent is supposed as a first Principle known by the light of nature. Next,
he argues thus: I may surely say he has no Supremacy; therefore he has none.
Lastly, I must have leave to suppose we had convincing reasons for casting him
out, and my Companions think the same; Ergo I have removed all appearance of
r^ason from the Romanist's whole exceptions. With such slight talking as this,
kind Readers, Dr. H. would gull Souls into Hell; and (which is the misery of
miseries) send them thither with nonsense in their Heads.

Sect. 2.
How Dr. H. prevaricates from his formerly-pretende! Evidences. His ignorance
of the way of interpreting Scripture manifested in his groundless explication
of The Lot of Apostleship, Act. 1. for a lesser Province.
Dr. H. in his fourth Chapter of Schism, to undo the Pope's Universal
Pastourshi^, undertakes to undo St. Peter's first; by showing that his
Commission was limited to the Jews only. To do which handsomely, he would
limite the Jurisdiction of each Apostle likewise to certain Provinces; lest his
particular pique against the Pope's Predecessor S. Peter, should be too
notorious, and manifest that his passion had engaged him in a partiality
against that Blessed Prince of the Apostles.

But because this doctrine of the Apostles exclusive Provinces, (as he calls
them, Of Schism, p. 70.) limiting their universal Jurisdiction, was so rare a
novelty, that blind Antiquity never so much as dreamed on it, nor any Author,
that I can ^ear of, ever so much as named or mentioned it before: he fetches
the first root of their pedigree, their An est, from the words (...), and
(...), the lot of Apostleship, and Judas his proper place in Hell; which he
will have signify, exclusive Provinces, restraining the Jurisdiction or Power
of each single Apostle.

His Disarmer first showed, then challenged him, ( of Schism, p. 47. that his
interpretation of the first place, for Exclusive Provinces, (which was his
first Evidence, or rather the Ground of his future Evidences) was so strong and
unmovable, that it alone resisted the whole world being evidently opposite to
common sense, repugnant expressly to Scripture, injuriously contrary to all
Antiquity, prevaricating from the translation of their own Church, and lastly
contradictory to himself. The Cath. Gent. calls the interpretations wretched
and blasphemous, This was our charge, let us see now his defense.

First, ashamed to father his own Grounds or his own words, ( Answ: p. 38.) he
denies that he meant these for Evidences, or ever thought on them as such.
But, God be praised, his own book of Schism is extant, which ( page 70.) ends
the fourth parag. by professing to offer his Evidences: after which begins the
fifth parag, thus, And first it is evident by Scripture that S. Peter was the
Apostle of the Circumcision or Jews, exclusively to the Uncircumcision, etc.
and no Evidences from Scripture pretented in the same parag. but these two
miserable mistakes of it already noted; from which, Repl. p. 50. l. 11. he
pretends to deduce that distinction of Provinces.

Next, he tells us in the same place, that it needed no Evidencing; the thing
being evident by it is own light, that the Apostles went not all to one, but
disposed themselves over all the world to several Provinces. If this were his
sole intent there, then why did himself professedly go about to evidence, p.
70. l. 4. what he tells us here needs no evidencing? Or, what was his meaning
to labor so hard with testimonies and Id ests, from the fifth parag to the
twentieth, now by pretending irrefragable, now unquestionable Evidences, to
prove that which he tells us here is evident by it is own light, and needs no
other? But indeed that was not his intent then, but to show their Jurisdictions
exclusively limited, (as shall be seen:) though in this Book of his second
thoughts, preceiving it was impossible to make good his proofs or excuse his Id
ests, manifested by his Disarmer to be so impertinent; he prevaricates from the
whole question, and relinquishes^ position (which, could he have proved it,
might have do^e him some service) for another which, though granted, does him
none at all. For what hurt is it to S. Peter's Headship among the Apostles, if
some went one way, some another, to preach?

Thirdly, he is terribly rigorous against S. W. in telling him, in the same
place, that his seventh Section is borrow^d from the Cath Gent. For (besides
that the Cath. Gent. puts only one exception against Mr. H's wrong
interpret^tion of (...), whereas S. W. put seven) no honest man living who is
true to his cause, and has more regard to it is good than to an aerie flash of
his own honor, will refuse to write to the same sense another has writ before
him, only because himself was not the first Author or Inventer of that sense;
if he sees that neither himself nor any man else could write better upon that
point: which were in effect to renounce reason, because it is not originiz'd
from his own invention, but proposed first by another. In this manner all
Catholic writers borrow all they write from the Church; striving to come as
near her sense and Grounds as they can possibly, and not vainly hugging
self-fancied Grounds of their own, as is the Protestant's mode. But this shows
what kind of Spirit Dr. H. is of; who thinks it a disgrace to write what one
deems truth, if it hap to be the doctrine or sense of another: and account it
his only vainglorious honor to be the first broacher of new explications of
Scripture, and other rare inventions never before heard of Of which humor of
his this present point is a pitiful instance, his book of Schism a perfect
model, his Folio-Annotations on the Bible ae large Map; as some more prudent
Friends of his own complain.

Fourthly, whereas he says here that my seventh Section is answered Repl. c. 4.
Sect. 2. it is a great mistake; the greater part of my exceptions being not so
much as touched there. And surely, it had been a great providence, if going
about there only to answer the Cath. Gentleman's one exception, he should have
answered beforehand, by a kind of prophetical foresight, all my seven.

Fifthly, (to come to his Reply, the pretended place for answer) he is accused
for being a bad Interpreter; and he spends the greatest part of his pains in
showing himself a good Grammarian, and manifesting the notion of the word
(...). Which is a quite different thing. The same word may have twenty several
notions in it self, but has ordinarily but one of those as it is found in the
Context and Syntax with other words. The significations of words are to be
found in Dictionaries; the Interpretation of them, as they stand in
propositions, depends upon the antecedents, consequents, with all the other
train of concomitant Circumstances: especially upon the import of the whole,
and transaction of the business or thing there spoken of. Hence, the
signification of the words interpreted to be sometimes downright and proper,
sometimes bowed to a Metaphor, sometimes strained to a Catachresis, nay even
sometimes taken absurdly and barbarously: so that, though the phrase or word
seems oftentimes very odd in it self, if taken alone; yet the circumstances and
total import of the sense make that acception (though never so improper)
altogether necessary. It being possible, even for the best Author, to mistake,
or be careless in the right use of a word; but absolutely impossible and a
Contradiction, he should not understand his own meaning and intention, when he
goes about to speak or write.

Hence is evident how little is likely to be ever convinced, by Grammatical and
Critical quibbling upon the dictionary signification of a word: and how little
it conduces to the interpretation of any place, more than barely to show the
possibility that the word may have, in some cases, such a signification; both
the possibility, probability, and certainty that it must have it there; being
lest to the present circumstances, and the import of the whole Series of the
sense. It being therefore out of question between us and granted, nay asserted
and held by us, that (...), if taken in it self, can signify either a lot, or
whatever is obtained by lot, whether it be Office, Province, an horse, a bag of
money, or whatever else; or whether it be by way of division or without: it is
plain that Dr. H. in showing the grammatical signification of the word in it
self, has beat the air frivolously to no purpose. Nor is his showing it to
signify such a kind of lot in other places of Scripture to any better end: Both
because, if the books be writ by several Authors, it may probably have one
acception in one, another in another; and perhaps a diverse one in the same: as
also, because, however the word can possibly signify a Province obtained by
lot, if put in due circumstances; yet, that it can possibly have that
signification here or in this place, must depend upon the present circumstances
and import of that Chapter, or all that belongs to that business: which
circumstances not being found in any other place of Scripture, the showing the
signification of it in other places is little or nothing to the signification it
ought to have in this.

It were good sport fort one, who is at leisure and has nothing else to do,
to observe what havoc this plain Rule of interpreting Scripture rightly would
make with Dr. H's critical Folio-Annotations on the Bi^le. We shall only apply
it to this present place, and desire the Protestant Reader to peruse this
Chapter from verse. 15. to the end, where all that belongs to this business is
contained; and see whether he can find any ground, or appearance of Ground,
either precedent in the Apostles intentions, concomitant in the transaction of
the business it self, or lastly subsequent in the effect of casting lots, why
the thing received by that means should be a lesser province, or that the words
(...) should signify so. Of their antecedent intent we have no other notice
than this (even according to the Protestants own transtation,) that they meant
to make up the number of the Apostles by substituting another in the place of
Judas) not to go to a lesser Province, but) Act. 1. v. 22. to witness with them
the resurrection: which, though all grant it was performed by going several
ways, yet there is no such thing there expressed, to ground or infer Dr. H's
following interpretation, which is all concerns us at present.

Again, Act. 1. v. 17. the words, For he was numbered with us, signify that
they had reflections on the imperfectness of their number, and the following
words, and had obtained part of this ministry, make it impossible that a
lesser province should be there signified: for, Judas had not obtained a lesser
province in his lifetime, as Dr. H. grants in many places: which is confirmed
by verse. 25. where it is said, that Judas, by trangression, fell from his part
of this ministry and Apostleship. Now, speaking properly, it is equally
impossible one should fall from a condition or state he had not before, as fall
locally from a place in which he actually was not before. He had therefore (if
we speak properly and according to the express words of the 25. verse) that
thing before, from which he fell; that is, he had actually in his life time
that part of ministry and Apostleship into which S. Mathias succeeded: but Dr.
H. grants, he had not actually before his death a lesser province, but the
Office of Apostle only: therefore those words can with no propriety signify a
lesser Province, but the Apostolical dignity only; and so it was the Apostles
intention to surrogate S. Mathias only into this dignity.

Next, as for the transaction of the business it self, it was only performed
by casting lots and prayer; no circumstances imaginable, nor the least word
being there favorable to this explication, or that can be pretended to favor
it: if we omit, as we ought in all reason, the phrases in controversy; for we
must not prove the same thing by it is self. To come then to the effect
subsequent to the casting of lots; nothing can be invented either plainer in
it is self, or more explicative of the former intention. The words are these,
the lot fell upon Mathias; and the effect was, that he was numbered with the
eleven Apostles. Relate these words to the 17. verse, For he (Judas) was
numbered with us; and to the following verses, importing thus much, that Judas
fell, and, by his fall, there wanted one of the former Apostolical number: upon
this they cast lots, and the result of that action is expressed to be this, that
he was numbered with the eleven Apostles. Ioyn the well ordered series of these
circumstances together, which the very place it self affords and offers; and
tell me good Reader, if it be likely any thing can be meant by that into which
they chose Mathias, but the dignity or office of an Apostle: tell me whether it
be not a wretched interpretation (as the Cath. Gent. called dit,) only upon a
possibility that the word, taken in it is self and grammatically, or as found in
other circumstances, may have such a signification; to infer, against the whole
stream of all the present circumstances, and without the least Ground or shadow
of Ground from the place in which it is found, that it signifies a lesser
Province.

Thus much for that place, as explicable by the right Rules of interpreting
Scripture. Now then, should we condescend to criticize upon each particular
word taken in it sell; (...), if taken alone, signifies either the lot, or the
thing obtained by lot; and in that place it is evident and granted to be the
latter: but still it is left to be determined by other adjoining words, what
kind of thing this was which was thus obtained. The words joined with it are
these, (...), of this ministry and Apostleship: and by these the general
signification of (...) is to be determined; that is, whether it signify a
province, or an office. I would ask him then, first, how often he has read
(...) for a place of ministry, or (...) for a place where an Apostle was to
preach? Next, I would ask him, what means the word (...), this? which should
rather, in all right, have been (...), that ministry, etc. had it related to
that province which Judas had or should have had; but, being as it is (...),
this ministry, what could it mean but the present office of Apostleship, which
the Apostles all at that time enjoyed, from which Judas fell, and into which S.
Mathias succeeded? Lastly, I would gladly know of him, whether (...), etc. part
of this ministry or Apostleship, v. 25. do not manifestly signify the same as
(...), does here, v. 20 (at least I am sure S. Peter tells us there it does)
and whether their own translation do not render this to be an office, Psalm.
109. v. 8. Let another take his office? Judge then, indifferent Reader, what
Evidences are to be expected from Dr. H. whose first and ground-Evidence here
is thus manifoldly weak. Magnis tamen excidit ausis; and he has still this
honor (which he esteems most important) that this explication is perfectly his
own, and not borrowed from any other: which poor S. W. as he disgracefully
objected to him, is glad to do, wanting (alas!) Dr. H's miraculous talent of
interpreting Scripture so as no man living ever did before him; I may add, nor
any wise man will ever do after him.

Sect. 3.
With what weak sleights Dr. H. would underprop his ruinous explication of
(...) (Judas his place in Hell) for a lesser Province: and how he produces
Testimonies importing an evidently-disparate Interpretation for just-the-same
with his.
THus much for the first Ground of Dr. H's evidences, from those words, Act. 1.
v. 25. That he may take (...), etc. part, or the lot, of this ministry and
Apostleship. Now follows the second, and the more famous one of the two, in the
same v. 25. (...), from which Judas) as their own translation renders it) by
transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. Which last words,
(...), or his own place, to show there were such things as exclusive provinces,
Dr. H. ( of Schism, p. 71.) paraphrases to signify, his own or proper place or
assignation for the witnessing the Resurrection, and proclaiming the Faith or
doctrine of Christ to the world: Others, and among them the Cath. Gent. and S.
W. nay even all the Protestants (as far as I can hear) except Dr. H. make
account it signifies Judas his own place in Hell; and that it is absolutely
impossible it should signify in that place a leasser province, as Dr. H. would
have it.

His first Argument, that it cannot signify a place in Hell, is drawn from the
charitable opinion we ought to have of Judas; accusing the Cath. Gent. of
uncharitableness for interpreting it so, in these words, ( Repl. p. 53.) It was
sufficient to say of Judas that which had been said, v. 16. 17. 18. 19. to set
out the horror of his Fact, and his bloody death; and that he needed not
proceed to the revealing of secrets, etc. But I wonder what secret it is to say
that Judas is in Hell, after it had been revealed and pronounced by our Savior
himself ( Io. c. 17. v. 12.) that he was the Son of Perdition, and he had died
in despair by his own hands. But let us observe the order of Dr. H's charity: (
Answ. p. 22 l. 16. 17. 18. 19. etc.) he could not retain a favorable opinion of
salvation attainable by the maintainers of the breach between us (meaning the
Pope and Cardinals, who had pronounced the Sentence of Excommunication against
his Schismatical party,) nor by the Catholic Converts in England; nay, he had
decreed and denounced Hell and damnation to S. W. and the Romish Factor, for
showing he had forgotten his Accidence and his other toyish weaknesses; yet he
would not have us censure Judas too rashly, or judge him in Hell for betraying
our Savior: The likelihood of the others damnation is of no difficulty with
him; this he calls a secret; and blames the Cath. Gent. for revealing it.

His second argument is drawn from S. Chrysostom's words upon that place,
saying that S. Peter insults not over Judas, calling him villain or detestable
villain, but sets down the fact simply and his present vengeance. To which last
words Dr. H. annexes his Corollary; and to make sure work, as before he has
often confuted us with his own surely, so now he ascertains it with his own sure:
His present vengeance, that sure is it (says he) which befell him in this
world. A weighty argument! as if any space of time intervened between wicked
men's death and their being in Hell; and, as if their vengeance of damnation
were not full as present as their temporal vengeance of an ill death here. I am
sure the Psalmist Psalm. 55. v. 16. in that very place which uses to be applied
to mean mystically our Saviors words of Judas, wishes They may go quick into
Hell: which expresses a vengeance present enough, and earlier than their
vengeance in this world, to wish them in Hell before they are dead.

In stead of a third Argument, he would persuade us in courtesy to admit a
parenthesis here: his plea for this parenthesis is this, because the use of
parentheses in Scripture is very obvious: If then the words ( from which Judas
by transgression fell) be pounded up in a parenthesis, so as they may not at
all help the signification of their neighbors, (which is something too hard
dealing,) then he tells us his interpretation is clear and unavoydable. But,
what means he when he tells us, that the parenthesis needs no more formal
expression than only by putting a comma after (...)? would he have it a
parenthesis or no? A parenthesis relates not to the sense of the foregoing nor
following words; but leaves the sense entire though it be omitted: what is
within commas only cannot always thus be omitted, without oftentimes maiming
the sense. Again, how must a comma put after Judas needs make his
interpretation so clear and unavoydable; since he knows well that many, both
Protestant and Catholic Commenters put the comma there, and yet avoid so
easily his interpretation, that they never so much as dreamed of it? Lastly,
let us remember that a parenthesis leaves the words on either side as perfectly
coherent in sense, as if it had never intervened; and then, let us see how Dr.
H. puts his doctrine in practice: To receive (says he) the lot of his
ministry and Apostleship (from which Judas by transgression fell) to go, or
that he may go to his proper place. Thus he. Where, to omit that he takes now
the liberty of a formally expressed parenthesis, though, while he was begging it
of us, he seemed willing to be contented with a comma only; to omit this, I
say, I would ask this candid man, who ( Answ. p. 18.) so like a Saint professes
his entire desire to speak the full truth of God, why he changes the words this
ministry, etc. into his ministry and Apostleship? and, if he be loath to
answer, I shall do it for him, and tell the Reader he had good reasons to
falsi^y it. First, because the word [(...), This] denotes some present thing;
and, no lesser Province being (according to his Grounds) at that time
determined or present, but the office of an Apostle only (which he is resolved
it shall not signify,) it was therefore good reason he should change This into
His. Next, the word This relates to all the words within the parenthesis, and
depends upon them for it is signification (as is evident;) and so destroys all
his pretense to have a parenthesis there; such a kind of reference being
against it is nature. Thirdly, the following words do not hang handsomely
together with the precedent, unless This be changed into His; therefore 'twas
fitting to do it. Add that, to gain some sorry advantage, he changes the words
of their own translation, that he might go, into, that he may go; because the
thing, according to Dr. H's interpretation, being to be performed for the
future, may go can signify futurely, which might go does not, as his Antagonist
Will. Lilly has told him in his Potential mood. Such another trifling
advantage he gains; by saying that a comma after (...) is already in the
printed Copies: had he said, in some printed Copies, he had been more candid;
for the words, the printed Copies, import it is so in all that are printed;
which is false, it being neither so (to omit others) in the printed Copies of
Stephanus nor Arias Montanus, held by themselves to be the best.

His fourth argument is that Hell being the common place of all wicked men, it
cannot fitly be expressed with such a double emphasis, as is (...). I answer
first, that there is no double emphasis there; the first (...) being nothing
but a plain propositive article. Next, to come to the point; as Son of
Perdition is a name for all wicked men, yet applied particularly to Judas by
our Savior, he being (...) and in a peculiar and transcendent degree such: so,
though Hell be the common place of all wicked men, yet it is tmore properly and
peculiarly his; his particular wickedness giving him a special title to it. And
lastly, who doubts but that Judas in Hell has a proper place of his own which
no other damned soul has? So that, as Dr. H. says here, that those words may
very fitly be affirmed of Mathias his province; so his, as it is not any man's
else: so I say, with the same reason, that those words may very fitly be
affirmed of Judas his place in Hell; it being so his, as it is not any man's
else. Is not this an undaunted Adversary, who dares adventure to come into the
lists of disputation, armed only with such Bull-rushes as these?

His last argument, which you must imagine his strongest, (for art and prudence
both require this order) is this, ( Repl. 53) that It is not near so proper to
say, he sinned to go to Hell; as that the other was chosen and surrogated into
Judas his place, to go to preach to such a quarter of the world. True indeed;
for, if it be taken thus maimed and corruptedly as he has rendered it, it is
so far from proper, that it is absurd and nonsense. But, I would know of Mr.
H. where he ever found it rendered he sinned to go to Hell, except only in
this present partial translation of his own. Observe, good Reader, the
sincerity of this man: the Greek word (...) can signify, if taken in due
circumstances, to sin; but, as taken here joined in construction with (...),
from which, it is impossible to signify so, as every man sees; for who ever
heard such a phrase as to sin from a thing? Now, what does Mr. H? he leaves out
the words, from which, which were necessarily conjoined with the rest in
construction; and then, (to make the phrase sound absurdly and disgracefully)
first, gives the word such and English as was impossible it should bear in that
place, (For, what sense make these words, from which Judas sinned? next, begins
the phrase at sinned, (which word he joins with going to Hell, though in the
parag. before he would have had them separated) and says, it is not proper to
say, he sinned to go to Hell; whereas 'twas only his own sly craft, which had
made it improper. So sincere was his profession of his earnest desire to speak
the full truth of God, that he here purposely annihilates God's word, which is
his Truth, and will not let it speak out fully; but first gagges it with a
parenthesis; next, cuts out it is tongrue by maiming the Context: whereas, he
might have seen it rendered in their own translation, from which Judas by
transgression fell, nay he rendered it so himself before, which will not let
ignorance excuse him; and he knew well enough that the word (...) joined with
(...) signifies plainly departed aside, prevaricated, went aside, etc. and then
the sense is no harsher than this, that he went astray from one state to go to
another; from the Apostolical office to go to Hell, or from being an Apostle,
as our Savior reprehended him, to become a Devil.

After this rare defense of his blasphemous, crooked, distorted interpretation
of those words, ( Repl, p. 54.) he ends his Section, praising the said
interpretation for innocent, obvious, and far from wrested: and hopes that all
this amassed together will vindicate it. That is, he dares not even hope that
he has produced any one thing to stand to and build upon: yet (as the wordish
side of the Schools hold that Quantity or Divisibility may be made up of
Indivisibles;) so he thinks an accumulation of weaknesses will make his defense
strong, and a great deal of nonsense, if it be amassed together, will compound
good sense.

Thus far his Reply proceeds to make good his interpretation by reason. Next,
in his Answer he endeavors to authorize it by Testimonies; which he braggs of
there ( p 39.) to be just the same with the Doctor's, meaning himself.

Not to wrong Dr. H. otherwise than by showing plainly how he wrongs himself,
his own credit, and his Readers eyesight; we will first put down his
interpretation of (...) in the very place which occasioned this debate; that
afterward we may show what a ^yrgopolynices humor it is in him to brag that
his and those are just the same.

The place is, of Schism, p. 70. 71. where he makes (...) the same with (...),
rendered by him distributions, lots, or lesser Provinces; and afterward
Englishes the words themselves thus [ his own or proper place or assignation
for the witnessing the resurrection, and proclaiming the Faith and doctrine of
Christ to the world.] A lesser Province, then, or proper place to preach in, is
manifestly his sense: wherefore, we must expect the self-same in the
testimonies, to wit, a Province or place, otherwise we can do no less than
think that Dr. H. would gull us to our faces.

The first testimony, which he says (with what truth shall be seen) is
perfectly to his sense, is from Theophylact on Acts 1. which I shall repeat,
putting Dr. H's own words fully, as I find them in his Answer p. 39. (...),
etc. He calls that his own place which Mathias, so as it was just and fit
should obtain: For, as Judas was a stranger to it, ever since he began to be
sick of covetousness and treason, so it properly belonged to Mathias ever since
he showed himself worthy of so great an Office. Where we hear no news of a
lesser Province at all, as Dr. H. would persuade us to believe against our
eye-verdict; but of an Office, which Judas had demerited by his former
villainies even while he was in it, and Mathias had merited by his worth and
desert even before he had obtained it. Now, if a lesser Province be
just-the-same with the Office of Apostle, then Dr. H. has dealt honestly with
his Readers, when he pretended 'twas so.

The ^econd testimony is introduc't with, The like again (as indeed it is) and
borrowed from Oecumenius, (...), etc. His own place he calls his suffocation,
etc. or else Judas being gone, he, Id est, Mathias may have the place to
himself, receving his Episcopacy. So that Episcopacy, which their own
translation (as has been shown) explicated to be an office, is now become just
the same with a lesser Province, or some determinate part of the world to
preach in.

The third is put thus; So Didymus; the word (...), place, signifies many
things; amongst the rest, an Order, a^ when we say the place of a Bishop, or of
an Elder. Where (to omit the weakness of inferring it signifies so here, from
the possibility of it is signifying so in it is self, nay from it is having many
significations) Mr. H. makes the order of dignity to have just the same notion
with a local distribution of place, or a lesser Province: which are so not
ajot-the-same, that it is as easy to maintain there can be an Hirco-cervus, as
that these two notions of different species can be one.

The fourth troops after it is fellows in this form. So the ordinary gloss; ut
abiret in locum suum, Id est, sortem Apostolicam; That he might go to his own
place, Id est, the Apostolical lot. But, whether this Apostolical lot were the
office of Apostles, as we hold and have proved at large; or a lesser Province,
as he holds, and pretends to find it here identically expressed, nothing at all
is found in this place, which the Doctor notwithstanding assures us is
just-the-same with the latter.

This done, he triumphs over S. W. most unmercifully, animated by these his
just-the-same interpretations. In a word, if he will contend that these
Authors give a third explication of the words (...), which neither of us had;
I grant it: but, to say it is just the same with his (as Dr. H. does here) is
so perfect a piece of abusiveness to his Readers, as will be able ever
hereafter to dishearten even his best Friends from crediting his bare saying,
though never so confident and triumphant, who would not have them credit their
own eyes.

Were all that has been said concerning these two mis-explications of Dr. H's
duly considered, little would remain to let any man, who has any tender respect
to Truth and God's word, plainly see, they are justly to be styled blasphemous.
But, because he will acknowledge no blasphemy at all in them, we will show him
two. The first is a blasphemy against the honor due to God's word: for sure it
can be no less, thus to make a nose of wax of those sacred Oracles; and, that
he may maintain perversely a self-imagin'd conceit of his own, to detort it thus
shamefully and pervert it, both without and against all circumstances found in
the Context, and all ground any where else, save only in the brain which bred
the Chimera. A Reverence, I say, and a tender respect is to be had to God's
word; not wresting it to bear testimony to every falsehood imaginable, (as it
easily may, if treated on this manner,) nor handle it in such a sort as the
maintainers of paradoxes do the testimonies they cite from Authors; which they
on set purpose sinisterly (but far more ingeniously and handsomely) mistake, by
a pretty fetch to make show of a proof of their merry Theses. The second is a
blasphemy against the honor due to Faith; which, being in it is self certain,
suffers in it is fundamentals, if occasion be given to think it such a weak
thing, as either to be built upon or overthrown by such more than frivolous,
less than probable, grounds, as are those distorsions of Scripture now spoken
of. Will not Atheists and Heathens laugh, to see those that profess
Christianity object, against a point held so universally of Faith, as this of
the Pope's Headship was, such quod^ibetical trash? And, is not Faith it self by
such a non-sensical debating it, (should no Profession of Christianity bring
better arguments than this Doctor) liable to be imagined, by prudent men not
yet acquainted with it, an idler and more groundless Story than the very tales
of King Oberon and Robin Good Fellow?

Two blasphemies then, Mr. H. attend your mis-interpretations; I mean, such as
Catholics hold for blasphemies: who defend Faith to be a thing certain, and to
have certain grounds; as also that God's word is never to be interpreted, but
with gravity and seriouness, and, as near as is in a man's power, to the sense
the Context most strongly carries; at least, not abused and vilify'd by
fathering upon it such groundless interpretations; nay treating it in such an
irreverent fashion, that there is no position in the world so unwarrantable,
absurd, false, and impious, but may, by the same method of groundless
criticizing, be deduced thence: which devolves into this, that God himself, the
Author of Truth and the expresser of it in the holy Scripture, shall, by this
means, become the Father of all falsehoods and the Author of every groundless
and non-sensical absurdity. This manner of treating Scripture, then, we
Catholics account in an high degree blasphemous; nay, to open the way to all
blasphemousness: and this, because we do not dogmatize upon it or affix to it
any interpretation that we build faith upon, which is not warranted by the
Universal practice of the Church, and our Rule of Faith, Universal Tradition:
though we know it is the Protestant's gallantry to make it dance afther the
jigging humor of their own fancies; calling all, God's word, though never so
absurd, which their own private heads, without ground or shadow of ground,
imagine deducible thence; nay more, to call it an Evidence, that is, a ground
sufficient to found and establish Faith upon. And thus much for Dr. H's
blasphemous and irreverent treating both Faith and Scripture.

Sect. 4.
How Dr. H. prevaricates from his own most express words, the whole tenor of
his Discourse, the main scope of his most substantial Chapter, and lastly from
the whole Question, by denying that he meant or held Exclusive Provinces. And
how, to contrive this evasion, he contradicts himself nine times in that one
point.
AT length we are come home close to the question it self, Whether the Pope be
Head of the Church; pretended to be evidently disproved by Dr. H. in the fourth
Chapter of Schism, by this argument: S. Peter had no Supremacy; therefore his
Successor the Pope can have none. The consequence we grant to be valid;
founding the Authority of the latter upon his succeding the former: But we
absolutely deny the Antecedent, to wit, that S Peter had no Supremacy, that is,
supreme power and Jurisdiction in God's Church. Dr. H. pretends an endeavor to
prove it in this his fourth Chapter, offering his Evidences for this negative,
p. 70. l. 4. First, from S. Peter's having no Universal Jurisdiction, (from
parag. 5. to parag. 20.) Secondly, (from thence to the end of the Chapter) from
his not having the Power of the Keys as his peculiar^^ty and enclosure; that
is, from his not having them so as we never held him to have had them.

His first Argument, from S. Peter's not having an Universal Jurisdiction,
proceeds on this manner: that each Apostle had peculiar and exclusive
Provinces; pretended to be evidenced in his fifth parag. from the words (...),
lot of Apostleship, and (...), Judas his place in Hell: (of Schism p. 71.) that
the Jews only were S. Peter's Province; nay, that but one portion of the
dispersed Jews can reasonably be placed under S. Peter's Jurisdiction: that the
Gentiles were S. Paul's, etc. and all this undertaken there to be evidenced by
testimonies from Scripture, Fathers, and other Authors.

What has been the success of his Evidences from his (...), and (...), has
already been manifested, by showing that he had neither any ground in the place
it self to favor his explication of a lesser province, nor among all the
many-minded Commenters on Scripture, so much as one Authority to second it. As
for his limiting S. Peter's Jurisdiction to the Jews only, and S. Paul's to
the Gentiles by his pretended proofs; his Disarmer offered him, p. 52. that if,
among those many testimonies he produces to prove it, there be but found any
one sentence, line, word, syllable, or letter, which excludes S. Peter's
Authority from the Gentiles, more than what himself puts in of his own head, he
would be content to yield him the whole Controversy; which he vindicated, to
the very eyes of the Reader, from every testimony, one by one, alleged by Dr.
H. In this manner stood the case then between S. W. and his Adversary: it
remains now to be seen what reply he tenders to so grievous, heavy, and
unheard of a charge; and how he can color a fault so gross, palpable, and
visible to the eye of every Reader.

Observe, good Reader, I beseech thee, (whether thou be Catholic, Protestant,
or of whatever other profession) that now the very point of the Controversy is
in agitation: For we pretend no tenor for the Pop'es Supremacy, save only
that he succeeds S. Peter, whom we hold to have had it: if then it be
evidenced, (as is pretended) that S. Peter had none; the Doctor has inevitably
concluded against us. Reflect also, I entreat thee, on the grievousness of the
charge laid by S. W. against Dr. H. and make full account, (as reason obliges
thee, and I, for my part, give thee my good leave) that there must be most open
knavery and perfect voluntary insincerity on one side or other: and, when thou
have examined it well, (I am a party, and so must not be a Judge) lay thou the
blame where thou shall find the fault. Neither despair that thou have ability
enough to be a co^petent Judge in this present contest: here is no nice
subtlety to be speculated, but plain words to be read: for, what plainer, than
to see whether in the testimonies there be any words limiting the Jurisdiction
of S. Peter, or whether they were only the additions of Dr. H. antecedently or
subsequently to the testimonies?

But what needs any Judge to determine or decide that which Dr. H. himself has
confessed here in his Reply and Answer? where seeing it impossible to show any
one word, in all that army of Testimonies which he mustered up there, limiting
S. Peter's Jurisdiction to the Jews, or excluding it from the Gentiles, which
yet was there pretended; he has recourse for his justification to the most
unpardonable shift that ever was suggested by a desperate cause: viz. to deny
that he meant exclusiveness of ^urisdiction; that is, to deny his own express
words, the whole tenor of his discourse there, the main scope and intention of
that Chapter' and lastly to change and alter the state and face of the whole
Question. This is my present charge against him, consisting of these four
branches? which if they be proved from his own words, he is judged by his own
mouth, and can hope for no pardon, but the heaviest condemnation imaginable
from all sincere Readers; since it is impossible to imagine a fifth point from
which he could prevaricate, omitted by him, and consequently, his present
prevarication is in the highest degree culpable and unpardonable.

First then, his own express words manifest he meant Exclusiveness of
Jurisdiction. For, of Schism p. 70. he uses the very word exclusively, saying
that S. Peter was Apostle of the Jews exclusively to the Gentiles: and, that
this exclusiveness was meant to be of Jurisdiction, is no less expressly
manifested from the following page; where it is said, that but one portion of
the dispersed Jews can reasonably be placed under S. Peter's Jurisdiction,
which is seconded by his express words here also, Reply p. 56 the portion of
one Apostle is so his, that he has no right to any other part, -- Excludes him
from any farther right, etc. and sure if he have no right to preach to any
other Provinces, he has no Jurisdiction at all over them.

Secondly, the whole tenor of the discourse there manifests that he meant
exclusiveness of Jurisdiction.* Exclusiveness of Jurisdiction is mentioned by
him as the Ground of all his ensuing dispute; as was shown in the foregoing
parag. to which we will add his other parallel expressions: The Jurisdiction of
that Metropolis belonged to James the Just, and not to Peter: of Sschism, p.
73. S. Paul's independence on S. Peter: page 74. to wit, in Jurisdiction or
power. No power can descend from S. Peter to any other, for another great part
of the Christian world: p. 80. Had he (meaning S. Peter) any Jurisdiction over
the Churches of Asia? p. 83. No other Apostle could countermand S. Paul's
instructions, no appeal left, etc. p. 83. S. Peter's baptizing in Brittany must
in all reason be extended no farther than this his line, Id est, to the Jews
which might at that time be dispersed there, etc. p. 84. All which render it
most manifest, that he meant Exclusiueness of Jurisdiction and power to preach
to another line or Province; if there were any tenor or connection at all in
his discourse, and that it rambled not forwards blindly, himself knew not how
nor whither.

Thirdly and lastly, not only the whole Controversy of Schism is about the
limitation or illimitation, exclusiveness or not exclusiveness, of the Pope's
Jurisdiction, and the Doctor's tenet, that this Jurisdiction is limited to such
an extent, and excluded from the rest of the Christian world, so as he has no
power or command at all over them: but also his present Chapter (4. of Schism)
pretends to evidence this limitation of his, from the limitation of S. Peter's;
as is most visible parag. 6. of the said Chapter, and indeed in each parag.
there, to the twentieth. So that, the import of his argument stands thus; S.
Peter had no Universal Jurisdiction, thefore his Successor the Pope can have
none. This being so, who sees not that, since the thing to be inferred is the
Pope's limitation of Jurisdiction, as held by the Protestants, that is such a
limitation as debats and excludes him from any lawful power or right at all to
intermeddle with more than is his imagined Province; and that this inference is
built upon his succeeding a limited Predecessor S. Peter: who sees not, I say,
that the Antecedent must mean S. Peter's Jurisdiction was so limited to his
supposed Province, that he had no Jurisdiction or power at all to meddle with a
Gentile; but that it was against right and unlawful for him to do so? This
therefore is an evidence beyond all shuffling to avoid it, that Dr. H. in his
fourth Chap. of Schism, intended to prove the Jurisdictions of the Apostles
were exclusively-limited to their own Provinces; so that they lost all power to
preach to another Province: from which Dr. H. prevaricating here, and not
defending his testimonies produced there to prove it; it follows that he
acknowledges S. W. charge to be true; ( Schism Disarmed p. 52.) that, among
those many testimonies he produces to prove it, there is not found any one
sentence, line, syllable or letter excluding S. Peter's Authority from the
Gentiles; save only what the Doctor puts in of his own head: as he shows there
in each particular allegation.

This being then Dr. H's meaning, till S. W. charge of the perfect dumbness of
his testimonies put second thoug^hs into his Head; let us see how he waves his
own express words and manifest intentions there: which being so perfectly
visible, as has been shown, we may be sure the prevaricating from them can
cost him no less than plain self contradictions.

His first self-contradiction is found Answ. p. 38. parag. 2. where he makes
the point he was to prove to be no more but this, that the Apostles went not
all to one, but disposed themselves over all the world, to several Provinces:
By which, meaning, as he must, (for otherwise it cannot be said to be evident
by it is own light) that one went to one place, ordinary Province, or region of
the world, to preach, another to another, without any relation at all to
exclusiveness of Jurisdiction; we have quite lost the question: which was not
Whether the Apostles one went one way, another another way, to preach; but,
whether S. Peter, and consequently the Pope his Successor, had an Universal or
limited Jurisdiction, extending his power to all, or excluding it from all but
his pitiful Province; as was manifested before, by Mr. H's express words, to
have been his meaning.

His second self-contradiction is found in the same place; where he says that
what was signified by (...), (or exclusive Provinces belonging to each Apostle,
which was shown plainly before to be his express meaning) is evident by it is
own light, and needs no evidencing. And yet, in his book of Schism, c. 4.
parag. 4. he set himself very formally to offer his Evidences for that point;
and prosecuted his intent, from parag. 5. to the 20. to evidence it by such
clouds of testimonies, (which he calls Evidences, and some of them irrefragable
and unquestionable ones) as may very near, if not perfectly, equal all the rest
that are found in his whole book. So that, either he must co^fess he spent the
most substantial part of his book to evidence that which needed no Evidencing,
but was Evident by it is own light; or else, (which is the truth of the
business) that he has changed the whole question here from what it was there:
For there it was of Exclusive Jurisdiction, and therefore very obscure, needing
the pretense of many testimonies (though dumb) and his own Id ests and
voluntarily add^d words, to make it seem evident; here it is only of one
Apostle going one way another going another to preach, which indeed needs no
evidencing, nor was ever in question between us.

His third self-contradiction is, that, notwithstanding his own express words,
the scope of his whole Chapter, the tenor of his whole discourse; and the
state of the whole question manifesting he both did and could not but mean it
of exclusive Jurisdiction, (as has been most expressly and amply shown;) yet
he calls my acception of his words in that sense, my mistake; Answ. p. 39. l.
34. and again, p. 41. l. 7. 8. etc. he complains that S. W. would conclude from
his words, that he would have all the Apostles to have several Provinces
limiting their Jurisdictions, and exclusive of one another's right; which he
calls there also a mistake and detortion. Where the Reader may see how
perfectly he denies his own words of exclusive Jurisdiction, and how openly he
prevaricates from all the four formerly-mention'd pretenses, shown already to
have been his own; which were the strongest ries imaginable to bind any man to
hold to what he has said, who had not forsworn all respect to truth or honesty.

His fourth self-contradiction is, that, though in the place now alleged he
complains of me, that I would conclude from his words that the Apostles had
Provinces exclusive of one another right, yet his own plain words, Repl. page
56. l. 2. 5. most expressly grant it; where, speaking of those Provinces
proper to each Apostle, he has these words; So his that he has no right to
any other; so his, as excludes him from any farther right. Is not this handsome?

His fifth self contradiction is a very neat one. According to this place
alleged, S. Peter^s Province is so his, as excludes him from any farther
right; that is, from any right to Preach to another Province; yet in the same,
Sect. p 57. l. 18. he grants it lawful for S. Peter to Preach to Gentiles;
that is, to those of Paul's S. Province. Now we duller Souls imagind that right
and lawfulness was all one, and that no man could lawfully do what he had no
right to do, but Dr. H. confronts and counterposes these two identicall
notions, by excluding him in one place from right to preach to another
Province, and in the other place granting the lawfulness of his preaching to
another Province; which being the express places in which he goes about to
declare his meaning in that point, manifests his tenet to be, that the Apostles
might lawfully do what they had no right to do, or might lawfully do against
law and right, that is might do it lawfully but could not rightfully, which
settles into this elegant Contradiction, that they might lawfully do it
wrongfully. Thus self-unkind Sosia beats himself according as the change of his
unconstant and fantastical Grounds puts his mind in several Shapes.

His sixth self contradiction touches more particularly this point in hand of
exclusive Provinces; He tells us ( of Schism, p. 70.) that Authority and
Commission was given to all the Apostles indefinitely and unlimitedly, not
restrained by Christ's words to any parti^ular Province; and again ( Repl. p
55.) speaking of the particular assignations of S. Peter to the Jews and S.
Paul to the Gentiles, he affirms expressly, that it was not by any particular
assignation of Christ's, but by agreement amongst themselves that this
assignation of Provinces was made; yet, the same Author ( of Schism p. 74. l.
4. maintains the direct contrary or rather contradictory positionto the form,
saying that S. Paul had his assignation immediately from Christ. So utterly
void of all truth is this Chimera of exclusive Provinces, that the Author of it
understands not his own meaning in it, or at least forgets what he said before
concerning it when he comes into new circumstances; or rather indeed
voluntarily says any thing according as it suits best with his occasions.
Hence, in the former places it fitted his turn to say that the exclusive
Provinces or assignation must come from their agreement not from Christ;
because he was there to show their Commission and Authority limited, which, as
coming from Christ was held by all to be unquestionably Universal; but in the
last place, where he had undertaken to show S. Paul's independence on S. Peter,
it favored more his intent to say, that he had his assignation imediately from
Christ; lest S. Paul should have any dependence at all on S. Peter, no not even
for consenting to his assignation,

His seventh self-contradiction is, that building upon the words Gal. 2. 7.
(the Gospel of the Circumcision is committed to me, as the Gospel of the
uncircumcision to Peter) for the exclusive Provinces of those two Apostles, he
by consequence gets all the rest of the Apostles leave to play, since one as he
says is excluded from any right to preach to another Province, and there can
be no more Provinces or people to Preach to than Jews and Gentiles, which are
there distributed between these two Apostles: nor is the word (...), which,
according to Dr. H. ( Repl. p. 55.) signifies the Agreement which was to give
them exclusive Provinces) applied in the place alleged to any but S. Peter and
S. Paul in order to the Jews and the Gentiles. This kind favor not
withstanding done to the rest of the Apostles, he afterward spoils, by giving
them Provinces too; treating them as discourreous Schoolmasters use to treat
their Scholars; that is, first giving them leave to play while the supplicant
is present, but, he being gone and the circumstance changed, enjoining them a
task as labourious as had been their School exercise it self. When S. Peter's
Universal Jurisdiction was to be limited, then it went current that the Jews
were his peculiar Province, and the said place brought to evidence it. But,
this once done, he bethought himself that the Power over all the Jews was too
much to attribute to S. Peter, and that the Pope might hap to grow proud to
succeed a person of so ample an Authority: wherefore finding that such and
such Apostles preached in such and such a place to the Jews, he thought it best
to call the Jews there their Province; So that good S. Peter (whom all
antiquity flatterd it seems with the title of Prince or Head of the Apostles)
has allotted him by Christ's Head-Steward Dr. H. ( of Schism, p. 71. l. 21.
22.) no more but one portion (or a few miserable Parishes) of the dispersed
Jews to be under his Jurisdiction But Dr. H. takes it ill ( Answ. p. 42) that I
laugh at him for thus treating S. Peter. I Answer, the most ridiculous position
that ever was made seriously by any Divine in the world (as is this of
exclusive Provinces) is not treated as it deserves unles it be laughed at. Next,
he tells me that I never offer to consider the allegations by which it was made
evident. I Answer, sure Dr. H. is a sleep, I considerd in Schism Disarmed each
allegation of his minutely and particularly through six whole Sections, that is
from p. 42. till p. 87. and offered to yield him the whole controversy, if he
could show me the least word in any one of them limiting S. Peter's
Jurisdiction to any such Province; which he dares not here accept, but denies
his own words and flies from the whole question as has been shown. Thirdly, he
calls my words a calumny, and complains very Soberly that I never relent at it.
I Answer that I confess my ill nature, I never relent into retractation of my
tenet upon the persuasion of contradiction. Rhetoric, though oftentimes I may
relent into a smile, mingled either with pity, if I see the fault was
ignorance, or else with just zeal and scorn when I see Souls traind to Hell by
wilful frauds. Lastly, he asks, upon this occasion, what contradictories may
not this wonder-working faculty of S. W's reconcile? I Answer, it cannot
reconcile Dr. H's contradictions here, this being a task beyond miracle, but to
return to his self-contradictions.

His eighth is, that whereas ( Repl. p. 57. l. 19. 20. etc.) he would evade his
own implicatory position in which he was entangled by telling us, he meant
only that S. Peter's and S. Paul's Provinces were exclusive, when they met at
the same City; himself flatly contradicts it in his Book of Schism, p. 84.
where Speaking of S. Peter's Baptizing and constituting Bishops in Britany, he
tells us, it must in all reason be extended no farther then S. Peter's line, as
he was Apostle of the Circumcision, Id est (says he) to the Jews that might
at that time be dispersed there. In which place he manifestly makes S. Peter's
Province exclusive in Britany, where he never pretends that S. Paul met him;
though before he told us that the agreement between S. Peter and S. Paul was
only exclusive when they met at the same City, etc. How powerful and terrible
is truth which can drive her opposers to defend themselves by such miserable
and weak implications?

His ninth self-contradiction quarrels with both parts of his sixth at once;
according to the former part of which S. Paul had not his Province from
Christ's assignation, according to the later part of it he had it imediately
from Christ's assignation; yet maugre both these ( Repl. 58. par. 5.) he makes
S. Paul's peculiar Province Spring only from the Jews refusing and rejecting
his doctrine; only, I say; for he affirms there expressly that till the Jews
refused and rejected it, he does not betake himself so peculiarly to the
Gentiles; whence follows, in all likelihood, that if the Jews had not rejected
Christ's doctrine, tenderd by S. Paul, that Apostle had never gone peculiarly
to the Gentiles, nor by consequence should have had any peculiar or exclusive
Province at all. Is not this a solid man? To omit that this experiencing of
more fruit among the Gentiles then among the Jews is that which S. w. puts for
the reason of his peculiar Apostleship and the Appellation of Apostle of the
Gentiles ensuing thereupon.

These and some others are the self-contradictions with which this Adversary of
mine, seeing it impossible to show one word in any testimony excluding and
limiting the Jurisdiction of the Apostles, shuffles to and fro on all sides,
that so what ever position he should be challenged with he may slip and avoid
it by showing (as he easily may) that he said in another place the express
contrary, and then when he has done he preaches repentance or else Hell and
damnation to his wicked Adversary for calumniating him who thus earnestly
desires (for Sooth) to speak the full truth of God (Answ. p. 18.) and that so
carefully, that to make sure work, for fear one part of the contradiction
should not be the truth of God, he affirms both; But I hope the Reader will be
aware of his shifting weakneses, and waving all his self said affirmations, his
Gentile nonsense, his pious formalities, will press him home with this
Dilemma. Either S. Peter's Authority was so limited by his pretended
designation to one Province, as he had no power to preach to another, or it was
not but remaind still illimited and Universal, not witstanding this imagind
designation; if it remaind still unlimited and Universal, how can the Pope's
Authority be concluded limited from his succeeding S. Peter, if S. Peter's
remaind ever unlimited? But, if his Authority and Jurisdiction was limited, and
that this was the thing to be proved by Dr. H. in his book of Schism, then why
does he not vindicate his testimonies from that shameful charge laid against
them particularly by S. W. that there is not one wordin them limiting the
Apostles Jurisdictions, but what himself adds of his own Head? And why does he
instead of thus vindicating them here, sometimes flatly deny the question,
sometimes shuffle about to blunder a point so clear, at any rate, though it
cost him no less then such numerous and most palpable self-contradictions,
sure the knot must be great which could stand need of having wedges thus driven
in point blank oppositely on both sides to break it asunder.

Sect. 5.
What multitudes of absurdities and access of fresh self-contradictions follow
out of his newly-invented tenet of Exclusivenes of Jurisdiction, then only
when the Apostles met in the same City.
AFter his self-contradictions march his lesser absurdities, not so bulkie and
substantial ones as the former, yet still his, and too big to be wielded by
any man but Dr. H. nor by him neither, unles the necessity of a bad cause,
incumbent on him to defend, had added to him such an increase of strength as
uses to proceed from desperation. But, not to take notice of them all, I will
only take that part of his Reply which I find most pertinent to the point in
hand, and then see what abondance of that kind of fruit it bears

In his Reply therefore, p. 57. I find these words; I have sufficiently expressed
(tract. of Schism c. 4. p. 7.) how far this agreement extended, and how far
exclusive it was; not that it should be unlawful for Peter to preach to a
Gentil, or for Paul to a Jew; but h^at when they m^t at the same City (as at
Antioch certainly they did, and at Rome also I make no question) then the one
should constantly apply himself to the Jews, receive Disciples, form them into
a Church, leave them to be governed by a Bishop of his assignation, and the
other should do in like manner to the Gentiles. Thus he very pithily: let us
unfold and lay open what he has (as his custom is) involued here, and see what
a heap of weaknesses lies sweating there, crowded up in so narrow a room.

First, he brings these words here as an explanation of his meaning, that is,
of the state of the question between us concerning how far these Provinces were
exclusive: whereas in the place cited ( of Schism c. 4. par. 7.) it is only
put as an instance of their imagined exclusive Jurisdictions, and introduc't
with an Accordingly; not purposely Stating or determining the measure or extent
of their agreement; nor is there any expression found there which sounds to
this purpose.

Secondly, this Exclusivenes of Jurisdiction, which before made such a loud
sound, is now only come to be such when they met at the same City; and, by
consequence, abstracting from that circumstance, S. Peter had Universal
Authority: which is a great largness of his toward S. Peter, and I wonder
whence this kindness springs toward the Pope's Predecessor.

Thirdly, since these two Apostles, as far as we hear, never met in any City
after this pretended distribution of Provinces save only at Rome and at
Antioch, it follows that, as far as Dr. H. knows, S. Peter's Jurisdiction was
universal over both Jews and Gentiles in all the world besides; and at all
other times except only those short seasons in which they met together.
Fourthly, it follows that the Pope's Authority is not limited save only where
he meets S. Paul or his Successors, (or perhaps, as he needs will have it, S.
John) and then I conceive it will be very ample.

Fifthly, since he grants, that both the Congregations of Jews and Gentiles were
joined in one under Pope ^lement (of Schism, p. 79.) that Pope by consequence
succeeded them both; and so the exclusivenes of S. Peter's Jurisdiction, when
he met S. Paul, cannot possibly infer such an exclusivenes or limitation of
Jurisdiction in the now Popes, or the Popes which have been since the imagind
conjunction of those Congregations* however h^ may pretend it makes against the
universal Jurisdictions of those Popes, who preceded Clemens. Thus at unawares
Dr. H. grants the Pope as much as we desire, and yet very innocently thinks he
impugns him; or (as himself expresses it Answ. p. 11.) lays the Axe to the
root and stocks up Rome's universal Pastourship.

Sixthly, the question being turned into exclusivenes of Jurisdiction when they
met in the same City only* it follows, there is not the least pretense of a
testimony from Scripture for this position thus stated; for it is no where found
nor pretended to be found in Scripture, that their Jurisdictions were only to
be limited, in case of meeting in the same City. So that now the pretense of
evidencing from Scripture, which in the book of Schism, made a great noise, is,
by this new stating the question, or rather evading it, struck quite dumb.

Seventhly, it is to be observed, he has not a word in any testimony to prove
their exclusive Jurisdictions in Rome and Antioch, but only those which
affirmed that they preached, were Bishop in Rome, and founded the Church in
both places: All which might easily be done by a promiscuous Authority; nor
does he offer one word of proof to underprop his weak testimonies why it could
not be thus performed.

Eigthly, his place, in his book of Schism, which he produces for their
exclusive Jurisdictions, falls short of what he alleges it for, affirming
only, that when they met at the same City one should constantly apply himself
to the Gentiles the other to the Jews. Now the prudent consideration of
circumstances may determine one man to do constantly this thing, another to
do constantly another thing, without inferring that either of them lost their
right to do the other, by this constancy of action exercised upon this one. By
which faltring mistake of his own words we may see, that when he alleges them
now, as a sufficient expression of his tenet of exclusivenes, he only sought
to escape from and change his former question; and to evade, by virtue of the
more moderate word [ constantly] which standing in the confines between
exclusivenes and not exclusivenes, might, at a dead litf, by the Midwifry of an
Id est, or a criticism, bring forth either signification.

Ninthly, the Jews (according to Dr. H.) being S. Peter's Province exclusively
to the Gentiles, and not exclusively till they met in one City; it follows
that, unles they had met, he had no exclusive Province at all. Hence.

Tenthly, since they agreed upon exclusive Provinces it follows, they agreed to
meet at such and such cities, else the bargain of exclusive Provinces had been
spoiled; yet it is no where read, that ever they made any such agreement after
this pretended distribution of Provinces.

Eleventhly, put case S. Peter had come to some City two or three months.
before S. Paul (and we cannot imagine their correspondence so precise, nor their
employments other where so indifferent, but this might very easily and very
often happen) then it must follow, that that Apostle had universal Authority to
preach to both till S. Paul come, nor can we imagine him idle or negligent to
do what good he could to all. Put case then that that Prince of the Apostles,
who by one Sermon converted three thousand, should by three months labor there
convert twice that number of Gentiles to Christ's faith; to govern whom, the
whole Authority over both being yet in his own hands, it is fitting he should
use the said Authority in ordaining and constituting Deacons, Priests and for
the orderly governing his numerous Converts; and those too, distinct in all
points from the Priests of the Gentiles; for Dr. H. grounds interdict them all
Communion. (See Sch* Dis. p. 64.) Things thus orderd, and the Gentiles settled
thus under S. Peter, S. Paul arrives at the City. Then begins the hurliburly.
S. Peter's Authority, which before extended to both Nations, begins suddenly to
feel the cramp and conuulsion-fits, and shrinks up to the Jews only; and, in
all probability, a very few, perchance twenty or thirty more or less may be
imagined to live in that City S. Peter's Jurisdiction being thus grown
exclusive in respect of the Gentiles, by S. Paul's coming, consequently all the
Gentiles formerly converted by him (however addicted to their Apostle, Pastor
and more then father S. Peter) must presently change their Master, and do
Homage to S. Paul, acknowledging him their proper and now-sole-Governour. The
Gentil Priests, ordained before his coming, either may be degraded lawfully by
S. Paul, or else submit themselves to him, and receive the approbation of their
Jurisdiction from him, as the order of Government requires. Moreover, if S.
Paul had hap to be alone in the same City before, and to have converted Jews,
as his custom was, then the poor Jews must avoid S. Paul's Congregation and
run to S. Peter's Church as soon as he arrives.

But, to proceed with our case, S. Paul's occasions call him away from that
City, and ere he removes Dr. H. assures, that he must leave behind him a Bishop
of his assignation, that is, over the Gentiles; then presently we must imagine,
that S. Peter's Jurisdiction, which had felt a kind of Winter-Season during S.
Paul's residence there, he departing, begins to feel a happy Spring, budding
now and Sprouting out a fresh toward the Gentiles. So that now the Scene of
Jurisdiction and Government is quite changed again, according to Dr. H's
grounds; and, were not S. Peter a good man, he might undo all that S. Paul had
done, and be revenged on him for coming to the same City where he was to limit
his Authority. The Gentiles therefore which were converted before by S. Peter,
as soon as S. Paul is out of sight, begin to face about again, and S. Peter
recovers his own. To work therefore heegoes, and falls to preach Christ's faith
to the Gentiles the second time, which before he durst not; Converts many, and
having by this time got power enough to do it, being about to depart leaves a
Bishop of his own constituting to govern them; So that we have now got two
Gentil Bishops in the same City; and, if Dr. H. say there was not, he must say
we are beholding to the Apostles prudence and goodness for it, not to his
grounds of illimited Jurisdiction when they met not, and limited, when they met
in the same City, which infers they had Authority to do this and many other
absurdities, and by consequence his position in it self destroys all order
both of Authority and Government.

Again, when they met at the same City, in case a Gentile had come to S. Peter
and desired to hear Christ's doctrine, S. Peter must refuse to teach him it,
and send him to S. Paul; telling him it was beyond his power, because S. Paul
and he had exclusive Jurisdictions when they met at the same City; or else
desiring him to stay till S. Paul was gone away, or else to watch some handsome
opportunity when S Paul should go to the next Town, and then he would do him
the favor. And the like must we imagine in case a Jew went to S. Paul Lastly
when those two Apostles preached Christ's faith publicly (as their custom
was) then, in case S. Peter had spied some Gentiles or S. Paul some Jews coming
to their Sermon, presently (as if some excommunicated person had come in
presence) all must be supposed to be hush't, and the Sermon quasht; else we
must imagine that that Apostle civilly makes a parenthesis in his discourse,
desiring them to withdraw and retire to the others Congregation, confessing
heartily that now that his counter-Apostle meets him in the same city, his
Jurisdiction is exclusive, and that he has no power at all to give them any
notice of Christ and his Law, but must be forced to exclude them from his
Congregation. Can thou refrain smiling, Reader, at such a heap of comical
absurdities.

But, to return to the place in his Reply, the source of all these gallant
consequences, and to bundle up together the other absurdities in it, which to
treat diffusedly were a wearisome and ungrateful task; what means, his saying
here it is not unlawful to preach to another Province, and yet saying ( Repl.
p. 56. l. 2.) he had no right to do it what means his putting here, the
meeting in one City to give an exclusive and peculiar Province to S. Paul,
whereas he had before (according as it served his turn best) made it come from
three other several causes and some of them contradictories; to wit,
imediately from Christ's assignation; not from Christ, but from agreement among
themselves; and lastly, only from the Jews rejecting and refusing him, as has
been shown from his own words before in his sixth and ninth self
contradictions? what means his putting here S. Peter's exclusivenes of
Jurisdiction to arise from the same circumstance of meeting S. Paul in the same
City, and yet ( of Schism, p. 84.) excluding S. Peter from meddling with
Gentiles in Britany, into which country he pretends not to show S. Paul came,
much less met him there in the same City? what means his stating here S.
Peter's Jurisdiction not exclusive, that is illimited till he meets S. Paul,
and yet ( of Schism p. 71. l. 21. 24.) stating the same Jurisdiction exclusive
to all but one portion only of the dispersed Jews, without reference at all to
S. Paul's meeting or not meeting him, but to the division of places and
Provinces only. Lastly, what meant he to talk of evidencing his then tenet
from Scripture, and yet the exclusivenes of Jurisdiction only when they met in
the same City, not so much as pretended to be shown from Scripture.

These man fest and manifold self-contradictions and heaps of absurdities,
shown from Mr. H's own words, will let every rational man see and make every
sincere man acknowledge, that he cares not a pin what he says, nor what
nonsense he deludes his Reader with provided he delude him civilly,
courteously and gentilely; nor what contradictions he maintains, so he can but
imbosk himself handsomely in them, and hide his head from being discovered. Yet
he tells us ( Rep. p. 56.) he doubts not to reconcile all the (...) here, at
least that one who has a greater (...), may do it; and so, fully satisfies his
Reader, if he will be content with pedantry in Greek, instead of plain sense
and truth in honest English.

Sect. 6.
The Question concerning his imagined Exclusive Provinces stated and cleared. A
plain Explication of the place, Gal. 2. upon which he grounds them.
HAving thus laid open how Dr. H. shuffles about to avoid the effects of his
own position; we will proceed to examine the point it self, and lastly Answer
his testimonies alleged to conclude these exclusive Provinces. Concerning the
point it self four positions are to be considerd, which may be imagind to
concern it; first, that the Apostles went not all one way to preach* but one or
more one way, others another. The second, that all the Apostles made a positive
agreement to go one or more to such or a Province. The third is, that they so
agreed to go to such and such Provinces, at their present parting as they
agreed never to go to any other for the future. The fourth is that their
Jurisdiction was included within such a Province, and excluded from all other
imagind Provinces.

The first is evident and confessed, but nothing at all to our question which is
concerning limitation or illimitation of Jurisdiction; And who sees not how
shallow this inference is; the Apostles went some one way, some another to
preach, therefore S. Peter is not Prince of the Apostles, or Head of God's
Church; Or thus, the Apostles, who confessedly had their Jurisdictions
Universal from Christ, thought it more discreet and fitting to go some one
way, some another, therefore their Jurisdictions become limited; which is as
much as to say, that when Christ gave to each Universal Jurisdiction, and sent
them to teach all Nations, he meant they should all go one way, for otherwise
(according to this manner of arguing) had he meant they should go several
ways, it could not consist with that present intention of his to give them at
that very time universal Jurisdiction.

The second, to wit that they all made a part or positive agreement to go
determinate several ways, or to such particular places, is very obscure, and
rather related as a thing imagind or opinionated to have been, then asserted
and manifested by any authentic proof. Nor does it at all touch our question,
which is about Jurisdiction, unless it can be proved that they made a part of
exclusive o^ limited Jurisdiction; Of which nature not the least word o^ proof
has hitherto been produced, not will ever be producible for the future.

The third, to wit, that they made a positive pact for each one or more to go
to such determinate places and no other, is yet obscurer and less authentic
then the former, no exact Itinerary of their travells being extant, much less
of their nonplus vltra's by pact and agreement, but all the whole business is
left to blind and inconsequent conjectures, according as they were found or
observed to have preached in one Country, and not observed to have done so in
another, but whether persecution, a mutual war, or convenience of
circumstances dispersed them thus, nothing is or can be concluded hence. Nor,
were it all granted, can any inference be grounded upon this, prejudicing our
tenet, or even touching our question, which is concerning Jurisdiction; since
prudent consideration of circumstances might be of force to determine the
Apostles to agree that such and such should stay constantly in this Province,
and nor preach actually in another, without any necessity of their agreeing to
limit their universal Jurisdiction given by Christ; and so it cannot bear any
show of inference, that they agreed to limit the power it self, (about which
our controversy is) because they agreed to limit the exercise of that power.

The fourth position, which concerns the exclusivenes of their Jurisdiction
from all save their own Provinces, and is the only thing which can seem to
advantage Mr. H. or concern our question, which is about the limitation of
Jurisdiction, is absolutely false and vterly groundles, not warranted by any
one testimony; first invented by Mr. H's fancy, pretended to be evidenced by
testimonies in his book of Schism, challenged by S. W. not to have a word
concerning it in any one testimony there alleged to prove it; not ownd
constantly by Dr. H. in his Answers, but absolutely prevaricated from and
denied, though at the cost of so many and so gross self-contradictions;
attended on by a troop of absurdities as has been shown; And lastly not coming
home the question neither, as shall be seen hereafter; for what inference is
this; Each Apostle was imediate overseer of his own particular Province,
therefore one of them was not over all the rest.

The place from Scripture insisted on to evidence this (for Dr. H in his Answ.
p. 38. is of late grown jealous that his (...), and (...) fall short of
evidences) is Gal. c. 2. v. 7. 8. 9. 10. which I will first put down as I find
it in their own translation, then explicate it; whether with more consonancy to
all circumstances, then Dr. H's, Exclusive Jurisdiction when they met, does,
let the Reader judge.

The words, in the place cited, are S. Paul' s and these; When they saw that
the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me as the Gospel of the
Circumcision was to Peter (for he that wrought effectually with Peter to the
Apostleship of the Circumcision, was mighty in me toward the Gentiles) And
when James Cephas and John who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace which
was given unto me, they gave me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship,
that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the Circumcision, only they
would that we should remember the poor, etc. This is the place upon which Mr.
H. builds his tenet of exclusive Provinces; with what right let this plain and
connaturall explication inform the Reader.

Our Blessed Lord and Savior determined the conversion of his elect both of
Jews and Gentiles, and had already sent down his holy Spirit upon his Apostles
in Jerusalem, where upon their zeal inciting them, and the place they were in
giving them occasion, they added, by their preaching, multitudes of the Jews to
the new-growing Church. Still the Gentiles, out of Judea heard no more news, of
him than the star led Sages and some straggling preachers had told and were
ignorant of his heavenly doctrine except what rumor might have variously and
obscurely spread. He chose therefore S. Paul, both for zeal (though hitherto
misled) natural and acquired abilities, as also his being bred among the
Heathens being born at Tarsus in Cilicia, fit and proportioned for that end. To
him he appeared near Damascus, enlightened the eyes of his mind by striking
blind those of his body, made him powerfully his, told him his errand, that he
should carry his name before the Gentiles: not that his commission should extend
to them only (since the Commission given by Christ to each Apostle is
acknowledgedly universal) but that he was by God's all-ordering providence
fitted, chrosen and designed more particularly for that end. The former
circumstances gave him his addiction, his addiction so qualified produced great
fruit, and all these together got him the appellation of Apostle of the
Gentiles; particularly such indeed, but not exclusively; it being otherwise
evident all over the Acts that he preached commonly and earnestly to the Jews.
Where he was converted, there he imediately began to preach, and so proceeded
in that work, till some began to suspect him and his doctrine as not coming
from Christ, because he had not lived and conver'st with Christ, as the other
Apostles had. Upon this he is forced to come to Judea to confer his doctrine
with the other Apostles and receive their approbations; which they found exact
and entire, expressed by those words, nihil comulerunt, they in conference added
nothing to me. S. Paul having thus given account of his doctrine, and the
efficacy of his preaching to the Gentiles, and the Apostles finding that S.
Peter was in like manner eminently and particularly efficacious in converting
the Jews in Judea (expressed here in the 8. v.) two things ensved here upon, to
wit, that by giving S. Paul the right hand of fellowship they acknowledged him
a true Apostle, or a fellow Apostle; and, at once determined, that since he
thriu'd best among the Gentiles and S. Peter best among the Jews (the greatest
harvest of which was found in Judea) S. Paul should go ^ut of Judea to the
Gentiles, and take Barnabas with him; S. Peter with therest remain in Judea
still to preach to the Jews; and this is all the business which Mr. H. would
make to be an agreement to distribute exclusive Provinces.

The meaning then of [(...), the Circumcision] in the ninth verse to which S.
Peter was to apply himself, I take to be Judea or the Jews there, not those in
dispersion; and of [(...)] the Gentiles to be those out of Judea. Now, if this
be so then to omit all which has been said formerly, Dr. H's assigning S.
Peter (of Schism, p. 71.) only the Apostleship of some of the Jews in
dispertion, by founding the exclusivenes of his Authority upon this place,
vanishes into it is original nothing; for, in case any distribution of Provinces
be signified here, S. Peters's must be the Jews at home, in Judea, not those
abroad or in dispertion, if (...) denote here only Judea, or the Jews in it.

Now the reasons for this explication of mine, are, first because the efficacy
of S. Peter's preaching to the circumcision had been experienced with in Judea,
S. Paul's over the Gentiles, without Judea; and consequently their severing
themselves, being upon this account, should mean that one should stay where he
had experienced such fruit, that is, in Judea, the other go where he had found
the like, that is, out of Judea. Secondly, the words very well bear it; since
the Jews do not live united in any considerable confluence, save in Judea, nor
the Gentiles but out of it, which is the thing that gives a common denomination
to a people. Thirdly, S. Paul's words, only they would that we should remember
the poor, imediately following, show plainly the meaning is that he was
designed by these words to go out of Judea, and therefore desired to remember
the poor which were in Judea, as he accordingly did, Romans 15. v. 25. 26. But
now I go to Jerusalem to minister to the Saints, for it has pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which
are in Jerusalem. Fourthly, the Phenomenon of all the circumstances favor it.
Fifthly the place of Theophylact cited by Dr. H. ( Answ. p. 40.) is express
for it, (...), etc. S. Paul, being come to Judea, he departed thence, both
because he was sent a Preacher to the Gentiles, and because he would not build
on another foundation. Sixthly, S. Hierome upon that place is most clearly for
it; where he makes the sum of S. Paul's words to be these, me misit ad
Gentes, illum posuit in Judea; he sent me to the Gentiles, and put or placed
him in Judea. Yet Dr. H. from this place gives S. Peter an Exclusive Province,
to wit, the Gentiles; nor any Gentiles, but those of the dispersion, out of
Judea only.

This remaining of S. Peter in Judea, and S. Paul's remouall out of it, seemed
then best for the present circumstances, but was far from signifying
exclusivenes from another's Province for the future; it being well known that
S. Peter preached out of Judea afterward, to wit at Antioch, Rome and other
places; The sum then of their determination was this that they resolved to do
what was most prudent in those circumstances, to wit, that some should stay
among the Jews, others go abroad among the Gentiles; which by consequence was
only to consent to do prudently, not to make a formal bargain or pact, much
less perpetuity of such a pact; least of all does it, even intimate the
limitation of power and Jurisdiction, as the question it is produced for,
requires it should.

Again this agreement of theirs being nothing but a consenting to that which
they judged by circumstances was fore-determined by Gods will, consequently
there was no more Exclusivenes after then before their agreement, nor their
subsequent agreement any farther designation (as D. H. calls it) in respect of
S. Peter and S. Paul, then the antecedent designation by God Almighty; The
plain text manifests this most clearly; [ when they saw that the Gospel of the
circumcision was committet to me, as the Gospel of the Uncircumcision to Peter]
where we see their judging it was already so committed is the reason why they
decreed it should so remain, and that they should preach still where God had
showed it his will, by giving such a blessing; which superadds nothing to the
former.

Next follows the motive why they judged that there was such a particular
Commission, in these words; for he that wrought effectually with Peter to the
Apostl^ship of the Jews, was mighty in met toward the Gentiles; So that the
efficacity of preaching and experience of more ample fruit was their sole
motive of the one's thus remaining, the others sending abroad; and not an
intention to limit one another's Jurisdiction or assign exclusive Provinces.
After this follows the result of their former consideration, in these words,
Then they gave to us the right hand of fellowship, that we should go to the
Uncircumcision, etc. Which expresses no more than this, that one should go one
way another betake himself another, as Dr. H. grants else where ( Answ. p. 38.)
which how far it is from even touching any Jurisdiction, much less from
limiting it, every Child may discern.

Again, to speak properly, and according to the force of the Greek, their going
into diverse countries was no part of the agreement, but a pure sequel arising
out of convenience. For, dederunt dextras (...), that is, they gave us the
right hands of communion or communication, signifies no more then that, by
embracing or shaking hands, they acknowledged us to be of the true faith and of
their communion, in respect of which every one sees that the going into diverse
places was a mere accident; unles we will say that S. Peter would not have
acknowledged his doctrine good, nor receive him into communion but upon promise
that he should go out of Judea. To omit, that both the scope of S. Paul's
journey, and the Scripture's expressing that this was the result of it, jointly
with the consent of interpreters do force us to this exposition of that place.
Again, it is impossible these words, speaking literally, and properly, should
signify an agreeing to go to several Provinces, both because the phrase, [
they gave the right hands of communication] signifies an accepting and
acknowledging Paul and Barnabas in something common to them and the rest, as
was the doctrine of Christ's ^aith, and could not relate to going to diverse
Provinces, which were pretended to be particular, as also because (...), is no
where found to signify in the Greek simply they agreed; and lastly, because an
half point in the Greek copies at (...), communion or fellowship, disjoyns that
precedent phrase from the following of going to such and such places. The words
then, that we should go to the Heathen, they to the Circumcision, are a mere
sequel, if we follow the rigor of the letter; and so the whole place signifies
thus much, that whereas S. Paul was disturbed in his preaching, and was glad to
clear his doctrine by coming to Jerusalem, they gave him the right hand of
fellowship acknowledging him their fellow Apostle, and his doctrine entirely
sincere; that so each might fall to their work again in the same places, and in
the same manner as formerly.

Now Mr. H's Disarmer, proceeding upon the grounds of this plain explication,
held there was no other, that is, no new and farther designation (as Mr. H.
calls it ( Answ. p. 41) save only this of Gods special cooperation with them
in those several places, though he was far from denying that one Apostle went
one way, others another to preach, (as the Dr. knows well enough) and that
their determination was only a prudential subscribing to what Gods particular
Providence had hinted to them; and consequently no novelty at all of
designation appears here in respect of S. Peter and S. Paul, which was our
question; and yet Dr. H. (not understanding that the subscribing to a former
designation, or proceeding to act according to it, is in it self no new, or
farther-designation as he calls it) nicknames this explication of mine one
little deceit of S. W. which the Catholic Gent. had not attaind to. And truly
it is so little, that without the magnifying glass of passion and prejudice,
which enhances nothing to great somthings, and makes vast beams of matters
slenderer then moats, it cannot at all be discernible. It shall be D. H's
honor to be the Author of great deciets, and self-contradictions which neither
unskilful S. W. nor the Catholic Gent. dare aspire to.

Again, were it a deciet to say, that there were no other assignation there
expressed, yet D. H. is the most unfit man in the world to undecieve others in
that point, who in another place holds the same point himself, to wit, that the
Apostles agreement and the precedent designation signifies the same thing. His
words are these ( Repl. p. 55. l. 12.) The right hands of fellowsh^p, the
agreement that was made betwixt them, etc. is sure the interpretation of the
(...); which if it be so, to wit, that their entrusting expressed antecedently
have the same sense as their subsequent agreement, then I wonder what is become
of his farther designation, since one is but the interpretation of the other,
that is has the same sense with the other.

Sect. 7*
The Examination of five Testimonies brought in recruit for his exclusive
Provinces; of which the first is expressly against himself; the next three,
even in his own grounds, impertinent to our Question; and the first borrowed
from the Arch heretic Pelagius, and falsify'd to boot.
AT present we have no more to do, but to Answer his lately gleand testimonies,
huddled together confusedly in his Answ. p. 39. 40. And though, when reason is
to manage the business, we are to expect nothing but contradictions from this
Dr. as himself has amply informed us; yet, being now got into his own element
of comon-place-book testimony-parcels, we must imagine his art is at it is
vertical height.

The first is from S. Ambrose on Gal. 2. 8. which I shall transcribe as I find
it cited by him; Petrum solum nominat ac sibi comparat, quia Primatum ipse
acceperat ad fundandam Ecclesiam, se quoque pari modo electum ut Primatum
habeat in fundandis Gentium Ecclesiis. He names Peter alone and compares him to
himself, because he had received the Primacie to found the Church, and he
likewise is chosen to have the Primacie of founding the Churches of the
Gentiles: where, first, if Primatus signifies Primacy of Jurisdiction (and
unles it signifies so it is nothing to our question, which is about Jurisdiction
only) then it is not possible to imagine a testimony more expressly for our
tenet of S. Peter's universal Jurisdiction and greater then S. Paul's, than
this which he alleges against it; saying that S. Peter had the Primacy to
found the Church, without any limitation at all mentioned confining him to this
or that Church; So that, if there be any exclusivenes or shadow of exclusivenes
found in that place as I see none) then it ought in all reason be the
exclusivenes of S. Paul from the Jews, since he is particularized by it to the
Gentiles; and not of S. Peter from any, who is not particularized here at all
to any part or portion of the Church, but extended to all, unles D. H. will
say, that the word [ Ecclesia, Church] signifies a piece of the Church only.
This testimony therefore might serve to some purpose, were it brought to prove
that S. Peter's Jurisdiction was Universal, and S. Paul's limited, but to prove
S. Peter's limited from words that extend it to the Church, without any note of
limitation at all found there, is still Dr. H's old and bold trick, of gulling
the Reader to his face, with out either shame or conscience. Secondly, the
comparison between those two Apostles and the ( pari modo electus) if we will
stand to the words in the testimony, make this sense as applied to particulars;
that, as S. Paul was particularly chosen to found the Gentiles Church, so S.
Peter was in like manner particularly chosen to found the whole Church, which
signifies that S. Peter was universal Pastor, and S. Paul under him: which is
kindly done of Mr. H. and deserves great thanks from us. Though I wonder the
sincere Reader can without just resentment suffer himself to be so tamely
deluded, as D. H. endeavors here, by making him believe that testimony of S.
Peter's Primacy to build the Church, signifies that he was only over the Jews;
and that not all these neither, but only over one portion of them in
dispersion; nor yet that these were his exclusive or peculiar Province, unless
S. Paul chanced to meet him in the same City. Thus perfectly careless is he
whether the place he alleges be indifferent, for him or against him (as has
been shown all over in Schism Disarmed) so he can dazzle a vulgar headed
reader's eyes with the glorious pretense of a father's or councill's testimony
and make way to introduce it by some voluntary and boldly-promising preamble of
his own as he does at present; assuring us here ( Answ. p. 39. l. 35.) that
these words of S. Ambrose are plain; but, whether plain for him, or plainly
against him it matters not with him; and that in them S. Ambr. asserts all that
was either his purpose or interest to affirm: as if it were either Dr. H's
intent or his advantage to conclude S. Peter over the Church without any
limitation put down, that is, over the whole Church, and S. Paul over the
Gentiles only, and so under him.

The second testimony is from S. Chrysostom, saying that S. Paul demonstrates
himself to be (...) equal to them (...): and compares himself with Peter the
chief of them. Thus he. In Answer. First the word (...) coming from (...)
which signifies any kind of extrinsecall honor, whether it springs from better
parts, greater efficacy, more industry in preaching, or from what so ever cause
and not only from dignity of Jurisdiction, it follows likewise that the word
(...) taken in it is self as indifferently appliable by circumstances to signify
an equality in any of the former respects, as it is to signify an equality in
the latter of Jurisdiction; and the like may be said of the word (...), since
of it self it only signifies that S. Paul compared himself to S. Peter; but,
in which of the former regards this comparison was made, the general
signification of the word leaves indifferent and to be deermined by
circumstances. Secondly the best circumstance to judge what this word should
signify in that place is the subjecta materia or place it self, of which this
is the explication; which being Gal. 2 8. where there is nothing at all
relating to Jurisdiction but to efficatiousness in preaching to Jews and
Gentiles, of this therefore the comparison between these two Apostles must be
understood; in this respect only must they necessarily be signified by these
words to have been equally-dignified, and not in Jurisdiction or governing
power which is not there spoken of. Thirdly, that this is the meaning of it is
clearly shown by the following Testimony (which is his third) out of
Theophylact, who for the most part transcribes out of and follows S.
Chrysostom; It Is this, (...), he shows himself equal (...) Peter: which words
D. H. cites, but leaves out the words imediately following, lest they should
quite spoil his pretense of proving out equality of power from the other. The
following words are these; (...): So that the testimony taken entirely is this,
he shows himself equally honored with Peter, for he who had given to Peter
efficacy of preaching to the Jews gave me (...) the same toward the Gentiles.
Where nothing is or can be more evident then this, that the (...) there spoken
of was the self same as was expressed by the ((...)) the self-same efficacy of
preaching, which nothing concerns equality or superiority of power or command
in order to Government, as plain sense tells every man, and Dr. H. himself
grants Answ. p. 51. l. 26.

The fourth testimony or rather the second part of the first is still from S.
Amb. which,) as the Caspian sea runs under ground a long way and then rises
up again in the Euxine) sculks under a parenthesis in which the two late
Testimonies are found, and shows it is Head again at the end of it in this form.
Ita tamen vt and Petrus praedicaret Gentibus si causa fuisset and Paulus
Iudaeis nam vterque invenitur vtrumque fecisse; sed tamen plena authoritas
Petro in Iudaismi praedicatione data agnoscitur and Pauli perfecta authoritas
in praedicatione gentium invenitur, yet so that Peter might preach to the
Gentiles also if there were cause, and Paul to the Jews; for both of them is
found to have done both: but yet the full Authority is acknowledged given to
Peter in the preaching to the Jews and Paul's perfect Authority is found in
preaching to the Gentiles. Where, the first part of the testimony is expressly
contrary to Dr. H. this granting that each might preach to either, he denying
they had right to do so, Repl. p. 56. and that S. Peter had no Jurisdiction
save over one portion only of the dispersed Jews (of Schism p. 71.) The second
part of it which concerns plena authoritas, full Authority or power, is only
meant of greater powerfulness and authoritative efficacity in preaching, not of
fuller power of Jurisdiction. No^ can it be otherwise, either proceeding upon
grounds common to us both, these words being the explication or comment upon
the greater efficacity of preaching spoken of in the 8. v. and so are to be
understood to mean that said efficacy, which none imagins to signify
Jurisdiction; and particularly upon Dr. H's grounds which makes no designation
of Provinces till the agreement expressed as he will needs have it in the 9. v.
by their giving the right hands of fellowship; to which this special
efficacity of preaching, mentioned in the, 8. v. and it is exposition are
antecedent. Again suppose it signified full power of Jurisdiction yet there
wants ( when they met in the same City only) to make it express for Mr. H's
tenet; So that neither can it concern our question of Jurisdiction; nor, did
it, could it reach home to Dr. H's purpose. Lastly, to render this place
impossible to serve Dr. H's turn, let us look Answ. p. 51. l. 26. and we shall
find him expressly contend that preaching or converting is nothing to the
matter of Jurisdiction and therefore not argumentatiue for us to infer S.
Peter's larger Jurisdiction from his preaching to more: Now then, since the
Authority here spoken of is only in praedicatione, in preaching (as the
testimony it self inform us) consequently it can neither concern our question
which is about Jurisdiction, nor make for his purpose, and all this follows out
of his own words and his own grounds.

The fifth Testimony is from S. Hierom (as he tells us) that the Churches of
the Jews seorsim habebantur nec his quae erant ex gentibus miscebantur, were
held a part nor mingled with these of the Gentiles, and that the agreement was
made that S. Paul should preach to the Gentiles, Peter James and John to the
Jews. The latter part of this testimony is already answered and shown that this
was a prudent consent to act in such sort as God's special concurrence had
manifested to be best in those circumstances. To act, I say, not to make a
formal and perpetual pact the one Province should be (as Dr. H. expresses it
( Repl. p. 56. l. 2. 5.) so one Apostles that he has no right to another part
but is excluded from any farther right; which includes two things besides some
to go one way and some another; to wit perpetu^ty of such a right, and
exclusivenes; neither of which are any where expressed in this testimony.

As for the first part of this place concerning the severing of the Jewish and
Gentile Churches. First I Answer, that I doubt not but the Apostles did
prudently let them use their devotions a part as long as the Jewish customs
were in fresh observation, and therefore the conjuction of them in common Acts
of devotion would have been subject to breed offense and scandalls; but, I deny
absolutely that which can serve Dr. H's turn, to wit, that they ^sed their
endeavors to keep them still a part for the future, which they had done had
they constituted distinct Bishops over them to govern them as contradistinct
Provinces; for, this would have made the breach which was only occasional at
first and so easily by degrees alterable, pass into ecclesiastical
Constitution, not easily violable, by this means keeping on foot the division:
and also this carriage of the Apostles would have countenanced the breach and
the groundless scandal which occasioned the breach.

All therefore the Apostles did was no more then as if Magistrates who govern
in common a City, if the Citizens chance to fall at variance, some prudently
comply with one side, others with the other to reduce both to unity ad amity
which is far from making two little commo^wealths of them or assigning them
distinct Magistrates to govern them: which had they done who sees not but by
taking a way the Unity of Government they had established the division. Such was
evidently the Apostles demeanor here, such their intentions; to wit, as much
as they could without scandalizing either party, to bring them to Unity and
Uniformity into one Church and to Unite them in him whom they taught to be the
head cornerstone, Christ Jesus, in whom was no distinction of Jew and Gentile:
And surely had the distraction in the Primitive Church been thus continued by
Apostolical agreement to sever them as distinct Provinces and constitute over
them opposite-litled Bishops we should both have heard news of ^ome of those
Bishops expressed by some testimony from antiquity to have been over Jews only
or Gentiles only; and also have heard of their reuniting after wards under one
common Bishop, and how the former Bishops, either one or both, were dispossessed
or lost their place. Yet not a syllable could Dr. Hammond find to express the
former save his own, Id est, nor to countenance the latter but his own new
invented Scholion, or (as he calls it of Schism p 79. his clew,) to extricate
the Reader out of the mazes into which ancient writers may lead him; as has
been shown particularly in Schism Disarmed. Part. 1. Sect. 10. 11. 12.

Secondly, to return to our Testimony Dr. H. prettily ioyns these two places
together thus, S. Hierom having affirmed on Gal. 1. 22. that the Jewish and
Gentile Churches were severd, adds (says he) on this verse of c. 2. that
they agreed that S. Paul should preach to the Gentiles, etc. and thence having
found the word severing in the first place, he infers a severing of Provinces,
and introduces it with a sure. What means ( having affirmed in his comment on
the first Chapter he adds in his comment on the second,) as if the second place
following so far of and spoken in a another occasion had been an addition to
the first; all his following book is added to any line of it if this be adding.
But this is another Gentile gullery of the Reader to his face to make him
conceit by ( having affirmed he adds) that the severing of Churches expressed in
the first place relates to their agreement found in the latter, which would
have made some show of a proof. But, alas, how far are these two from being
added together or conjoined? This pretended agreement among the Apostles to
which the second part of the Testimony relates, happening fourteen years after
what was recounted in the first Chapter v. 22 on which the first part of the
testimony comments, as is clearly seen in the first verse of the 2. Chapter.
After fourteen years, etc. So that the meaning of Dr. H's ( having affirmed he
adds) comes to this, that, having affirmed one thing in one place he adds
another thing in another, which happend fourteen years after, and indeed much
longer the scandal between the Jews and the Gentiles having been much
ancienter, and ever since the beginning of the preaching of the says to both.
Thus Dr. H. civily abuses his Reader; and, as long as he does it civily, S. W.
must not be angry with him or if he does he must not hope to go to heaven as
Dr. H. has told him from Scripture, p. 3.

What is said hitherto is pretty but yet Dr. H. uses to be kinder when he
alleges testimonies and either brings such as are expressly against him, as
he did lately from S. Ambrose, and in many other places; or else contradicts
himself; let us examine this a while and we shall see, he continues his former
favors to us. I slall suppose with Dr. H. that he produced the former
testimony of severing the said Churches to prove those several Provinces both
because I find the word ( sever) which he uses in his inference no where but in
that place only; as also, because if it were not produced for that end, I know
not what it serves for at all. Again, I shall suppose with him that these
imagined lesser Provinces of Jews and Gentiles were assigned by Apostolical
agreement, not by Christ; as he amply declares himself of Schism p. 70. And
that this agreement was that which is expressed Gal. 2. v. 8. 9. etc. as he
expresses himself in many other places of the two Provinces of Jews and
Gentiles. Now then this place of S. Hierom's being (as he says) upon Gal. 1.
22. which concerns matters done fourteen years before this agreement, (as the
beginning of the second Chap. manifests) the result is that these several
lesser Provinces, as deducible from this testimony, were fourteen years before
they were. But this is a contemptible contradiction in Mr. H. who aims at
higher matters. So much for the upshot of Dr. H. ( having affirmed, he adds)
which signifies thus much that S. Hierom. having affirmed one thing in one
place, and on an occasion happening at such a season, he adds a quite
disparate thing in another place a mile of, and an occasion relating to another
time fourteen years after, which Dr. H. preposterously adds or ioyns together,
and then lays the blame on S. Hierom.

Thus much to show how impertinent this testimony had been, in case it were S.
Hierom's; but now, if it be none of that fathers but another author's, and he
two an heretic, nay in all probability the Arch heretic Pelag^us, and this
confessed by all sides both Catholics and Protestants, and moreover most
unlikely to be unknown to Dr. H. what characters shall we think such a writer
deserves who characters himself so earnestly to desire to speak the full truth
of God (Answ. p. 18.) and yet quotes the most pestilent heretics for the most
Orthodox fathers, and would have his Readers rely for their salvation upon
their rotten Authority; which is in a manner to stand to the devill's courtesy
whether he will have their Souls or no.

It is an ordinary thing to print in the volumes of the fathers all Treatises
which have hapt to be entitled theirs, let them be genuine or spurious. To
discern them or take cognizance which are sophisticated, which not, belongs
particularly to learned men who read the fathers for their own or others
profit, lest they rely on themselves or vent to others the poison of heresy and
error-tainted opinions in stead of Orthodox faith; nay indeed this, for the
reason given, ought to be their first task; but most necessarily and specially
theirs who undertake to write and print controversies of religion; the main
universal importance of the employme^t engaging them to look with the
perfectest care how they play their game when Souls ly at stake. If the thing
then be obvious, the diligence of such an author is hugely concerned to look
upon what grounds he proceeds; but, if he be also much read in books of this
nature, his candor and conscience are bound by the highest engagements God
himself could impose to acknowledge either absolutely or at least dubiously
that such a book is a known heretics not a Catholics* That Dr. H. had so
little insight into fathers as not to know this, I cannot in his behalf suspect;
I doubt not bu^ he is industrious and laborious enough, and takes as much pains
in reading to as little purpose as most men living; and I wish his indirect
dealings in other places would let my charity consist with truth to think him
innocent of the latter and greater fault. However, I will not judge him my
self, but I suppose his friends, who have a great opinion of his general
reading, will think it not heartily done after they consider this which follows.

Two commentaries on the Galatians are entitled S. Hierom's the one larger and
acknowledged by both sides, the other briefer and acknowledged by neither; nor
is it possible that any man, who had run over the titles of the Treatises which
go under S. Hierom's name, should be ignorant that two such commentaries there
were; and so, had he meant honestly in citing a place out of one of them, he
would have told us in which it was found, whether in the larger or in the
briefer. To put down then a Testimony and cite only Hier. in Gal. 1. 21.
without telling us in which commentaries on the Gal. it was found (when as Dr.
H's much reading will not permit us to think he was ignorant there was two)
joind with this observation that the testimony was not found in the larger one,
but in the lesser; not in the genuine, but in those which are acknowledg'ly
spurious, consequently this slight half citing it savours very strong of a
wilfully-affected insincerity.

Now the exceptions of our Dr. against these briefer commentaries as also all
those shorter ones upon S. Paul's Epistles, are these, that it is manifestly
shown from S Augustine that they were writ by the Arch heretic Pelagius. For
that father in his third book de peccatorum meritis and remissione c. 1. says
that he had read the short commentaries of Pelagius upon all the Epistles of
Paul; and in the same book c. 12. he cites some things out of the 7. c. of the.
1. Cor. which are found in them. Our Doctors also gather manifestly Pelagian
opinions and positions out of the same commentaries upon Romans c. 5. 6. 7. 8.
and. 11. Upon. 1. Cor. 4. Phil. 1. and 3. Upon Tim. c. 6.

Nor have the Protestants a better opinion of them their own much approved
Rivetus in his book Criti^i sacri printed at Geneva p. 374. affirms that both
the difference of the style and the opinions of them show them to be none of S.
Hierom. that Ambrosius Catharinus thinks that Pe^agius writ them, because upon
the sixth and ninth ad Romans he teaches that eternal predestination is from the
merits of the elect foreseen by the divine foreknowledge; that Senensis doubts
not but the author of them was sick of the Pelagian pestilence because upon the
7. c. ad Romans he calls it a madness to think that original sin was derived
from Adam. After this he quotes Victorius and Bellarmine, and says that the
latter of them proves them out of S. Augustine to be writ by the Arch-heretick
Pelagius, Thus far their own Rivetus.

And now, I beseech thee Protestant Reader, be true to thy self, and thine own
Soul, and see what sincere Drs thou reliest on, who though when they speak
freely and are not put to it in dispute they grant that these commentaries are
an Arch-hereticks; yet, when they are put to it to maintain their paradoxicall
faith, make S. Hierom an Arch-heretick, or else the Arch-heretik Pelagius his
doctrine S. Hierom and Orthodox, by making those books his, so they can but
glean any sorry scrap of a testimony thence to lend a dim color to their
cause, and to countenance it by a sophisticate and counterfeit Authority; nay,
only half-cite the place, to cloak the insincerity of which their own hearts
are conscious; and lastly, which is most worth noting this very testimony so
miserably authorized is so mainely relied on, that he can never make the ends
of his discourse meet without the help of this, every foot, nor even pretend to
show one word in any testimony for his tenet but by making this one of the
three testimonies which must piece up that one word, as shall be seen hereafter.

Thus much to show how weak this Testimony is in it self had it been true, and
how the Dr. falsifies it is Authority to gain it an undue credit; but this is
not all, the falsifying the Authority of this Testimony could not serve his
turn, but he must falsify the words two, pretending that S. Hierom added upon,
Gal. c. 2. v 8. that the agreement was made that S. Paul should preach to the
Gentiles and Peter James and John to the Jews whereas there is noe news of any
agreement expressed in that place; for upon the words [ dextras dederunt, they
gave us their right hands] in which phrase Dr. H. places the agreement there is
noe comment at all found save only this, ita nos docere debere, that Paul and
Barnabas should teach thus and thus; and upon the following words, relating to
Paul and Barnabas nothing but only this, ambo enim missi erant simul vt
gentibus praedicarent for they were both sent together that they might preach
to the Gentiles. But whether this sending sprung from an agreement among the
Apostles or from the sole designation of God Almighty, expressed both by his
special cooperation with them, as also by those words, separate for me Paul
and Barnabas, etc. the testimony alleged says nothing. Now Dr. H. building
mainly upon this agreement and expressly citing this place for it where noe
agreement at all is found, it is most manifest that he has falsified the words
of the testimony as well as it is Authority.

Sect. 8.
Two other Testimonies for the same point scanned: the first abused, and yet
still impertinent to his purpose; the second, a most egregious and notorious
falsification. S* Hierom's mind in this point of Exclusive Provinces.
THe sixth Testimony is from Theophylact on Gal. 1. 22. recited by Dr H. thus
(...), etc. Being come to Judea he departed thence, both because he was sent a
preacher to the Gentiles, and because he would not build on another's
foundation. In Answer: does he say, he could not build on another's
foundation, or, as Dr. H. expresses it Reply p. 56. had not right to do it? if
not, what are these words to us, who do not desire that S. Paul should do
imprudently, as it had been if leaving the Gentiles, where himself had begun to
preach with experience of so much fruit, he should apply himself to preach in
Judea, where S. Peter had experienced the like fruit; which was, in other
language, to leave a place where his preaching was most needful and most
particularly fruit full, and stay in another where his preaching was needles
and not so particularly fruitful. Is this any thing at all to our question of
limited or unlimited Jurisdiction. Secondly, the words, because he was sent a
preacher to the Gentiles, are meant of Christ's Mission (as shall presently be
demonstrated) acknowledged by Dr. H. ( of Schism, p. 70.) to have been
unlimitedly and indefinitely given to all the Apostles not restrained by
Christ's words to any particular Province, and in particular speaking of S.
Paul's Province, Repl. p. 55. l. 31. So that the bringing this proof for
lesser Provinces, is perfectly frivolous and self-contradictory. Thirdly, this
testimony is upon, Gal. 1. 21. and speaks of his coming to Judea to see Peter,
which was more then fourteen years before his next coming thither, Gal. 2. when
this distribution of those lesser Provinces by agreement are pretended to be
made. This is seen most evidently from the direct tenor of those places
counting exactly the years; I went to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. 1. 18.
After, I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. Gal. 1. 21. After which
imediately follows, Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem
with Barnabas, etc. at which time the pretended agreement was made and the
right hands of fellowship given, (as is to be seen in the following verses)
upon which he builds the assignation of those fancied Provinces, ( of Schism,
p. 73. Answ p. 41. l. 5. Repl. p. 56. l 14. and p. 57. l. 4. etc. and in many
other places so that we see this second going up to Jerusalem, when the
Provinces are imagined to be given, was fourteen years after his being in Judea
mentioned in the Testimony, besides the time S. Paul was in Syria and Cilicia.
This distance of time is unquestionnably the outward show of the letter; but,
howsoever it may be interpreted, this is most certain and without all
controversy that it was afterward. These things being so, what a shame then is
it to bring a testimony, relating to things done long before, to prove his
conceit of lesser Provinces held by himself to have been assigned long after.
But is this all the shame? let us see. The testimony is put down by him in
indifferent terms, being come to Judea he departed thence, etc. without any
distinction when this coming was whether before, at, or after the pretended
agreement; whereas had it been known that it was at his coming only to see
Peter, which hapened before that agreement, whence he deduces these lesser
Provinces of S. Peter and S. Paul, it had been manifestly discovered to be
perfectly useles to prove that there were such lesser Provinces at all. These
words therefore hewarily leaves out least they should quite disgrace the rest.
The testimony entirely recited is this, (...), etc. coming to Judea only to
see Peter; which former words being so few, so linked in context with the other
words, and so totally disadvantaging his pretense of lesser Provinces
deducible hence (they being future, even in his own grounds, in respect of this
time he came to see Peter) I shall take leave to think there was design and
Artifice in omitting them and producing the testimony so advantageously
imperfect, though I hazard another excommunication in Greek from the crafty
alledger and abuser of it.

From his Answer let us go to his Reply, p. 55. where we shall find him from
falsifying in jest, fall to do it in earnest; and that, so openly and
manifestly as is impossible either to be cloak't, with evading glosses or
excused by ignorance or mistake. I commend therefore the examination of it to
Dr. H's friends more particularly; even submitting my self to their censure if
he be found excusable. To put all clearer I will fully transcribe from the
place alleged.

His seventh testimony; where after he had told us that Paul and Barnabas had a
Province entrusted to them by giving the right hands of fellowship which he
calls their agreement to do so, he undertakes to prove it beginning his fourth
parag. thus. And this is the special importance, (says S. Chrysostom) of the
[(...) but contrariwise] the beginning of v. 7. as that is apposed to (...)
their adding to him, v. the 6. James says he, and Peter and John were so far
from opposing any thing that he had done, from advising any thing more, from
telling him any circumstance more then before he knew, that they not only
approved but commended what he had done, and, to set things the more
unquestionably for the future, made this agreement with him and Barnabas that
whensover they should come to the same City mixed of Jews and Gentiles Peter and
John should betake themselves to the Jewish, and Paul and Barnabas to the
Gentile part of it. And here I find the first full stop, all the rest being
commas, which followd the, [ says hee] to wit, S. Chrysostom's by which it is
evident that no well-meaning Reader, who took not upon him to sift this wily
Author, could suspect but that all the words following that [ says hee] went
upon S. Chrysostom's account, and were alleged as his. This once premised, we
will set down S. Chrysostom's testimony in his own words; and that every reader
may understand it, introduce it with a short glance at the occasion of them out
of Scripture.

S. Paul, compelled by some calumnies against his doctrine, went up to
Jerusalem to communicate the gospel he preached to them who were of
reputation, Peter, James, and John, who as he affirmed (...), in conference
added nothing to him, (...) but contrariwise, finding his doctrine entire and
perfect, and moved by seeing the grace that was given him, gave to him the
right hands of fellowship; acknowledging, by this acceptance of him for their
fellow Apostle, that his doctrine was sound Now S. Chrysostom's comment upon
that place which is the testimony related to by Dr. H. is this. (...): what
means, [but contrariwise] some affirm S. Paul says that they not only not
taught him, but were taughtly him; but I should not say so, save only that
they blamed him not, but were so far from blaming him, that they also praised
him; for praising is contrary to blaming; and so proceeds in expressing their
commendation and approbation of his doctrine throughout this whole place
alleged. Here, reader, thou see what S. Chrysostom makes the spec all
importance of the [(...) but contrariwise] to be; to wit that they praised
him, praising being contrary to blaming.

Hence appears the first wilful falsification of Dr. H. who having spoken of
S, Paul's having a Province entrusted to him by Apostolical agreement,
imediately subjoyns. And this is the special importance, says S. Chrysostom.
[(...), but contrariwise] as if the commending S. Paul's doctrine, in which
only S. Chrysostom puts the antithesis and opposition to the blaming it, did
not only import but specially, import the intrusting him with a lesser
Province whereas all the special importance of it is only this that Dr. H.
has a special faculty of his own in falsifiing, and making special fools his
credulous Readers to think all his forgeries gospel because he gives them
special fine words, and assures them he has a special desire to speak the
full truth of God.

Yet a simple falsification is too weak to defend Dr. H's cause wherefore, to
make sure work, he twists them into a compound forgery. In his book of Schism
he endeavor's to prove that these Apostles had several Provinces at Rome and
Antioch; his Disarmer showed to the eye of the Reader that he had not one word
expressing that position in any testimony alleged but what he added with an,
Id est, of his own head: It is expected therefore that he should at least
produce new ones which were express in his Reply and Answ. and, that we may
see how strongly warranted his Tenet is, he brings here one so home and
express that I confess some difficulty to Answer it; I mean the latter part
of the long testimony lately recited as from S. Chrysostom; and to set the
things the more unquestionably for the future, they made this agreem^nt with
Paul and Barnabas, that, when soever they should come to the same City mixed of
Jews and Gentiles, Peter and John should betake them selfs to the Jewish and
Paul and Barnabas to the Gentile part of it. This is expressly now and full
for Dr. H's tenet, not a testimony-bolt shot at rovers, or only touching the
question obscurely, as was his custom in other places. But, alas, how is the
good testimony spoile'd and the alledger of it exposed to shame; not a word of
all this long rabble so nearly importing the Question is found in the Author,
but only voluntarily added by the good Dr. and fatherd upon S. Chrysostom. no
news, God knows, is there in the place it self either of setting things
unquestionably for the future, nor of making an agreement, nor of, meeting in
the same City, nor of Jews and Gentiles mixed, nor of betaking themselves to the
Jewish or Gentile part of it, nor of any thing to that purpose; but only of
the sufficiency of S. Paul's doctrine, their approving it, praising it, and the
like. So that Dr. H. for want of a better Author quotes himself for his own
tenet, coins a pregnant and convincing testimony out of the mint of his own
brain; and then, to make it current, stamps upon it the Image and
superscription of S. Chrysostom. And all this out of his entire desire to speak
the full truth of God.

This falsification being so notorious, it were not amiss to make some brief
animadversions upon it, that Dr. H's art in this and many other places may be
better discoverd, and the reader more perfectly undeceiu'd in the opinion of
his sincerity.

Note first then, ere he introduces the testimony he speaks of the direct point
in controversy to wit, of entrusting of Provinces by Apostolical agreement.

Note secondly, that, this done, he brings in a quite disparate thing; to wit,
the approving and commending S. Paul's doctrine.

Note thirdly, the fine words with which he introduces it, [ and this is the
special importance, says S Chrysostom, of the (...)] which, though
absolutely false as has been shown, yet, those pretty confident words of
special importance, and the fathering it upon S. Chrysostom make it seem
authentickly true and pass down glibly with a cursory Reader.

Note fourthly, how he lays out at large in the former half of the long
testimony S. Chrysostom's words concerning the sufficiency and laudablenesse of
S. Paul's doctrine, as if it were importantly concerning the having a Province
entrusted him, whereas it is quite concerning another matter; which is his old
trick of a busing the reader to his face, so often discovered.

Note fifthly, how having alleged a testimony about S. Paul's
praise-worthines, which nothing at all concerns our question, and by this means
got a cloak for any thing he should think good to add of his own head he
proceeds with a career in S. Chrysostom's name to their agreement of distinct
Provinces when they met at the same City; to countenance which not a syllable
is there found: yet he goes smothly from one matter to the other without the
least rub so much as of an hypocolon to stop him; by this means comprising all
under the common head of ( says he.)

Note sixthly, that, as he ushered in his former falsification with the
confident phrase of special importance, so here, that the Reader may not
distrust nor doubt but that all is real, he ushers in his latter with un
questionably; to set all (says he) unquestionably for the future. What Reader
now could be so discourteous as to suspect Dr. H's integrity where as he
assures him with such doubt-setling expressions as these are, and makes his
bold-fac'd testimonies wear nothing but special and unquestionable in their
serious countenances?

Lastly it is to be noted that in his book of Schism, he used to add these
self-invented testimony-parcells with an, Id est; but since, Id est, which
stickled so much before, was shamed out of countenance by Schism Disarmed, now
he adds what words he pleases in a smooth even tenor with the true part of the
testimony, without any, Id est at all; both because the words of the father and
the addition of the Dr. were so disparate that noe, Id est, would possibly
conioyn their sense, as also, because such distinctive notes are discernible,
and so might prove tell-tales and discover his craft, which he hoped by running
from the father's words to his own with a sly smothnes might remain less
discoverable.

And so much for these seven testimonies, the flower of Mr. H's second
thoughts in his Reply and Answer, to support his tenet of exclusive Provinces
which Schism Disarmed had ruined. All which have been shown so impertinent to
the point they are brought to prove that he might with better reason have
alleged the first verse of Genesis, [In the beginning God created the heaven
and the earth] as a testimony for his exclusive Provinces; for, though that
place were impertinent to his purpose, yet it is not opposite nor contradictory
to it; whereas these said testimonies produced by him are at best impertinent
to what they are intended for, and most of them directly contrary to his
on-all-sides-destitute tenet.

I had forgot one small testimony of Dr. H's for these exclusive Provinces,
which hides it self so nicely in a Parenthesis that it escaped my observation.
But having found it we shall not neglect to pull it out of it is hole, because
it will give us some further instructions what a Master of his ^ ade Dr. His in
venting his testimony-ware with the best advantage. It Is found Answ. p. 41. in
these words when I say Peter was the Apostole of the Circumcision exclusively
to the uncircumcision (as when Eusebius hist. l. 1. c. 1. says that he preached
in diverse nations (...) to the Jews that were of the dispersion) the meaning
is evident, etc. Thus he, whereas first there is not a word to that purpose
found in the place alleged. Secondly, how can only his preaching to the Jews
of the dispersion countenance that they were his Province, since it is known and
granted that he preached also to the Jews in Judea; so that if from such a
manner of expression it may be inferred that the one is his Province, by the
same reason it may conclude for the other also. Thirdly, observe how neatly he
brings Eusebius to speak on his side, I say Peter was the Apostle of the
Circumcision exclusively to the uncircumcision, as Eusebius says he preached
to the Jews of the dispersion: which signifies thus much; Just as I say S.
Peter was Apostle of the Jews of the dispersion exclusively (in which word lies
the whole question) so Eusebius says that he preached to them not naming any
exclusion at all, and by consequence not saying a word to our purpose or the
question in hand, it being granted that each Apostle preached to any Sect or
nation as their occasions invited them. Is not this a worthy similitude? yet
this, expressed drily as is Dr. H's wily way, and the testimony touched at
slightly gulls an ordinary Reader to his face and persuades him that Eusebius
does perfectly second Dr. H's tenet of exclusive Provinces.

It was ob^ected to Mr. H. by the Cath. Gent. that S. Peter preached to
Cornelius a Gentile and therefore that he was not over the Jews only or
exclusively: he Answers that this preaching to Cornelius was before the
designation of Provinces, Repl. p. 57. and therefore the argument is of no
force. I reply, it is S. Hierom's argument upon, Gal. c. 2. v. 7. where he moves
the present question in these words. Occulta hic oritur quaestio, Quid igitur?
Petrus si invenisset ex Gentibus non eos adducebat ad fidem, etc. here arises
(says he) an obscure question; what if Peter found any Gentiles, did not he
bring them to Christ's faith; or, if Paul found any Jews, did not he move them
to the baptis. of Christ, Then he proceeds to solve it, by saying, that one had
principale mandatum, a principal charge over Jews and the other over Gentiles,
that either side, haberent quem sequerentur, might have one whom they might
follow. All which the prudence of Magistrates requires to be practiced without
limiting Authority as has been shown. This done he signifies their promiscuous
intention to preach to both and consequently their Jurisdiction (for certainly
they did not intend to do what they had noe right to do) in these words, In
commune vero hoc eos habuisse propositi, vt Christo ex cunctis gentibus
Ecclesiam congregarent; legimus enim and a S. Petro Gentibus baptizatum fuisse
Cornelium and a Paulo in Synagoga Iudaeorum Christum saepissime praedicatum.
But in common this was both their intentions to gather a Church to Christ out
of all nations; for we read that both Cornelius, a Gentile, was baptized by
Peter, and also that Christ was very often preached by Paul in the Synagogue of
the Jews. Where,

Observe first, that the very question between Dr. H. and me is here moved by
S. Hierom, to wit, concerning the exclusivenes or not exclusivenes of these
Apostles Jurisdictions; or, at least (for I imagine it impossible S. Hierom
should even dream of such an absurd position) of their acting exclusively.

Observe secondly that since their exclusivenes consisted only in their
meeting in the same place, as Dr. H. holds, There and there only it is (says
he, Rep. p. 59. l. 10.) had S. Hierom been acquainted with any such matter, it
had been impossible not to express it here; since the discourse it self
necessarily directed him to it. For how could he Answer a question about their
exclusivenes, without saying they had such an exclusivenes when they met, if it
were true that they had none at all but only in the occasion. But, alas S.
Hierom and all antiquity were ignorant that there would arise in future ages
such a quicksighted wit as Dr. H. who could see things better a mile of then
they could do at a yard distance.

Oserve thirdly, that it was strange he should not Answer that this particular
addiction of theirs was by Apostolical agreement or Dr. H's farther
designation, but to put it originized from another occasion.

Observe fourthly, that his Answer insists only upon the principale mandatum,
the principal charge to apply themselves thus severally, and expresses it not
as an act of distinct Jurisdiction but of a prudent aeconomy, that either side
haberent quem sequerentur, might have whom to follow; to wit, in their
neglecting or retaining the Mosaicall institutions, as is shown there; since,
in all likely hood, one side or other would totally have declined from Christ's
faith had not this prudent distribution of them selves intervened

Observe fifthly, that this principale mandatum in which S. Hierom places this
particular application of themselves was from God; both, because none on earth
had power to lay commands upon those tow Apostles; as also, because it is
sufficiently intimated in the foregoing words; me Paulum misit ad Gentes, illum
posuit in Iudaea he (to wit God) sent me to the Gentiles, and placed him in
Iudaea; which being so, it is express against Dr. H. who holds that the
Commission of Authority as given by God to each Apostle is unlimited, of
Schism. p. 70.

Observe sixthly, that this speciale mandatum prejudiced nor hindered not their
intentions to preach to all Nations expressed by in commune vero, etc. and the
following, legimus enim, etc.

Observe seaventhly th^^ S. Hierom does the same as the Cath. Gent. to wit,
makes account that S Peter's preaching to Cornelius a Gentile, prejudices their
exclusivenes so that if Dr. H. have any thing to say against the Cath. Gent.
in this point, let him go and wrangle first with S. Hierom.

Oserve lastly, that S. Hierom bringing this passage granted by Dr. H. to have
happend before his imagind agreement, as an instance against their
exclusivenes, and that upon the 2. to the Gal. the agreement is supposed to be
made, shows plainly that S. Hierom made account that there was noe agreement at
all made in this point; or that, if there were, things stood in the same manner
after the fancied agreement as before it; otherwise this instance of his had
been to noe purpose; being of a passage happening long before it.

This Testimony of S. Hierom I at first intended only to let Mr. H. see that
this learned father made the same argument as the Cath. Gent. did; but, finding
it the most express for our controversy that Antiquity affords, (as far as I
have read) since it proposes and solves the very question between us I thought
good to let the reader see how far Antiquity was from Dr. H's chimericall tenet
of exclusive Provinces, and how perfectly for ours of the Apostles
still-Vniversall Jurisdictions; each expression here found being either
emphaticall for us, or else sounding clearly to our manifest advantage by
seconding ad confirming our explication of this place and passage.

Sect. 9.
Dr. H's manner of arguing to prove that S. Peter had no singular supremacy (as
he styles it) at Jerusalem.
NOthing is so weak but falsehood, which is weakness it self, can think it worth
producing to strengthen it self by; and, as this breeds acceptance, so passion
and desperation forces the unfortunate Patrons of a self-ruinous cause cling to
the feeblest shadows as to most substantial proofs to underprop their weak
Ivy. This is seen by pitiful experience in Dr. H. who is enamored on every
toy, though the passage or expression be perfectly indifferent, absolutely
disparate, nay some times quite opposite to him, so his strong antipathy against
the Pope, joined with his smooth-sly art can make a quodlibeticall dish of it
to please the palates of his partial friends or unattentive Readers. Each leaf
of his hitherto has given us several instances of this true charge yet none
more evidently then this present passage now to be replied upon.

He told us confidently of Schism p. 73. that he quite took of all pretensions
of S. Peter to the singular supremacy there, that is, at Jerusalem, where S.
James was Bishop: his Disarmer asked him and now asks him again what he mea^s by
singular supremacy there? was ever the Pope's Authority dressed up in such an
expression as this of singular supremacy: would not supremacy have served the
turn, if he had a mind to be rightly understood, without such an odd Epithet?
or, if he would needs give it an Epithet why should it not rather universal,
then singular. Again, what means his adding the words [ there.] The supremacy
in debate betwixt us is neither subject to Here Is nor There Is, but universal and
spreading it self to all places in the whole Christian world. All the
singularity and particularity shown there at Jerusalem was of S. James being
particular Bishop of that place; and then indeed by proving S. James such; he
quite takes of S. Peter's pretension to such a singular supremacy; but what is
this to his being chief of the Apostles? cannot one be so without being
particular Bishop of each see in the world? I excepted therefore against that
illphrad title of honor, [ singular supremacy] as an ambiguous word, and apt to
make the vulgar Reader imagine that S. Peter's universal authority is lost if
any one be found singularly supreme in his own see; and I had good reason to be
jealous of it, knowing it to be one of Dr H's best arts to couch himself in odd
indifferent expressions which helped by some circumstances (little more then
indifferent also) may make the Reader apt to take them in a sinister sense, and
yet leave an evading hole for the Dr. to say afterward when his Adversary
should challenge him, that he meant otherwise

Thus much for his uncouth expression of [ singular supremacy] as it was found
alone in his book of Schism without a Comment; here in his Answ. p. 42. he
explicates himself to mean, such a supremacy as was not common to the other tow
eminent Apostles; which is as wise as the text it self, and intimates thus
much, that they had each supremacy there, but that S Peter's supremacy was not
singular or above theirs; which would ground this pretty contradiction to the
former that none at all were supreme but all equal Or if he meant not that
each was supreme there in respect of the other, then what needed he add
singular at all? let him but grant us only a supremacy in S. Peter in respect
of the other Apostles, and we shall not desire him to add the frivolous word (
singular) nor needed he impugn so powerfully that expression which we never
challenged nor stood upon, nay not so much as heard of till he coined it.

But I accept of his comment; let it mean such a supremacy (Authority, he would
have said) as was not common to the two other eminent Apostles, who does he
impugn it, or, as he pretends, quite take of S. Peter's pretensions to it.
Because (says he of Schism p. 73.) S. James his Jurisdiction was not by Peter
alone entrusted unto him, but by James and John together with Peter: so that
the argument stands thus; S. Peter cannot be higher in Authority, unles he does
all things alone by himself. Is not this excellent? But, what follows is
superexcellent and transcendently rational; his Disarmer showed his
consequence naught, because an Archbishop going to consecrate a Bishop uses to
take two other Bishops with him, which yet argues not that the Archbishop has
any greater Authority than a Bishop: so that as it is inconsequent to say, an
Arch bishop does not alone entrust a Bishop with a Bishopric, but takes two
Bishops a long with him to do it, therefore he has noe higher Authority then
the Bishops he takes with him; so, it is equally inconsequent to say, S. Peter
did not alone entrust James with the Bishopric of Jerusalem but took Peter
and John with him, therefore he had no higher Authority then Peter and John.
This consequence absolutely denied by me and an instance given to show by
parity the weakness of it, it was his task to strengthen it here; yet he has
the confidence to repeat it, and, in stead of sodering the incoherence of it,
catches at my instance and tells me it neither does nor ever will be made
appear by S. W. that S. Peter was an Arch bishop in respect of those two other
suffragan Bishops James and John. Did I say S. Peter was an Archbishop and the
other two his suffragans? what means then this laying out my words in such a
form? that he had higher Authority was mine and the Catholic Tenet which
higher Authority I showd not invalidated by his taking other two with him by
the parity of an Archbishops carriage in the like case, and hence denied the
consequence: yet in despite of Logic and the commonest rules of disputing he
is resolved his consequence shall hold till I who am the defendent and am
answering his argument prove mine own tenet and turn to be Opponent, making it
appear (as he heartily expresses it) that S. Peter was an Archbishop, and the
other two his suffragans. The sum then is this Dr. H. argues thus S. Peter
took other two with him to consecrate James, therefore he has noe higher
Authority then those he took with him; I Answer denying the consequence, and
affirming that he might be higher in Authority notwithstanding; showing it by a
parity; what does our disputant? in stead of strengthening his weak consequence
he only replies, I marry but you shall never prove nor make it appear that S.
Peter was higher in Authority then the other two; whereas any one, who is
meanly acquainted with the most ordinary laws of disputing, knows it is his
part who is here the Opponent to make his consequence appear valid and
concluding, mine, who am the defendant, or Answerer to deny, grant or
distinguish only, not to prove my Tenet or make it appear. Perhaps Mr. H.
having got some credit for ordinary slight pulpit sense, may still in the
judgment of some prejudiced or weak understandings conserve his credit by such
Evasions; but I am confident that any knowing sincere man will acknowledge that
any freshman in the University would be hist out of the schools, if he defended
his argument noe better then the Dr. has proved his consequence.

He adds a Testimony out of Clemens, which he says deserves to be considered
(Answ. p. 42. 43.) and it shall have it is full desert. It Is this, that Peter,
James and John being (...), honored before the rest by our Lord did not contend
for dignity, but those James the first Bishop of Jerusalem, which Testimony is
very express that they all chose him, and did not wrangle in chosing him; but
as for Dr. H's purpose, what it makes for that none but himself can tell us,
where (says he) the (...) or precedence, that Peter had from Christ, is common
to James and John also, and so no singular supremacy. The force then lies in
the ((...), or, honored before the rest) and in it is being spoken in the
plural number in common: I ask then and put it to Dr. H's choice; does this
word sound priority or preeminence in Authority and Jurisdiction, or does it
not, but some other priority, as of favor, gifts etc. If it does, then it
makes these three Apostles superior in Jurisdiction to the rest and puts the
rest subject to them, which Dr. H. will (Iam sure) by noe means admit nay
expressly denies in this very page. If it does not, then what does it concern
our question, which is about Iurisdiction^ for let the rest be never so much
before S. Peter in all other regards, yet as long as they are not equaled to
S. Peter in Jurisdiction and Authority, still our Tenet is in tire to us and
untuch't. Testimonies therefore which can make against us must concern
Jurisdiction, and show an equality among the Apostles in that; of which since
this place cannot be understood, as has been shown, it cannot consequently
pretend to tuch us at all. Again admit the honoring above the rest; spoke in
common of these three Apostles, signified any Jurisdiction or higher degree of
Authority, yet how does it appear hence that one of these three was not
honored above the other two; since the words themselves express nothing to
the contrary but easily permit it to be so without any violence offered to
their sense; Cities are honored more then Villages, yet it follows not from
these words that all Cities are of equal honor with one another. So miserably
weak is Dr. H's reason, which is only declamation pitch, that it cannot be
imagined, unless a man had his strong fancy, how his best testimonies, which
deserve, as he tells us, such consideration, can in any manner concern the
question for which they are alleged, nor carry home to the meanest semblance
or shadow of a conclusion.

But to proceed; having proved gallantly from three being honored before the
rest an equality of that honor in all those three, and supposed against his own
Tenet that this preference of honor means Jurisdiction and Authority, and so
that these three Apostles were equal in that respect, he adds, and as such
they chose and ordained the brother of the Lord; which, sure, is not after the
manner of an Archbishop and his suffragan Bishops, where you see the upshot of
all expressed in his sure-footed conclusion, which sure, etc. depends upon the (
as such) and the ( as equal in Authority,) and that ( as such) depends upon
Dr. H's invention; no such reduplicative expression being found in the
testimony: so that, as long experience has tought us, Dr. H's arguments and
testimonies put to the Analytick test, are resolved into his own sayngs and
self confident sures, as into their first principles and the ground work of his
testimonies, which are allowed only to descant and reflect glancingly upon his
own more substantial, solid and pregnant affirmations.

Thus much to show how impossible it is this testimony should prejudice us; now
(though we have better grounds then to stand need to build upon it) in all
probability it makes rather for us: for, what strange matter was it or worth
taking notice of, that they should not contend for dignity about choosing him,
if they were all equal in digni^y? what so high commendation is it in those
Apostles that none of them strove for preeminence of Authority, if there had
been unquestionably none at all belonging to any one of them? Or what novelty
is it that persons of equal Authority should do things by common consent?
Whereas, had some one had power to do it alone, and yet condescended to it with
the joint-consent and joint-execution of others, the carriage was worth
observation for the particularity of their peaceablenes, humility, mutual
confidence and brotherly charity.

After this worthy testimony comes hobbling in a Scripture Proof, to make good
all that went before, in this form. And so also in the place to the Gal. e. 2.
v. 9. James and Cephas and John are equally dignified by S. Paul and have all
there the style of (...), seeming to be pillars. This testimony has two parts
as it is put by Mr. H. the first, that they were equally dignified by S. Paul
in the 9. v. the second, that they are all three called pillars. But as for the
first look in the place and you shall find noe other note of their being
equally dignified save only that these three are named together. Has not this
Dr. of Divinity a strange reach of reason, who can conclude men equal in
Authority because he finds their names in the same place? so that, should he
hap to find the King, Tom fool and John a Nokes named all together, presently
his levelling logic concludes them all equally dignified. The like acutenes is
shown in the second part which sounds to the same time, both being nonsense in
Ela. They are all called pillars, ergo, they are all equal, cries the Dr. as
if one pillar could not be higher then another. But he makes noe distinction
between a community and an equality, nor will vouchsafe to understand that
degrees are notions superadded to the common species of things; whatever things
he finds named by the same name in the plural number, presently he makes them
go a breast in the same degree of height or worth. He would make a rare man to
write a book of logic for the levellers: If he ^bserves that peasants, as well
as Princes, agree in the common name of men, and are called so in the plural,
presently he concludes that peasants and Princes are equally dignified the Lord
Ma or of London and the Geffer Major of Grims^y are equal in Authority and
dignity by the same reason, because they are both in the plural called Majors.
Nor only this but Cities, Commonwealths rivers, horses, books noses,
mountains, stars, and universally all things in the world must be levelled
into an equality, because the common name in the plural agrees to all of each
kind, by Dr H's parallel logic which concludes the Apostles equal because
they are called pillars, nay even from their being named together. Is the
answering such a pitiful Adversary worth the loss of an hovers time, were it
not that the sleight-reasond preaching-vogue, which now takes vulgar heads, had
got him an opinion amongst many, and so, by means of that, not by any force of
his reasons, enabled him to do mischief, unless his wilful and affected
weaknesses be laid open. I might hope also for some ameandment from another,
but I find him so long beaten to his slender-woven cobwebb declamation-stuffe,
I despair that all these friendly reprehensions will make him reflect upon his
weak reasonings and make them stronger for the future.

He was told in Schism Disarmed of the same faults; to wit, of proving the
Apostles equally foundation-stones, because they were all called so in the
plural; that the Apostles were all equal because that common Appellation in
the plural was given to all; that none had more power then another (that is
all had equal power) because each sit upon a throne to judge, that is had
power only; that the Spirit satt without distinction, that is equally upon
each, because the Scripture says in common that it sat upon them; that all
had the holy ghost equally (by the plowmans argument for the equality of his
eggs) because all were full of it. For these and other faults of the same
strain Dr. H. was reprehended by his Disarmer, yet still noe amends not hopes
of amends appears, in these answering books after he had been so often told of
it, nor by consequence are we to expect any other from him in his following
treatises.

Sect. 10.
Dr. H's Pretenses of Testimonies (as he calls them) and his manifold
falsification of S. Chrysostom, to prove James at Jerusalem clearly superior
to S. Peter.
AS for the point it self concerning S. James, I am reprehended for
misunderstanding Dr. H. and that he endeauored not to prove S. James his
priority of dignity and Authority, but only to prove that in his see James was
considered as a Bishop, Answ. p. 43. l. 20. 21. and 27. whereas neither any man
denied him to have been Bishop there, nor could it any way advantage Dr. H's
cause if this were ptoved; for what follows against S. Peter's being chief of
the Apostles that S. James was Bishop of Jerusalem, and the Jurisdiction of
that Metropolis? Has not each Catholic Bishop the same now a days over his
private Diocese, and yet remains subject to the head of God's Church
notwithstanding? Again, if he intended not that S. James had greater Authority
there, what meant his fiction of his having the principal place, and giving
the sentence, that the Rescript is grounded upon his sentence, etc. Surely when
one gives the sentence, and the others only propose, the former must be held
to have greater power in that place and those circumstances then the latter.
But [ principall] with him sounds noe priority at all, nor can he be held to
any thing who has got once the privilege to say and unsay again as he
pleases. He was accused of making S. James at Jerusalem, superior to S. Peter,
which he denies p. 43. blaming me for misunderstanding him, yet in the p. 44.
ere the Echo of the former words were well out of the Reader's ears, he goes
about to prove and infer in express words from testimonies that James in this
council was clearly superior to S. Peter; which is clearly contradictory to his
former words. But we are not to wonder at what is grown customary and familiar.

Next, he goes about to show ( Answ. p. 44.) that he has at least pretenses of
testimonies that S. James had the principal place, the first of which
pretenses is, that he is named before Peter, and unless this conclude our
argument from S. Peter's being named first must be prejudiced. I Answer, our
argument drawn thence for his principal place among the Apostles insists upon
his constantly being named first, and not once only; which might happen
without any great mystery in it. Again, what mean these words, the Romanists
argument from the (...), concluding his primacy from being first named. These
are two quite different things. The argument from his being first named,
consists in this, that in the orderly naming of the Apostles his name is found
first placed: whereas, the argument from the (...) lies in this, not that he is
first named, but that he is in these words named or expressed to be the first of
the Apostles.

His second pretense of a Testimony, as he calls it, is from S. James his
giving the sentence; and though their own translation rendered the words [(...)]
wherefore my sentence is, by this means making it only his judgment in the
matters, yet Dr. H. tells us, he still believes it signifies the sentence. The
first ground of this his belief is, because it is S. Chrysostomes observation
that his speaking last was founded in his being Bishop of Jerusalem: what
then? could not he be Bishop there and speak last both, without giving the
sentence? were there noe worthier persons present, or did the thing to be
concluded only concern his see, or indeed did it concern it at all? the
Rescript, the effect of this consult, being directed only to Gentiles, which
were noe ways subject to the Bishopric of Jerusalem. But let us see S.
Chrysostomes testimony (...) He was Bishop of the Church in Jerusalem
therefore he speaks last, unfortunate man! with whom nothing succeeds, nor any
testimony thrives, but either they are against him or nothing at all to his
purpose, as has been shown all over; or when they hap to be full and express
(as this is (then they come of worst of all. Let him look into their own
edition of S. Chrysostom and Dannaeus his Notes upon them, printed at Eton,
and he shall see what is become of his (...) therefore he speaks last upon
which only he builds; verba haec (says he) interpres non agnoscit, nec
certe videntur apt locari; nam, quod Episcopus esset, ideo prior loqui debuit,
non posterior. The Interpr^ter does not acknowledge these words, neither truly
do they seem to be fitly placed: for, in regard he was a Bishop he ought in
that respect to speak first not last. But it is noe matter, Dr. H. can cast a
figure of hysteron proteron, make first be last, and any corrupt piece of an
Author become pure Chrysostom and rare sense, so it do but be befriend him at
a dead lift.

His second worthy proof is that S. Chrysostom says that James (...), ordains
or decrees those things. As if the decree were not manifestly made by all
present but by James only, and called there by S. Chrysostom himself, p. 795.
l. 36. (...) a common decree; yet, because he finds an expression of decreeing,
common (as he well knows) to all that were present, but, (his present occasion
not inviting him) not taken notice of by S. Chrysostom in that place,
imediately S. James is thence concluded the best man in the company, the giver
of the sentence, or whatever else Dr. H. pleases. Any thing may be as well inferd
as that which he pretends. Again, I would ask Dr. H. why he leaves out the
words (...), from the law, which were imediately joind in context with the
former thus, (...), he ordains those things out of the law, by this simple
putting down (...) gaining something a better semblance for the absoluteness
of S. James his decree. But I shall have occasion to explicate hereafter this
whole place out of which Dr. H.) as his slight manner is) picks out a couple
of words.

His third proof is from S. Chrysostom's setting down the (...) good order
observed in their speaking first I will transcribe the place as I find it in
that father, and afterward let the Reader see how craftily Dr. H. abuses it
for his purpose. (...). There was no haughtines in that congregation, but good
order, or (as the Interpreter renders it) been composita omnia, all things well
composed. After Peter Paul speaks and no man interrupts him; James represses
himself and does not dissent. He was entrusted with the principality)
Bishopric) John says nothing here, the other Apostles say nothing, but keep
silence and take it not ill; so pure from vain glory was their Soul. Where we
see the (...) or good order spoken of consisted in this that they did not
interrupt one another in speaking, as is the custom of haughty and
vainglorious persons, but any one spoke without disturbance what he had to say;
not in this, that such an one spoke first, this man the second, another last.
This is evident by the place as taken in it self let us see now how Mr. H.
works upon it.

He had already proved from his late-mentioned unauthentick testimony that S.
James had the principal place because he spoke last; then he names the word
(...), which he englishes, good order, in speaking, set down (as he says) by
S. Chrysostom; Next, he leaves out all those words which might manifest what
was meant in that place by good order, to wit that there was noe haughtiness
in that Congregation, that their Souls were free from vainglory which should
have shown plainly that the (...), or good order consisted only in behaving
themselves modestly and peaceably and not in the best man's speaking last.
Thirdly he tells us that after Peter Paul speaks but leaves out the following
words (...) and noe man stops his mouth or hinders him, lest we should
apprehend that the good order consisted only in this that they did not
interrupt one another in speaking, which apprehe^sion would have spoile'd the
Drs good order of the principal man speaking last fourthly, to hinder the
Reader from the same right apprehension, he omitts all the words following that
which related to James, to wit John says nothing here, the other Apostles say
nothing, but keep silence and take it not ill, because it was impossible that
Keeping silence, and saying nothing, should signify good order inspeaking;
which he pretends is meant there Fifthly, by picking out of the testimony
these words, after Peter Paul speaks and James forbears, and interposes not,
for he was entrusted with the (Bishopric or) principality, and there ending,
he gains a rare semblance for his purpose that S. Chrysostom made S. James for
good order's sake reserve himself till the last, because he was the best man;
whereas take the whole entire testimony concerning that matter) more then three
quarters of which he omitts,) and it is most evident to every ordinary Reader's
eye that it is impossible it should signify any such matter, as has been
shown. Sixthly, to come to that imperfect piece of a testimony, and mangled by
him to corrupt the sense which is the soul of it, the Interpreter
acknowledges not the causall particle [(...) for] upon which he builds S.
James his warines not to speak till his turn the last place. Seventhly had Mr.
H. been so candid as to put the words as he found them in the context, related
to so particularly by himself, tom. 4. p. 796. l. 28. (...), James flies not
back or resists not, without recurring to the marginall (...), interposes not,
all color had been wastht of from his sophisticated testimony, even as dressed
up by himself. For, what coherence make these words in Dr. H's grounds, he
resists not, for he was entrusted with the Bishopric, if the being a Bishop
they gave him the principal place, and so made him more able to resist or
dissent. Add that the Interpreter to whom his own side defer much render's it
non resilit, he flies not back, which makes the marginall word (...) (to which
Dr. H. recurrs without giving us notice of it) less authentic. In a word the
whole testimony manifests only that they demeaned themselves peaceably and
quietly without contentions and proud interrupting one another; and the
particular line, picked out by his sence-corrupting art, notes on the by,
amongst other things which showed their humble and peaceable charity, that one
of these namely S. James had a particular charge over the Jewish Sect, whose
cause it seemd to be to observe the Mosaicall law and so it was by consequence
his Interest to oppose S. Peter and S. Paul's contrary Verdict; yet not
withstanding, such was his peaceable carriage that (...) he resists not, or as
the Interpreter render's it, Iacobus fert and non resilit, illi erat
principatus concreditus, with comes to this sense that he suffers it quietly
and flies not back from their fore determination, although the charge he had
seemd to engage him rather to favor the Jewish party. But Dr. H. by omitting
all the words which could show the true import of the place, by taking a line
only which could by additional arts give a gloss to another quite-disparate
sense, by mangling that otherwise-something unfitt line by adding it after his
former testimony of being Bishop because he spoke last; by introducing it with
these confident words [ and yet more expressly setting down the (...) good
order observed in their speaking] then, by putting the maimed and corrupted
testimony down thus, After Peter Paul speaks and James forbears and interposes
not, for he was entrusted with the Principality, and lastly, by shutting up
close his testimony there, lest the vigor of it should take air by admitting
in the following words; by all these numerous evasions, I say, he makes the
honest and unwary Reader believe that S. Chrysostom sets down their good order
in speaking (as he renders it,) to consist in this that James having the
principal place forbears till the rest have done, and speaks in the last place
as his higher dignity and as the Dr. expresses it a little after his being
clearly superior to S. Peter required where as the (...) or good order spoken
of there, rather signifies noe order at all as Mr. H. takes order; but that he
who had any thing to say might freely and quietly speak without fear of being
proudly checked or contentiously interrupted by another.

Lastly I would know with what face Mr. H. renders (...) which signifies only
good order [good order in speaking] since it is plain from the testimony that S.
John and the rest of the Apostles spoke nothing at all, and yet they are put
there as bearing part in this (...) or orderly and quiet demeanor here spoken
of. So that the words [ of speaking] are added by Dr. H's own imagination to
the (...) or good order, and for no other end but to prove that the first
should speak last.

This manner of alleging Testimonies may be reckoned as another head or
commonplace of Dr. H's wily shifts; and consists in this, that though the
whole scope and import of the Testimony be against him, he touches slightly
and in passing, as it were, at two or three words of it, which taken alone and
introduced with a handsome boldness seem to sound for his purpose whereas the
whole import of the place is either point blank opposite, or quite disparate,
at the best half a dozen indifferently-appliable words found in it, sometimes
scarce a monosyllable, as has been shown all over in Schism Disarmed, see in
particular his ample and pregnant testimony from the bare and vulgar
monosyllable [ come.] Schism Dis. p. 81.

Sect. 11.
Other self contradictory proofs, wilful mistakes and wily sleights of Dr. H's
to maintain the same point.
AFter this hysteron-proteron, testimony concerning James his first-last place,
we have another from S. Chrysostom thus put down by Mr. H. (...), etc. for
thus (speaking of S. James) it behooves him that is in great power or Authority
to leave the sharper things to others, and himself to draw his arguments from
the gentler and milder Topics, and hence Mr. H. infers James in this council
clearly superior to S. Peter.

This seems terrible; but, to render good for evil and not to wrong Dr. H. who
thus baffles us with testimonies, we will make himself the rule of interpreting
this place. He tells us p. 43. that he pretends not that any of the other
Apostles had any greater Authority then Peter, much less James the Bishop of
Jerusalem, who, as he supposes, was none of the twelve, but only that as
Bishop he had the principal place even in S. Peter's presence. How this equal
power of all the Apostles consists with S. Peter having no power save over one
portion of the dispersed Jews only, as Dr. H. affirmed of Schism p. 71. I will
not now examine* with concerns us to observe in it is only this, that he
produces not these testimonies to prove the greater power of any in this
council, but only the principal places of James. This being clearly his
meaning, (as it is also more particularly expressed throughout this whole tenth
paragraph in the end of which this Testimony is found, what mean the words
(...) great power, in which the whole force of his testimony lies? does (...)
use to signify place, or (...) principal, or both of them together principal
place as that is contradistinguisht from greater power? How come then the words
(...) to signify principal place? That he had in that place great power which
the words (...), directly and properly signify, we willingly grant; since we
deny not his being Bishop there but that he had greater, or, as Dr. H.
expresses it, was clearly superior to S. Peter, is both expressly
contradictory to himself, and to his whole scope and intention; which was to
prove as he tells us not his greater power but principal place only But let
us grant that Dr. H. has forgot what he was about; and that in stead of
proving the principal place only, he having light on an odd testimony which
spoke expressly of (...) power infers there-upon that James was clearly superior
there to S. Peter, meaning in power; let all this I say be granted and
pardoned, if S. James were superior there in power to S. Peter, I suppose he
was likewise superior to the rest; (for I fear not that Dr. H. should deny his
inference of all the Apostles equality from their being called
foundation-stones pillars and Apostles in the plural) then I ask whither Dr.
H. thinks in his conscience that these Apostles who had Authority to constitute
James Bishop there had not Authority likewise to remove him, if they saw it
convenient? if they had, then they had an Authority superior to S. James even
in his own see; and, I would ask Dr. H. even in his own grounds why S. Peter
should not be his superior still as well as S. Paul was yet superior to Timothy
and Titus after they were fixed Bishops S. James being constituted Bishop in
Judea shown to have been S. Peter's Province; (I mean such Province as he is
pretended to have had) as well as the Gentiles, over whom Timothy and Titus
were constituted Bishops were pretended to be S. Paul's Province. Again we
will pardon Dr. H. his affirmation that the Apostles distributed their
universal great Province into several lesser ones. Those famous (...) and
(...), and yet giving S. James here an (...), or Province also, whom he holds
here to be no Apostle. Or if Dr. H. refuse to accept the pardon and fall to
qualify thefact, then I use my advantage and urge him; was S. James
independent, or was he still subject as Timothy, and Titus are held by himself
to have been, even after they; were Bishops? If he were independent, then he
went a breast with the Apostles in self Authority, and had his
catachrestically-nam'd (...), as well as they; But, if he remained still
subject, then his territory being amongst the Jews, and S Peter being by Dr.
H's exclusive place of Scripture named Apostle of the Jews in the same tenor
as S. Paul was over the Gentiles. Gal. 2. it is given us by Dr. H's grounds
that in all probability he could be subject to none but to the Apostle of the
Jews S. Peter, and that in his own see, which was in S. Peter's Province, at
lest that kind of Province which he can be pretended from Scripture to have had.

But what should those words of Dr. H's signify ( Answ. p. 43.) that in his see
James was considered as a Bishop, and so had the principal place even in
Peter's presence. Cannot one be a Bishop, but he must sit in a council before
his betters? Suppose the Apostles had constituted a Bishop of Rochester in
England, and assembled themselves there in conuncil; must therefore the honest
Bishop of Rochester sit before S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles? Nay
more, let us imagine a national council to be met there, ought not the Bishop
of Rochester give place to his Metropolitan the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
let him pronounce the sentence? yet D. H. here out of his ill will to the
Pope's predecessor S. Peter, will let S. James do neither though he hold's him
to have been no Apostle. But 'ts sufficient with him that he is a Bishop in
that place to infer him to be clearly superior to all there, to have the
principal place, give the sentence, and what not? Nor matters it that even
according to Dr. H. the others are Apostles and he none, nor how high they, how
low he be in Authority; if S. Peter be in company, the private Bishop shall
be clearly superior to them all; whereas, had he been absent, S. James had
neither been thus exalted, nor the other Apostles thus depres't 'twas S.
Peter's being there which put all out of order.

Lastly, what means his inference of his being clearly superior in that
council? This is the most unlikely point of all the rest; this council (as has
been shown) concerned not S. James his particular Jurisdiction, but the common
good of the Church, of which the Apostles were overseer's; nor did this in
particular concern S. James, who (as Dr. H. here grants) was none of the
Apostles. In a word, if he contend that they let him have the principal place
out of a respectfull and courteous deference upon another score, as he was our
Lord's brother and very ancient, let him bring authentic testimonies that they
did so, and we shall easily grant it. But what does courtesy concern power, or
the right to a thing, or place. Thus we read that Pope Anicetus, gave S.
Polycarp the preeminence even in his own Church, yet we think not that his
civil condescension wronged his Jurisdiction; though (I know) if Dr. H. could
prove so much of S. James here, all were lost to S. Peter without hopes of
recovery. But if he proves his principal place by right upon the account only
of being Bishop there, it is infinitely weak, and inconsequent; reason absolutely
disclaiming any such inference; and as for authority the very testimonies he
brings to prove it are either expressly against him and contrary to his own
grounds, or else unauthentick; or, lastly, nothing at all to his purpose, as
has been shown.

His next testimony that S. James says, with power I judge, makes neither for
him nor against us: since we grant that each here had power, and used that
power invoting or decreeing; so has, and does each member in Parliament, which
yet consists well enough with their different degrees of power in thus voting,
and decreeing; so that, though we read that one member did it, upon an
occasion relating to him in particular, without excluding the rest, we cannot
upon that negative argument either infer that he alone did so, or pronounced
the Decree, unles his expression had something particular, not competent to the
rest; As for example, had it been phras'd thus. Let it be enacted, Be it
decreed, etc. there had been some ground that he pronounced the sentence, but
his words being only I judge, or (as their own translation renders it) my
sentence is, which sounds no higher strain of authority nor any thing not
equally-competent to any or each of the rest, since each might without any
great ambition, say, my sentence is thus, and thus, it is impossible any reason
unprejudiced can think any more deducible thence then that his particular
sentence was expressed by those words.

Thus much for the words, following Dr. H's explication of them. But to give S.
Chrysostom leave to explicate himself, let us hear what he says. In the same
Homily and upon the same passage we find these words; (...), he with good
reason ordains those things to wit to abstain from things strangled, etc. out
of the law, lest he should seem to abrogate the law: then follows, (...). And
observe how he lets not them hear those things from the law, but from himself,
saying I judge, that is from my self, not having heard it from the law. Where
we have two things remarkable in this prudent carriage of S. James, whose
circumstances (being Bishop, and Resident in Jerusalem) required on the one
side that he should not disgust the Jews his Diocesans by seeming to slight
the law; on the other side he was not to wrong Christianity, by making those
things necessary to be observed precisely upon this account because the law of
Moses prescribed them. To compose himself equally in this case without giving
offense to one side, or other, S. Chrysostom observes first that he ordains
these things out of the law, that is, such things as were materially found in
the law; and commanded there, and so auoids the Jews displeasure; but does not
ordain them formally, because they were commanded by the law, so avoiding the
wronging of Christianity, but of himself who as an Apostle had power to do such
things: (...), I judge, that is, of my self (or own Authority) not as having
heard it from the law; that is, not as from the Authority of the law of Moses.
This being so, the words cited by Dr. H. (...), I judge, that is, I say with
power, is given by all reason to signify the same as the former explication now
laid out at large, and of which this seems to be only a brief repetition. For
first, why should we imagine that S. Chrysostom, should give two disparate
interpretations of the same word (...) taken in the self same circumstances?
Next, were it not only a repetition of the former, why is he so short in this
latter explication as to pass it over slightly in these words; nothing
neither before, nor after relating to that interpretation. Thirdly because the
words I say with power are perfectly consonant to the other, I say it of my
self, not as from the law: that is, from mine own power not from the power of
the law, to which mine succeeds, And lastly because if we look more narrowly
into the place we shall find that neither Testimony is an explication of the
word (...), which signifies judging, or (as Dr. H. will needs have it) giving
the sentence, but of the emphatical [(...)I;] which in the first place denoting
a self authoritative expression of his power in opposition to the law and it is
power, consequently in the latter place, where the emphasis of the same (...)
is explicated by [with power] there is no ground imaginable why it should
signify otherwise than the form (...), of my self; or, why it should have any
emphaticall relation or opposition to any other Authority save that of the law
only. So that there is not the slenderest appearance of S. James his having
the principal place, or giving the sentence, from the words (...), with power
more than from (...), of my self. This self power there spoken of relating to
the law's no power nor influence of power in thus decreeing, not to the other
Apostles lesser power then his as Bishop. But, as his ordinary custom is, Dr.
H. picks out any two words, neglecting to consider the true import of the
father's meaning by them, and having thus singled them out, he only touches
them slightly with a grave carelesnes and thinks the deed is done.

What follows in his 12. paragraph craves only that the Readers would use
their eyes to avoid his crafts who would blind them, All I need do in answer is
to quote particularly the places in which I am sure there can be no deceit.
Dr. H. told us in the last line of p. 72. and the first of p. 73. in his book
of Schism, that the Rescript was grounded upon S. James his sentence (which a
little before he made the sentence) quoting for it, Acts 15. v. 22. My answer
Schism Disar. p. 59. l. 1. 2. etc. Was, that in that place there was nothing
particularizing S. James, but only that then (to wit, after S. Peter, S. Paul,
and Barnabas and S. James had spoken) It seemed good to the Apostles, and
Elders with the whole Church, etc. Now if there be nothing in that Verse
alleged, signifying that the Rescript was grounded upon S. James his sentence
for which it was brought, then it is plain I neither misunderstand nor mistake.
To avoid all caville I took the Verse as I found it in their own translation,
in which nothing was found sounding to that purpose yet all this exactest
diligence avails nothing at all with an Adversary, who takes liberty to say any
thing, I must needs commit two faults in transcribing one Verse, and yet
transcribe it right too; so that S. W. faultines is now become the Text, and
this Text (beloved) is divided into two parts, the first part is a
misunderstanding the second is a Mistake. The first that S. W. would make him
imagine the sentence was so his, as not to be the Councills; whereas indeed S.
W. made him imagine noe such thing, but only (as himself told me there) that S.
James his particular sentence expressed by [ my sentence] was the sentence. But
this was antecedent to the point there treated, and here vindicated, the
question there was, whether the 22. v. there cited, signified that the Rescript
was grounded upon S. James his sentence, which was the thing he produced it for
but to this point he says nothing, neither vindicating that signification of
the Verse, nor so much as putting it down: Thus much for S. W. first fault of
misunderstanding. The second fault is as he courteously counterfeits is a
farther mistake and that the words [ then seemd it good, etc.] mean a
subsequent determination to the Dogma, or Decree, If so, I wonder who was in
the fault or mistook? I pretend to prove nothing from it, and so was not in
possible circumstances to mistake it he pretended to prove from it that the
Rescript is founded on S. James his sentence, which he says here, it signifies
not, but a subsequent determination of sending men to Antioch, and then when he
has done he kindly and courteously lays the blame from himself, and on S. W.
telling him he has mistaken which when he has done he concludes with a
Gloria Patri, how well he has qualified S. W. to consider whether Dr. H. or
he be wiser or honester. But in case I had mistook in calling those words [
then seemed it good, etc.] the Dogma, or Decree I at lest mistake with good
Company; for good S. Chrysostom was expressly of my mind, who after he had
commented upon the former Verses he makes his transition to this in these words
(...) after wards the common decree follows, and immediately produces this very
Verse which the Dr. denies here to signify the Dogma, or Decree, but only a
subsequent determination.

Next he tells the Reader (par. 13.) that I would conclude in favor of S.
Peter's Authority from his speaking first, etc. It had been more ingenuous to
represent me in mine own language, I use not to build conclusions absolutely
upon conjecturall premises without expressing how far I build on them, as I
did there Schism Disar. p. 60. by saying that in reason one should rather
think, etc. nor did I rely even for thus much upon only his speaking first,
but that after such debate as had been concerning this matter v. 7. in reason
one should rather think, it argued some greater Authority, in him who should
first break the ice, and interpose his judgment, in such a solemnly pronounced
oration as did S. Peter. But Dr. H. omits that which I grounded on, to wit, [
after such debate, etc.] which add's a circumstance much increasing the
rather-probability of his greater Authority; and truly to a man not prepossest
with prejudice the Text it self is sufficiently favorable as far as I
pretended. And the Apostles and Elders came together for to consider of this
matter; and when there had been much disputing Peter rose up and said unto
them, etc. Now Dr. H. will have his first speaking arise hence that he had been
accused of preaching to Cornelius a Gentile, and so gives an account of his
actions. But the Text it self gives no countenance at all, but looks much awry
upon such an evasion. S. Peter's words are, men and brethren you know that a
good while ago God made choice among us that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear the words of the Gospel. where we see that his preaching to the Gentiles
was a thing already known to the Congregation, known long ago, and known to
have been God's will and choice, the former knowledge of which was enough to
satisfy such persons, and to make S. Peter's giving a new account of that
action needles and to no purpose. Neither indeed does it sound like an Apology,
nor is there any circumstance favoring that interpretation. The occasion was
about the necessity or no necessity of circumcision v. 5. and more immediately
their long disputing upon that matter. Next the action of preaching to the
Gentiles is expressed clearly here as needing no account but as known by them
long ago to have been God's will. And lastly, pursving the same matter, and
saying that God had put no difference between Jews, and Gentiles, he comes to
the point; Now therefore why tempt ye God, etc. where the word [ therefore]
making his former discourse have an influence upon this latter of not obliging
to Circumcision, show's it to be merely a pertinent, and orderly exordium to
confirm and give light to what followed, which this voluntary Interpreter of
Scripture in despite of all the circumstances (as his custom is) will need's
have to denote S. Peter's Apology or justification of him self for preaching to
the Gentiles?

Again, were S. Peter necessitated to justify himself, how does it follow that
he must therefore need's speak first? Do even those who hold up their hand's at
the bar use to begin with their defense, and Apologize for their innocence in
the first place! No strength of reason but Mr. H's could have defended it self
so confidently with such a paper-buckler, or have thought cob-webs
impenetrable. James must be first, because he spoke last, and S. Peter must
speak first because he was to Apologize and give account of his actions.
Whereas S. Chrysostom in Act. 1. v. 15. whom Dr. H. most relies upon in this
place, makes his speaking first, both here, and in all other places an argument
of his Primacy; (...). S. Peter (says he) as entrusted by Christ with the
sheepfold, and as the first of the quire always begins to speak first. What can
be more expressly destructive to Dr. H's tenet, and interpretation of this
place, yet (it not belonging to me at this time to allege testimonies, and
object) I went not far to fetch it, or seek it in remote Authors, but took the
first obvious testimony I met, in this very father which he chooses here for his
best Patron, and in that very treatise which he built upon, as most express,
for this his altogether-unwarrantable position. Nor consequently can it be
imagined but that Dr. H. must needs see how averse S. Chrysostom was from what
he would make him profess, in case he ever looked into the very Author he
quotes, and most relies on.

Sect. 12.
How weakly Dr. H. argues to prove S* Paul's Authority equal to S. Peter's. S.
Chrysostomes judgment concerning S. Peter's Supremacy.
I had granted that the conferring the honor or dignity of Apostle upon S. Paul
was not dependent on S. Peter, and that the place cited Gal. 1. showing that he
had it immediately from Christ concluded very well for that purpose, yet
concluded nothing against us, who never held the contrary tenet. But, I denied
absolutely that the dignity given was not inferior, subordinate, and in that
sense dependent on S. Peter, and that any such thing was deducible from that
place whence Dr H. pretended to prove it. Now what the duty of an Opponent is
in these circumstances every boy in the University can inform Mr. H. to wit, to
make good his consequence, and to manifest that the conclusion follows, out of
these premises, or that place whence he pretended to deduce it. What does this
Dr. of Divinity? first he tells us Answ. p. 46. that S. W. ought in any reason
to have offered some proof for this; (to wit, that the power given was
subordinate, or dependent on S. Peter) which he knows is most denied by the
Protestants. A secure method of disputing? Let us put it into a paral^ell, and
we shall see what a rare Logician this Dr. is. Put case then that himself were
to maintain and prove that Logic were no Science but an Art, and should argue
thus; The end of Logic is not Contemplation, but Action; therefore Logic is
no Science. His adversary (as S. W. did) distinguishes his consequent;
therefore it is no Speculative Science, I grant it; therefore it is no practical
Science, I deny it, I marry replies Dr. H. but you must prove one part of your
own distinction, and manifest that Logic is a practical Science, nay more
tells him gravely (as he tells me here) that, unles he can make it appear, he
cannot say it is such with any sobriety, after which learned carriage, I
suppose the Reader who has only studied Logic a fortnight will imagine that
the whole schools fall a hissing at my notable Adversary, who speaks nonsense
with such gravity and sobriety; and acquit his Antagonist from any note of
insobriety, save only his indiscretion to think the answering such an
adversary worth his pains.

Secondly he answers, that unles the same Christ that gave him this power
immediately appear to have subjected it to S. Peter, as clearly, as that he gave
him the power, which it is certain appears not, this cannot be said with any
sobriety. Where besides the relapse into the same fault of exacting his
Respondent should make his own distinction appear, it is worth observation how
cautious the Dr. is to make all sure against S. Peter's Primacy. It must be the
same Christ which must do this, lest there be juggling underhand. A weighty
caution? and he must appear full as clearly, to have subjected this power, as
to have given it: extreme rigor! or else S. W. must forfeit his sobriety for
affirming it. Hard measure! In answer; I am not afraid of all these cautions
but tell him more, and stick not to assure him that it equally apperes to me,
as it appears that Christ is God. If he startle at this, and demand by what
means I can give him such an assurance? I reply, that the voice of the
Catholic Church, infallible, because ever built upon the testification of a
world of immediate fathers and Pastors, equally ascertained all who deserted
not that Rule for that point, that (...), or Simon the first signified not an
onely-complementary but Efficacious Primacie in the Church as it did ascertain
them, or does the Protestants against the Socinians that the words I and my
Father are one signify an unity in Divine Nature or the Godhead: and the like I
say of all other places of Scripture which can be pretended to ascertain it
infallibly. This voice of the Church equally, I say, ascertains one point as
the other; by which words I mean not but that the latter point concerning
Christ's Godhead is in it self, out of the nature of the thing, of more eminent
and immediate necessity for salvation then the former; but my meaning only is
that the testification, and recommendation of it, as coming from Christ is
equal in the one, as in the other, being indeed the self fame. But perhaps Mr.
H. will deny the infallibility of immediate attestation which sometimes he
grants at unawares ( Answ. p. 36.) and will have it equally appear by
Scripture. If so, then I set an Anabaptist upon his back, armed with Dr. H's
own words, and let them scuffle for it. Unless the same Christ (says the
Anabaptist) appear as clearly from Scripture to have commanded the Apostles to
baptize little children which yet believe not, as to have sent them to baptize
believers (which it is certain appears not) it cannot be said with any sobriety
that an Infa^t ought to be baptized. Thus Mr. H. trips up his own heels when he
thought to kick at S. Peter, and the Anabaptist getts the upper hand. Or if Dr.
H. runns to Tradition for the certainty of one point, and denies it is certainty
for another, then he is to be asked by the Anabaptist why he should in reason
rely upon that Authority which himself grants is taken in aly in the point of
Peter's Primacy, and in all the other points in which Catholics differ from
them? and also S. W. must demand by what securer Rule he guids him self when he
affirms it has erred in some, and not in other points, and why it may not
perhaps err in all if it can err in any.

But why must I be accused of want of sobriety, for distinguishing without
making the parts of my distinction appear, and yet Dr. H. who is the Opponent,
pass for a sober man though he says what he pleases at random, nay more,
places in his confident self affirmations the sum of his whole Defense. He
tells us here we must make it appear that this power was subjected to S.
Peter; but himself makes it not appear we do not, by any other argument then
this, that he assures the Reader within a parenthesis, that it is certain it
appears not, what ill luck it was that S. W. had not the forecast to say it is
certain, too for then he had saved his sobriety, and all had been well.

Thirdly, conscious to him self that all hitherto was evasion, he would seem at
length for fashions sake, as it were, to touch the point; but seems only,
after his accustomed slight manner, in these words. Thirdly the place Gal. 1.
17. belongs expressly to the power after it was giv^n, and yet then he
depended not on him. Attend Reader here is a dreadful sentence pronounced
against S. Peter's Supremacy; for if, after it was given, it was no ways
dependent on S. Peter, all is lost to S. Peter's Superiority. First I know thou
wonderst why, the point being so mainly important, and Dr. H. having found a
place of Scripture to prove it from, expressly too, (as he tells thee) he
should not be larger in it citing those express words, and then making
invincible arguments from them. To lose his advantage in such circumstances,
only relating hastily the place, then touching it slightly, and not
prosecuting it home, nor indeed at all, but saying only something there upon,
sounds a betraying of his cause, and some preposterous favor to his
therein-befriended Adversary S. W. Secondly, thou may observe, that there are
here two propositions; one, that the place Gal. 1. 17. belongs expressly to
the power after it was given: the other that yet then he depended not on him.
The first is pretended from the Text, and expressly too. The second is left
indifferent (as his blinding manner is) whether it be proved from the Text, or
by his own affirmation; If the latter, I must put it upon this score of his
it is certain, and so it needs no further answer; But, if it be pretended as
from Scripture, it shall have audience, and thou shall hear it examined.
Thirdly, please to take notice that the Verse Gal. 1. 17. which he brings to
testify his tenet expressly, but, by omitting it slubberingly, bids it say
nothing, is this, as I find it in their own translation. Neither went I up to
Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me, but I went into Arabia, and
returned again unto Damascus. And this is all: where we hear no news of any
power at all, much less expressly belonging to power; nay more, expressly to
the power after it was given, as Mr. H. promised us. Fourthly grant yet all
this, that it belonged expressly to the power after it was given, yet how does
this place prove that the power given was not dependent on S. Peter's as an
inferior degree to a superior, which is the whole question between us?
Nothing is said here but only that S. Paul preached in Arabia, etc. ere he
went to the Apostles before him. The place there named by him, taken in it
self, without relation to the other Verses, expresses nothing of power at all,
but only that S. Paul went to other places ere he went up to Jerusalem; and,
taken with other adjoining Verses, only intimates this, that S. Paul, having
commission immediately from Christ, had Authority, to preach to other places
without demanding first the other Apostles order, and approbation, which is
both granted by us, and innocent to our cause: but whether the power given were
less, equal, or greater then S. Peter's nothing is found there at all, much
less does the 17. Verse it self speak of power, still less does it expressly
belong to it; least of all to power after it was given, as imdependent on S.
Peter, as Mr. H. braggs.

To make this yet plainer, the Reader may please to advert that there is no
Catholic in the world but holds, that, if our Savior immediately command a
thing he may be obayed without asking counsel, or leave of any Superior, nay
even against their contrary command, or prohibition. Next, that our Savior not
only could, but did give immediate commands, and Commissions to persons of
different ranks; as to the Apostles, and Disciples to preach to the whole
world; and to Philip the Deacon to goeto convert the Eunuch Acts. 8. v. 26* 29.
These things being so, all shadow of reason in Dr. H's discoursevanishes, which
would conclude S. Paul independent and of equal, and not subordinate power
with S. Peter, because he had an immediate Commission from Christ, and
proceeded to act according to that Commission without going to ask S. Peter's
leave first. The Disciples, having immediate order from Christ, preached the
Gospel, without asking leave, or receiving approbation from the Apostles. Were
it not, now a worthy inference to parallel Dr. H's and conclude that therefore
the Disciples were of equal Authority with the Apostles. But Dr. H. is so wary
that he speaks his nonsense, slightly, sprinklingly, and in brief, that, that
lineaments of it not being discovered, the deformity of it may not appear. And
this is the most frequent with him of all the rest of his sly ricks, and in a
manner natural to his whole strain of writing.

From Dr. H's reason, and Scripture testimonies we come to fathers to prove
that the power given was not inferior to, or dependent on S. Peter's. He
appeals to S. Chrysostom for this point, affirming (as he lays it out) of S.
Paul distinctly, (...), not needing Peter nor his voice, The explication of
this place is already given here in the paragraph foregoing, to which add in
particular, that if by voice he means Commission, and order to preach; it is
clear he needed it not, having received it immediately from Christ; if
instruction of doctrine he needed not that neither, having learned it fully and
perfectly from Divine revelation; what follows hence necessarily for equality
of power we see not, and Dr. H. pretends here to prove it by no other argument
then only by telling us within a parenthesis that he supposes it. Both the
former interpretations then we grant each of them fits the words very well,
whereas his of equality of power is impossible to be evinced from this
testimony, and inconsistent even with Dr. H's grounds, as shall be shown.

It follows, (...) but being equally honored* with him; to which the father
adds in a parenthesis (...) for I will say no more. Upon which words Dr. H.
exults, which (says he) what it is an intimation of, I leave S. W. to
conjecture. Nor is S. W. nice to tell him his thoughts what S. Chrysostom
intimated by those words, to wit, that he could have said more with truth, but
represt him self as not willing out of reverence to those Apostles to make
comparisons of inequality between them; which manifests plainly that S.
Chrysostom in that place speaks not of power at all, or equality in that
respect; since neither was it ever heard of that S. Chrysostom, or any else, no
nor the most perverse Protestants held S. Paul above S. Peter in power; nor can
it consist with Dr. H's own grounds, who Answ. p. 43. l. 25. disclaims
professedly any such pretense that any of the other Apostles had greater
Authority then S. Peter. Thus Dr. H. thinking he had served S. Peter and the
Pope a trick, by making S. Chrysostom intimate that S. Paul had greater
Authority then he; has at once contradicted his own grounds, and quite
disanull'd his own best testimony; rendering it impossible to relate to power,
or Authority, for which he produced it, unless the opinion of the whole world,
or (which is firmer and more inviolable) Dr. H's. own word's be a mistake,
asserting that no Apostle had greater power then S. Peter.

As for the (...) or equal honor of those two Apostles it has already been
shown formerly from the father's words to signify equal honor for (...) the
same efficacity of preaching; and, in this place, both it, and the not needing
S. Peter's voice, relate only to the sufficiency of S. Paul's knowledge making
S. Peter's instructions needles: as appears by the words a little after, (...),
etc. not as if S. Paul were to learn any thing of S. Peter, etc. And thus
indeed the possibility of S. Chrysostomes saying more of S. Paul, or that he
was more honored, and higher then S. Peter may have good sense; many holding
that S. Paul was higher in learning, and the greater Divine. They must be
therefore testimonies expressing equality in power of Government which can
conclude any thing against our tenet concerning his power; for, in other things
it is no question but that S. Paul ^ad many advantages above S. Peter; as, in
preaching to more Nations, in writing more Epistles, in greater sufferings, and
many other regards, where of some be expressed. 2. Cor. c. 11. Again, this very
Verse which Dr. H. would have relate to power after it was given and it is
independence on S. Peter, S. Ambrose whose judgment I shallever prefer before
Mr. H's interprets in the same sense as we take it, to wit, of independence in
learning only; explicating S. Paul's words thus, non fuisse (dicit)
necessitatem electum se a Deo pergendi ad praedecessores suos Apostolos vt
aliquid forte disceret ab illis quia Deus ei reuelauit perfilium suum quomodo
doceret. S. Paul says it was not necessary that he, being chosen by God, should
go to the former Apostles that he might learn any thing of them, because God
had revealed to him by his son how he should teach.

But, because S. Chrysostom has been pretended as his constant Patron in this
particular controversy therefore (though it cannot be exacted of me who am the
Defendant to produce testimonies, and object) to let the Reader see how unhappy
Dr. H. is in the choice of his friends I shall take liberty to manifest, and, I
hope, with evidence from two or three places of that father what S.
Chrysostom's opinion was in this point of S. Peter's higher Authority amongst
the Apostles. I will not press here the high titular expressions he gives S.
Peter, (Pan^g. in Pet. and Paul) how justly soever I might, of (...), the
leader, or Captain of the Apostles; (...); the beginning of the right faith:
(...): the great pronouncer of sacred things in the Church, (...) the
Corypheus, or Head of the Apostles, etc. Nor will I insist much upon my
formerly-alledged testimony that he was (...), entrusted with the Sheepfold,
though I might with good reason, the word (...) being a collective and denoting
an Universality. But,

My first place (which I rather make choice of because it relates to S. James
whom Dr. H. would make clearly Sue periour to S. Peter in his own see) is taken
out of Hom. 87. upon S. John: where, speaking of our Saviors extraordinary
affection and familiarity toward S. Peter, he immediately subjoyns this
interrogatory (...); If this be so how then came James to have the Episcopal
seat of Jerusalem? he solves it him self thus, (...), because he ordaind him
(S. Peter) not Master of that seat, but of the whole world. Here we see the
vast difference between S. James and S. Peter's Jurisdictions; one being Master
of that private seat at Jerusalem; the other, Master of the whole world;
whence follows evidently that neither S. Peter's Jurisdiction is limited by any
other bounds then the world it self is, and that he had Jurisdiction also at
Jerusalem it self, not after the nature of the particular Bishop there, but of
an universal Governor or Master of the world; unles perhaps Mr. H will
allege that Jerusalem is no part of the world; for then indeed I shall not
know how to reply. Neither let him, as his custom is, run to the Dictionaries,
and Lexicons to tell me that the proper signification of (...) is such a Master
as teaches or instructs, and so sounds no Government nor Jurisdiction: for he
must know that that is the proper signification of the word as it is found here
which the circumstances accompanying it determine it to have. To them then let
us look, the same word (...), or Master is appropriated here to S. Peter in
order to the whole world, as it is to S. James in order to Jerusalem; it being
expressed but once, and in construction, referred to both. Since then, as applyd
to S. James it signifies his being Bishop of Jerusalem, and so expresses
directly Jurisdiction, and power of Government, it is against all reason to say
it can possibly signify another thing as applied to S. Peter. According to this
testimony then S. Peter was universal Bishop of the Church, and of an
illimited Jurisdiction. But perhaps Dr. H. will not allow the parenthesis in
the testimony I answer I put down the testimony here as I found it in the Greek
Context set out by themselves and printed at Eton; and, though it were left
out, the sense it self putt's the opposition between S. Peter's being such over
the world, as S. James was over Jerusalem, which concerns commanding power,
and Jurisdiction.

My second place is fech't from his comment on Act. 1. where, speaking of S.
Peter's behavior about the election of a new Apostle he has these words;
(...) with good reason does the first (S. Peter) undertake the business with
Authority as having them all delivered into his hand. What can this signify,
but that he as first, and as a supreme Governor had power over all the rest
that were present; and, who were those who were present? all the rest of the
Apostles, and the chief of the Disciples. In what other manner he as first can
be said to have had all the rest within his hand, and therefore with good
reason to have taken the management of that busienes authoritatively to
himself, I profess I cannot in Dr. H's behalf imagine; and, am persuaded
himself will confess it (after perusal of the following testimony) that this
was S. Chrysostom's meaning.

The Third testimony which shall be also my last (for I deem it impossible to
find another more express for this, or any other point) is taken from the
same place, and spoken upon the same occasion the election of some one to be
Apostles, (...). What then? was it not in Peter's power to elect him? yes, it
was altogether in his power, but he does it not, lest he might seem to do it
out of favor. What can be more express and full? The thing to be performed
was an Act of the highest Jurisdiction imaginable amongst the Apostles, to wit,
the making a new Apostle. The other Apostles, and chief Disciples were present
to the number of one hundred, and twenty; yet S. Peter had power to do this of
himself in their presence Nor is this expressed dubiously by the father, but as a
thing certain and beyond all question, (...), yes altogether, absolutely, or
without doubt. Nor have we here any diverse Lections to diminish the Authority
of the words which the Dr. makes a pitiful and little prevailing use of, in
his lisping testimonies; nor is it a word, or two picked out blindly, and
wrested to a quite different interpretation, as is his of discovered Method,
but a pithy expression of the full scope, and import of the place. Nor is this
perfect expression put alone, but seconded with a note, that he did it not of
his own single power, lest he should be mistaken by others to make such a one,
an Apostle out of favor; which is the frequent, and ordinary carriage of every
wise, and prudent Governor. Nor do we pretend to any higher strain of
Jurisdiction in S. Peter then that he could elect a new Apostle by his own
power which this father not only grants, but strenuously assertes; nor! in our
parallel tenet of the Pope's Authority, can we attribute to him any partic^lar
act, more supreme, or more savouring of highest Authority, than to constitute
Bishops and Patriarchs in the Church by himself, and of his own particular
power. Nor, lastly, was this testimony peep't out for in strange places but
offered me by the same Author whom Dr. H. most relies on, and in the same
Treatise which he most frequently cites. Judge then, Reader, whether it be
likely or no that Dr. H. considering his industrious reading this father and
this Treatise (as he manifests here) could possibly remain ignorant what was S.
Chrysostom's tenet in this point, and then tell me what he deserves who
against his own knowledge and conscience alleges imperfectly, mangles,
corrupts, and falsifies this fathers words to gain some show of his consent to
his paradoxicall point of faith; nay, makes him, by such legerdemain
sleights, his chiefest Patron to defend it, as has been laid open, and
discovered particularly heretofore though he could not but know that no writer
extant could be more expressly against it then is this holy and learned father
S. Chrysostom.

Sect. 13.
Dr. H's success in answering his Adversaries first Testimony. His insincerity
in pretending our own law against the Pope's Authority.
IN his book of Schism p. 74. Dr. H. told us with Authority and very
confidently that certainly S. Paul was noe way subordinate or dependent on S.
Peter, at Antioch, as appears by his behavior toward him avowed Gal. 2. 11.
that is, his, withstanding him to the face. Discourteous S. W. who gives not a
jott more credit to Mr. H. where he cries certainly, surely, irrefragably,
unquestionably, expressly, distinctly, accordingly, etc. which are the nerves
of his discourse, than if he had said nothing at all, would not budge into
assent notwithstanding his so confident assurance to warrant him; and as for
Gal. 2 11. by which he pretended to make it appear, he replied Schism Disarm.
p. 62. that S. Cyprian, and S. Austin thought otherwise, who interpreted S.
Peter's bearing it patiently not as an argument of his less or equal
Authority, but of his greatest humility; that being higher in dignity he should
suffer so mildly the reprehensions of an inferior. The place alleged from
those fathers was this: Quem quamuis primum Dominus elegerit, and super eum
aedificaverit Ecclesiam suam, tamen cum secum Paulus disceptauit, non
vendicavit sibi aliquid insolenter aut arroganter assumpsit vt diceret se
Primatum tenere and obtemperari a nouellu and posteris sibi potius opportere;
nec despexit Paulum quod Ecclesi^e prius persecutor fuisset, sed consilium
veritatis admisit. Whom though our Lord chose to be the first of the Apostles,
and upon him built his Church, yet, when Paul contended with him, he did not
challenge, and assume to him self any thing, in any insolent and proud manner,
as to say he had the Primacy, and so should rather be obeyed by new, and late
Apostles; nor did he despise Paul because he had formerly been a Persecutor of
the Church, but admitted the counsel of truth. Dr. H. preparing to answer this
place (Answ. p. 46.) notes first that this is the first testimony I have
brought from Antiquity; as if it necessarily belonged to me who was answering
his book, and showing his allegations unable to conclude, to object testimonies
also my self, and so be Opponent and defendent both; but as it was not my
task, so neither do I esteem it so rare a business to transcribe out of books as
needlessly to put my self upon that dull employment; though I know well that
annotation-men, and common^ place book souls, think it the rarest thing
imaginable. Next, he tells us that he never doubted S. Peter's Primacy in the
sense this holy fathers speaks, any more than of Christ's building his Church on
him, and that he gave me a testimony even now from S. Ambrose which expressly
avouched it I remember indeed such a Testimony Answ. 39 in the Margent, but I
remember withal that he brought it not, nay would not let it signify S.
Peter's Primacy in any sense over the whole Church, but over the Jews only as
appears by the fourlast lines of the same page 39. how ever we thank him for
granting here that he gaves us a testimony from S. Ambrose, which expressly
avoued S. Peter's Primacy in any sense over the Church, so he will promise us,
not to repent him self, and recall his grant, which he pretends to have so
expressly avouched there. But alas! what faith is to be given, to the most
formal bargain made with such Copes-masters of testimonies? he had scarce
writ eight lines after this professed express avouching it but he quite forgets
his so solemn promise, and makes the said place in S. Ambrose signify a
limited, and contradistinct Primacy saying that by the words of S. Ambrose, S.
Paul had a Primacy amongst the Gentiles as Peter amongst the Jews, though the
place it self in reference to S. Peter says only that Petrus Primatum
acceperat ad fundandam Ecclesiam, Peter had received the Primacy to found the
Church. How necessary an endowment is a good memory to defend a bad cause!
Thirdly he only denies (as he says) that this Primacy gave him any power over
S. Paul, and that I will remember he had reason to deny it from the (...) and
(...) equal honor given S. Paul by Chrysostom and Theophylact. I remember
indeed the words, but have quite forgot that he had any reason to deduce from
those words equality of honor sprung from Government or power of command,
having shown from those fathers explicating themselves that it is impossible
the words can bear that interpretation. Fourthly, in relation to those words [
he did not vindicate any thing to himself insolently, or assume it arrogantly,
as to say he had the Primacy, and rather ought to be obeyed, etc.] Dr. H.
discant's with this gloss, leaving us (says he p. 47.) to resolve that if he
had claimed any obedience at all from Paul by this Primacy he could not have
justified it from arrogance of assuming that which did not belong to him. Thus
he: so that the difference between Dr. H. and me in explicating this place
stands thus; that he makes those words non vindicauit sibi aliquid insolenter
aut arroganter assump sit to signify that S. Peter's praise worthiness expressed
consisted in his not chalenging what did not truly belong to him; whereas, I
make it consist in his not chalenging it in those circumstances, though it
truly belonged to him; he would have the words insolenter and arroganter so
taken as if the pride they denoted did involve falsehood, injustice, or
overweening; whereas I contend that they signify only in an insolent and proud
manner, well expressed in our English phrase, by standing upon his point, which
well consists with the truth of what he challenges and the right of what he
assumes.

Ere I descend to manifest that this is the sense of that place, I desire the
Reader to review the entire testimony, in which he will do right both to my
discourse, and his own memory; and, when he has done this, I offer him for his
satisfaction these following notes.

First that it had been no such great commendation of humility to say that S.
Peter did not usurpingly challenge what was not his right; but rather an
impudence, and an absurd haughtines to have done it; since then the fathers
intend here a particular commendation of S. Peter's modesty, it must consist in
this that though he might with rigor of right have stood upon his tip-toes (as
we may say) yet his goodness so moderated his height that he was content with
mildenes to bear an inferiour's reprehensions; in which great virtue is shown,
and, which being put, those fathers suppose that truly he was Superior.

Secondly, unles this be the meaning of that place, we have quite lost the
adversative sense which yet is unavoidable; for what sense is this, Though our
Lord chose him to be the first, yet he did not challenge to himself more then
belongs to him; or what special commendation do these words import; Though
King James, was King of England yet he did not challenge, or assume to himself
to be Emperor of Germany? sure it must be an envy of S. Peter's sanctity as
well, as of his dignity to diminish his praise-worthines intended here by so
frivolous and incoherent an explication.

Thirdly, the words, non vindicauit sibi aliquid insolenter, he challenged not
any thing insolently to himself, make good my explication; for, it had been a
very hard case if he could have challenged nothing at all to himself with truth
according to these fathers; no not even that which themselves had granted, the
line before, to wit, that our Lord had chosen him to be the first, and had
built his Church upon him; with truth therefore he might have challenged that,
which out of modesty he stood not insolenty and arrogantly upon.

Fourthly Dr. H. grants that a Primacy at least in some sense is granted S.
Peter from this place: wherefore the redditive part of the testimony; yet he
challenged not any thing, etc. so as to say, he had the Primacy, must be
granted to be true also, or rather it is the self same. Neither is it possible
that any man not totally possessed by prejudice can imagine any other, but that
in these words. Though our Lord chose him to be the first, yet he said not, or
alleged not that he had the Primacy, or was the first, the latter part should
be false unles the former were so too.

Firfthly, this being so, the following words in the reddi^ive part of the
testimony and ought rather to be obeyed by la^er Apostles, etc. must
necessarily be true too, since they follow in the same tenor of redditive
sense to the adversative, and are joined immediately by a copulative particle
to the former of having the Primacy. True therefore it is that he might in
right expect obedience in other circumstances from S. Paul; and by consequence
this Primacy here spoken of was not a dry and barren one as the Dr. would fancy
it.

Sixthly the subsequent words of his not objecting to S. Paul that he had been
a persecutour of the Church, make it yet more evident; since he might with
truth have said so, but of his goodness would not; since then the foregoing
word's of his having the Primacy are true, and the following ones also of S.
Paul's having been a persecutour are true also, upon what grounds can this
Adversary of S Peter's imagine that the middle words importing his rather right
to S. Paul's obedience which run on in the same even tenor with both the other
should be false? or how could he ^hink to evade by deducing from those words
that the fathers left us to resolve hence, that if he had claimed any
obedience from Paul by this Primacy he could not have justified it from
arrogance of assuming that which did not belong to him; nay making this the
sum of his answer to that place.

Lastly the concluding words, [ but admitted the counsel of truth] expressing
the result of the whole business, show that i^ plainly imports an Encomium of S.
Peter's candor; that when the thing objected against him was true, he
maintained not his own saying by Authority, but made his he^g^h of dignity,
expressed there to be most eminent, stoop to the sincere acceptance of truth;
which in a Superior and Governor is a most laudable carriage, and an
unparalleled commendation. And thus Dr. H. comes of in answering S. W. first
testimony; which being pressed speaks more against him then was at first
intended, being only brought to show that these fathers thought that manner of
carriage between S. Peter and S. Paul expressed Gal. 11. rather argued S. Peter's
greater humility then his lesser, or equal Authority.

After Mr. H. had endeavored by wresting the former testimony to win S.
Cyprian, and S. Austin to side with him against S. Peter's Authority he
proceeds to destroy the Popes Authority in that Apostles, even from domestic
testimonies also: His own canon law approved publicly by himself as legitimate
shall secretly by Dr. H's inspiration play the Traitor, and under mine now in
these latter days the said Authority which till now every one took it to
confirm. A strange attempt, if Mr. H's strength were equal to his courage.
The place is cited in the Decret. out of the 2. Epist. of Pope Anacletus, which
makes it yet more home and terrible against the now adays-Popes, it begins
thus: Post Christum a Petro sacerdotalis coepit ordo, After Christ the
sacerdotall order began from Peter and so goes on in other expressions of that
strain so far from prejudicial that they are very favorable; and as for these
first words, if we look into the Epistle it self, it makes S. Peter the same
in order to Christian Hierarchy, as Aaron was to the Leuiticall, which we
account no small honor. He adds (says Dr. H.) that the Apostles, ipsum
Principem eorum esse voluerunt, would have him to be their Prince; that is,
consented he should be such; To which words Dr. H. subjoyns in a parenthesis (
where he read this I know not) Thus Dr H. takes liberty to talk ridiculously,
yet should I smile at him a little he would excommunicate me again in Greek,
and his friends would be displeased. Anacletus lived in the Apostles days, and
(as he tell's us in the said Epistle) was ordained by S. Peter himself, yet Dr.
H. finds fault with this his assertion because he knows not where he read it.
Christ, and his Apostles came not with books in their hands, but with words in
their mouths, to teach the world their doctrine. Therefore Dr. H. should rather
have scrupled where he had heard it, then where he had read it, and put the
force of his exception there; and then we could have told him there was none
in those days for him to hear but only either Christ or his Apostles and
Disciples; neither can we doubt of his immediate conversation with them, who
was (as the same Epistle expresses) ordained by S. Peter himself.

These preambulatory expressions favoring so much our cause would make one
think that the same Author could not be so forgetful, as to undo utterly the
same Authority in the self same Epistle, nay in the next line, after he had
called S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles; nor that Anacletus was such a Courtier
as to speak those former kind words only for complement sake, and afterward
when it came to the point, immediately deny all: yet Dr. H. expresses him here
as speaking first on the one side, then on the other; and that when on the one
side he had given us the former favorable word's, the false tokens it seems of
otherwise-meant friendship, presently (like Margery's good cow which gave a
good meal, and when she had done kick't it down with her foot) on the other
side, as Mr. H. tells us, with equal clearnes he prevaricates from what he had
pretended, and over-throws S. Peter's supremacy quite. The clear words (as he
calls them) are these, caeteri vero Apostoli cum eodem pari consortio honorem,
and potestatem acceperunt. But the other Apostles in like consortship received
honor and power with him. Which he never explicates, nor applies (as his
sleighting custom is) but puts them only down and then triumphs upon them, as
if they could not possibly bear any other interpretation. Whereas, I make
account every good Catholic may grant these words without any difficulty, and
that they make nothing at all against us. For, to say that the other Apostles
received pari consortio honorem, etc. in like consortship honor, and power,
does not infer that they received parem honorem and potestatem equal honor,
and power, but that as he had received it from Christ, so they pari consortio,
likewise, or in like manner as being his fellows received it to. Again our
tenet granting to each universal Jurisdiction all over the world, grants
likewise that each precisely under the notion of Apostle, that is, of one sent
to preach Christ's faith, had a like consortship of honor and power; each of
them being dignified with an unlimited Apostleship, and Jurisdiction or power
to preach; but, speaking of the Apostolical College as a community and so
requiring order of Government, we affirm with S. Hierome that S. Peter was
supreme in that respect, nor is there any thing to the contrary found in this
place. Again, the words cum eodem appear by their placing to be better joynd
with acceperunt, then with pari; for then they should rather have been put
after it, paricum eodem, etc. and so the whole place imports thus much, that
though our savior chose S. Peter to be first yet the rest of the Apostles
acceperunt cum eodem received with him that is, at the same time he received
it, in like consortship (that is, of Apostleship ( honor and power; which was
verified, when he in a common indifferent expression after his Resurrection
gave them their last and unlimited Apostolical mission, euntes in vniuersum
mundum praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae. Going into the whole world preach
the Gospel to every creature.

By this it appears that the place may have another meaning than that which Mr.
H. fancies; now that it must have another, none but Anacletus him self in the
same Epistle shall certify us; who manifests himself as plain a Papist in this
point of the Pope's supremacy as either the Cath. Gent. or S. W. Putting down
there the orderly ascent of Ecclesiastical judicatures after that of Bishops
being to be judged by their Metropolitans he rises higher to that of Primates
and still higher to that of the Apostolical seat or the Pope's in these words.
Primates tamen (vt praefixum est) and tunc, and nunc habere iussae sunt, ad
quos post sedem Apostol came summa negotia conueniant, yet the Cities are
ordered to have their Primates, to whom the chief busienesses (after the
Apostolical seat) may come. And a little after, Episcoporumque causae, and
summorum negociorum iudiciae (Salua Apostolicae sedis authoritate) iustissime
terminentur. And let the causes of Bishops, and the judgments of the highest
matters be most, justly decided by them, the Authority of the Apostolical
seat remaining unprejudiced. By these two places we may take an estimate of
Dr. H. solidnes, and sincerity, who catches at the shadow of a word, or two,
pari consortio, in like consortship, so waxen natured that they are easily
capable of a diverse shaped signification; and thence argues ad hominem,
against us that our own Authors, and our canon law, are clearly opposite to our
doctrine; whereas he could not but know, and see in the very same place that
there was noe testimony imaginable, more expressly for us, or more
prejudiciable to him then the said Epistle if we look after the meaning of the
Author in the entire import of it, and not what the many-senc'd or rather
indeed the noe senc'd Dictionary interpretation of two single words give them a
possibility to signify. Neither let Mr. H. think to excuse him self that he
argues ad hominem in alleging these words, and so it imports not his cause at
all what the Epistle it self* says, since he builds not upon it himself, nor
allows it is Authority; for still, as long as it is shown that he imposes upon
that Epistle and it is Author a sense which he knew they never intended he can
never avoid the note of insincerity; and by how much the thing it self is more
unlikely, that the Authority we allege for us should be clearly against us
(as he says) or the fell same Epistle contradict it self; by so much it is a
far more shameful rashness, and an affected precipitation in him to pretend it,
and object it, unles upon most evident and unavoidable grounds.

Sect. 14.
Dr. H's trick to evade bringing some Testimony to confirm his own, We know.
His two-edged argument to conclu^e against S. Peter's supermacy both from
Exclusivenes and not Exclusivenes of Jurisdiction.
IN the beginning of his fifth Section Dr. H. who was so rarely skillfull in
the art of memory as to contradict himself near a dozen times in one point (as
has been shown, Part. 2. Sect. 4.) is now on a sudden become Master of it,
and undertakes to teach'it S. W. whose memory (alas as he says is frail.) But
ere my Master gives me my lesson he reprehends me first very sharply for my ill
memory, calling it my predominant fault, and that railing is but my blind to
keep it from being descried; nay moreover, this modest man who falsifies, or
corrupts every thing he medles with, is angry with me that I do not blush.
Expect (Reader) some great advantage gained against me which can move this
Preacher of patience to this passion, who in the beginning of his book so like
a saint professed his readiness to turn the other cheak to him who should strike
him on the right.

To avoid mistakes on my part, and cauills on mine Adversaries I shall put down
both our words, and appeal to the Readers eyes His were these of Schism p. 74
Thus we know it was at Antioch where S. Peter converted the Jews and S. Paul
the Gentiles. And what it was which Dr. H. (in the plural number [ Wee] as
became his Authority,) knew to be thus, he expressed in the immediately foregoing
words, to wit, that whenever those two great Apostles came to the same City,
the one constantly applied himself to the Jews, received Disciples of such,
formed them into a Church, left them when he departed that region to be
governed by some Bishop of his assignation, and the other in like manner did
the same to the Gentiles. This is that (Reader) which Dr. H. knew to have been
thus at Antioch; This is also the place Reply p. 57. when all else failed him,
he stood to as a sufficient expression of his exclusive tenet of those Apostles
Jurisdictions.

Now my words Schism Disarm p. 62. upon his [ Thus we knew it was at Antioch,
etc] were these. That his first testimony was his own knowledge Thus we know,
etc. but that he put down no testimony at all to confirm the weaker one, of his
[ we know] which yet had been requisite, that we might have known it too. And
this was all. What railing words the Dr. find's here which should make him
complain so hainously, I know not, unles it were that I called the testimony of
his own knowledge, weak; and indeed if this be railing, despair of learning
more courtesy till Dr. H. by growing wiser teach me it. But my predominant
fault of an ill and frail memory for which shame must make change color is
this, that I said he put no testimony at all to confirm the weaker one, of his:
We know, yet afterward set down two testimonies of that, of which I lately,
denied any. If he means such things as he produced for testimonies, I set down
indeed the very next Section not only two, but ten of them: But, if he means
such testimonies as I expressed my self to deny there, that is, such as did
confirm his own Thus we know I am so far from blushing at it, that I still
make him this bold profer, that, if amongst all the following testimonies there
be found any one word confirming his own Thus we know, and what it relates to,
that is, making S. Peter's Authority exclusive to the Jews, and S. Paul's to
the Gentiles when they met at the same City but what himself adds of his own
head I will yield him the whole controversy. Nor let him tell me what he fancies
to be deduced thence, but what the testimonies themselv's express; the
deductions are his, the words only are the testimonies: let him show me any
one exclusive word in any one testimony, and I profess before all the world
that I will not only pardon him the impertinency of the rest, but also grant
him all. Judge now Protestant Reader, who has most cause to blush: examine
well if ever thou heardst such a challenge made to any writer yet extant, and
not accepted of; and then see to what a trifler thou trustest for thy
salvation; who in steed of replying to the purpose, and showing thee those
exclusive words, tells his Adversary that it is a predominant fault in him to
challenge him that he had never a testimony to confirm his own: We know; and
then, seeing himself unable to show any, thinks to evade by telling his
challenger, he ought to blush for his frail memory; whereas he should rather
have blamed him for his bad understanding, and bad eyes, neither apprehending
nor seeing a word in any testimony to that purpose.

In answer to his pretended testimonies I noted ( Schism Disarm. p. 63.) that
they affirmed no more but the founding the Church of Antioch by Peter, and
Paul, which might be done by their promiscuous endeavors without distinction
much less exclusion of Authority and Jurisdiction. Dr. H. answers here; it is
true, this was possible, and if it had been true had manifestly prejudged S.
Peter's singular Jurisdiction and clearly joynd Paul socially with him. It is
impossible to get a positive word of sense from this man, first, he will never
willingly use the common words which express the question between us, as chief
in Authority amongst the Apostles, their Head, Prince, etc. but, as before he
used the ambiguous phrase of S. Peter's having noe singular supremacy at
Jerusalem, so now he recurr's to singular Jurisdiction at Antioch; which
being doublesenc'd if we take it in one, he will be sure to evade hereafter by
taking it in another. Secondly, let us suppose him to mean honestly, that is to
intend by it, that S. Peter was not higher in Authority of Government than S.
Paul, as the question determines it, let us observe how this quodlibeticall
reasoner argues: his whole intent was to conclude against S. Peter's Authority
in question from his being exclusively limited to the Jews when he met with S.
Paul in the same City; and now here, though he should grant their preaching in
the same city to have been promiscuous, and indifferent both to Jews and
Gentiles, yet he says it manifestly prejudges S. Peter's higher Authority
still: nothing can come wrong to him let it be exclusive or not exclusive,
still either part of the contradiction equally fitts his concluding faculty.
Dull Aristotle! Dull Schools, and Universities who could never light on this
secure method of disputing! Thirdly, let us put this manifest proof into form,
and it stands staggering thus S. Peter and S. Paul preached promiscuously to
the Antiochians, therefore S. Peter had manifestly noe higher Authority then S.
Paul. Good: did not Paul and Titus do the same in other places, were they
therefore equal in Authority? Fourthly observe these words, that their
promiscuous preaching clearly joined Paul socially, with him. Here again we
must give Dr. H. leave to talk impertinently, and be content not to understand
him; for if he means that he was socially joined with S. Peter, as his
fellow-Apostle, or fellow laborer, who either doubts it or imagins that it
prejudices us: but, if he means that he was equal in Authority what force of
reason can make these two so remote ends meet in a Conclusion: he was his
fellow-preacher, or preached with him, t^e^efore he was equal in Authority
with him; as if the community of things under one notion, could not stand with
their inequality under another; or as if we were not all fellow Christians,
yet one notwithstanding of greater dignity and Authority then another.

In answer to his dumb testimonies which affirmed only that S. Peter and S.
Paul taught the Antiochians, and founded the Church, there, I replied Shism
Disar. p. 63. that this might have been done by the promiscuous endeavors of
those Apostles. Dr. H. undertakes here p. 48. to remove this might be, that is
to show it impossible that they promiscuously taught the Jews and Gentiles at
Antioch. His first argument is drawn from the Inscription of the Rescript,
which was directed to the Gentiles, separately from the Jews, that they should
abstain from things strangled, etc. Let us not wrong the argument, but put it
into form as it deserves. The Rescript was directed to the Gentiles, and not to
the Jews; ergo S. Peter and S. Paul did not preach promiscuously both to Jews
and Gentiles in Antioch; what unseen mysterious wires there are which make this
Antecedent and Consequent hang together is beyond my guess, and proper to
Revelation: for the words in which he puts most force (...) to the brethren
which are of the Gentiles express only that there were some Brethren at
An^ioch Gentiles besides some others of another Sect, but they express nothing
at all of preaching, nor of promiscuous, or exclusive Authority over either; or
if either be intimated here it must be the former of promiscuous Jurisdiction
over the Gentiles, since the Rescript was sent to them as well in the name of
S. Peter (whom he will have only over the Jews there) as of S. Paul whom he
places over the Gentiles; yet this he calls an Evidence, introducing his second
testimony thus. And besides more Evidence which therefollows Act 15. to the
same matter, which as superabundant we must imagine he omitts and chooses this
impertinent proof even now related for a more irrefragable Evidence than all
the rest. After this follows his second proof against their promiscuous
preaching out of S. Hierome as he says, Seorsim, etc. the Churches which were
of the Jews were held a part, nor were mixed with those which were of the
Gentiles. Which testimony in the space of four pages he makes use of thrice;
and it deserves to be made much of by Dr. H. for it is borrowed from the
Arch-heretick Pelagius, and falsely imposed upon S. Hierome, as has been shown
largely heretofore Sect. 7. As for the argument he makes from it we shall do
it the right to put it into form also, which done, it stand's thus. The
Churches of Jews and Gentiles were held a part, therefore S. Peter, and S. Paul
could not impossibly preach both to Jews and Gentiles, Thus Dr. H. undertakes
to remove my might be and show the endeavors of the Apostles at Antioch
impossible to have been promiscuous, by such a Medium, as none can possibly
imagine the necessary connection it has with other terms. What forther reply
may by needful to these words of the Arch heretic Pelagius upon another score
is already given when we treated of it formerly.

Sect. 15.
How Dr. H. omitts to clear himself of his falsification of Scripture. His
unparell^d absurdity that it was forbidden by Moses his law to converse with or
preach to a Gentile.
Dr. H. unwilling that the Jews and Gentiles should communicate in any thing,
no not even so much as in a common teacher, had these very words in his book of
Schism p. 75. we read of S. Peter and the Jewish Proselytes, Gal. 2. 11. that
they withdrew from all Communion, and society with the Gentile Christians, upon
which S. Paul reprooved him publicly, etc His Disarmer challenged him to have
abused S. Peter, and his Jewish Proselytes, and the sacred Scripture too,
alleging that in the Text cited by him, as the place where we read it, there
is noe such word to be read as the large-senc'd All in which the Dr. places the
whole force of his argument One would think now that a man who had not over
come those trivial considerations of shame, and dishonor should either have
shown that the solely important word All was in the place which he cited
expressly for it, and assirmed it was read there; or else confess heartily and
ingenuously that he wronged, or at least was mistaken in the place he
alleged; But Mr. H. is of another Spirit when he is challenged of falsifying
any place by his self additions, seeing it a desperate or impossible task to
clear himself, he either passes it by with a gravely-Gentile carelesnes; or
else grows angry, and would persuade his Adversary to blush when-'it is his own
turn. He never goes about to show us it is read there, where he promis't us it
was, which was objected and so was his task to clear but instead thereof (
Reply p. 61.) where he undertakes to answer it, recurs to an evasion as weak
and unwarrantable as the clearing his falsification had been impossible. His
evasion comes to this, that since S. Peter abstained from the Gentile diet
least he should seem to offend against the Iew^sh law, therefore since it was
equally against the Jewish law to converse with a Gentile as to eat the Gentile
diet, he must certainly be supposed to abstain from other communion with them.

That it was forbidden by the Jewish law to converse with a Gentile he proves
first from the Text, the Jews have no dealing with the Samaritans, and from the
Disciples marvelling that he talked with the woman. What means this Dr. by this
instance? The question is of Gentiles; the Samaritans were not perfectly such,
nor yet perfect aliens from Moses his law but rather as obstinate Schismatics
and Heretics from it, whose conversation by consequence they deemed more
contagious than that of pure heathens; who, agreeing in no common principles or
point with true believers, were therefore less likely to decieve them with
false glosses.

Ibid. His second assertion superadds to the former that the preaching to a
Gentile was to the Jews as unlawful as the eating any unclean meat. This he
proves from S. Peter's vision, where one is represented by the other; Act. 10.
and that without that vision he durst not have come to one of another nation,
and that it was unlawful for a Jew to do so; as is expressed v. 28. all
Communion is interdicted the Jewish and Gentile Church at Antioch, hence it is
against the Judicial law to converse with them, or preach to Gentiles. hence
lastly the Catholic Gentlemanis unhappy continually in his objections.

See here, Reader, a pattern of the Protestant manner of writing in Dr. H's,
which is to lay the whole force of their proof upon any harsh-sounding Text and
something difficult to explicate, though they know in their consciences that
there are an hundred nay a thousand other Texts expressly against their pretense
from that one. Two things then I offer in answer to this objection; the one,
that it is the most absurd position that ever blurred paper to affirm that the
Jews were forbidden by the Judicial law to converse with or teach a Gentile.
Next that, had it been so, it had neither prejudiced us, nor availed Dr. H. in
order to these circumstances at Antioch.

As for the first, there is scarce any one point imaginable so frequently
contradicted in Scripture as is this assertion of Mr. H's. For, to begin with
the law it self, Leuit. 22. 10. There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing,
a sojourner of the Priests, or an hired servant shall not eat of the holy
thing, where we see supposed that strangers, sojourners and hired servants,
which might not eat the passover, that is, who were Gentiles, might live
amongst the Jews. And in the 12. v. a much more difficult point is supposed,
tow it, of a Priests daughter married to a stranger. Again, 1. Kings 8. 41. 42.
43 Solomon prays that all the people of the earth may hear God's name, and
that God would hear that prayer of the stranger who comes out of a far
country to the house at Jerusalem. So far were they from abhorring to
convert and converse with Gentiles as they express themselves zealous of both.

Now as for examples of their conversing with Gentiles there are so many of
them recorded in holy writ, that I know not where to begin to recount them.
Spies sent by Iosvah were designed to do it, Rachab the harlot, and her fathers
house were saved and lived with the Jews after they had taken Jericho,
particularly it is expressed by the sacred writer that she or herposteritie
lived in Israel even to the time he writ Josh. 6. 25. Elias conversed nay lived
in the house with the widow of Sarepta, Elizeus with Naaman the Syrian; David
lived with Achis; Solomon conversed and made a league with Hiram, 1. Kings. 5.
12. the Machabees legates conversed with the Romans, and the spartiatae and
themselves made a league with them without ever scrupling at it, though they
chose rather to die then eat wines flesh forbidden by the law, which manifests
that conversing with Gentiles was not equally (as Mr. H. affirms) forbidden by
the same law as the eating unclean meats. The Jews conversed with Gentiles in
captivity, neither do we hear of any expression of abhominating their civil
society with them. Or that they broke Moses his law in so doing, or any one
put to death upon that score. Our savior expresses of the Pharisees that they
did circuire terras and Maria, go about Sea and land to make one Proselyte,
which was impossible to be done without both conversation and preaching.
Innumerable other examples might be gathered out of Scripture of their
conversing with Gentiles, by one who thought so manifest a point worth further
clearing; and consequently I cannot think that this Folio-annotation Bible man
could possibly be ignorant, but that the contrary to this euading assertion of
his built upon one wilfully misunderstood place, was most evident in Scripture.

Nor was only Moses his law and the whole stream of Scripture-instances
opposite to this new tenet of his, but the position it self is absolutely
implicatory, supposing the lawfulnes to make a Proselyte; for, how could a
Gentile possibly come to be of the Jewish law without the conversation and
instruction of some Jew. In a word, David commanded together the strangers in
the land of Israel, 1. Chron. 22. 2. and, they were found, when Solomon
numbered them afterward, to amount to one hundred fify three thousand six
hundred 2. Chron 2. 17. and those able men fit to work, as appears by v. 18.
that is there were one hundred fifty three thousand, six hundred strangers,
besides male-infants, boys, very old men, and the whole female sex, which in
likelihood were as many as the men. Let us then put them in all, as we can in
reason judge no less to amount to three hundred thousand. Now, is it possible
that any but a mad man should imagine that either there were none amongst this
vast number Gentiles still, since none was forced to be a Proselyte, nor (as
far as I ever read) turned out of the country because he would not become of
the Jewish law; can any imagine there were none amongst this numerous multitude
as yet a cathecumenus (as we may say) and learning his duty when he should
become a Jew? or, grant them all to be Proselytes and of Moses his law already,
yet, can any man without having great title to Bedlam think that three hundred
thousand Gentiles were converted to Moses his law and became Proselytes without
any Jews very frequently both conversing with them and instructing them; or
lastly, that (considering how strict the Jews were in observing the law of
Moses) this so frequent-conversation and instruction equally unlawful
according to Dr. H. as eating any unclean diet, could have been used, and yet
then no conscience made of it that ever we heard of; no prohibition of that
unlawful custom, no banishing the Gentiles from amongst them; but rather
making their country a rendevous for all to come that would; no reprehension,
no animadversion, stoning etc. used toward the practisers of this conversation
with and conversion of the Gentiles; but it must be imagined that Moses his law
was publicly and frequently, and yet calmly and quietly broken; and that, in
David's reign and the beginning of Salomons, the purest times of the Jewish
Church, rather than a Protestant Minister, one Dr. H. should fail in
vindicating his unparalleld absurdity, that the Jews at Antioch had no
Communion at all, no not even civil conversation with the Gentiles their
Fellow Christians, because they were forbidden to do it by the Judicial law,
of which they were zealous.

Thus much for Dr. H's absurdity of absurdities that it was forbidden by Moses
his law that the Jews should either civilly converse with or charitably
endeavor to convert a Gentile. Now, put the case it had been thus forbidden,
and thus unlawful, what likelihood was there that the apprehension of that
unlawfulnes should still remain at the time we speak of, so as to make the
Jewish Christians abhor still all conversation with the Gentile ones at
Antioch. For this vision of S. Peter's, directing his endeavors to preach to
the Gentiles could not but be universally known both by the occasional
relating it, of which there was great necessity by reason of the scandal which
that nouelty caused at first, as also by it is effects, the conversion of
multitudes of Gentiles which ensved thereupon. Grant then that the action was
accounted scandalous to all that heard it, and that this vision of S. Peter's
iustify'd it, and him for doing it, it cannot be imagind but that this relation
of his vision was spread far and near amongst the Jews with whom he conversed,
specially Dr. H. granting that when S. Paul met him not he preached both to Jews
and Gentiles, he was obliged to publish the said vision as a warra^table excuse
of his and the other Apostles frequently preaching to the latter. Again, we
read that those that were scandalized at S. Peter's conversing with the
Gentiles Act. 11. after he had cleared himself, and related his vision expressed
their full satisfaction by holding their peace and glorifying God for it v. 18.
Now then I argue, either the Jews at Antioch were in like disposition of mind
to be scandalized, seeing S. Peter converse with Gentiles there, Gal. 2. or
not: if not, then there is no ground why Mr. H. should think that the Jewish
Christians there held it unlawful to converse with the Gentile ones; if they
held it unlawful, then I ask again upon what grounds can Dr. H. think that S.
Peter should not (as he was obliged) endeavor to satisfy them that it was
God's will by declaring his vision to them also as well as he did to the Jews at
Jerusalem Act. 11. Or why he should conceit that the Jews at Antioch were so
incomparably more unreasonable than the others, that whereas those at
Jerusalem, though at first so hott as to contend with S. Peter about it Act.
11 v. 2. yet remaind so perfectly satisfied by S. Peter's discourse as to
glorify God. v. 18. those at Antioch should persist still obstinate and
unsatisfied, and not give any credit at all to their Apostle and according to
Mr. H. their only Governor, S. Peter.

Moreover, ere this contest happened at Antioch about eating the Gentile diet,
it was no new matter, which is that which causes scandal, but a public and
known thing that the Gentiles were convers't with and preached too, Act. 11. v.
1. we read that the Apostles and Brethren which were in Judea heard of it, v.
20. that some who were of Cyprus and Greece preached to the Grecians in
Antioch, v. 22. that when the Church at Jerusalem heard of it, they sent
Barnabas (to them) to Antioch for the same end: So that see how the Church of
the Jews furthered and promoted the preaching to the Gentiles, so far were they
from being now scandalized at it. After that, Barnabas brought Paul also
thither, and they preached there one whole year, v. 26. and more particularly
to the Gentiles, as Dr. H. grants, at least promiscuously none ever denied; nor
did this year only intervene (sufficient time to let the Jews in the same city
know that the Gentiles might be conversed with and preached to) but many more
ere the controversy about the Gentile diet happened, as may easily be gathered
from the 2. chapter to the Gal: it being expressed there to have been fowerteen
years at least after S. Paul's conversion, which is related, Act. 9.
immediately before the conversion of Cornelius, Act. 10.

Now, as for other particulars Philip had preached to the Eunuch a Gentile.
Act. 8. 35. and in Samatia, Act. 8. 5. and in the same Chapter v. 25. S. Peter
also with him preached the Gospel in many villages of the Samarians. Yet Dr. H
after all this public preaching to Gentiles and Samaritans, avowed to be
lawful by the so long and frequent practice and doctrine of the chiefest
Apostles and pillars of Christianity, and (which is worth noting) most
solemnly and openly professed and exercised at Antioch in particular, will yet
after all this have the Jewish Christians in Antioch ignorant that it was
lawful to converse with or preach to a Gentile; And all this, because rather
then he will yield to the plainest truth, there is no paradox so absurd, so
non-sensicall and contradictory, but he thinks it worth his patronage, so it
yields him the mutual succor of any sorry evasion, when he is taken in a
falsification or some other unavoidable weakness.

But, though nothing else could bridle Dr. H. from such extravagancy of
insincerity and weakness, yet, I wonder much his own words could not curb him,
and make him if he needs would run the Maze, to do it at least with in his own
lists. His own words which occasion^d this debate, of Schism p. 75 are these,
we read of S. Peter and the Jewish Proselytes, Gal 2. 11. that they withdrew
from all Communion and Society with the Gentile Christians. Now, if they
withdrew from all Communion and Society, I suppose they had and used formerly
both Communion and Society with them; else, how could they be said to withdraw
from it; yet this Patron of Protestantism from whom it is impossible to get a
word of sense or sincerity, but perpetually he both corrupts other men's sayings
and contradicts his own, will have them never to have had at all, that from
which he tells us they withdrew; since they were equally zealous of Moses his
law, before as after the breach, by which law he assures us it was forbidden so
much as to converse with a Gentile.

Lastly, is it possible that passion should inveigle any man of reason to such
a strange conceit, as to imagine that, each party being Christians, they should
avoid even courteous or civil commerce one with another: or, that the Apostles
would have countenanced by their compliance such an uncharitable carriage? But
is this all? let us see between whom this all-Communion was broke; between two
Churches; and by whom? by S. Peter and his Jewish Proselytes: Now, since Schism
is formally and point blank counterpos'd to Union and Communion between
Churches, if all-Communion be broke between those Churches, it is a perfect
contradiction in terms, to say there is not a Schism made between them: And,
since it was S. Peter and his Jewish Proselytes who behaved themselves actively
in this point, it follows by most absolute and necessary consequence, that they
must be all Schismatics, and Blessed S. Peter their Ringleader. But it is no
matter with him; rather shall S. Peter instead of being Head of the Church, be
an Head of Schismatics, than Dr. H. be acknowledged a Schismatic and a
falsifier: and, not only the Authority but also the Sanctity of that holy
Apostle be sacrificed to the Protestant interest, rather than so great a Patron
of theirs, and so saintly a falsifier shall want an evasion to soder his
cracked credit. Neither let Dr. H. think to escape making S. Peter and his
Jewish converts Schismatics by saying that this was a prudent managery only (
Rep. p. 62.) and so justifiable by the present circumstances; since it is most
undeniable that the breaking of all Communion with another Church is the extern
Act of Schism; and then, let him remember his own grounds laid against himself
in his first Chapter of Schism p. 10. that the matter of fact only is to be
considered not the causes or motives. Since eo ipso that fact is Schism, nor
can be iustifi'd from being such by any causes, motives, or circumstances
what-soever; Now then, since the fact of breaking from all-Communion which the
Gentile Church, that is of Schism from it is in express terms imputed to S.
Peter and his Jewish Proselytes by Dr. H. I expect then what possible motive
this Author can pretend to allege sufficient to excuse them from Schism, whose
doctrine it is in the place cited that no motive or reason was sufficient to
render matter of fact of this nature excusable or justify it from being Schism,
nay damnable, worse then sacrilege, Idolatry, etc. as the fathers there cited
by D H. avouch.

The sum then of this part of Dr. H's defense is, that he takes no notice at
all of his falsifying by adding the only important and large-senc't word All
to the Scripture, nor attempts to clear himself of it; but, instead of doing
this, he goes about to maintain his position counterfeited to be found there to
wit, that Jewish Christians withdrew from all-Communion with the Gentile ones,
by this argument that it was equally forbidden by Moses his law to converse
with or preach to a Gentile, as to eat their diet. A paradox so incomparably
and notoriously absurd, that it is at once both perfectly opposite to the law
it self, repugnant to innumerable examples from Scripture to the contrary, and
the universal practice of the Synagogue; injurious to the Jewish Church in
it is purest times, making them frequently, publicly and uncontrolledly break
the law in a point (as he says) equally forbidden as eating the Gentile diet;
implicatory in terms, supposing once the lawfulnes of making a Proselyte;
impertinent to his present purpose and circumstances were it granted;
expressly contradictory to his own words, about which the present contest was
raised; derogating from those ancient Primitive Christians all charity, nay
even in the least and sleightest degree; and lastly, beyond all evasion, making
them perfectly Schismatics and S. Peter their Ringleader; and that,
proceeding on Dr. H's own grounds. Nor has he any thing to counterpo^ze this
heap of absurdities of the Seuenteens, but only a misunderstood place of
Scripture, of which himself must be the Interpreter; which is the right
Protestant Method, who build their faith upon any Text which seems at first
sight to make for them or is hard to explicate; although universal Tradition
of the foregoing Church, importing, involving and bringing down to us all
imaginable motives of the contrary truth evidence that Interpretation to be
impossible. But it is no matter what Dr. H. does or says; if he can but talk
any thing gentilely and slightly, the grave negligence must supply the want of
sense and Truth; especially if he but shut upwith a victorious Epiphonema,
pronounced with a serious-sobersadnes ( Repl p. 61. l. vlt.) Thus unhappy is
this gentleman continually in his objections, all is well, and his
sleight-sould Sermon-admi^ers take that to be the rarest Nectar of reason,
which, if examined is the most sublimated quintessence of
contradiction-absurdity, as has amply been shown.

Now as for S. Peter's words that it was unlawful for a man that was a Jew to
keep company or come to one that is of there Nation, upon which only he build
his position, otherwise altogether destitute of any shadow of proof. I answer,
that the Scribes and such like pretenders to a preciser Kind of holiness, had
lately introduced many customs of their own forging, under the notion of
Traditions (of some of which they are accused by our savior) and obtruded them
upon the consciences of the Jews to be religiously observed; especially at
Jerusalem the Rendevous of Jewish Doctors, and the place where their doctrine
had more immediate influence upon the minds of of they Auditors. Of those
precise customs this was one, of not going to a Gentiles house, or conversing
with them. To this, amongst others, S. Peter was inured by long education, in
so much that though he heard our B. Savior with his own mouth give them
commission to go to preach all over the world, in vniuersum mundum and omni
creaturae, to every creature; yet, finding employment enough amongst those of
the Circumcision, he never attempted it till by a vision he was immediately set
upon it by Almighty God, especially the obligation to his country laying a
stronger ty upon him, and having received order to preach first to the Jews
until they showed themselves unworthy, he needed a vision to tell him when
that time came, and circumstances were ripe for it. In like manner we read that
S. Paul, though chosen particularly to preach to the Gentiles, Act. 9. 15. yet
he affirmed, Act. 13 46. that it was necessary that the words of God should
first have been spoken to the Jews, and did not turn to the Gentiles but upon
their rejecting him.

By unlawful then in this place I take not to be meant, not against the law
of Moses; but, what their Teachers and Doctors, who governed their Consciences,
bore them in hand was unlawful: in the same manner as we now call many things
unlawful, which are not found forbidden by Christ's law, but which our
Doctors and Casuists judge to be unlawful. Again, we read that though the
Apostles and Brethren that were in Judea had heard that the Gentiles had
received the word of God. Act. 11. v. 1. yet the second verse letts us know of
none that found fault with him save those at Jerusalem only; and that, not
merely upon the account of going to the houses of Gentiles, but of eating with
them also, as the third verse expresses. But let their zeal have been never so
hot to maintain this newfangled apprehension, and let it be never so
universal to abhor the conversation of Gentiles, whiles they remained
Gentiles; yet, it is the strangest fancy that ever entered into a rational head,
to imagine that they should still retain the same uncharitable feud toward them
after they were become Christians and their fellow-Brothers in him, in whom
they were taught there was no distinction of Jew nor Gentile. Which sounds a
far greater absurdity in a Christian ear, than to say that they likewise
abhorred still the conversation of the Proselytes to the law of Moses after
their conversion; and that those one hundred fifty three thousand workmen who
lived dispersed among the Jews in Salomon's time, neither converst with their
neighbor Jews, nor took directions how to order their labor toward the
building of Salomon's Temple, but did their work by instinct and the guidance
of the private Spirit, as Dr. H. interprets Scripture.

Sectio 16.
How Dr. H. omitts to clear himself of falsifying the Apostolical
Constitutions, and to take notice of all the Exceptions brought against that
Testimony in Schism Disarmed. His acute manner of arguing. As also how he
brings a Testimony against him in every particular to make good all his former
proofs; and by what art he makes it speak for him.
THe next Testimony of Mr. H's which comes under examination, is taken from the
writer of the Apostolical Constitutions, who tells us (according to Dr. H. of
Schism, p. 75.) that Evod^us and Ignatius at the same time sat Bishops at
Antioch, one succeeding S. Peter the other S. Paul, one in the Iew^sh, the
other in the Gentile Congregation. Now if that writer tells us no such thing,
no not a word of this long rabble, is it possible Dr. H. can deny himself to be
a manifest and wilful falsifier? Schism Disarmed challenged him upon this
occasion of a manifest falsification; and that that writer neither tells us (as
Dr. H. pretended) that they sat at the same time Bishops in whichwords
consists the greatest force of the Testimony: nor that they succeeded the
Apostles, with that distinction; nor that the Jewish and Gentile Congregations
were distinct, much less that those Apostles Jurisdictions at Antioch were
mutually limited, which indeed only concerned his purpose; but only that
they were ordained by the Apostles, The text being only this Antiochiae
Euodius ordinatus est a me Petro, Ignatius a Paulo: At Antioch Euodius was
ordained by me Peter, Ignatius by Paul, without the least word before or after
concerning that matter; Of all these falsifications and voluntary additions
Schism Disarmed p. 65. 66. challenged Mr. H. yet, in return he offers not one
word to clear himself Reply c. 4. Sect 7. the place whither ( Answ. p. 48. l.
31. 32.) he r^ferd me for answer to this point; nor to show us that that
writer tells us what he so largely promised us; of Schism p. 75. only in his
Answer p. 48. he assures us that in his Reply, the whole matter of Euodius and
Ignatius is further cleared (as if he had cleared it already) and S. W' s
elaborate misunderstandings forestalled; he should have said misreadings, for
it was mine eyes and not mine understanding which failed me, if he had not
added to this testimony all which made for his purpose.

Four observations I shall recomend the Reader to let him see that this
insincerity in Dr. H. was affected and voluntary. First, the words in the
testmony importing their Ordination, neither make against us nor touch our
controversy. Next, all the words added of his own head are made use of by him,
and solely-important in this occasion. Thirdly, that he never particularized
the place in the Author where this testimony was to be found, which he
ordinarily uses, but leaves us to look for it in a whole book, hoping we might
either be weary in looking it, or miss, and so^ himself in the mean time
escape scot-free. Lastly, he so iumbles together the two different letters (as
his common trick is) that no man living can make any guess which words are the
testimonies, which his own; and, should we pitch upon any to be the
testimonies, relying upon the translation letter, in that part they sat at the
same time Bishops, we find the most considerable word same put in a less
letter, as if it were part of the citation, whereas no such word nor any thing
to that sense was found in the Author. And thus Dr. H. (as he professes Answ.
p. 18. speaks the full truth of God.

But instead of clearing himself from being an arrant falsifier, Dr. H. (as his
custom is) attempts to show himself an acute Doctor; and when it was his turn
to show us the pretended words in his testimony, he recurs to the defense of
the position it self. And first he cries quits which the Catholic Gentleman
who, as he tells us in a dry phrase ( Repl. Sect. 7. number. 1.) casts one stone
at all his buildings together. And what stone is this? He challenged him not to
have brought one word out of Antiquity to prove the with drawing from all
Communion (already spoken of) to have been the cause of the division of the
Bishopriks in Antioch and Rome.

This is the Catholic Gentleman's stone, as he calls it, which levelled by him
at such an impenetrable Rock of solid reason as Mr. H. rebounds upon the
thrower's head with this violence.

First that he manifested from Antiquity in his book of Schism that the Church
of Antioch was founded by S. Peter and S. Paul, Repl. p* 63 I answer, it is
granted; but what is this to the point; since this might easily be performed
by their promiscuous preaching, without exclusion of Jurisdiction, or breaking
of all Communion between Churches.

Secondly, that he manifested there, that there were two Churches at Antioch,
the one of the Jews the other of the Gentile Christians. I answ. he has not
one testimony in the whole book of Schism which expresses this position nor in
these later books, save only that from the Arch-heretick Pelagius, already
replied to, Sect 7

Thirly that in those Churches at the same time sat two distinct Bishops,
Euodius and Ignatius. I answer this is only proved from his own falsification
of the testimony from the Apostolical Constitutions; not a word of the fitting
together of two in those two distinct Churches found either in that or any
other place, as yet cited by him. Thus the Catholic Gentleman's stone sticks
yet insost reasoned Dr. H. for want of solidnes in the place it light to
reverberate its motion.

Now let us see what Dr. H. who braggs so much of a Hending his Adversaries
(...) has left unreply'd upon in this his Answer to Schism Disarmed: in which
Treatise, p. 66. I objected all these weaknesses in this one point.

First, that were it granted that two sat together it would not serve his turn
a iott the more. For what would he infer hence? that S. Peter and S. Paul were
distinct Bishops there also? Grant this too, what follows hence against the
Pope's Authory? I know his intent is to conclude hereupon that, therefore S.
Peter and S. Paul had exclusive Jurisdictions at Antioch, therefore S. Peter's
Jurisdiction was limited, therefore the Pope had not an illimitted one: but how
does the one's presiding over Jews the other over Gentiles argue a limitation
of that power it self, or at all necessarily touch the interior Right? ^uppose
I should deny his consequence, and using Dr. H's word ( Repl. p. 62. upon a
like occasion at Antioch) say that this might have been only a prudent
managery, a wise ordering designed by S. Peter and S. Paul; I wonder how he
would proceed with his argument and prove his consequence that it was intended
for a real not seeming counter-Iurisdiction. I am sure as yet he has not
produced any thing at all to disannull this instance of his arguments in
consequence, nor strengthened his proof against this obvious pretense that it
might have been thus otherwise. Again, was there not room enough in Antioch
(and the like may much better be said of Rome) for two to preside and preach
in? could not they divide the City into two halves for the better convenience
of their Auditors coming promiscuously to hear their doctrine, but there must
necessarily be a distinction of the Jewish and Gentile caetus, the Jewish under
one and the Gentiles under the other, as Dr. H. expresses it Answ. p. 48. lin.
vlt.) telling us there that there could not be two Bishops in Rome without this
distinction. Further, let us suppose that the Jewish Christians would not
mingle with the Gentiles in the exercise of divine worship where there was this
scandalizing diversity of their ceremonies (for I cannot think that, holding
them their fellow Christians, they should be so uncharitable as to abhor
their Communion as much as if they had been excommunicate, Schismatics,
Heretics, or as if they had still remained Heathen as Dr. H. contends) yet I
see no impossibility that S. Peter in his half of the City should some times go
to Iewis Congregation, sometimes to the Gentile; and S. Paul do the like in
his; So that still Dr. H's supple bow of reason is far from carrying home to
his mark, or concluding what he purposed. Nor let him object that this
distinction of the City into two parts, signifies exclusion of Jurisdiction
when they met: It infers no more but that they acted prudently in so doing, and
so as no wise man can be imagind' willing to do otherwise; since common sense
teaches us that if two Preachers come to one City and each be able to perform
his office without the assistance of the other, it were the height of
imprudence not to separate themselves and preach a part; nay and to show a
particular care, affection, and over sight toward their own converts, and to
let them know 'twas convenient they should continue rather with him wtih whom
they had begun. And this shall serve for an Answer to his lisping testimony out
of Epiphanius that S. Peter and S. Paul were Bishops in Rome. Which Dr. H.
Answ. p. 48. relies upon as a business whose force it is not possible S. W.
should dicert; though neither it nor any testimony else express a syllable of
S. Peter being over ^ews only, S. Paul over Gentiles, is the point to be
proved by it; but no where expressed save only in his own falsification
interdicting them all Communion, and his own Thus we know it was at Antioch.
But to return to his prudent neglects.

Secondly he was told, that the testimonies alleged by himself out of Eusebius
and Origin calling Ignatius the second, and out of S. Jerome calling him the
third, make against the sitting of those two together, his express and
important pretense. Yet he never answers these self opposed testimonies; but
instead of doing so adds two more Reply p. 63 out of Simeon Metaphrastes and an
Anonymus ancient writer, to witness the same and confirm my objection.

Thirdly he was told that he will never find S. Paul was accounted a
parcell-Bishop in Antioch that he should have a properly called successor
there, etc. In order to which, he offers us no reply save only his own former
weak fancy.

Fourthly that he undid all he had said with a testimony of Theodoret, which
affirmed in express opposition to his former place out of the Apostolical
Constitutions, that Ignatius was ordained by S. Peter. To which opposite
testimony instead of answering, he (seconds it with a another Reply p. 63. lin.
vlt.) was ever such a disputant heard of.

Lastly, it was objected that the Apostolical Constitutions, upon which he
builds, was a book excepted against by all sides; and Theodoret, who opposes it
in this point, was an Author beyond exception, and that therefore we have far
more reason to judge that S. Peter ordained Ignatius also then Evodius only.
Whence I furthe deduce that if, in the Drs. grounds, Ignatius were over the
Gentiles, and ordained by S. Peter, as Theodoret his better Author testifies,
S. Peter by consequence was over the Gentiles also in Antioch. Now what reply
attempts Dr. H. against an objection which enervates all the whole Authority he
relies on and shows him baffled in his own testimonies? not a word: yet, he
tells us in Greek that he attends his adversaries (...), that is, step by step;
though he still auoids him then most warily, when his attendance is most
necessary.

Nothing therefore has Mr. H. replied to those concerning Exceptions of mine,
nothing to his own testimonies in particular, though shown to have been against
him. Yet something he must say to every thing in one manner or other; that is
resolved; except it be to show the falsifying words in a testimony where they
are not found, in which case he is wisely silent His argument from these
contradictory places is founded ( Repl. p. 64) in reconciling them and making
them friends; the difference he tells us is but seeming and he goes about to
remove it; which way of arguing, in the first place is perfectly absurd, unles
he first prove the necessity of each testimonies being true, which he never
attempts; otherwise, to go about to prove a truth by reconciling falsehoods, or
truths with falsehoods, is such a new invention or arguing, that Dr. H. has all
the right and reason in the world to get a Patent of it, that none should use
it without his license. Secondly, the Authority of the Apostolical
Constitutions is acknowled'gd to be corrupt by the Protestants themselves; and,
consequently, unles he vindicate first that his main testimony fetc'ht thence
is true, for any thing he knows he goes about to reconcile a truth with a
falsehood; at least Theodorets Authority standing against it, it is justly
presumed to be such, which makes Dr. H's plea for his said Patent stronger.
Thirdly is it such news that Authors should be of several opinions? or, was
there ever Protestant till Dr. H. who held so, even of the fathers themselves;
yet, contrary here to his own Grounds, he will have none of them mistaken
though they contradict one another; he has invented a fancy how to reconcile
their sayings, ere he knows or proves whether they were mistaken or no in an
obscure matter of fact done long before their time. Nor cares he what this
reconcilement of contradictions costs, though it make all Antiquity blind, ^ll
his new fangled co^cied or Scholion which he putts down of Schism p. 79. l. 12.
gave light to the world, yet as long as he can by screwing and wresting make
them favor his cause, he is a man of peace and contradictions shall shake
hands and be friends.

But who is the Vmpire to decide this contradiction-quarrell? one, God knows
whom, called Ioannes Malela Antiochenus: and the testimony from him is found in
a manuscript in Oxford Library: that is, we may go look it God knows where.
Yet we will trust Dr. H. for once in a testimony not extant, who has deceived
us so often in those which were public and easy to be examined, and take the
place as we find it by himself. (...), etc. when Peter went to Rome, passing by
Antioch the Great, Euodius Bishop and Patriarch of Antioch happend' to die and
Ignatius received the Bishopric, S. Peter ordaining and enthroning him. Was
there ever testimony imaginable more express against this very point in
controversy and that in every particular than this he alleges as the knot of
all his proof. See his book of Schism. p. 75. l 26. 27. where he contends from
the Apostolical Constitutions that Euodius and Ignatius sat at the same time
Bishops of Antioch. See Ioannes Malela's testimony, which was to button
together all the rest, and conclude the controversy [ Euodius happened to die
and Ignatius succeeded him in the Bishopric.] See in the true testimony from
the Apostolical Constitutions put down Schism Disarmed p. 65. because Dr. H.
had falsify'd it, Ignatius ordinatus est a Paulo, Ignatius was ordained by
Paul: See Malela [Ignatius received the Bishopric, S. Peter ordaining him.
Lastly see in Malela's testimony Bishopric in the singular, Bishop and
Patriarch in the singular; whereas Dr. H. all over makes it his whole design to
prove Bishops, two Bishoprics at once in the same City. Observe the word
Patriarch, and ask Dr. H. whether he thinks in his conscience there were two
Patriarchs at Antioch one over Jews, another over Gentiles, or where ca^ he
even preten'd to have read or heard of such an absurd tenet. In a word there is
scarce any proposition affirmed by Dr. H. in order to this present point, but
finds here it is express contrary; and yet he brings this as the upshot of all
his proofs, and as that where in he meant to make all ends meet; introducing
it here in these confident terms, ( Repl. p. 64. l. 2. 3.) that the seeming
difference of his former testimonies is removed by Io. Malela Antiochenus, who
thus sets down the whole matter: whereas indeed the matter he sets down is
wholly contrary to Mr. H. Does this man care a pin with what false pretenses he
mocks his Reader and abuses his very eyes?

But was there no design in alleging this testimony, or can he make it, though
quite contrary to his tenet, serve his turn for nothing? yes; for, there is
nothing so contradictory to Dr. H's doctrine in it is self, but by cooking it up
hand somely he can make his advantage of it. He wedges in two parenthesisses of
his own in the middle of the testimony and then all is evident: The testimony
then, as by him put down, stands gaping thus; when Peter went to Rome passing
by Antioch the Great, Euodius Bishop and Patriarch of Antioch happened to die,
and Ignatius (who was, as was said, first constituted by S. Paul over the
Gentiles there) received the Bishopric (that, I suppose, must now be of the
Jewish Province also, over which Euodius had been in his life time) S. Peter
ordaining and enthroning him. Now, as for the testimony it self, taken alone it
is expressly against him, as has been shown; the only virtue and force of it
lies in the parenthesisses; and if we examine these, the total strength of the
first lies in the words, as was said, that is, by himself, for he has produced
as yet never a testimony which says Evodius was constituted by S. Paul over the
Gentiles; the sole force of the latter parenthesis lies in the all-conquering,
I suppose, which is perfectly gratis, and without all show of any Ground either
in Antiquity or common sense, as has been largely manifested. And so by this
mean's, we have gotten two other very strong testimonies to confirm his own we
know; to wit, as was said and, I suppose; nor have we one express word from
any testimony save from his own knowledge, his own saying, and his own
suppositions. The result is that this testimony, the upshot and knot of all the
rest, is it self absolutely against him, and only brought to countenance his
parenthesisses, not with it is influence, but with it is presence; So that his
testimonies are as it were the Stock upon which he ingrafts his own sayings
either in the middle by way of a parenthesis, or by means of an, Id est, in
antecedent or subsequent words; sometimes with distinction, sometimes with
none; and so, it matters not with him what nature the Stock it self is of,
since the fruit of testifying in favor of his tenet is to be expected from the
accessory scyons or spriggs (his voluntary additions) and so need not resemble
the Stock, which may be of an indifferent, perhaps contrary nature.

Sect 17.
How Dr. H. slightly waves to strengthen his six Testimonies shown invalid by
Schism Disarmed; and, in particular, what work he makes with a Testimony from
S. Prosper.
HIs six following testimonies to prove that S. Peter was over Jews only at
Rome, and S Paul over Gentiles are shown ( Schism Disarmed, p. 67. 68. 69.
first not to have a word in them to that purpose, nor intimating any thing
which may not as well and much better infer a promiscuous Authority than an
exclusive one; since they only signify that they founded the Church there, and
were Apostles and Bishops there: Secondly, he was accused there for calling
those obscure testimonies Evidences for the exclusive Jurisdiction of these
Apostles one over Jews the other over Gentiles; whereas, there was not one
exclusive particle in any one of them, nor so much as Jew or Gentile named by
them. Thirdly, in order to this, the notion of an Evidence was set down and
manifested how far his twilight-testimony-proof were from the pretense of being
such. Fourthly, his sly gullery of the Reader to his face, by endeavoring to
make him believe that the testimonies were parallel to his own confident
affirmation that it was evident, was there laid open, and shown to be a deceit:
His words ( of Schism p. 76) being, the same is as evident at Rome, where these
two Apostles met again, and each of them erected and managed a Church S. Peter
of Jews, S. Paul of Gentiles: whereas the testimonies which he ushered in with
so many Soes had not a word to that purpose, as was there shown.

Of all these weaknesses Dr. H. was accused by his Disarmer, in answer to which
he tells me Answ. p. 48. l. 35. that that wherein Rome was concerned is
reviewed Repl, c. 9. where nothing is found to that purpose, nor any where
else, save only, in the Sect. 7. par. 6. Where when I came to look in
expectation of some return to my exceptions, I found that he only enumerated
briefly the same testimonies of his former book, his irref^agable one (as he
calls it) from the Popes ^eales, his falsification (as shall be seen ere long)
concerning Linus and Clemens, which he tells us again are evidences, that they
clear that part which concerned Rome, and then having made this learned
mock-Reply that is, said over again out of his former book what had been
excepted against by me, and related us back in the margent to that very place
in it which I had impugned as thus manifoldly weak he ends with these words,
that Sure there can be no need of farther proofs or testimonies from Antiquity
in this matter. That bold faced word Sure is a Sure card, and Mr. H's Ace of
the trumps, there is no resisting it; when the game seems quite gone, it
retrives the loss and carries all before it. My answer was that all which
those testimonies intimated might have been performed by promiscuous preaching
of each both to the Jews and Gentiles; the sum of his Reply is only this,
that Sure it cannot, I objected that those testimonies were weak and concluded
nothing at all of such a distinction he answers that they are clear, are
evidences, and that Sure there can need no farther proof; So that we have now
got a fourth express proof added to his We know, I say, and I suppose, to wit
his own [ Sure,] the Sure nail fastened by the master of the Protestant
Assembly, Dr. H.

As for the testimony of S. Prosper, in which he was accused to render
Ecclesiam Gentium, the Church of the Nations, lest S. Peter and S. Paul should
both have meddled with Gentiles in Rome, which words should they be rendered
the Church of the Gentiles must necessarily follow, he referts me to his Repl.
p. 65. parag. 10. for satisfaction; where he acquaints me with his desire that
the truth of his interpretation may be considered by the words cited from him.
The words are these, in ipsa Jerusalem lacobus, etc. James at Jerusalem, John
at Ephesus, Andrew and the rest through out all Asia, Gentium Ecclesiam
sacrarunt, consecrated the Church of the Nations (says Dr. H.) Gentiles (says
S. W.) Upon this testimony Dr. H. argues thus. What Nations were these? Sure of
Jews as well as Gentiles: then follow the Grounds of this his assurance; else
Jerusalem could be no part of them, no nor John's converts at Ephesus, for
they were Jews, and then he concludes his mild-reasoning discourse with as mild
a reprehension, that therefore the Catholic Gentleman did not do well. Now,
as for his Sure, it is indeed a pregnant expression; but I deny the sufficiency
of the Authority which so Magisterially pronounces it; And, for what concerns
the Grounds of his assurance, they are both of them found only in his own
sayings, and no where in any testimony; my tenet, he knows, is, that all those
Apostles preached promiscuously to Gentiles also where soever they came. But,
lest he should think me hard hearted for not believing his Sure, I shall at
least show my self far from cruelty in making him this friendly proffer, that
if he can show me any one word in any testimony yet produced, which expresses
that S. James preached to Jews only in Jerusalem, or S. John to Jews only in
Ephesus, upon which alone he builds here that Gentium cannot signify Gentiles,
I will pardon him the answering this whole book; which to do on any fashion
will I know be very laborious and shameful to him; but to do it
satisfactorily impossible, unles he could put out his Reader's Eyes, and so
hinder them from reading his corrupted and falsified citations aright. Is there
anything easier then to show us an exclusive particle or expression if any such
thing were to be found there: But, if there be none, what an emptines, vanity
and open cozenage of his Reader is it to cry Sure, Surely, Certainly,
Unquestionably, and the like, when there is no other warrant to ground this
assurance, save his own weak fancy, inconsequent deductions, h^s interlac'd
parenthesisses, his facing the testimonies with antecedent, peecing them with
subsequent words; whiles, in the mean time, the testimony it self must stand
by and look on only like a conditio sine qua non, as if it were an honorable
spectator to grace his personating; and not have any efficacious influence, or
act any part in the Argument which bears it is title.

But to come to the testimony it self: first, I would know of Mr. H. how often he
has read Gentes taken alone without any additionall and determining expression
to signify both Jews and Gentiles; unles it be in this sense as it probably
might be in S Prosper's time, that Gentium Ecclesia signified the Christian
Church, in which the Jews were included, yet being no considerable part of it,
they needed not be expressed. Next, as for the word Nations which he recurs to, I
would ask whether (though those in Judea were styled the Nation of the Jews)
yet, whether those in dispersion at Rome were called a Nation or no, or rather
a Sect Thirdly, let Gentium signify, of the Nations, as he would have it, let
us see how Dr. H. has advantaged his cause: For, if it be so, then the words
Gentium Ecclesiam sacrarunt, they consecrated the Church of the Nations, are to
be applied to all the Apostles there mentioned: Now then, since Nations (as Dr.
H. tells us here) is Sure of Jews as well as Gentiles, the testimony must run
thus, James at Jerusalem consecrated the Church of Jews as well as Gentiles,
John at Ephesus consecrated the Church of Jews as well as Gentiles, Andrew and
the rest throughout all Asia consecrated the Church of the Jews as well as
Gentiles; and the like of Peter and Paul at Rome. Thus Dr. H. thinking to stop
one hole has made other three quite destroys the substance of his exclusive
tenet, while he went about to mend a circumstance. Fourthly if he will not
allow this signification of the word given and allowed by himself (as'applyed
to S Peter and S. Paul when it was his interest) to be appliable to all the
rest of those Apostles likewise, let us see what an unreasonable belief he
exacts of his Readers; to imagine that the word Gentium should dance from one
signification to another as his fancy shall please to strike up a diverse tune.
Hence applied to S. James and S John, it must be imagined to signify Jews
only, because it is against the interest of his tenet that they should open
their mouths to convert a Gentile at Jerusalem and Ephesus: But then S. Andrew
and the rest are not Apostles of the Circumcision, and so according to him must
not preach to a Jew in Asia, presently upon this the Ianus faced word Gentium
turns the other side of it is visage toward us, and represents to us Gentiles
only; yet, all this could not content Dr. H. he had a mind to limit S.
Peter's Authority when he met S. Paul in the same City, which he could find no
handsomerway to do then by making one over the Jews only, the other over
only the Gentiles: No sooner had Dr. H fancied this, but immediately the
obedient word Gentium turned round, and showed us both it is faces; and did not
now signify Jews only, nor yet Gentiles only, as fomerly but Jews and
Gentiles both; And yet, when this is done, it expresses nothing to the
contrary, but that each preached to both. Is not this a rare disputant? Lastly,
I would gladly know where he ever heard or how he came to imagine that the word
Gentes could signify Jews only, as it must according to his Grounds, as
applied to S. James at Jerusalem, and S. John at Ephesus? Reader perhaps it
may cause mirth in thee to read such Gottam-absurdities in a Dr. of Divinity,
but I assure thee it is most wearisome to me to stand laying open such weak
impertinencies, nor do I hope for any honorable triumph from the confuting
such trash.

Sect. 18.
Dr. H's Irrefragable, Evidence from the Pope's Seals disclamed by himself,
and, expressly denied to be a proof. His manner of arguing by asking
questions.
But as the lesser lights vanish at the rising of the Sun so we cannot but
imagine that all the former dim testimonies of Dr. H's, which gave such a
twinkling uncertain light, disappear at the sight of his Evidence of Evidences,
or his Irrefregable Evidence, as he calls it, from the Seals of the Pope's, and
what say the Seals of the Pope, or Matthew Paris in their behalf? that S. Paul
stands on the right hand the Cross, and S. Peter on the left; and this is
produced by Dr. H. as an irrefragable Evidence that S. Peter was over the Jews
at Rome S. Paul over the Gentiles, of Schism p. 77. l. 25. 26.

But first Dr. H. disclames Answ. p. 49 any such pretense from those pregnantly
testifying Seals, but only that they were brought for a testimony of the
Church of Rome's being founded by S. Paul, as well as S. Peter. If so I have
wronged Mr. H. and shall ask him pardon: If not, I shall ask no further
satisfaction of him save only to leave him to the Reader's judgments when I
shall have once conuinc't him by their eyes. In his book of Schism p. 76. the
9th paragraph begins thus. The same is as evident at Rome, where these two
great Apostles met again, and each of them erected and managed a Church one of
Jews another of Gentiles. After which position immediately follow the
testimonies which should have proved it, beginning thus; So says S. Irenaeus,
and more expressly Epiphanius, So the Inscription on their Tombs, So Gaius, So
Dionysius, So Prosper; Then, after the said testimonies, immediately likewise
follow these very words, And the very Seals of Popes are an Irrefragable
Evidence of the same. Now, what this same was, is manifest by the beginning of
the 9th parag. to wit that S. Peter was over the Jews S. Paul over the Gentiles
at Rome. But it is an ordinary evasion with him to deny his own words.

Nor is this all which these Seals of the Popes were to Evidence Irrefragably;
Let us trace the original position for which it was produced, and we shall
find it, ( of Schism p. 74.) to be this long rabble; that whenever those two
great Apostles came to the same City, the one constantly applied himself to the
Jews, received Disciples of such, formed them into a Church, left them when he
departed that region to be governed by some Bishop of his assignation, and the
other in like manner did the same to the Gentiles; This is his chimericall
position, which he pretended to manifest to have been at Antioch in his 8th
parag immediately following these words, and beginning with, [ Thus we know it
was at Antioch;] and to have been at Rome in his 9th beginning thus, The same
is as evident at Rome, (to wit that whenever those two great Apostles came to
that City to wit Rome, etc.) after this follows his proofs for the same tenet,
So says Epiphanius, Gaius, Dionysius, etc.] and, lastly, immediately after
these follows this Evidence of Evidences in these words; And the very Seals of
the Popes are an irrefragable Evidence of the same.] Now what this relative [
Same] looks back upon is most irrefragably evident to any one that can read
English and understand common sense, to wit, that whenever those two great
Apostles came to one City, etc. and the rest of that large position before
cited, it being most palpable that he went forwards to prove that, nor ever
mentioned any other new thesis till long after his irrefragable evidenc^ was
over past; so that the bare pictures of S. Peter and S. Paul upon the Seals of
the Popes are still an Irrefragable Evidence, that, whenever those great
Apostles came to the same City, the one constantly applied himself to the Jews,
received Disciples of such, formed them into a Church, left them when he
departed that region to be governed by some Bishop of his assignation, and the
other in like manner did the same to the Gentiles. So rare a thing it is to
have a strong faith against the Pope.

Nor has he only prevaricated from his Irrefragable Evidence by denying the
manifest scope of it expressed in his own words, and by mincing it to be an
Instance not a proof though before he called it an Irrefragable Evidence; but
to cover the shame of it he quite annih^lates the force of it is other
fellow-testimony Evidences, Answ. p. 49 l. 31. 32. by denying them to be proofs
also, but to be spoken in agreement only with his proof out of Scripture Gal.
2. that Peter was by agreement to betake himself to the Jews. Whereas first
that place of Scripture had been produced page 73. but this pregnant
Seal-testimony, and most of it is fel^ ows p. 77 nor is there the least shadow
of relation of these places to that, as who so reads the 9th and 10th parag*
where they are found will manifestly see. Secondly Repl. p. 64. par. 6. he told
us that Epiphanius his words cleared the busines-concerning Rome, that the
other testimonies were Evidences to that purparse; and concluded that Sure
there can need no farther proofs, nor testimonies from Antiquity in this
matter Nay, he stuck so strongly to the testimony of Epiphanius, Answ. p. 48.
that he maintained it impossible for S. W. to divert the force of it. So that
the, same six testimonies and Popes Seals were there called Evidences, clear
and sole-sufficient proofs, which are here denied to be proofs at all, but
only things spoken in agreement. But the reason of this double dealing is
evident; for, there, he was challenged not to have one testimony from Antiquity
of those Apostles exclusive Jurisdictions, and so had then no better shift save
only to make another dumb show of the self-same testimonies, and then cry
them up for clear Evidences and sole-sufficient proofs from Antiquity. Here
the weakness of his pretended best, I mean his Irrefragable Evidence, was shown
to be most silly and weak; where upon himself modestly decries both that and
it is fellow Evidences of an inferior rank, and says that they are no proofs at
all, but things spoken in agreement. Nor let him say that in his Reply where he
called them such clear evidences and proofs, he meant they were only
sufficient proofs that those Apostles both founded the Church at Rome; This was
never in question between us, but granted by both sides; Neither did Schism
Disarmed ever challenge him to prove this; but that they founded that Church
with exclusive Jurisdiction over Jews and Gentiles. Now then, since in his
Answer to that except on, p. 48. l. 34. 35. he refers to the said place in his
Reply, he must mean there that they are sole-sufficient proofs and clear
Evidences to prove exclusive Jurisdiction of the one over Jews at Rome, the
other over Gentiles, unles he will confess himself an open and manifest
prevaricatour from the whole Question. Thirdly, since he puts down his own
thesis in these words, that each of them at Rome erected and managed a Church,
S. Peter of Jews S. Paul of Gentiles, and then immediately subjoyned his proofs
in this form, So says Irenaeus, etc. it is impossible to imagine other, but
that these testimonies were produced to prove the immediate foregoing thesis.
Fourthly, by denying these to be proofs, that S. Peter was at Rome over Jews,
S. Paul over Gentiles, he denies by consequence that he has produced any proof
at all for that fancy of his, except his own blush-proof confident expression
[ The same as evident at Rome] since in the 9th parag. the proper place to
prove that point, there is nothing at all sound, but those testimonies denied
by him here to be proofs, and his own now recited words: Though, I must
confess, toward the latter end of the 10th parag. he has a very express
proof in these words, [ of S. Peter's being over the Jews at Rome we make no
Question] he must mean over Jews only, for otherwise it opposes not us who
hold him our selves to have been over both Jews and Gentiles there; So that he
carries the whole question between us by saying it is evident, and himself makes
no question of it; relying finally upon nothing but these confident raw
affirmations of his own, since he denies all the testimonies he produces to be
proofs of the point. Lastly, seeing he says that these testimonies are spoken
only in agreement with some other thing, and they had no imaginable relation
to a farre-of-afore-going place of Scripture, as appears by my first note, and
are most necessarily and manifestly related to prove the exclusive thesis it
self, as is evident by my second, let us examine a little nearer Dr. H's reach of
reason, and strength of Logic. What mean these words that they are not
produced for proofs but in agreement. I ask, have they any influence or
efficacitie at all upon the conclusion or thing they are brought for, or no? if
they have, they are proofs; if not, they are indifferent. If any thing follow
out of them they infer or prove it; if nothing, what do they there Either they
are for the point and then they ground a deduction to establish it and are
arguments and proofs in it is behalf; or else they are against it, and are still
proofs, though for the contrary; or, lastly, they are in themselves
indifferent, that is neither for it nor against it, and then the first chapter
of Genesis would have served his turn as well as these neutrall testimonies; yet
Dr. H. takes it ill here that I should offer to make any incoherence appear in
his discourse who never in his life knew what it was to make any notions cohere
at all, save only in a loose Sermonary way, which the least puff of
declamatory air would counterbuffe and dissipate to nothing.

But the Hydra head of this Irrefragable Evidence starts up with a numerous
recruit, in the form of questions ( Answer p. 49. l. vlt.) Is not the Pope's
Seal (says Dr. H.) an Evidence that Paul as well as Peter had the planting the
Church of Rome. I answer, grant it; what follows hence? this could have been
done by their promiscuous endeavors. And is not that agreeable to Peter's
preaching the Jews and Paul's to the Gentiles when they met in a City where
were multitudes of both? I answer you must mean to Jews only, for it is our
tenet that each preached to both; and then you have been often challe^ged that
you have not brought one syllable of proof for it but your own word only. Nor
is their founding the Church agreeable even to your own words in any other
sense then as agreeable signifies indifferent, or not contrary to it, since the
founding a Church, signifies only the thing done in common, not the particular
manner of doing it, either promiscuously or exclusively which is all our
question but is equally appliable to both: or rather indeed, sounding only a
common endeavor in doing it, it is rather inclinable to a promiscuous sense;
nay, the force of the word, the Church, which is to be understood of God's
Church at Rome, evdently gives us to understand that there was but one Church,
not two, for otherwise he was bound to say the Churches not the Church. It
follows immediately after his former question. And was not that the importance
of the agreement Gal. 2. 9. I answer there was no agreement there to any such
purpose. The giving the right hand of fellowship was to acknowledge S. Paul a
fellow-Apostle and his doctrine sincere; the applying themselves some to Jews
others to Gentiles was a pure sequel: (...), the Circumcision, to which S.
Peter lent at that time his special endeavors, signified the country of
Judea, not the Jews in dispersion, all which has been manifested most
particularly heretofore, Sect. 6. much less is it imported there, as Dr. H.
after his openly-falsifying manner pretends here, that when they met in a City
where were multitudes of both they should carry themselves thus and thus; there
being no talk there of either Cities or multitudes which he tells us here the
agreement there imported, and then cites immediately for it Gal. 2. 9. without
the words. But he proceeds. And is not that an Argument that Peter was not the
universal Pastor, but that the Gentiles were S. Paul's Province, as the Jews
S. Peter's. Not a jott good Dr. your premises are no stronger then your bare
saying, which makes your inference thence weaker then water. Your conciet of
Provinces the groundwork of all your pitiful dicourse was shown to be a
grou^dles fiction. Nor, were there such, would it make for your purpose unles
they were exclusive; nor would it serve your intent that there was exclusivenes
in the actual endeavors of the Apostles, but you must evince an Exclusivenes
in Right ere you can pretend to limit a Right: nor have you brought as yet one
express word of any testimony to make good the least of these. Again, if by
universal Pastor you mean one who has Jurisdiction to preach in all places
of the world and to all sorts of people, as your wise Argument seems to intend,
you need not trouble your self, we grant each Apostle to have been an
universal Pastor in this sense; but, if you mean that S. Peter was not higher
in Authority amongst the Apostles, how does this follow though he were
supposed to be limited as a particular Bishop to his private Province; or, as a
Bishop, had a flock distinc't from S. Paul's, is not even now a days, the
Pope's Bishopric limited to the Roman Diocese his Patriarchate to the West,
and so his Authority under both these notions limited exclusively and
contradistinguisht from other Bishops and Patriarchs, and yet we see de facto,
that he is held chief Bishop in the Church and higher in Authority then the
rest notwithstanding. Do not our eyes and the experience of the whole world
testify this to be so? yet were all the former absurd inventions of
Apostolical Provinces, their exclusivenes, S. Peter over the Jews only, etc.
granted; still his utmost inference would be no stronger then this now related
which the eyes of all the world gainsay; to wit, that because others had their
particular assignations, Provinces, or Bishopriks distinct from S. Peter's,
therefore S. Peter could not be higher in Authority then those others; by
which one may see that my learned Adversary understands not what is meant by
the Authority he impugns; but makes account the Pope cannot be Head of the
Church, unles he be the particular and immediate Bishop of every Diocese in it.
Whereas, we hold him contradistinct from his fellow Bishops, for what concerns
his proper and peculiar assignation; and only say that he is higher then the
rest in Jurisdiction and power of command in things belonging to the universal
good of the Church. This point then should have been struck at and disputed
against, not that other never held by us, that none in the Church has his
particular Bishopric or assignation save the Pope only, against which only
Dr. H. makes head while he makes it the utmost aim of his weak endeavors to
prove S. Peter a distinct Bishop from S. Paul, and to have had a distinct flock.

Sect. 19.
Dr. Hammond's method in answering his Disarmer's challenge, that he could not
show one express word limiting the Apostles Jurisdictions in any of those many
Testimonies produced by him for that End; and how he puts three Testimonies
together to spell that one word. His palpahle falsification and other pitiful
weaknesses,
AFter Dr. H's Irrefragable Evidence followed immediately ( of Schism p. 74.)
And all this very agreeable to the story of Scripture, which (according to the
brevitie of the relations there made) only sets down S. Peter to be the
Apostle of the Circumcision; and of his being so at Rome we make no question
Upon these words, his Disarmer ( Schism Disarm. p 73.) enumerated as many
significations imported by that word only, as were obvious, and confuted them
severally, because he found the words ambiguous; telling him that neither does
Scripture only set down S. Peter as Apostle of the Circumcision but James and
John also Gal. 2. 9. nor is S. Peter any where expressed as Apostle of only the
Circumcision but expressly particularized the contrary Act. 15. and 7. His
Answer. p. 50. affords us a third signification, so impossible for S. W. to
imagine, as it was to foresee all the weakneses Dr. H's cause could put him
upon. It Is this, that the words (only) is set clearly in opposition to the
Scripture's, making more particular relations of S. Peter's preaching to the
Jewish caetus at Rome, etc. Now, had the Scripture produced by him made any
particular relation at all of any such matter, then indeed his [ onely] might
have been thought to mean the want of more particular relation, etc. but if in
no place alleged by him there had been found the least particular relation at
all either of a Jewish caetus at Rome, or S. Peter's preaching to it
particularly, or indeed so much as intimating his preaching in that City, then
what ground had Dr. H. given me to imagine that the restrictive particle only
was put in opposition to a more particular relation from Scripture of that, of
which the Scripture had given me no relation at all? Is there a greater misery
then to stand trifling with such a brabbler? To omit, that, take away the
former parenthesis from having any influence upon the words without it, as it
ought, and then one of the significations given by me is absolutely unavoidable.

But against the first signification impugned by me, he challenges my knowledge
that he could not mean so without contradicting himself; and my knowledge
challenges his conscience that he cannot be ignorant how he contradicts himself
frequently and purposely upon any occasion when he cannot well evade. As for
the second sense I conceived that ambiguous word might bear, I repeated my
challenge to him Schism Disarm. p. 73. that, If he could show me the least
syllable either in Scripture or other testimonies expressly and without the help
of his, Id ests, and scruing deductions restraining S. Peter's Jurisdiction to
the Jews only and excluding it from the Gentiles, I would yield him the
Laurel and quit the Controversy. This challenge though offered him before p.
52. 53. and p. 68. yet he here first accepts, not for the Laurell's sake, he
remitts that to S. W. but upon so tempting an hope as to be at an end of
Controversy, which I dare say he repents he ever meddled with; yet was he very
hasty to begin with Controversies voluntarily and unprovoked; and now when he
sees himself answered and unable to reply, the moderate man grows weary and
wishes himself at an end of them, as if he thought himself, when he begun
first, so great a Goliath that there could not be found in the whole Army of the
Church a sling and a stone to hit him in the fore head.

Ere I come to lay open how he acquits himself of this accepted challenge, I
desire the Reader to consider, first, the import of it; which is to exact only
of him to show one exclusive word expressed in order to S. Peter's Jurisdiction
in any one of those many testimonies he produced for that end. Secondly, let
him heartily observe what infinite disadvantage I offer my self, and what an
incomparable advantage I offer my adversary in such an unparalleld proffer and
condescension; one restrictive word for the restrictive point now in question
between us, makes him and undoes me. Thirdly, let him remember how Dr. H.
called those proofs Evidences for that restrictive point, the whole
Controversy being about the limitation or illimitation of Jurisdiction; and
the total scope of that first half of c. 4. to limit S. Peter's to the Jews
only. Fourthly, hence follows that it is mainly important and most absolutely
necessary that Dr. H. should now lay hold of this fair occasion to lay the Axe
to the root of Rome, as he expressed his intent Answ. p. 11. Fifthly, the
conditions of the victory are the most facil that can be imagined; for, what
easier than to show one exclusive particle, as only, solely, alone, or some
such like, expressed in any testimony if any such thing were there. Sixthly, it
is to be observed that he has accepted of the challenge, and so stands engaged
to show some such word expressed in some testimony. Seventhly he is allured to do
it by the tempting hope to be at an end of Controversy, as himself confesses.
And lastly, unles he come of well from so condescending, and so easy a
challenge already accepted of, that is, unles he show some such exclusive
particle expressed in some testimony he cannot avoid manifesting himself the most
shameful writer that ever handled pen, the most pernicious ruiner of Souls
that ever treated controversy, the most insincereconscienc'd man that ever
pretended to the name of a Christian, if in treating a question about Schism in
which is interessed men's eternal salvation and damnation, as himself proves
amply of Schism c. 1. and the most fundamental point thereof, as himself
likewise confesses this to be, which concerns S. Peter's universal
Jurisdiction ( Answ. p. 74) he cannot produce nor pick out one express word
to that purpose from that whole army of his testimonies which he called
Evidences, but from his own words only; So that all the motives imaginable
conspire to ma^e Dr. H. as good as his word, the hazard of his Reader's
eternal damnation; the care of his own conscience, and of his own credit;
the hope to be at an end of Controversy, (none of the least to him as he is
caught in these present circumstances) promise of victory, the extreme
moderation and facility of the understanding, and lastly his own acceptance
here of the challenge.

By this time I know the Reader expects that Dr. should come thundering out
with a whole volly of testimonies, showing in each of them plain words
expressing his tenet, at least that he should produce some one express
particle, limitting S. Peter's Authority without the help of his scruing
deductions, as he promised his challenger; But, he, never so much as attempts
what he late pretended; that is, he attempts not to show any express word in
any testimony, but instead there of prevaricates to his old shuffling tricks,
huddles together three testimonies, and fancies a shadow like allusion from one
to the other, and thence adventures to infer a conclusion. What is this to our
question or my challenge, it debarred his scruing deductions, and required some
one express restrictive word; he linkes three citations together to make a
slight gloss, which no one alone could do, and then deduces and concludes,
which was interdicted by his self-accepted challe^ge. What need three
testimonies, strung together, to show one restrictive word? or, what relation
has the pointing out to us such a word to the inferring a conclusion from
three testimonies? I desired and he promised me some one word which was express,
that is, which needed no conclusion at all; he puts me of with a conclusion
only which intimates there was never an express word. His deductions are his,
the words are the testimonies; I never challenged him that he could not deduce
the most ivicy conclusion, from the most flinty testimony, as he did the best
in all his book of Schism from the bare monosyllable come; My challenge was
that his deductions were loud, his testimonies quite dumb, without one
express word in them to his purpose. This word which would have saved and
gained Dr. H. so much credit and Ease I desired should be shown me; But since
he is silent in pronouncing it, he gives it for granted that he could produce
none; and so the Reader and I know what to think of him, whose self-conciet
dares hazard his Reader's Salvation upon his own bare unauthorized sayings,
and altogether unwarrantable imaginations.

Now, as for his three testimonies themselves, they are the former old ones
already answered over and over; towit, that from Gal. 2. of the imagined
agreement for exclusive Provinces, that of Epiphanius saying that the two
Apostles were Bishops in Rome, and that of the Arch heretic Pelagius,
concerning the holding a part the Jewish and Gentile Churches. The first he can
make nothing of without an Ellipsis, which he makes up himself. Our bargain was
that he should show me some exclusive word, expressed in any one of his citations
for his exclusive tenet, and the first of the three long letterd testimonies
which by being put together were to spell this one exclusive word, is imperfect
without something understood, that is, notexprest. Good! The whole force of the
second from Epiphanius lies in this word Bishops, which yet affirms S. Peter
and S. Paul to have been at Rome; which word is so far from being of an
exclusive signification, that it is common and inclusive of both. Yet* he tells
us here that it is express; and makes it more ample by reciting it thus, that
in Rome Peter and Paul were the same persons, both Apostles and Bishops. What
force he puts in the [ same persons] none but himself can imagine, since none
ever dreamed that Epiphanius spoke of two different Peter's and Paul's whom he
called Bishops, from those he called in the same line and with in the same
comma, Apostles* And, as for his last testimony it is borrowed, from the
Arch-heretick Pelagius as has been shown heretofore, Sect. 7. Moreover grant
that the Congregations of Jews and Gentiles were for a while during the heat of
the Scandal held a part at Antioch, and some other places, yet this
Arch-heretick's testimony expresses not it was so at Rome when the Apostles met
there, which was some years after that fit of Jewish zeal at Antioch; and the
vehemence of the Scandal, by the Apostles prudence, went on mitigating every
day; So as this unauthentick testimony borrowed from the wicked Pelagius, has
not one express word of exclusion even of the Jewish caetus at Rome, much
less of the Apostles were exclusively over those two caetusses (as he terms
them) nor has Dr. H. any reason to think that all the Jews of the dispersion
were thus zealous, since we may gather easily (Act. 13. 42.) that both Jews and
Gentiles were together when S. Paul preached at the Synagogue at Antioch in
Pisidia, and most expressly Act. 14. v. 1. 19. we read that in Iconium, Paul
and Barnabas went both together into the Synagogue of the Jews and so spoke
that a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Gentiles believed
Which, besides that it shows plainly the Jews there thought it not against
Moses his law to avoid the conversation of a Gentile, so it manifests likewise
that they were in a disposition rather to admit converted Gentiles than
unconverted (which yet we see here they did) since the unconverted denied nay
laughed at Moses his law and Christ to boot, which the converted did not; which
shows that though he may have some lame pretense that the Jews at Antioch were
too nice, yet he has none at all, no not so much as a word, that this
fastidious zeal was epidemicall, or that it was so at Rome; Nor does this
testimony from Pelagius express this at all either in circumstances of time or
place; and this express place of Scripture with it is fellows are main
prejudices against it. Yet Dr. H. vaunts his undaunted valor, that from these
three testimonies he shall adventure to infer the conclusion that S. Peter's
Jurisdiction was restrained to the Jews only and exclusively to the Gentiles.
And, I question not but Dr. H. is a very bold adventurer, and is not a fraid to
infer the most absurd and remote positions that ever were dreamed of, out of
the most unconcerning and dumb testimonies all over his hook.

But, it seems that even this Conclusion of his which he deduces out of
testimonies instead of showing me one express word in them, is not of it self
evidently consequent neither, but needs still further proofs and reasons to
support it, which he puts thus ( Answ. p. 51.) For how could there be two
Bishops in one City, (a thing quite contrary to all Rule and practice as soon
as the division betwixt Jews and Gentiles was taken away) unles there were two
such distinct caetus. I answer, he neither has nor can show that the Sitting
of two in one City then sprung from such a division of the Jewish and Gentile
caetus: And, if by practice, he means common practice, it is granted; but if he
means it was never practiced upon occasion, as his words [ contrary to all
practice] intimate, then I suppose one instance will suffice to destroy his
universal position to wit that three paires of Bishops Meletius and Paulinus,
Paulinus and Flauianus, Flauianus and Euagrius, sat successively two together
Bishops of Antioch. Now what occasion there was for this in the Apostles days
shall quickly be shown. It follows, in proof of the one
expresse-worded-Conclusion, If there were two such caetus, then they that were
of one caetus under one Bishops, were not of the other caetus under the other
Bishop. I answer, it is evident by the light of nature that one is not another,
and needed no proofs; yet, to show his Skill, he gives it a double one. First,
because the caetus were kept a part and impermixt. So indeed said the
Arch-heretick Pelagius cited by Dr. H. so often, and relied on so firmly for the
only prop of his cause as to this point; for he can never make his
unconnected ends of testimonies meet but by the mediation of this. Secondly,
because no Bishop was to meddle in another man's Province. Which, till the
Testimony from Pelagius be made authentic, touches not us; for till then it
is not proved these two Apostles had such distinct Provinces. He proceeds: And
if it be pretended that it is true in coordinate Episcopaties, but holds not
betwixt a Bishop and his Primate (this is the first time he has yet seemed
even to come near the question) then the former arguments return again, that
showed from Scriptures and Antiquity that S. Paul was independent from S.
Peter, and that S. Paul had the Primatu^ Prmacy among the Gentiles as Peter
among the Jews. I reply, that my answer are full as nimble as his arguments,
and return as fast as they; telling the first of them that he haht not produced
a word either from Scripture or Antiquity showing that the power given to S.
Paul was not dependent on S. Peter, which was the thing in question though
indeed in what concerns not the question, towit, that the actual giving the
power depended not on S. Peter, but was done immediately by Christ, the
Scripture, is express and plain. As for his second argument it is a flat
falsification, the words (are S. Ambrose's (which he here omits to tell us)
which as cited by himself, Answer p. 39. in the margent. Say that Peter,
Primatum acceperat ad fundandam Ecclesiam, had received the Primacy to found
the Church; which word Church, he makes here to be the Jews only as
contradinguish't from Gentiles, though by the force of the very phrase it
signify the whole Church of Christ made up of both Jews and Gentiles, and so is
expressly contrary to him, and definitive for our tenet as is shown heretofore,
Sect. 7. His last Stop-da^ger is, that, though it may be that S. Peter did
convert some other such as Cornelius (that is, other Jews) yet this is not
argumentative for S. W. being nothing to the matter of Jurisdiction, and
withal but a whimpering (may be) in his language. Where first he is resolved
to pursve his so often affected mistakes that I am to argue and prove, who (he
knows well) undertook to Answer him, and show that his arguments and
testimonies prove nothing. Nor did I tell him that a Maybe may not serve, or is
not proper for an Answer: my words are plain Schism Disarm. p. 20. that he
ought not bring May bees for proofs. For how can a proof conclude evidently
unles the inference be necessary? or how can the inference be necessary, unles
the Conclusion must be so! and, who sees not that a May-be otherwise does, out
of the force of the terms, destroy a must be so. Wherefore, as, if I were to
argue for the ground of my faith, I should hold my self obliged to leave no
room for a possibility to the contrary, so I am sure I cannot wrong mine
Adversary in expecting the same measure from him: If then Dr. H. whose turn it
is to dispute here (since he produces testimonies and proofs, which he calls
Evidences) will conclude any thing necessarily, his testimonies ought to infer
that the matter, pretended to be proved thence must be, that is, the contrary
may not be; and then, though it be not augme^tative for S. W. whose task it is
not to argue; yet it is sufficiently responsive for him to show that the
contrary may be. And this is all can be exacted of me or any other defendant in
rigor of Logical disputation. If I have done more in most places than I was
obliged, and shown that the contrary not only may be, but is, and very many
times that it must be; and so have wronged perhaps my self in taking more pains
with such a trifler then needs; I hope I have not been injurious to my cause by
showing my self a too zealous though perhaps in some circumstances an
unseasonable Patron of it in over acting the part of a Respondent or Answerer.

Now that conversion, (as Dr. H. says) is nothing to the matter of
Jurisdiction (though it concerns not me at present to define one way or other,
yet) as coming from Dr. H. it is the most unbeseeming and self-contradicting
position, co^futing at once almost all his third Chapter, the most substantial
part of his book; which Chapter though concerning Jurisdiction (as indeed the
whole question is) yet run's almost upon nothing else but preaching and
conversion, which he tells us here is nothing to that matter. See of Schism p.
71. the foundation of all his tenet imaginary Provinces defined to be such an
Apostles proper place or assignation for the wittnessing the Resurrection and
proclaiming the faith or doctrine of Christ to the world, that is preaching or
converting, Sect p 74. Thus we know it was at Antioch where S. Peter converted
Jews, S. Paul Gentiles. You have been the Disciples of Peter and Paul. See p.
76. they founded the Church at Rome; which was done by preaching, at least it
expresses not Jurisdiction. See p. 78. S. Peter was Apostle of the
circumcision: S. Paul preached at Rome in his own hired house. p. 84. that S.
Peter's baptizing many into the faith of Christ, etc. in Britany must be
extended no farther then his line as he is Apostles of the Jews. So that, there
he argued from preaching or Conv^rsion, to Jurisdiction, which he says here is
nothing to it; And the words he there intermingled, expressing more
particularly Jurisdiction, as ruling, etc are his own not his Author's, except
when he speaks of a particular Bishop in his proper See, as of S. John at
Ephesus, which hinders not but the particular Bishop of another see may be
higher then he; as we see now a days that more particular Bishops are subject
to their Metropolitain; and so such a Jurisdiction is nothing to our question,
unles he first evidence it is equality with the pretended highest.

Sect. 20.
How the Apostles in likelihood of ^^ason behaved themselves when two of them
met in the same city. Dr. H's agreeable Testimony (as he calls it) shown
neither to agree with Scripture, the Author he cites to prove it, nor yet
with his own grounds.
THus much in answer to my wordish Adversary; now for the point it self of
those Apostles being both Bishops in one City, to clear that more thoroughly,
let us consider what was likely to happen out of of the nature of the thing it
self joined with the prudence of the Apostles. The Spirit confirmed twelve were
sent to preach to all Nations; when, and where, was left to God's provident
disposing of circumstances applied to their prudence. For, the task being
difficult, and they not knowing by prophetical foresight what place and time
would for the future be always most convenient (as appears by S. Paul needing
a vision of a man of Macedonia to direct him thiter and other times of a
special direction of the Holy Ghost) they were to govern themselves by that
high prudence which amongst other gifts rained down upon them in Pentecost.
Most lingered in Judea till occasional circumstances together with the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, dispersed them; some went one way, some another.
Amongst the rest (to particularize in two, and come nearer our point) S. Peter
and S. Paul, the two most efficacious Apostles, were after some years by an
especial providence directed to Rome, that Christian faith might gain a more
advantageous propagation by the influence that Head City had over the subject
world. Coming thither, and, each being sufficiently able to preach a part from
the other, it was very unfitting they should preach both together, but, that
they should accommodate themselves in such a convenient distance that the whole
City might be best summoned to Christ's Faith by the noise of these two
Apostolical Trumpets. This done, they fall to preach; the hevenly newnes of
their doctrine, the prodigiousnes of their miracles make multitudes flock to
them from all parts. In the City were Gentiles and Jews both. Nor have we any
ground to imagine that God's providence was so miraculously particular, as to
direct only Jews to S. Peter, and only Gentiles to S. Paul. Equally
promiscuously then they both came to each, according as chance, rumor,
acquaintance, or other circumstances guided them. The Apostles did not
enviously deny the knowledge of C^r^sts law to any that came, but preached it
impartially to all; equally promiscuously then they preached each of them both
to Jews and Gentiles. For it had been the hihgest imprudence to hazard the
loss of yet weak and slenderly-mou'd Souls by seeming to neglect them, and
sending them away to another; and to order their actions ere they had ownd
their wills. The converts baptized by each could not but take a very particular
ply and addictio^ to their proper Apostle and father. Let us put case then that
there should happen a scandal of the Jewish converts under each against the
Gentiles (which yet Dr. H. no where showed to have been at this place, Rome;
nor at this time in any other place,) about eating of Gentile diet; (for that
there ever was any farther quarrel between them, or that they abstained from
all Communion, is an absolute impossibility asserted only by a plain
falsification, as has been shown.) Let us consider what effects such a
scandal was likely to produce. Is it imaginable that all the multitude of the
Gentiles under S. Peter should shift sides and run to S. Paul, and all the
Iewi^h from S. Paul to S. Peter? or rather that the Apostles prudence ordered
things so, that, when in any assembly where some practice emergent out of the
favorable conciet the Jews had of Moses his law, was likely to come in play, or
any thing to the contrary, they would order them to keep a sunder to avoid the
scandal. We find plainly by the place lately cited that in other
circumstances the Jews met with perfect Gentiles in the same place both at
Antioch in Pisidia and Iconium; or, had there been such hatred between them, as
not to endure one another's sight or company (as Dr. H. wildly imagins) each
might preach and celebrate to one after the other was departed, or else in
several places; any thing is more easy to be imagined than that all of each
side should forsake their proper Apostle and more than father, to whom under
God they owed all their hopes of Heaven, or that the Apostles at their first
coming should post them from one to another, and not give them audience if they
would ask, or leave to hear Christ's law if they would learn. But, to proceed;
supposing on that each was converted by either, hence followed a particular
addiction of their converts to their respective Pastors; and, from this
addiction, a greater aptitude to be directed according to Christ's law, to be
instructed corrected, and governed by one rather than by the other, and by
consequence a greater good to the Governed; whence it was necessary that those
two Apostles, living in so great a City that it was fully capable of both their
endeavors, should continue their distinctive way until their deaths. Nor does
this oppose us at all, since not only reason grants it, but our own eyes and
evident experience attest it, that either of them may be immediate Bishops over
several particular flocks, and yet with this it may be easily consistent that
one of those may be superior in Authority to the other, as we see in a Bishop
and an Archbishop, an Archbishop and a Primate. Hence appears that the being
Bishops at Rome both at once, which proof the Dr. most relies upon, as that
whose force it is not possible to divert, neither concludes the one was over
Jews only, the other over Gentiles, for which he produced it; nor yet that
one of them was not Superior to the other. But to return to my Aduersary's
Answer.

Another agreeable testimony of Dr. H's which (as he told us heartily before)
were not proofs, that is proved nothing, is, that the Scripture affirms of S.
Paul that he preached at Rome in his own hired house receiving them that came
unto him. Act. 28. 30. which will most fitly be applied to the Gentiles of that
City, the Jews having solemnly departed from him. v. 29. Thus he, of Schism p.
78.

I replied (though such a saples trifle required none) that there was no such
word as solemnly in the testimony, upon which only he grounds. He answers here
p. 52. that he cited not the word solemnly from that verse as any part of the
sacred Text. I ask, why then did he put the word solemnly which is not found
there in the same letter with, departed, which is found there, and immediately
cite, v. 29. It was his insincere common trick I glanced at, and it is this,
that he omits the words of Scripture themselves, either confounds the two
letters promiscuously, or else puts his own and the Scriptures words equally in
the common letter, and then immediately cytes the place for it, without
intimating at all, that it is his own deduction only from that place, but, by
the whole carriage of it, gulling the unwary Reader that all is pure Scripture,
to which he subjoyns his insincere citation, relating us to a place where the
most important words are wanting.

Next, he goes about to prove the solemnity of their departure from other
verses in the same Chapter. I ask; what is this to the pretense that their
solemn departure was found v. 29. which he cited for it? I denied not the
solemnity of reprehension exp^est to the unbeleeving Jews in other verses, but
only, that there was any solemnity of departure expressed in that verse; for
read the whole place, and we find not a word of any resolution in them to come
no more, much less of any resolution in S. Paul not to preach to them,
wheresoever he found them in other places (which nevertheles was that which Dr.
H. should have showed) and indeed nothing but an ordination of God, that his
law should be preached to Gentiles. [First then, the words of solemn
reprehension, [The heart of this people is waxen gross, and their ears dull of
hearing] are impossible to be applied to the Jews which believed, as is expressed
v. 24. we have therefore no ground hence of any solemnity of departure in order
to them.

Secondly S. Chrysostom whom he cites here for this point only says as he
puts him (...), when they agreed not they departed; that is, they not believing
forsook him, where it is plain he speaks expressly of the unbeleeving not of the
believing, and yet plainer from what Dr. H. puts after wards (...), those words
of Scripture he applied to them upon their unbelief. Now, since S. Chrysostom
speaks of those to whom S. Paul applied the words of Scripture, and these are
impossible to be applied to the Jews which v. 24. believed, it is equally
impossible his words should be appliable to the believing Jews.

Thirdly, grant he had solemnly reprehended the innocent believing Jews also,
was it not possible for them to return after such a dismission, nor for S. Paul
to apply himself again to them? nay was it not possible this might have been
don even to the unbeleevers themselves? I am sure the Texts says nothing to the
contrary, for to this purpose I instanced ( Schism Disarm. p. 74.) that Act.
13. 46. both Paul and Barnabas told the Jews boldly that they would turn to the
Gentiles, and departed more solemnly, shaking of the dust of their feet, v. 51.
and yet they afterward preached many times to the Jews, as is to be seen in
the Acts. By which I only could mean that this greater vehemence and solemnity
of their departure hindered them not yet from applying themselves to the Jews
for the future: But my acute Adversary takes it as if I expected the self-same
shaking of the dust of their shoes, at Rome also; and, having given his
reasons, concludes that therefore this ceremony was not now seasonable. A very
seasonable and pertinent Answer.

Now, as for the believing Jews remaining with S. Paul he answers this with
If's and expects I should produce Evidence against them. Is not this a gallant
disputant? when his argument is shown to be weak, he under props it with a lame
If, and then tells his Adversary he must supply his turn and argue, because he
(alas) is weary, has already done his best, and can stretch no further. Yet he
grants that those Jews which believed (if they continued) became a part of S.
Paul's caetus, and allows it possible that some Gentiles might be in S.
Peter's, instancing himself in Clemens. Now, then, I would ask, if this be so,
how many Jews S. Paul might convert and govern, and how many S. Peter? some, he
says here, is no prejudice to his tenet; I would know then what be the stints
and limits of this number of heterogeneus converts, beyond which their
Jurisdiction might not pass; or, why they should be so partial as to admit
some and send away others who came to them with the same desire to hear
Christ's doctrine. Again, I would ask, what the Jewish converts under S. Paul
should do in case they hap to take a toy against the Gentiles for eating a
piece of Pork; Dr. H's grounds in this case interdicts them all Communion and
conversation; According to his doctrine, S. Peter must have two
altogether-unco^nected Churches under him, a greater one of Jews a lesser of
Gentiles; and S. Paul, on the other side, a vast Church of Gentiles and a
smaller kind of a Chapel of Jews. And thus Dr. H's former agreeable discourse,
neither agrees with any thing else nor it self neither; since, the same
difficulty occurs here as if each Apostle had preached promiscuously and
indifferently both to Jews and Gentiles; since each must be over two
Congregations if the Jews hapt to be too zealous for Moses his law, as well as
in the other case of preaching to both, which he so much strove to evade; and
^ould by no means admit.

Sect. 21.
How Dr. H. vindicates his Falsification of S. Ignatius by committing another.
His formerly called Evidences denied now by himself to be proofs for the
point; but, metamorphos'd into Branches of Accordances, seasonable
Advertissements and Fancies. The rare game in hunting a^^er his proofs, with
the issue of that sport.
SChism Disarmed p. 76. accused Dr. H of subjoyning out of his own head words
most important and expressly testifying the point in hand, to a dry testimony of
S. Ignatius. He qualifies the fault, too great to be acknowledged with what
truth shall be examined. The place it self only related that Linus was Deacon
to S. Paul Clemens to S. Peter. Dr. H. of Schism p. 78. puts it thus,
Accordingly in Ignatius Ep. ad Trall. we read of Linus and Clemens that one was
S. Paul's the other S. Peter's Deacon, both which afterward succeeded them in
the Episcopal Chair Linus being constituted Bishop of the Gentile, Clemens of
the Jewish Christians there. Where, note.

First, that there is nothing but a simple comma at the word [ Deacon] where
the testimony ends; nor any a thing like a full point of a testimony till the
words [ the Jewish Christians there.]

Secondly, there is no other distinctive note imaginable to let us know which
are testimonies, which his own words.

Thirdly all the art insincerity could imagine was used here to make no
distinction appear: as to tell us we read what followed there, and never
telling us how far we read it; to iumble the two different letters confusedly
together; and to put the words, Episcopal Chair, Bishop, Gentile, Jewish
Christians, which were not found in the testimony, in the small translating
letter, and the same with the word Deacon, which was found therein.

Fourthly, the word [ Deacons] found in the testimony, is nothing at all to our
controversy, for what is it to us that S. Peter had such a Deacon, and S Paul
such another? whereas the other words subjoined by himself are mainly important
to his point.

Lastly, this confident affirmation of his, that Linus was constituted Bishop
of the Gentile, Clemens of the Jewish Christians there, is no where else either
found, or so much as pretended to be shown, and so it could not be imagined but
that those words were part of this testimony. For who could ever think that any
man should be so shamelesly insincere as to put down such concerning
expressions under the shadow of a testimony, and yet those expressions
authorized by nothing but his own word, nor found any where but in his
self-inuented additions.

All these sleights discover plainly that there was artifice and design in the
business; and that he slily abused his Reader, by putting a testimony, which
signified nothing, for a cloak, and then adding what he pleased; hoping it
might be countenanced by the grave Authority of Ignatius, and, by such a
dexterous management, be taken for his, at least he hoped it might pass
unsuspected by his confident asserting it; or, how ever, he hoped at least that
for his last refuge he could evade by saying he meant it not for a proof, but
in agreement only, or (as he prettily calls it here) a branch of accordance;
and that is a defense good enough for him, being as good as the nothing-proving
proof was. The shadow of a buckler is the fittest to defend the shadow of a
body.

He is troubled that I expected this testimony should say any thing to S
Peter's being only over the Jews. What could I expect other? our question is
about the limitation of Jurisdiction, what serve his testimonies for, or what
do they there unles they can prove that? But he says that that conclusion was
proved out of Scripture; which is a flat falsification, since he could neither
show me one restrictive word in Scripture to that purpose, whereas his position
even now put down and pretended to be proved thence is restrictive; nor durst
he rely upon Scripture alone, when he was to find us that so much desired one
word, but was forced to piece it out with other two places from Epiphanius and
Pelagius the Archeretick, To omit that the testimony it self Gal. 2. expresses
nothing of any agreement for such an end, as ( Sect. 6.) has been amply shown.
He adds that this from Ignatius is only a branch of accordance with that. In
the name of wonder where shall we look for Dr. H's proofs? There is not one
testimony he has produced out of Antiquity as yet for this point, but he
falls from it when he should maintain it, and says it is no proof but only
spoken in agreement, or (as here i^ a quainter and gentiler phrase) a branch of
accordance, and a seasonable advertissement. Come along Reader let thee and I
go hunt after Dr. H's proofs for this point from the first starting it; To
trace it step by step, we begin with of Schism, c. 4 par. 4. where he says
that question of S. Peter's supremacy must be managed by Evidences, and so
concluded either on the one side or the other; professing there that he began
to offer his Evidence for the Negative. Let us not despair then of these
Evidences and proofs so solemnly promis't us, but address our selves for their
quest. The fifth par. begins thus; And first it is evident by Scripture S.
Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision or Jews exclusively to the
Uncircumcision or Gentiles. Here we se the point to be evidenced, and from
Scripture. Now in this par. (which has such a fair promising beginning) there
are two places of Scripture, the famous (...) and (...), both which he denies
to be Evidences Answ. p. 38. But to proceed: The 6. par. begins with an If,
proceeds with a parenthesis, agreeable only as he there expresses it; and so,
according to him, no proof. The rest are his own words only till we come at S.
James, and the proofs following till we come to the end of the par. are not in
order to the main point, but only to prove that James at Jerusalem was
considered as a Bishop (which was out of question between us) as himself
declares his own meaning Answ. p. 43. l. 27. The rest of that as also the next
parag. proceeds with Accordingly, p. 74. l. 4. and again, Accordingly ibid.
lin. 20. According p 75. lin. 22. which show that all these were not proofs,
but things spoken in agreement, or branches of accordance only. Five
testimonies follow par. 9. in order to those two Apostles planting the Church
at Rome; which he expressly denies to be proofs of this our point Answ p. 49. l.
32. 33. and says they are spoken in agreement only, as also the next three
which are found in the beginning of the tenth, though one of them be here
called an Irrefragable Evidence. But let us pursve our game. These testimonies
over past, the next from Scripture are introduc't with Agreeable, and so are
meant to be in agreement only and no proofs. The 11th par. begins with
Accordingly again, which leads in the late-ill-treated testimony from Ignatius,
denied here Answ. p. 53. to be a proof for the pretended point, and expressed to
be only a branch of accordance lin. 26. The rest of the 11th par. is his own
Scho^ion only, and pretends no proof. The two next paragraphs are nothing but
his own words relating to the former only accordant no proofs; and so being
merely corollary accordances or thin deductions from the other, can have no
more force then their aerie Parents. And if we look narrowly into them we shall
find the whole strength of the one consists in the words [ by all which it
appears] to wit, by his branches of accordance, which, he confe^es, bear no
fruit of proof: of the other in ( It (...) manifest.) The 14. and 15. par. are
employed in showing S. John over the Jews also, and not S. Peter over the Jews
only, and that Timothy was over Gentiles, but not a word that he was over
Gentiles only there found. In the 16 par. he huddles together a company of his
own dema^ds; which, I conceive, are not things like proofs. Though I confess
toward the middle of it he has a most pregnant proof, and enough to make his
honest Protestant Reader as glad as if he had found an Hare sitting; but, when
Schism Disarmed brought him nearer it, it proved to be nothing but a brown
clodd. It was his most ample and most importantly-expressive
Scripture-testimony from the bare monosyllable Come. The 17. par. has no
pretense of proofs; Nor yet his 18th, but is totally built upon his own words,
[ The same may certainly be said] and [ I^ must in all reason be extended no
farther] etc. The 19th begins with his own suppositiou; and is prosecuted with
the old Accordingly, which halesin by the arm another branch of accordance
from S. Prosper, which ends all that particular Controversy; the next par. that
is the 20th beginning a new business; that is, the donation of the Keys. All the
testimonies then hitherto related are accordances only, now what an Accordance
or a thing in agreement means is best known from himself, Answ. p. 49. l. 32.)
that they are not proofs of the thing they agree to; that is, have no influence
to conclude or infer it to be so, whence follows that the said testimonies are
in themselves indifferent to the main point, and only appliable to it; the
sleightest manner of arguing that ever was argued by any man for such an
important point, whose Soul a security in his Schism has not made sleepy.

But, let us see to what these indifferent and nothing-proving accordances
relate and agree to; that is, let us see what is his only proof for his main
point. He intimates to us Answ. p. 53. l. 21. 24. and p. 49. l. 28. that of
Gal. 2. To it then let us go, as being his only proof he stands to for this
point, which therefore we have purposely reserved till the last. We find it in
the beginning of parag. 7. of Schism, slightly touched at thus. So again for
the Vncirc^mcision or Gentile Christians they were not S. Peter's Province, but
pec^liarly S. Paul's, by S. Peter's own confession and acknowledgment Gal. 2.
7. Expect Reader that this only proof of Dr. H's shall come of well and be
express for the point in question, how ever his branches of accordances have
sped.

To do him right I will put down this 7th v. as I find it in their own
translation; But contrariwise when they saw that the Gospel of the
Uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was
unto Peter. Where (and the same may be said of the following verses) first,
there is nothing at all expressing Jurisdiction which is our question, but
only of preaching the Gospel to them, that is of converting them; which
himself acknowledged to be nothing to the matter of Jurisdiction. Answ. p. 51.
l. 25. 26. Secondly, there is nothing there expressed of any exclusive power of
preaching to Jews only, as he expressly pretended Answ. p. 53. l. 22. from
these or else the following verses. Thirdly, this particular Commission has
already ( Sect. 6.) been shown from the following verse to be nothing but God's
more efficacious assistance. Fourthly, here is not the least news of S. Peter's
own confession and acknowledgment of any thing, as he in his only proof in big
terms pretends and quotes for it immediately Gal. 2. 7. unles he contend that
the words ( they saw) signify they confessed and acknowledged; and so make
seeing and saying to be all one; which is nothing with him; fifthly, if he
pretend this is not the place or verse of the Gal. which he relies on, I answer
I neither find this corrected in the Errata, not v. 9. (which in his Answer he
recurrs to chiefly) quoted at all in his book of Schism c. 4. for this point,
but only for S. I^mes his being named before S. Peter p. 72. l. 10. And
besides, the same exceptions of insufficiency now made against this, are
equally made against the other. Sixthly, his According^ies begin to come in
play p 74. l. 4. a little after his citation of this verse, which manifests this
to have been the place pretended for his only proof, to which the rest
accorded. Lastly, this being then his solely-reliedon proof, after what a
strange manner he manages it? one would think that he should have put down the
words, and either have showed them express; or else, if they were not, make
his deductions from them: what does this acute-sincere man; he omits wholly the
words; gravely and slightly touches the false sense he has given, them; puts
down his own tenet, subjoins to it the words [S. Peter's own confession and
acknowledgment] pretends them to be Scripture; and immediately cites the place,
where no such words were found. Was ever such a weak Soul put into a body; and
yet this is the man cried up for the best of the Protestant Controvertists.

Thus ends the slender-sented pursuit of Dr. H's proofs for this main
fundamental point of his, that S. Peter was not over the Gentiles. The result
of which is, that all the Testimonies he alleged for it are no proofs but
dwindling accordances only; and his only proof Gal. 2. both impertinent and
falsified. So rotten are all Dr. H's branches of accordances and also the
saples tree it self, whence those soon-blasted Imps Sprouted.

But, besides the Gentile expression of branch of accordance, he has here
Answ. p. 53. two other pretty expressions of this testimony, concerning Linus
and Clemens being S. Peter's and S. Paul's Deacons; the one, that it is a
seasonable advertissement; the other, that it is a phansy (as he writes it) And
says that he who likes not the phansy should have directed his Reader to some
other solid way to reconcile those repugnants of story concerning Linus and
Clemens. As if it were so necessary a thing that all repugnances in Story
should be reconciled, or that the repugnant sides must necessarily both be
true; Wherefore, let him but first evidence that either part of that never-as
yet-reconcil'd repugnance is certainly true, and I will undertake to reconcile
them better then Dr. H. has done in making one over Jews the other over
Gen^iles only. Although, if one side or both be false, I must confess it
beyond my skill to reconcile truths with falsehoods, or falsehoods with one
another. Moreover, Schism Disarm. p. 77. directed him expressly to some other
ways how the fathers went about to reconcile that repugnance; which he instead
of confuting or so much as acknowledging I did, objects here that I should
direct him to some other solid way* and truly, I shall ever account the ancient
fathers more solidly able to reconcile repugnances in Story near their days
(were they reconcilable (then such a weak judgment, as Mr. H's so long after.

Sect. 22.
Dr. H. affected ignorance of the Popes Authority which he impugns, framing
his Objections against an immediate Governor, not a mediate or Svperiour. His
pretended infallibility in proving S. John higher in dignity of place than S.
Peter. His special gift also in explicating Parables, and placing the sa^nts
in Abraham's bosom.
Dr. H. of Schism c. 4. par. 13. affirmed that for another great part of the
Christian world It is manifest that S. Peter had never to do, either mediately
or immediately, in the planting or governing of it, and instanced in Asia
pretended to be only under S. John. I answered ( Schism Disarm. p. 78.) that
he brought nothing to prove his own It is manifest. He replies here ( Answ. p.
54.) that this is manifestly evinced by the testimonies annexed p. 14. and upon
this calls me an Artificer, that he is now grown into some acquaintance with
me, and yet (virtue is grown necessity with him) he must not take it amiss;
nor shall he truly if I can give him any just satisfaction. I desire to gain
and keep every man's good will, though I will not court it by the least
compliance nor kindness to the detriment of Truth.

Bear in memory Reader this positiuely absolute t^^sts of his, that S. Peter
had nothing to do either mediately or immediately, etc. And if thou find any
word in any testimony produced by him, expressing this ample position, or that
S. Peter had nothing to do in governing them mediately (which is the question)
save only that he governed them not immediately (which is nothing to our
question) then I give thee leave to account me an Artificer or what thou will:
but if thou find not a word to that purpose, do thy self the right as to
think Dr. H. is a most notorious deluder, and beware of him as such.

I shall put down all his testimonies as largely as himself did in the 14. par.
to which he refers me. The first is from Clemens Alexandrinus, (...) where
appointing Bishops; The second and third are from Eusebius, (...), where
obtaining some one part, or lot. (...), he administered the Churches there.
Now, in these three testimonies we find only that S. John appointed Bishops
in Asia, which we grant that each Apostle might do where ever he came over all
the world; that he obtained one certain lot or Bishopric, to wit that of
Ephesus, which signifies no more but that he was a particular Governor there;
that he administered the Churches there; all which is competent to every
Metropolitan in God's Church, whom yet we see daily with our eyes to be under
an higher Ecclesiastical Governor, and consequently his Churches under him
are under the same Governor mediately, although immediately under the inferior
only. His fourth testimony is a flat and wilful falsification; It Is taken
from S. Prosper, and put down by him thus, Ioannes apud Ephesum Ecclesiam
sacrauit, John at Ephesus consecrated a Church. Whereas the place it self is
Gentium Ecclesiam sacrauit, consecrated the Church of the Gentiles. Now because
all over this par. it is Dr. H's pretense that S. John was at Ephesus over Jews
only, and the word Gentium would by no means be won to signify that, nor yet
would the word [ Nations] (as he rendered it before) any way serve to signify
only Jews, he prudently maimed the testimony, and left out the malignant word
Gentium, because it could by no art be brought to favor, but utterly defied
and contradicted his party. A politic Divine! yet as long as this rare crafts
man in the art of falsifying can but call S. W. an Artificer all is well, and
the good women will believe him.

The testimonies for Timothy under S. Paul being over the Gentiles in Asia, are
of the same strain or worse; the first of which expresses no more but, that he
undertook the care of the Metropolis of Ephesus, that is, was particular
Metropolitan of that place. The second affirms at large that (...), etc. An
whole entire Nation, that of Asia, was entrusted to him. Now S. W. imagining
that an whole entire Nation could not signify Gentiles only, or a part of that
Nation, called it an unpardonable blindness to allege this testimony for a
tenet quite contrary to what it expressed; But I am suddenly struck blind my self
and caught that disease only by seeing Dr. H's blindness. And first, I am blind
for not seeing that the testimony related to Timothy and not to S. Paul;
whereas himself promising us in the end of his 13. par. to insist on S. John
and S. Paul, and after he had treated of S. John in the 14th using these very
words in the 15. throughout all the Lydian Asia the faith was planted by S.
Paul among the Gentile part and by him Timothy constituted Bishop there; and
then immediately introducing his testimony with so says Chrysostom, he must
be blind who could think this testimony was not meant of S. Paul. Add that the
testimony it self speaks not of constituting a Bishop, and so gave me no
occasion to imagine it related to Timothy's being thus constituted; and besides,
the words ( throughout all Asia) which he joins there with S. Paul, were
fittest to be related to (...) in the testimony. Nor, can it be pretended to
have been an affected oversight; since I gain not the least advantage by it, it
being equally strong for Dr. H's weak argument whether Timothy or S. Paul were
only over Gentiles there, for which it was produced. My second blindness is
that I could not see the obvious Answer, which is that S. Chrysostom puts it
only in opposition to the word (...), precedent; the testimony being) as he
afterward puts it) that Timothy was entrusted with (...), a Church, (...), or
rather an entire Nation. Now in the book of Schism he omitted himself the word
(...), and the former part of the testimony, and then tells me it is obvious it
was put in opposition to (...), and so I am become blind for not seeing that
which was not at all there, but left out by himself. Gramercy good Dr. When he
says that (...) is not set to denote all the several sorts of caetus in Asia;
I ask, do^s it exclude any, or is it set in opposition to the Jews? if not, how
can it possibly signify the Gentile part only, for which he produced it? my
blindness then, Reader, consists in this that I would not renounce the most
common light of nature, and think that an whole and a part is the same; nor
consent to believe that the words ( an whole entire Nation) signify one sort
of people living there or part of that Nation only.

In order to these late testimonies it is to be observed, first, that our tenet
makes the Pope over the whole Church in this sense (not that he governs each
particular Church immediately but) that he is chief in Authority and over those
inferior Bishops, Metropolitans, etc. who are the immediate Governors of those
particular Churches, and so he becomes mediately in this sense over all
Churches, or the whole Church.

Secondly our parallel tenet of S. Peter is not that when he was Apostle he
could preach in more places then another, but that he had an higher Authority
then the other, each of which could preach in any or all places of the world*
and that when he was fixed Bishop, he had an influence of Authority over any
other Apostles when they were fixed Bishops in other places, not that he was
immediate Bishop or Metropolitan of their particular Bishoprics.

Thirdly, hence is evident that the proofs which can prejudice this point must
signify that those particular Apostles, Metropolitans, or Bishops, had none
superior to themselves, and by consequence who were mediate^y over their
Churches, and that it avails nothing at all nor comes to the point to prove
that such and such were over such and such particular Jurisdictions
immediately: no more than if some writer 500. years hence should argue that the
Pope was not in the year 1650. Supreme Governor in our Church, because he
finds at that time such a one Primate in France, and another Archbishop of
Toledo in Spain.

Fourthly, it is no less evident that Dr. H's pretense that it is manifest
that S. Peter had nothing to do either mediately or immediately in governing
the Churches of Asia, from the former testimonies which expressed only that
those Churches, or that country were under those Apostles or Bishops, without a
Syllable signifying that those Apostles themselves were not under an higher
Apostle, and so their Churches mediately subject to him; it is evident, I say,
that he has not produced a word to prove his position except his own, It is
manifest; and consequently it was no artificial trick, but plain downright
natural Truth to challenge him with that palpable weakness.

Fifthly, his whole process is in another respect totally impertinent and
frivolous. His fundamental intent was to limit the Jurisdictions of the
Apostles, as such; and to make them mutually-exclusive under that notion, by
giving to each proper Apostolical Provinces; and here, proceeding to make good
that his intent, he proves them limited as they were Bishops; which is a quite
different thing. For every Bishop, as such, is over his own peculiar flock and
particularized to it; where as that of an Apostle; being not a settled
Authority as the other, has not in it is own nature any ground to be constant
to such, but may be promiscuous to all. Though it was not forbidden to any
Apostle to settle himself in some particular seat, and so become a Bishop of
that place.

The result then of all the former testimonies is this, that Dr. H. avoyd's the
whole question of the mediate Government of S. Peter, which is the point his
Adversary holds, and disproves the immediate only which we never held, and,
when he has done, tells his Readers Answer p. 56. S. W. has little care to
consider that, wherein the difficulty consists; when as himself never touched
the difficulty at all.

But I had forgot the beginning of his 14. par. that S. John had the dignity of
place before all other in Christ's life time, even before S. Peter himself. Now
I went about to parallel it by the proportion an elder Brother has to a
younger, which is a precedence without Jurisdiction, and so resembles Dr. H's
dry Primacy. But the Dr. ( Answ. p. 55.) catches my similitude by one of those
feet by which it was not pretended to run, add's to it excellency of power of
his own head which was never named nor insisted on by me, and when he has done
says that it is an addition of my fertile fancy; whereas I never pretended it
as his words but my parallel; nor yet put force in the superiority of
Jurisdiction, but in that of a dry precedence only: neither meaning nor
expressing any more by highest in dignity, than himself did by dignity of place
before all others.

In his Answ. p. 54 he tells us he mentioned two things of John. 1. of Christ's
favor to him, and this (he says) is infallibly inferred from the title of
beloved Disciple. I stand not upon the thing, both because it is unconcerning
our question, and true in it self; only I am glad to see that Dr. H. is more
certain in his inferences than his Church is of her faith; since he is
confident of his infallibility in those; whereas, in this, to wit, in faith, he
only affirm's that it is not strongly probable his Church will err, Repl. p.
16. At length, Protestant Reader, thou see whether thou art to recurre for
thy infallible Rule of faith; to wit, to Dr. H^s inferences. The second is S.
John's dignity of place before all others, which (he says) was irrefragably
concluded from the leaning in his breast at Supper. Here again Dr. H. is
irrefragable and infallible; yet he no where reads that S. John thus leaned on
Christ's breast more then once: nor can we imagine that our Savior taught his
Disciples that complementalnes as to sit constantly in their ranks at meat,
seeing that in this very occasion, to wit, that very night, he forbid such
carriage by his own example, and that even at meat, Luke 22. v. 26. 27. L^^ him
that is gr^atest among you be as the younger, and he that is chief as he that
does serve. For whether is greater, he that sits at meat or he that serves?
Is not he that sits at meat? But I am among you as he that serves. So far
was our Savior from giving occasion for over weening by any constant
partiality of placing them at table, that his express doctrine and example was
to bring them to an humle indifferency, and that in serving one another, much
more in sitting before or after another.

But, to return to Dr. H. as he is Master of ceremonies to the Apostles, and
places them at table; His doctrine is that S. Peter had a Primacy of order
only amongst the Apostles without Jurisdiction, which consequently could be
nothing but a dry complementary precedence to walk, stand, or speak first, etc.
for no greater Primacy can be imagined, nor in higher matters, if we abstract
(as he does) from Jurisdiction. Again, his doctrine is likewise that S. John at
table had the dignity of place before all others even before S. Peter himself;
so that to make his doctrine consonant, we must conceive that S. John had a
Primacy of order before S. Peter and the rest in sitting, and S. Peter had a
Primacy of order before the rest and S. John too in standing or walking A rare
doctor! It Is a wonder that he gave not Judas also a kind of Primacy before all
the Apostles in a third respect, to wit, in dipping with out Savior at the
same time in the dish; since the leaning on Christ's breast was done no after
then the dipping in the dish was, for any thing we read, both were equally
accidental, for any thing we know (for we find it no where expressed that our
Savior placed him or he himself there by design,) And in this the dipping
argues more dignity then the sitting, in that the sitting was only next our
Savior, but the dipping was at the same time: which would have grounded an
infal ible and irrefragable inference for Dr. H. that Judas had an absolute
Primacy, and have served him rarely to over throw S. Peter's, had it not hapt
that Judas was in other respects malignant, and so it was not the Drs interest
to own the argument. But Dr. H. proceeds. And accordingly it unavoydably
follous that Lazarus, being represented parabolically in Abraham's bosom, is
there described to be in the next place to the father of the faithful, and it
being certain that some one or more saints are next Abraham, I presume we may
believe Christ that Lazarus is capable of that place, all S. W. scruples have
not the least validity in them. Observe the solid Logic of this man. My
scruples or objections were Schism Disarm. p. 79. that if being in Abraham's
bosom were being in dignity of place next to the father of the faith full, it
followed that Lazarus was a bove all the Patriarchs and Prophets except
Abraham: As also, that none was in Abraham's bosom except Lazarus only, since
there could be no more Nexts but one. Instead of answering he repeats what he
had said before; only he add's fine words to amuze his Readers (whom he
supposes must be fools) as Accordingly, unavoydably, Parabolitically, it being
certain, I presume we may believe Christ, etc. gentilely, calls my objections,
scruples, and then assures the Reader they have not the least validity in them.
But, if we ask, where did Christ ever say that Lazarus was above all the
Patriarchs and Prophets except Abraham, truth would answer us that Christ never
said any such thing, but one Dr. H. who, like a more modest kind of David
George, calls his own words. Christ's, his own sayings God's word when he
lists. And as for degrees of glory, which he talks of here, I wonder what would
become of them if his doctrine should take place; for since he knows well the
Ancient fathers constantly affirm that all the former faithful were in the
bosom of Abraham, and this according to him (as being next Abraham) signifies
dignity of place before all others, it follows that all the multitude of faith
full Souls had each of them the dignity of place before all others; that is,
each of them was next Abraham and highest; hemming him in (as you must
conjecture) on every side, without any more priority of order between them than
the Philosophers make between the right hand and the left in a round pillar.
And thus much at present (which is as much or more than such trifling nonsense
deserves) for Infallible, irrefragable, according, unavoydable, Parabolicall,
Christ-pretending, all-scruples invalidating Dr. H.

Sect. 23.
Dr. H's Falsification of Falsifications, and with what multitudes of
weaknesses he attempts to take up the business.
IN his book of Schism c. 4. par. 16. Dr. H. demanded very confidently of the
Romanists what could be said in any degree probably for S. Peter's universal
Pastorship over this Asia whose seven Metropoles are so early famous, being
honored with Christ's Epistle to the Revelations. Now S. W. as any ordinary
Reader would, imagined that Dr. H. put some force in these latter words to
prove the former, that S. Peter had nothing to do with them, both because these
are the only positive words in the whole paragraph all the rest being
interrogatories only, as also because I could not guess what they did there
else, unles it were to divert the Readers eye from the question by such
impertinent expressions, nor had I observed yet that Dr. H. was such a strong
reasoner, as to think a proof even contrary to his tenet much less
impertinent, unworthy his method of arguing.

He pretends to have meant nothing by those words save only that those seven
were considerable parts of the universal Church, as if Christ wrote Epistles
to Churches, not because they stood need, but because they were bigg ones. But
let them be considerable, what then: he says Answ. p. 57. there is no pretense
that S. Peter should be said (...), to feed or to govern, or so much as to have
meddled with the administration of these Churches of Asia. I answer, there is
the same pretense that he was mediate Governor of these as of any other; that
is, was over those persons who were over those Churches; and though we hold not
that he fed, governed, or administered those as their particular and immediate
Overseer, yet we make account that our Savior said thrice to S. Peter, Feed my
Sheep. John. 21. as also that the word Sheep excluded none, but included those
of Asia also: For Mr. H. I suppose, doubts not but the Christians there were
Christ's sheep as well as the rest. How this commission to S. Peter to feed
Christ's Sheep was particular to him shall be seen afterward. Part. 3. Sect. 2.

But now room for Dr. H's Falsification of Falsifications, which thunders with
so many volleys of power limitting expressions, as, were it charged with Truth,
would quite have battered down the walls of Rome. It needs no more but
repeating to show it notorius; It Is this ( of Schism p. 83.) does not S. Paul
give Timothy full instructions and such as no other Apostle could countermand
or interpose in them, leaving no other Apostle or place of application for
farther directions, save only to himself when he shall come to him, 1. Tim. 3.
14. 15. Here, Reader, thou see terms most restrictive of Jurisdiction, and so
most nay solely-important to the question; no other Apostle, could countermand,
etc. no other Appeall, no farther directions, only to himself, etc. Thou
see, I say, these; and thou see likewise the place of Scripture quoted
immediately for all these. Now, Schism Disarmed p. 81. showed from their own
translation that there was not one word of this long rabble in the place
alleged, but the bare, barren and useles monosyllable Come. Is it possible now
that any man should go about to cloak such a falsification, which evidence as
clear as eyesight had manifested in it is most shame full nakedness? nothing is
impossible to be done in Dr. H's way.

He excuses himself first Answ. p. 57. l. 9. because he thought it was
conclusible from those words, 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15. But who bad him think so, when
there was never a word in the testimony or in the whole Epistle but might have
been said by a Metropolitan to a Bishop, or a Bishop to any Priest; to wit,
that he would order things when he came, bidding him be have himself well, etc.
Again, if he intended to conclude, why did he not put some expression of that
his intent, that the Reader might not be deluded by his quoting the place
immediately after those words: This pretense therefore is most frivolous and
vain. First, because his words are positive, absolute, and, as it were,
commanding our assent from the Authority of Scripture, not expressed like an
inference or conclusion; does not S. Paul, etc. as also because they are
relations of matters of fact; and, lastly, because they who conclude from
Scripture, put the place first, and then deduce from it; whereas, he quotes the
place after his own words, as we use to do for words found really in Scripture;
wherefore, either he intended not to conclude but to gull the honest Reader
that his sole important forgeries were sure Scripture; or else, if he meant to
conclude, he very wisely put his conclusion before the premises, and such a
conclusion as had but one unconcerning and useles word common to it and the
premises.

Secondly, he tells us, that to say that he inferred the whole conclusion from
the word come is one of S. W's arts whereas I charged him not for inferring
thence, but for putting down those words for pure Scripture. Again, himself (so
good is his memory) confesses this same thing seven or eight lines before,
which he here renounces; where having mentioned the former long rabble, he told
us in express terms that he thought it was conclusible from S. Paul's words,
1. Tim. 3. 14. 15. Now then, there being not one word of this pretended
conclusion found in that place, save the monosyllable Come, nor one exclusive
particle, nor even the least ground of any, he must either infer his pretended
conclusion from that or from nothing.

Thirdly he alleges that he thought his grounds had been visible enough being
thus laid; and then proceeds to lay them. But the jest is he never laid down
any such pretended grounds at all in the book of Schism where he cited that
place, and so it was impossible they should be visible, being then, perhaps,
not so much as in their causes. And as for these pretended grounds they are
nothing but a kind of explication of that place, that S. Paul sent an whole
Epistle of Instructions, and hoped to give him farther instructions, that he
should behave himself well in his office, etc. which are all competent to any
Bishop in order to a Priest, or to any subaltern Governor in respect of an
inferior; and so hinders not but S. Paul might be under another, though thus
over Timothy.

Fourthly, as for those exclusive words, no other Apostle could countermand or
interpose in them, leaving no Appeal, no place for farther directions, only to
himself, which were objected, and so it belonged to him if he could not show
them expressed there and so clear his falsified citation, at least to show them
concluded and deduced thence, as 6. or 7. lines before he had promised us. But
he quite prevaricates even from deducing them thence when it comes to the
point, and instead of doing so and proving them from the pretended place, he
repeats again the same demands bids us prove the contrary. I now demand (says
he) whether S. Paul left any other Appeal or place for farther directions save
only to himself. I answer, does the place alleged say any thing to the
contrary, or is any such thing conclusible thence, as you pretended: If it be,
why do not you make good your own proof from the place, and show this
restrictive sense either there in express terms, or else by framing your
conclusion from it? why do you instead of thus doing your duty, stand asking me
the same question over again? He proceeds. Whether could any other Apostle by
any power given him by Christ countermand or interpose in them? what need you
ask that question? you knew long ago that our Answer would be affirmative that
S. Peter could, in case he saw it convenient for the good of God's Church; or,
what is the asking this question over again to the showing that the contrary
was either expressly or conclusively there, as you pretended. If any could, let
him be named and his power specified, says the Dr. Is not this a rare man to
counterfeit himself ignorant whom we hold for Head of the Apostles, when as
himself has from the beginning of this Chapter impugned S. Peter as held such
by us! And to carry the matter as if he delayed his proofs till he knew our
Answer, as well known to him before hand, as his own name. It follows, and let
the power be proved by virtue whereof he should thus act. I marry: now the Dr.
is secure, when all else fails he has constantly recourse hither to hide his
head. When his Argument or proof is shown to be falsify'd in the express
terms, he pretends to conclude thence; and when it is shown unable to conclude
any thing, instead of proceeding to make it good or show that co^clusible from
thence, which he promised, he leaves it of, as some impertinent questions, and
bids his Answerer take his turn and prove; because he (alas) is graveld and
cannot go a step further. This done he triumphs. But S. W. dares not, I am sure
does not affirm this. What dare not I, and do not I affirm? that S. Peter had
power over the rest of the Apoles in things concerning the good of the
universal Church. It Is my express tenet, which he is at present impugning;
and which I both do affirm and dare maintain (so prevalent is Truth) against
Dr H. though backed by forty more learned then himself. But this politic
Adversary of mine, seeing he could not argue me out of my faith, would needs
fright me or persuade me from it, threatening me first that I dare not; next,
assuring me that I do not affirm i^. This solid discourse premised, he shuts
up with an acclamation of victory thus: And, if it cannot be said (as no doubt
it cannot) then where was S. Peter's supreme Pastorship? Where all the force of
this upshot of his lies in the If, and no doubt, both of them equally addle and
frivolous, since himself and all the world knows very well that we both can and
do affirm and hold that S. Peter was Superior in Authority to all the rest of
the Apostles.

Thus Dr. Hr. toys it with his Readers, hoping that the greater part of them
will be arrant fools. First, putting down a company of expressions totally
disanulling S. Peter's Authority, and immediately quoting for them, 1. Tim. 3.
14. 15. Next, when he is challenged of falsifying, instead of showing any word
there more then the poor monosyllable Come, saying, he only meant it was
conclusible or deducible thence. And lastly, instead of concluding, proving, or
deducing that Jurisdiction limiting sense from those words, which at least was
necessary, only saying the same words over again, asking some questions to
which he knew the answer long ago, bidding his Answerer supply his turn and
prove, telling us we dare not and do not affirm what his own knowledge and what
his own eyes assure him we both dare and do in this very present Controversy,
and then concluding all with an If built upon the former, and no doubt bred in
his own head and grounded upon his own fancy. Is such an Adversary worth the
loss of an hour's time to confute! were it not that the Authority he has got
by a sleightly-connected Sermon, enabling him to do some mischief amongst the
more vulgar, made it necessary to lay him open plainly and to show how unsafe
it is for them to let their Salvations rely in the least upon so incomparably
weak a Controvertist.

THIRD PART.
Containing a Refute of Dr. H's second fundamental Exception against the
Pope's Authority, from the pretended equal donation of the Keys to S. Peter.
Sect. 1.
How Dr. H's Shuflingly avoids either to acknowledge or d^sacknowledge the
notion of an Evidence given. What he means by his Evidences; and what is to be
expected from Catholics in manag^ng a Wit-controversy concerning Scripture.
His weak attempt to clear himself of Prevarication, Injuriousnes and Calumny
objected.
MY 13. Section in Schism Disarmed begun with putting down the true notion of
an Evidence; having already shown p. 17. that nothing but a perfect certainty
sprung from such rigorous and convincing proofs could rationally oblige the
understanding to assent; and that all assents, sprung from that, were
originiz'd from passion. Whence follows that the first Protestants could no way
rationally relinquish the Authority and Government of the former Church they
were bred in, and conclude in their thoughts that her Doctrine was false, her
Government an usurpation, unles moved by the said light of evident and
demonstrative Reasons; that is, unles they had grounds sufficient in their own
nature to convince them that it was so, and could not but be so. For, surely,
even in common prudence it had been the most rash action imaginable to hazard
the most greeveus sin of Schism, and consequently an eternity of misery to
their Souls upon probability only.

How great a favor Dr. H. had done himself, (who, though he begun first to
write,) yet now Answ. p. 50. l. 32. expresses a great desire to be at an end
of Controversy; and how great a kindness he had conferred on S. W to have
answered positively to these two points I or no, to wit whether less then such
a rigorous Evidence could justify the renouncing an Authority and possession so
qualified, and whether his pretended Evidences, I or no, were such, I need not
much declare. The whole controversy depends upon these two hinges and will
quickly find a decisive conclusion, if these points were positively answered
to, and vigorously pursued. Now, my notion of a Testimony Evidence (Schism
Disarm. p. 88.) was this, that the testimony it self must be authentic beyond
dispute; and the words alleged so directly expressing the thing to be proved
that they need no additions or explications to bring them home to the matter,
but are of themselves full, ample, and clear, and such as the Alledger himself,
were he to express his thoughts in the present Controversy would make choice
of to use. Whether he likes this definition of a Testimony Evidence or no, he
is resolved we shall not know. He dares not be negative or say he dislikes it,
because, what ever testimony falls short of this, falls short likewise of
proving that the thing must be; and so, concludes only that it may be; which
being too weak a ground in the judgment of every prudent Conscientious man to
hazard his Soul upon, as he must if he begin to Schismatize upon no better
Grounds, he saw it could turn to his disgrace if he denied the notion given, or
pretended that less Evidence would serve in a Controversy about Schism: nor
durst he be affirmative or approve of it, because he saw he had not produced
one testimony in his whole book worth a straw, if it were brought to that Test,
nor worthy to bestyled an Evidence.

Wherefore being in this perplexity, and (as the proverb is) holding a Wolf by
the ears, he recurs to his old Prevarications, and instead of approving or
disapproving of my Description of an Evidence, tells me ( Answ. p. 58.) what he
meant by his own Evidences; to wit, that he takes Evidence in the familiar
vulgar notion for a testimony to prove any Question of Fact, either in the
Affirmation or the nagative. But what kind of Testimonies these must be which
can serve in such a concerning discourse, whether such as I described
heretofore, manifesting that the thing must be, or not be; or probable ones,
inferring only that his Affirmative or Negative may be; or whether these
Testimonies need be proofs at all, but branches of accordance only, or spoken
in agreement (as almost all the Testimonies he has hitherto produced were) he
defines nothing. By his carriage in his book of Schism he seems to mean these
latter only; nor do his words here exact more then only a testimony, not
expressing any thing at all concerning the quality of this testimony, whether
the Authority of it must be valid, or invalid; clear, or obscure; express or
dumb; entire, or maimed with an Ellipsis; originally proving, o^ agreeable
only; set down right, or corrupted and falsified; an Orthodox Fathers or an
Arch-Heretick's; all is one with Dr. H. still that testimony is one of his
Vulgarly-Styl'd Evidences; and so, vulgar and half-witted Souls will rely upon
them in a Controversy importing no less then their eternal Salvation.

In the same place of Schism Disarmed Dr. H. was charged with prevaricating
from his pretended promise, instead of bringing Evidence of his own, solving
our pretended ones; and that this was to sustain a different part in the
dispute he first undertook; to wit, the part of the Defendant, for so we used
ever to style him who solved objections. He answers, that the one possible way
to testify any negative is to take a view of the places the Affirmers pretend,
and to show that those places have no such force in them. Observe these canting
words [ the one possible way] so handsomely preparing for an evasion, which
though more likely to signify the only possible way (as Vnus is often taken
for Solus in Latin) yet he has a gloss in readiness to say he meant'
otherwise. But, because he puts not down the other possible way, corresponding
to the one, we shall take it as it must in all honestly-meant probability
sound, and ask him whether there was ever such a strange position heard of in
the Schools that there should be no possible way to testify a Negative but by
solving the Affirmative places. Are there no Negative Testimonies in the words?
or cannot a Negative testimony testify a Negative point without necessarily
recurring to solve Affirmatives? We were taught in Logic to prove Negatives
by concluding in Celarent or Ferio, without being forced necessarily to stand
answering the arguments in Barbara and Darij for the Affirmative: whereas,
according to Dr. H's new Logic, the only way to prove a Negative point must
be to solve the Affirmative proofs. To omit that it shall be shown presently
how the solving Affirmatives, was no one way to testify a Negative.

Again, he was shown by Schism Disarmed that this way of arguing was rather
indeed to bring obscurity than Evidence, for all that it can pretend is this,
that the conclusion follows not out of those testimonies or premises, and
therein is terminated it is force, nor does it proceed so far as to prove or
infer that the thing in it self is untrue. Indeed, if it be known first that
the Opponent holds his tenet upon no other Grounds save only that testimony,
and that be shown plainly to be unable to conclude, he will be obliged to
relinquish his tenet so far as not to hold it any more, till he sees better
ground; yet still he is not obliged to embrace, or assent to the contrary
position, if he sees no Evidence for it; but to suspend all assent one way or
other; and to think rather that perhaps his may yet have other Grounds to prove
it true, for any thing he knows Much less is it proved at all that the
contrary is true, though all his arguments be solved till evidence be brought
for it. Wherefore, as long as this is not manifested, to wit that he has no
other tenor upon which he holds his position, the thing is much further from
being concluded, no not even ad hominem to be false; for though that medium do
not establish it, another may. But now, if it be manifest that the Adversary
builds least of all upon those places the other solves, nay nothing at all in
the manner that the other thinks they are to be managed and undertakes to solve
them, then the solving such Testimonies sinks into the miserablest, and lowest
degree of force, nay even as low as nothing.

This being our present case, observe I beseech thee prudent Reader the
infinite weakness of this Drs discoursive faculty. He first goes about to prove
our tenet false from solving 2. or 3 places of Scripture; whereas that very way
of arguing can infer no more, but that those places conclude not for it; nor
are places of Scripture arguments that we build upon at all for our faith, as
explicable by wit, in which sense he impugns them, but only as they are
explicable by universal Tradition, our Rule of faith. Since then Dr. H. not so
much as pretends to solve them according to the sense which Tradition gives
them (for he no where pretends to show that the attestation and practice of
immediate forefathers did not ever give them this sense) it is evident he has
not in this process impugned our faith at all, seeing he impugns no tenor nor
argument at all upon which we build, or hold our faith Indeed, our Drs
undertake sometimes to argue ad hominem against them and abstracting from our
Rule of faith, universal Tradition, fall to interpret Scripture with them
proceeding upon other Grounds, to wit, upon private skill and learning, to show
our advantage over them in their own, and to them the only way. If then Mr. H.
pretended only to try his wit with our Doctors in this place; then (were his
way of procedure by solving Testimonies allowable in reason) I should approve
of his intention, so he expressed it; But, if he say he meant to impugn our
faith, or build his own, he can never pretend it, unles he solve, or impugn
those Grounds upon which we build our faith. Make account then, Reader, that
that which Dr. H. and I are now about is nothing at all to faith, but only an
exercise of wit and private skill; and consists in this, whether of us can make
words lest without life and stark dead to our hands, by Grammatical and
Critical quibbling move more dexterously and smartly toward the end we drive
at; and is all one as if Lawyers should consent to abstract from custom and
knowledge of Ancestors, and the books of the known laws, (as I do now from
Practice and Tradition, the sole true Foundation of faith,) and dispute out of
some pliable, or obscure passages in odd histories, and some letters written
only upon occasion, as Gildas, and some such few remnants of that time in the
Reign of the Britains, by what laws the kingdom was then governed.

Again, since we build not all upon places of Scripture as explicable by
private learning, it belongs not to us to show them evidently concluding for
us, as thus explicated; no more then it does to divines to demonstrate
mysteries of faith by reason, which depend upon another ground, to wit,
Authority. We acquit our selves well if we show that, what is there, is
consistent with our faith; as divines do, if they can show mysteries consistent
with and not contradictory to reason; and we do more then the necessity of our
cause, or reason obliges us to, if we show them rather sounding to our
advantage as thus explicable. For, how can any man be bound in reason to show
that thing sounding in his behalf, upon which neither he nor his cause relies?
whereas, it belongs to the Protestants, who rely upon Scripture explicable by
private wit for their faith, to prove evidently that it is for them, and bears
no probability against them. In the same manner, as when Catholics go about to
prove their faith from Scripture as explicable by Tradition, it belongs to them
to show that explication infallibly certain; because they rely upon it as the
Rule of their faith.

Secondly, Dr. H. was charged with a palpable iniuriousnes in making the
answering our places of Scripture the sum of his first proofs, and yet
omitting our cheifest place of all. Io. 21. 15. 16 17. Dr. H. replies ( Answ.
p. 59.) this is just as Doctor Stapleton deals with M. Calvin; I answer, it is
very likely; for I do not doubt but Dr. H. inherits his father Calvin's faults,
and so deserves the same reprehension. But, how dealt Dr. Stapleton with that
good man M. Calv^n? why he called a Text of Scripture the most important place,
because it was not mentioned, So says Mr. Calvin's friend, Dr. H if we will
believe him; but, till he proves it better then by only saying it, we shall
take liberty to think that friendship blindes. Next, he tells us he has given
some account Rep. Sect. 8. n. 10. why he had done us no injury in omitting it;
and indeed, it is only some account; for he tells us there slightly no more
than this, that first, by the very position of it: but, secondly, more by the
occasion; and yet more, Thirdly, by the matter of the words that place is
prejudged from being any more than an Exhortation to S. Peter to discharge his
duty. But, is there no particularity in order to S. Peter? An hard case, that
after thrice saing, Simon Son of Jonas love thou me? more than these? (and
there upon) feed thou my sheep, nothing should be yet spoken in order to S.
Peter in particular. The some account then, which Dr. H has rendered us in the
place related, is that he has said there three things upon his own head and
proved none of them; which (as I take it) is to give no account at all. His
answers to it in other places shall be replied to other where. Thirdly, he
assures us that his reason of omitting it was by him with perfect truth rendered
p. 93. from his full persuasion that it had so very little appearance of
Strength in it, and had been so often answered that it would not be deemed
useful to any that he should descend to it. Let us examine a little Dr. H's
perfect truth. I ask, had he reckoned all the numerous places in Controvertists
where this and other texts had been answet'd, and found that this had been far
ofter replied to? if he did not, how can he affirm it, or allege this for his
excuse? if he did) which I confess is a task very proper for his ( Genius) why
does not he show us tables of accounts how many times the one, and how many
times the other has been urged? till which time, he gives us leave to believe
that it is as incredible he has done it, as it were ridiculous to have done
it. Again, me thinks reason should tell him, that if it were oftener answered,
it was oftener urged; and that it had not been oftener urged without having some
more appearance of truth in it, then the rest, which yet the other part of his
excuse denies. If he say, that it was urged more prevalently; still, it will ly
at his door that it was more worthy his taking notice of: otherwise, to excuse
himself, he indites his fellow-Protestan'^s of plain folly in answering that
place oftener, which on the one side had very little apperance of truth in it,
and on the other side had been neither very often, nor very prevalently urged.
Fourthly, he asks if there be any farther invisible reserve in that place not
taken notice of by Mr Heart in the conference with Dr. Reynolds, I answer;
truly, I was not by; nor shall I credit a relation which their own partial
Scribes writ, and their own partial selves brag they have under the disputants
hands; it is as easy to counterfeit a hand, as to counterfeit a testimony; If
there be no such reserve, then Dr H. tells us he must remember the issue of
that conference. And what was that? That Mr Heart flew of from this text to that
of Luke 22. v 31. from which being (says he) soon beaten by evidence (This
Evidence, I conceive, was some nothing-proving branch of accordance like those
Evidences of Dr. H's) The poor Papist, if we will believe his enemies, was put
to conclude in these words. Yet, I know not how, me thinks I cannot be
persuaded but that it makes somewhat for Peter's Supremacy. Words so sillily
unlikely, that the very rehearsal of them is enough to disgrace the whole
relation, and the alledgers themselves. Nor is it less unlikely that M* Heart
should fly from this place of S. John to that of Luke 22. v. 31. to prove S.
Peter's Supremacy; where nothing is found but only this, Simon, Simon, be hold
Satan has desired to have you to sift you as wheat. I wonder now in which of
these words Dr. Reynolds his friends will pretend Mr Heart placed the most force
for S. Peter's Supremacy; whether in the ordinary and common name Simon, in
Satan, in Sifting, or in wheat. Is not this Dr. a great wit to bring such
unauthoriz'd and unlikely trifles for his excuse? yet necessity (alas) has no
law: He tells us here he must remember this wise Story; as if it were such a
necessary business to give his reader a memorandum of a thing which he can never
make good; and is in it self the most unlikely truth and the likeliest fiction
that can be imagined.

Thirdly Dr. H. was charged of manifestly calumniating the Catholics in
calling their tenet concerning the power of the Keys a peculiarity and
enclosure of S. Peter He goes about to discharge his credit and Conscience by
showing both from my words and the Catholic tenet that S. Peter had some
particular power of Keys, and says he meant only that this particular power
was a peculiarity and enclosure of S. Peter. That the Catholic tenet, and
consequently mine is that he had such a particular degree of power of the Keys
promised, and given him, I willingly gra^^ and, had Dr. H. expressed so much
there, he had not been charged with Calumny; but if he expressed no such thing
there, nay carried it so, as if we had held that no Apostles had the Keys but
S. Peter, then all the empty wordishnes in his Reply and Answer will avail
nothing to clear him from so gross a fault.

Now, my reasons why I charged him with the said Calumny are these, because of
Schism p. 86. Speaking of the Donation of the power of the Keys in an
unlimitted and universal expression, he says of himself, that this power Math.
16. 19. is promised to S. Peter; by which words consequently he must mean the
power of the Keys in common; for it is opposite to his tenet to say that any
particular degree of that power was promised that Apostle. This done he puts
down the text of Scripture, I will give unto thee the Keys, etc. and then
subjoyns these words. But to him that from hence pretends this Donative, and
consequent power as a peculiarity and enclosure of S. Peter's, these
considerations will be of force to supersede his conclusion. Now, what this
Donative and power was meant of, is sufficiently expressed before, to wit the
power of the Keys in general without any restriction or particularization.
Wherefore, it is most manifest from his own words that he would have made the
honest Reader believe our tenet was that the power of the Keys in general and
common was S. Peter's peculiarity and enclosure. Secondly, one of his
considerations to supersede our conclusion (as he calls it) were two places of
Scripture, expressing only that the Keys were given to all the Apostles in
common, but nothing at all that they were given equally to all; wherefore they
can no ways impugn the inequality of S. Peter's having such a power, but only
S. Peter's having it alone; since nothing can be imagined plainer then that the
same Notion of a thing may plurally agree to many, and yet in unequal degrees
notwithstanding, there being almost as many Instances of it, as there are
things in the world. Evident therefore it is that he impugned S. Peter's having
the power of the Keys alone, and so calumniated us in counterfeiting that to
be our tenet, and impugning it as such, unles perhaps he will say he intended
to impugn nothing at all. Thirdly, what means the word [ inclusive] Is it not
(if applied to S. Peter's having the power of the Keys (as it is by him) as
plain an expression as could be invented, to signify none had that power but S.
Peter? Manifest therefore it is that he intended to make his Reader believe
that we held such an absurd Position, and thence erected a rare Trophee of his
own Victory, by showing (as he easily might) that all the other Apostles had
that power as well as he, or in common.

But observe how neatly Dr. H. deludes his readers in going about to clear
himself of this Calumny; for instead of showing from his own words that he
signified that which we held for S. Peter's peculiarity and enclosure was
only a higher degree of that power, which had been the proper way to show him
not faulty in the said words, he prevaricates quite from that only necessary
method, and runs to show from my words and the Catholic tenet that we grant
S. Peter a more particular power of the Keys; entangling poor S. W. on all
sides p 61. and obliging him by most powerful arguments to grant that which he
believes already as a point of his faith; and, when he has done, he insults
that that particular power was S. Peter's peculiarity, and enclosure; but never
goes about to show (which only was his duty) that he applied those words
peculiarity and enclosure to that particular power of the Keys in his book of
Schism, where he was charged to have calumniated us but to the common power
only. Though the question be not whether Catholics hold that S. Peter had an
higher degree of this power, which was his enclosure, but whether Dr. H.
expressed such to be our tenet in his book of Schism, or rather pretended that
the having the very power of the Keys it self was held by us to be his
enclosure, and peculiarity, and so calumniated us in the highest degree. Thus
Dr. H. pleads his own cause, and then concludes himself secure from being like
S. W. in calumniating him with whom he came to dispute.

After this Answ. p. 62. the Dr. is mistakingly apprehensive of Sprights, and
is troubled at the two appearanrances of the same Romanist. For imposing on him
two propositions which he never said, and disgraces the said appearances by
asking the reader what trust is to be given to such disputers. But what said
the two appearances of the same Romanist? one appearance says that Dr. H.
affirms no power of the Keys was given especially to S. Peter. The other
appearance says that he confesses the Keys were especially promised to S.
Peter. He answers, the truth is, he neither said one, nor the other. One of the
appearances replies. The truth is, he said both. The first of Sch^sm p. 87. l.
2. 3. where he says expressly, that these, to wit, the Keys, or the words
importing them, are delivered in common and equally to all and every of the
eleven Apostles. Now I imagined that those words equally to all and every one
is the very same, as particularly to no one. But Dr. H. thinks otherwise. (
Answ. p. 62. l. 18 denying that he affirmed no power of the Keys was given
especially to S. Peter. And yet presently l. 21. 22. Saying that he af^^rmed
that the power was given in common, and equally to all the Apostles, which is
so perfectly the self-same with the former as the very common light of nature
teaches us, that they are both one, and that not especially, and commonly, are
perfectly equivalent. To omit that this very position: That no power of the
Keys was given especially to S. Peter, is his own main nay sole tenet, he is
defending in this place, which yet he says here, he affirms not, and complains
of my foul play in disputing, for saying he holds his own tenet. The second
position is found p. 57. l. 11. where he grants that this promise was made to
S. Peter peculiarly, and l. 21. where he says that the words importing a
promise of the Keys are applied particularly to S. Peter, Now the applying
those words is the speaking them, for they were not first spoken then afterward
applied. To S. Peter then this promise was spoken, that is, was made
particularly or especially. As for his Evasion, that the former of these two
last places is only mentioned by him as a color the Romanist makes some use
of, it has no color at all from the place where it is found, or at least such
a dim color as none but himself can discern.

Sect. 2.
A Promise of an higher degree of power and it is performance shown the Texts
Mat. 16. and John 21. connaturally and rationally explicated.
THese preparative rubs being past over, and Dr. H's three great faults of
prevaricating, Iniuriousnes, and Calumny, with which he was charged, and went
about to clear, still challenging him for their Author, next comes the point it
self, since Dr. H. will needs put us upon the part of the Opponent.

Mr. H. undertook to solve some places of Scripture which were used by our
Doctors for S. Peter's Supremacy; where upon, I was obliged to undertake two
things; first, that our Savior promised the Keys to S. Peter in particular,
and after a particular manner, that is, the manner of promising them was
particular in order to S. Peter. Secondly, that, it being worthy our Savior to
perform his promise after the manner and tenor in which he promised,
consequently he performed that promise to S. Peter after a particular manner,
that is, gave him the Keys particularly, Schism Disarmed p. 90. 91. urged the
first place Matthew. 16. v. 19. etc. which concerned the promise, And, though Dr.
H pretends in the end of this Chapter, that he attends me in this Section (...)
foot by foot, yet he gave it no such at^endance in order to answering it but
only p. 60. 61. 62. he would needs engage me thence to confess a point of my
faith that is, that S. Peter had something, or some degree of power which the
rest had not, that so he might clear himself from having calumniated our tenet.
Since then I must be forced to repeat again what I said there, I shall do it by
arguing after this sort.

These words, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.
importing a promise, were spoken to S. Peter after a particular manner,
therefore the promise was made to S Peter after a particular manner. The
consequence is evident, for the promise was made by speaking it; If then it
were spoken to S. Peter after a particularizing way, the promise was made to S.
Peter after a particular manner. The antecedent I prove thus, those words were
spoken to S. Peter after a manner not competible nor common to the rest of the
Apostles; therefore they were spoken to S. Peter after a particularizing way.
The consequence is most evident, since particular, is expressly the same with
not common or not competible to the rest. The Antecedent is proved no less
evidently from the whole Series of the Text; where we have first a particular
Blessing of S. Peter, sprung from a particular act of his, to wit, his
Confession of Christ's Divinity. Blessed art thou; his particular name, and, to
avoid all equivocation which might communicate that name* designing whose son
he was, Simon Bar-Iona: my heavenly father has revealed it unto th^e, in
particular. Next follows Christ's applying his words in particular here upon,
And I say unto thee; then alluding to his particular name given him by Christ
himself with an emphasis and energy, Thou ar^ Peter (or a Rock) and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, etc. And after all these particular designations
follows the promise in the same tenor copulatively. And I will give unto thee
(still with the same speciality) the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven. Now, hence Iargue. The
Confession of Christ to be the Son of God, the Blessing there-upon, The name
Simon Bar-Iona, The designed allusion to that name, are not competible nor
common to the rest of the Apostles; therefore, the promise-expressing words
concomitant were spoken to S. Peter in a way not common, or competible to the
rest of the Apostles. But (to return whence we came) these words are a
promise of the Keys, and their power; therefore a promise of the Keys, and
their power was made to S. Peter, after a manner not common, that is
particular, and that upon occasions originally springing from, and constantly
relating, and alluding to S. Peter's particular person and particular name. And
thus much for the promise.

Next, as for the performance of this particular promise, we argue thus. It is
worthy our Savior, not only to perform his promise, but also to perform it
after the manner, and tenor he promised. But he promised the power of the
Keys to S. Peter after a particular manner, (as has been shown) ^^erefore he
perfo^med his promise, and gave it to S. Peter after a particular manner, and
consequently (which is the position we vltimately aim at) S. Peter had the
power of the Keys after a more particular manner then the other Apostles. The
Major is evident; because no man living would think himself reasonably dealt
with if a promise were not performed to him after the manner it was made; nay,
reason would think himself deluded, to have his expectation raised (as in
prudence it would) by such a particular manner of promising to something
extraordinary, and more then common, and, when it comes to the point, to have
his hopes defeated by a common, and merely- equal performance. The Minor is
already proved in the foregoing paragraph. The conclusion is the position in
controversy.

Reason therefore informs us, supposing once that the promise was made to S.
Peter after a particular manner that it should be performed to him after the
same manner, nor need's it any other proof from Testimonies, if we once grant
(as none will deny) that our B. Savior did what was most reasonable, and
fitting. Yet some of our Drs, arguing ad hominem against the Protestant, make
choice particularly of that place of John 21. v. 15. 16. 17. to infer such a
performance. I proceed therefore in the way I begun, and endeavor to show two
things; first that reason gives it, secondly that the Scripture favors it,
that this place signifies a particularity of performance to S. Peter, or a
performance to him after a particular manner.

The first I prove ad hominem thus, the promise being made to S. Peter after a
particular manner, and registered in Scripture (as has been shown) it is
fitting that the correspo^dent performance so worthy our Savior should be
expressed there likewise; especially in the Protestant Grounds who grant a kind
of self-perfectnes and solesufficiency to Scripture. But, there is no other
place in Scripture so apt to signify a particular performance as this (for the
other places cited by Dr. H. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, and ^s my father sent
me so send I you, express only a common performance) therefore in all reason
we should think that the particular performance is expressed there. The second I
show thus, the particular promise had preceeded, apt in it is own Nature to
breed some greater expectation in S. Peter. These words were apt to satisfy
that expectation; they signified therefore a particular performance* Again, the
thrice particularizing him by his name, and relation, Simon son of Jonas,
denotes the speaking of the following words to him particularly. But the
following words, pasce oves ineas, were apt, and sufficient to instate him in
the Office, and give him the Authority of a Pastor: It was therefore given him
in a particular manner to be a Pastor in these words. The Major is e^ident,
the Minor is proved. For, should any Master of a family bid one of his servants
in the same words feed his sheep, that servant would think him self
sufficiently Authorized to perform that duty. Thirdly, the word amas me plus
his, Do thou love me more than these, manifestly put both a particularity,
and a superiority in S. Peter above the other Apostles in the interrogatory:
Therefore, the inference there-upon; feed my Sheep, in ordinary reason should
signify after the same manner, and sounds as if it were put thus, Do thou
love me more then these, to which S. Peter assenting, our Savior may be
imagined by the natural sense of the words to reply, If it be so that thou
love me more then these, then feed my Sheep more then these; or, have thou a
Commission to feed my Sheep more then these, sense he is more likely to perform
his duty better, and so more capable and worthy of a higher charge who bears a
greater affection to his Master. This paraphrase the words them selves seem to
ground. For otherwise to what purpose was it to make an interrogation
concerning a greater degree of love? or, to what end was that particularizing,
and perferring words [ more then these] put there if they had no correspondent
influence nor connection with the inference which ensves upon it. Fourthly, the
verb pasce being expressed imperatively, and spoken by a lord to his servant,
ought in all reason to signi^y a Command, unles the concomitant words in the
Text force another sense upon it, which cannot be alleged here. Since then
every command of a lawful Superior gives a Commission to do that which he
commands, and that the words expressing this command are most evidently by the
circumstances in the Text, in a particular manner spoken to S. Peter, it
follows that S. Peter had by them a particular Commission given him to feed
Christ's flock, which is the thing to be proved.

Fifthly, the property of the word pasce, as it is distinguished from
praedicate shows that there was a kind of ordinary care commanded to S. Peter,
whereas by the pure Apostleship he and his fellows had but an extraordinary and
(as it were) a voyager Authority; for, an Apostle might preach in many Cities;
but, to be Pastor he must fix himself in one City because he could be but a
particular Pastor: But, S. Peter having for his charge, oves and Agnos, that
is, all the faithful, ^ould ^ever be out of his own Jurisdiction, so that
being still in his seat, he needed not fix any where; and, that he did so was
(...) abundanti; Wherefore Praedicate being spoken in general to all he
Apostles* pasce, to S. Peter only, and pasce having an especial force above
Praedicate it follows that something was here given to S. Peter by that word,
especially and particularly.

This is, Reader, what I conceive follows gen^inly out of the Texts themselves,
as explicable grammatically. Two things I desire both mine Adversary and thee
to take notice of. The one, that we are not now disputing how the many-winded
Commenters interpret this or that word; but what follows out of the
acknowledged words of the Texts, as managed by Grammatical skill. Nor do I
pretend to Evidence out of my own interpretation (that is, Animating of dead
words) neither my cause needs it, nor can my own reason suffer me to engage so
far, assuring me how seldom demonstrations are to be expected from the
tossing of mere words; My only intent then (as I told thee at first) was to
show what I conceived most connaturally and probably followed out of these
Texts, and their circumstances. Nor is it sufficient for mine Adversary to
imagine that another explication may be invented. But (since our contention now
is, about what the words can-best bear) he is to show that another can so
connaturally agree to the same particularizing circumstances in the said Texts.
And, if any man living can draw an argument out of the same words, more
coherent with all the circumstances there found, and more connected in it self
then mine is, nay from any other Text in Scripture, to show that S. Peter had
no promise of the power of the Keys made to him in a particular manner, and no
performance of that promise in the same manner, in which is founded his
superiority to the other Apostles, I will heartily confess my self to have the
worst in this wit-combat, and shall lay down the cudgells for the next comer.

Sect. 3.
Dr. H's solutions or contrary explications of those two places of Scripture,
sustained by most senceles paralogisms, and built only upon his own sayings;
nor shown nor attempted to be shown more naturally consequent from the Texts
themselves and their circumstances.
AGainst, this inference of mine from the words of these Texts Dr. H. never
goes about to show from the force of the same words a more connaturall
explication, which is the only method to show his advantage over us in
Scripture; but, in stead thereof, endeavors only to enervate our deductions
thence by some solutions gathered here and there. Now, this method of
proceeding had been allowable, in case we had built our faith upon such wit
originiz'd explications; or, if in trying our acutenes with them in their own
wordish way we had pretended to evidence or conclude demonstratively that this
must be the sense of those places; for then indeed any may be otherwise, which
they could imagine, would have destroyed our must be so; and we were bound in
that case to maintain our explication against any other, not only which the
words might be pretended to favor, but what the most voluntary dreamer could
fancy. But, since we pretend not to evidence or conclude demonstratively
thence, and only intend to show out of the force of the words that our
exposition is more probable, and connaturall; he has noe way to overcome in
these circumstances, but by showing us another out of the force of the same
words more probable and connaturall; which since he never attempts to do (as
far as I can see) it is plain he is so far from having acquitted him self in
that point that he has not so much as gone about it; and all the voluntary
solutions and possibilities of another explication he has produced out of his
own f^cy without endeavoring to show them more natural out of the force of
the Texts, are so little to the purpose, that they are not worth answering. Yet
we shall glean them up from the places in which he has scattered them, and
give them, which is more then their due, a cursory reflection.

Solution 1. The words of the Commission were delivered in common to all the
Apostles. Of Schism p 87. l. 2. Reply. The delivering them in common evinces no
more but that each Apostle had the power of the Keys; but, leaves it
indifferent whether each had it equally or in equally* since it expresses
neither; nor is there any so silly as not to see that mo^e persons may have the
same thing yet one of those may have it in a more particular manner than the
rest.

Now then, since we have a place of Scripture expressing a promise of the
Keys in a particularising manner to S. Peter, how can the other places of a
common delivery prejudice the having them more especially; since it abstracts
from having them equally, or inequally; and so is indifferent to and consistent
with either.

Solution 2. They are delivered equally to all and every of the Apostles, as is
evident by the plural style throughout that Commission. Of Schism p 87. l. 2.
3. 4 5. Reply. To think that a bare plurality can prove; much less evidence an
equality is such a piece of bedlam like nonsense that I wonder the silliest
old wife should be gulld with such an affected piece of foolery. Paul's, and
Pancras by this Logic must be equal, because they are both in the plural
called Churches; nay every piece of the world's frame is a mani^est instance
a^a^nst this paralogism; since in every species in Nature the particulars or
individualls are plurally styled by the same word, and agree in the same
general notion, though there be hundreds, sometimes thousand degrees of
inequality between them. Yet this infinitely weak reasoner has (as I dare
undertake to show) above forty times made this argument against us; and to
surpass his otherwise unparaleld'self, he calls it an evidence. Were it not
pretty to put some parallels to this piece of Logic, and make Dr. H. argue
thus. Constables and Kings are in the plural styled Magistrates. ergo (cries
the Dr.) it is evident they are both equal; A Captain and a General are both
plurally styld Commanders; ergo (concludes the Dr.) it is evident they are
equally such. The like argument he has made heretofore for the equality of
Apostles, pillars, foundation-stones, etc. because all of each sort were named
by one plural name. Pardon me then Reader if I have given such a harsh
character to this monstrous piece of Logic I profess I know not what better
name to call it by truly; and, besides other considerations, I cannot but
resent it in the behalf of man's nature Which is Reason, and am angry with Dr.
H. in his own behalf that he has by his passion, and interest so totally
defaced it in him self as to produce that for an evidence which is so far from
the least degree of probability that it is the greatest impossibility
imaginable. But especially, when I see that the same person who acknowledges
Schism greater then sacrilege, or idolat^y, would persuade rational Souls
into it by such putid nonsense, I confess, I cannot contain my expressions
from taking such liberties, as truth and Justice make lawful, but the
concernement of my cause necessary.

Solution 3. Each single Apostle had this power as distinctly promised to him
as S. Peter is pretended to have, and the words of Scripture, Math. 18. v. 18.
are most clear for that purpose. Of Schism p. 88. Reply, there is not a word
there expressing any distinction in order to any other Apostle, much less
singularizing each of them distinctly as you here pretend but a common and
plural donation only whatsoever you shall bind, etc. and, as for your
Syllogism by which you would evade the shamelesnes of this assertion Answ. p.
66. by saying that you meant only the Apostles were each of them singly to
have and exercise the power of the Keys, and not all together in common, or
joined together in Communion; first, neither agrees with your other words, for
it is one thing to say each could distinctly use that power, another thing to
say as you ( of Schism p. 8^. l. 13. 14.) this power was distinctly promised to
each of them, and then quoting, Math. 18. v. 18. as most clear for that purpose
where nothing is found but a common expression whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven, etc. without any distinction at all expressed.
Nor can such a pretended meaning stand with common sense, unles the Dr. will
confess him self to have calumniated our tenet, which imputation he has
before taken such pains to avoid; for either it is put in opposition to us, or
not; if not, what does it there, or to what end are all those testimonies
brought of Schism p. 89 to second it? If it be put in opposition to us, and yet
mean only (as Dr. H. says here) that it was promised to all the Apostles as to
twelve single persons each singly to have and exercise it, and not all together
in common; then our tenet must necessarily be supposed and pretended by him to
be, that no single Apostle could bind or loose, but all of them together in
common only which is so manifest a calumny that himself dares not openly own
it, though he slily impose it; as he did the other about the Keys being S.
Peter's enclosure. Yet it is as necessarily his, as the excuse given is his;
which if he disclame he acknowledges the objected fault.

Solution 4. The addressing the speech to S. Peter in the singular is a token
only that Peter as a single person should have power, but not, either that no
others should have it too (observe Reader how the calumny he formerly would
have acquitted himself of, still sticks to him) or that the manner in which S.
Peter should have it should be singular to him, and so as it was not to each of
them, Answ. p. 64. 65 Reply, this is only your own saying; show us out of the
words themselves that this is more probable, as I showed the contrary, and then
I shall acknowledge that you have animated the dead letter more artificially
then I; otherwise you have done nothing: for the question is not whether you
can say so, or no; but whether the words oblige you to say so.

Solution 5. The particularity, gives him particularly the power, but excludes
not others from the same power and the same degree of power. Answ. p. 65.
Reply. This is only said again, not shown that the words gave occasion to say
it, which was only to be done. He quotes indeed drily the places of Scripture,
yet puts down no words, as his custom is, but talks before and after the
barren and unapply'd citations what he pleases. We take the words of the Text,
debate them minutely and particularly, and bring them home to the point, to
show that our tenet of a more particular power is more probable out of their
native force. Let him do the like and show by the same method his explication
more connaturall then mine and I shall grant he won the field in this
probability-skirmish. Himself will not deny that S. Peter had as much promised
him as the rest when it was promised in common, Math. 18. v. 18. The having
then over and above this common promise at another distinct time and with most
particularizing and distinguishing circumstances a promise of he same Keys;
most manifestly is a privilege peculiar to S. Peter, and that on which we
ground the probability of having them promised in a particular manner, and
consequently performed in the same sort; which we make account we find with
the like particularities Io. 21. Let the Reader then observe what countenance
the words, Grammatically and prudentially scanned, give to our explications and
deductions, and expect what other explication, so well circumstanc'd, Dr. H.
can deduce of the same words taken in their own native force and energy, not
what he will say upon his own head.

Solution 7. The special energy of the applying the words particularly to S.
Peter, concludes that the Ecclesiastical power of aeconomy or stewardship in
Christ's house belongs to single persons, such as S. Peter was, and not only
to Consistories, or Assemblies. Of Schism p. 87. Reply. This is still your own
saying without ever endeavoring to show from the words, and their
circumstances, they persuade that this is the sense of them. But, let it be so
that you have evinc't against the Presbyterians from this place that a
community must not govern but a Bishop, that is, one who is Superior to that
community; who sees not how much better, and more probably it follows hence
that S. Peter was Superior to the consistory of the Apostles (they being
present when those particularizing words were spoken, whence Dr. H. proves the
Episcopal Authority over the consistory) then it will follow that in
succeeding times, and distinct circumstances, some one should be chief and over
the Assembly. Again, the words not being express for his position, he can
only make a parallel deduction thence after this sort, if he will argue from
the words, that the same should be observed in a Bishop and his consistory
afterward, which was I deated in this first consistory of the Apostles;
wherefore, since Dr. H. grants no higher degree of Authority in S. Peter than
in the rest of the Apostles, he can conclude no more but this, that the
Presbyters are all equal in Authority, as the Apostles were; that is, there
ought to be no more-highly-authoriz'd Bishop over them, but only that one of
those equally-dignify'd Presbyters ought to sit, talk, or walk before the rest,
according to Dr. H's explication of the (...), by Primacy of order. Thus whiles
the Dr. disputes from this place against the Presbytery, he falls into Popery.
As for what he tells me here that it is the interest of S. W. as well as of the
Protestants to mantain this point against the Presbyterians who a lone can gain
by the questioning it. I answer, that I love the Presbyterians so well as not
to wish them renounce their reason, that is, man's nature, which they must do
if they assent to what the Protestants say upon a probability only, nay a
totally improbable, and rather opposite Text. Nor should I wish them so much
hurt, as to believe Episcopacy, unles I made account the Catholic Church was
able to give them rigorously convincing evidence for her Authority asserting
it, which is impossible the Protestants should do, unles they plow with our
heifer, and recur to our Rules of faith, universal Tradition, so often renounced
by them for other points.

Observe, Reader, that I had shown his explication of this place of Scripture
against the Presbyterians to make unavoidably against thim self, Schism
Disarmed p. 95. In reply to which dangerous point ( Answ. p. 66* par. 16.) he
only calls my reasons expressions of dislike to his argument against
Presbytery, that it is not pertinent to the question, that it has not (as he
supposes) any show of the least di^ficulty in it and so ends. As if my showing
that our tenet follows more naturally out of the words, even as explicated thus
by him self, were only an expression of dislike, impertinent to our question,
or had not, if proved, any show of the least difficulty in it; yet he braggs at
the end of this Section, that he has attended me precisely and (...) step by
step, though he makes when he spies danger such large skips over me.

Solution 8. The words, feed my Sheep, are nothing but an ^xhortation to
discharge that duty to which he was before commissionated. Rep. p. 68. par. 10.
p. 63. Reply, had he ever a particular Commission given him, correspondent to
the particularizing promise, but here? or was not the word pasce spoken
imperatively by a Master to his servant as apt to signify a Commission as the
words, Go teach all Nations, were? how then appears it from the words that
this was only an exortation? and, if it does not, what is it more then Dr. H's
own saying?

Solution 9 The circumstances in the Text can never work a change in the
matter, an inculcated, express, particularized explication, introduced with a
question to quicken, and impresse it can never be converted by these
accumulation^ into a Commission for supremacy. Answ. p. 63. Reply, first you
must show that the words persuade it was only an Exhortation; else all this
and your following discourse falls to the ground. Next, such particularizing
circumstances to S. Peter in the presence of the rest are apt in their own
nature to make him or any man living ready to apprehend that the thing promised
belonged to him in a particular manner: else to what end served they, would no^
a common promise have sufficed if this had not been intended? Thirdly, there
needed no converting the signification of the pasce from an Exhortation into a
Commission of Supremacy. The word was apt before of it self to signify a
Commission; the accumulation of particularizing circumstances gave it to
signify a particular Commission. Let the reader examine Dr. H. by what force of
the words he proves it is an exhortation only, since the words themselves are
words of Commission, there being nothing proper to a mere exhortation in them.
And as for the Drs parallel here that ( Christ's praying the same prayer
thrice did not make it cease to be a prayer and commence a precept, t's so
silly as a sillier cannot be imagined; since neither the words of Christ's
prayer are apt to be converted from a praying to a commanding signification;
nor was it likely or possible that Christ should impose precepts upon his
heavenly father to whom he prayed, as he could upon S. Peter, not lastly is it
only the thrice saying that we build upon, as abstracted from all the other
particularising circumstances but the thrice saying a precept, and a precept
thus expressed.

Solution 10. The asking him thri^e, love thou me, made S. Peter no doubt
deem it a reproach of his thrice denying his Master. Answ. p. 63. The Text
says, Peter was greeved, because he said unto him the third time, Love thou
me, which Sure he would not have been, if he had looked on it as an
introduction to so great a preferment. Reply: Dr. H. has here at unawares
bewrayed what kind of Spirit he is of; who makes account that the getting some
great preferment is a ground of more gladness then our Saviors seeming to doubt
of his love to him would be occasion of sorrow. But he shall give me and all
good Christians ^eave to think that good S. Peter was of another temper; and
that he valued the good opinion of his Master, questioning so much his love to
him, above the attainment of any dignity imaginable. Though I must confess Dr.
H's Noe doubt, and Sure, upon which all depends, are two sure cards, were they
authorized by any thing besides his own words; and, it is a very competent
answer with him to say he is sure, and there is no doubt but that S. Peter
gap't so much after a preferment that he cared not, in comparison of it, what
opinion his B. Master had of him, in order to his loving him.

Again, how do the words so put it beyond all doubt that the asking him
thrice, love thou me, was deemed by S. Peter a reproach of his thrice
denial; whereas the Text tells us that S. Peter was fully persuaded of his
Masters knowledge of his love, and confidently appealed to that knowledge, Lord
thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. Nor have we any ground
to think that S. Peter apprehended his sweet Master so cruel as to upbraid a
forgiven sin, especially seeing the return of so much love in the breast of his
dear Disciple. If Dr. H. pretend that it was to excite in him a greater care of
Christ's flok, the words indeed give countenance to it. But then it should be
asked what necessity was there of exciting a greater care in S. Peter in
particular? had he shown him self of so negligent a nature as to give occasion
of doubt that he was not likely without this exciration to perform well this
particular charge? or rather, did not his whole carriage demonstrate the quite
contrary that he was ever most zealous, vehement, and hot to prosecute any
thing he went about? What reason then there could be of a particular incitement
to S. Peter to perform and look well to his charge, more than to the rest
without some particularity in his charge more than in the rest, passes reason
to imagine* The force therefore in this thrice repetition of love thou me in
all probability and according to the words rationally explicated, we make to
be this; that since it is ever the method of God's sweet providence to dispose
and fit the person for the charge, ere he imposes the charge it self, and the
best disposition to perform any charge with exact diligence is a greater
affection toward the person who imposes it, our Savior, by asking S. Pe^ter
thrice in that tender manner love thou me more then these, love thou me,
excited and stirred up in him a greater affection, both to dispose him at
present for the particularly-exprest charge of feeding his Sheep, and also to
mind him for the future upon what terms and conditions, and with what dear and
tender expressions he had pledged unto him the care of his flock. This
explication, I say, of that thrice asking we think most connaturall and
consonant to the Text, as rationally scanned according to what is most
befitting the divine wisdom; by which rule or any other principle had Dr. H.
guided himself in stead of recurring to and relying upon merely his own fancy
for his voluntary explications, I hope he would have been of the same mind too.

Solution 11. We need seek no other performance of this promise than that
which was at once afforded all the Apostles together. As, suppose a General
should promise a Commission this day to one, and to morrow should make the like
promise to Eleven more, that one being in their company, and then, upon a set
day some weeks after, should se^^ twelve Commissions to those twelve, one for
each of them, I wonder who would doubt of the exact performance of this promise
to that first, or seek for any more special performance of it Reply p. 67.
Reply: Dr. H. pretends a parallel, and yet* leaves all that in which the force
of the parallel was to be put, taking the common and indifferent circumstance
only. First he puts the supposition that a General should promise a
Commission this day to one, but he omits all that in which we place the
strength of our argument, to wit, that the General should promise the said
Commission to that one in a manner of expression not competent or competible to
the rest, as he did here, sounding an advantage over the rest in his desert,
his confessing of Christ's Godhead by the revelation of his heavenly father;
with such allusion^ to his name, and other particularisations, as in all
prudence are apt to breed an expectation of something particular in the thing
promised. He should have made his General have promised a Commission to one in
this manner, and then the answer had been, that that one man so manifoldly
particularized, and, as it were, called and singled out from the rest in their
own presence, had no reason to think himself ingenuously deal't with, if his
acknowled'g desert being particular, and the promise there upon so particularly
directed to him, and him alone at that time, he had received an equal
Commission only, that is, such a one as was common to all the by standers, and
not particular at all to himself. Next, Dr. H's following words, suppose this
General should to morrow make the like promise to eleven more, that one being
in their company, has two equivocations in it; the one in the words, the like
promise; by which if he means the promise of the same common thing, to wit the
power of the Keys, it is granted; but, if he mean's (as he ought, this being
the thing in controversy, and the sense best suting with that word) that the
like promise denotes a promise made after the same manner, and apt to breed no
more nor higher expectation of the thing to be given then if it had been
expressed (...) common only then it is palpably false and flatly denied. The next
equivocation lies in these words, suppose he should make a promise to eleven
more* that one being in their company; by which one would think that S. Peter
who had it promised particularly before, had it not promised again in common
now, but only stood by at this time while it was promised to the other eleven.
By which device he has avoided another point in which we put force, and left
it out in his parallel; and it is this, that S. Peter went a breast with the
rest in having the common promise made to him as well as they had; and exceeded
or was preferred before them in this privilege, that, over and above his
common promise, he had a promise made to him at other times particularly and
in a particularizing manner, so that the Drs similitude has not so much as one
foot left to hop on, that is, it resembles no part of the point as it is in
question betveen us, nor touches at all the controverted difficulty, and is all
one as if, going about to paint Caesar, he should draw only the rude lineaments
common to all mankind, and omit all the particular proportions and colors
which were proper to delineate that person. But the Dr. makes up his similitude
by supposing twelve Commissions sent to the twelve Captains, in which he would
subtly have his Reader suppose the Commissions were equally; for, if they were
unequal it would prove just contrary to his pretense. But what he mean's by
his sealed Commissions, or how he thinks this is verified in the Apostles, we
shall ere long discuss when he declares his meaning in it.

Dr. H's parallel having thus lamely played it is part, let me see if I can
make another more pat, and express then his was. Suppose then the late King of
England, as head of the Church there, could have made, and had been to create
Bishops all over England; and had already cast his eye particularly upon some
one particular person so far as to give him in particular the sir name of
Bishop (as he did S. Peter the name Cephas, a Rock) this done, upon occasion of
a particular service of his first acnowledging or confessing him King (which
we may suppose not to have been then acknowledged) he breaks out into those
parallel expressions. Happy art thou N. N. who, when others weakly doubt of my
Royalty do out of a particular affection to me acknowledge me King; and I say
unto thee, Thou art Bishop, and upon this Bishop I will build the Church of
England, and thus built it shall stand strong against all opposition; and J
will give unto thee the power of binding and loosing and whatsoever fault
against our Ecclesiastical laws, thou shall absolve from, I will hold that
person thus absolved guiltles; and whatsoever thou shall refuse to pardon, I
will hold it unpardoned likewise. Now I appeal to Dr. H's conscience whether
this person he would not in prudence judge by this carriage that he should have
some thing particualr given him, and whether though the King afterward, in a
common exposition, had promis't to make him, and the rest Bishops, yet there
would not remain still imprinted in his mind an expectation that he should be
a Bishop in a higher degree then the rest; to wit, an Archbishop of Canterbury
or York? since I think it as plain in prudence that such a carriage, and such
expressions should breed such an expectation, as most prudentiall actions use
ordinarily to be. Therefore, it was worthy our Savior not to delude the
expectation of S. Peter justly, rationally and prudently raised by his
particularizing carriage, and expressions to higher hopes; Therefore, he
satisfied it with a proportionable performance; therefore S. Peter had in
higher manner and degree the power of the Keys than the rest of the Apostles,
which is the thing to be evinced.

And thus ends this wit-combat between me, and Dr. H. in which, I hope, I have
performed fully my taks, which was to show out of the very words in the Text
that they sound in all probability and likelihood more favorably to my
advantage. And, if Dr. H. goes about to answer me, let him show out of those
very words, p^udentially scanned, that they persuade another interpretation,
and not tell us of his own fancy what he is able to imagine, as he does here all
over. Nor let him think it is sufficient to solve my deductions by showing them
not to spring from those words by rigorous evidence. For, first, this is to
oppose that which was never pretended; for, I pretend not to evidence by my
private wit working upon pliable natured words: a greater probability is
pretended from the letter of the Text as it lies; how he will impugn this but
by showing his more probable from the letter of the same Text I confess I know
not. Next, to fancy an explication which the words themselves persuade not, and
so to solve my probable deduction, because another is possible in it self is
very disallowable, and unreasonable; because a mere possibility of another,
destroy's not the probability of this* only a greater, or equal probability
pretended, can frustrate a greater probability presumed, where the Grounds of
controverting exceed not probability. And-lastly, to think to prejudice our
tenet or faith even by solving those places thus interpreted by privates skill,
is the weakest error of all; since neither our faith nor my self as one of the
faithful, rely at all upon any place of Scripture, as thus interpreted. This
conceit therefore is noe wiser than if a man should think to throw me down,
or disable me from walking by taking away my stilts, and yet leaving me my
legs whereas I stand a thousand times more firm upon these, than I did upon
the former. And I so totally build my faith upon the sense of the Church, so
little upon places of Scripture played upon by wit, that what Dr. H. ob ects,
and thinks me in chanted for holding it. ( Answ. p. 64.) I freely, and
ingenuously confess, to wit, that the infallibility of our Church, consisting
in this that she acknowledges no rule of faith save immediate attestation of
forefathers, would equally have done it, and equally have ascertained me that
S. Peter was cheef of the Apostles, as if our Savior had never asked S. Peter
three times, love thou me? Although, in other respects, I doubt not but that
these sacred Oracles of the written word are both a great confort, and ornament
to the Church, and very useful to our Doctors; yet not to hammer or coin a
faith out of them by the dints and impressions of wit, as the Protestants
imagine.

Sect. 4.
D H's most wilful and grand Falsification in pretending an Author for him
and concealing his words, found to be expressly and point blank against him.
His unparalleled weakness in dogmatizing upon the mystical sense of another,
which, almost in every point, contradicts his Doctrine.
AFter Dr. H. had pretended ( of Schism p. 88.) that the power of the Keys was
as distinctly promis't to each single Apostle as to S. Peter; and, after his
falsifying manner, quoted Matthew. 18. v. 18 as most clear for that purpose,
where no such distinction, or singularizing expression was found; his discourse
sprouts out into another branch of accordance in these words. And accordingly,
Math. 19. the promise is again made of twelve thrones for each Apostle to sit
on one, to judge, id est (says the Dr.) to rule or preside in the Church. The
Cath. Gent. and S. W. made account this interpretation was an odd one Dr. H.
Answ p. 67. referr's us to his Reply c. 4. Sect. 10. and there, he says, the
sense which S. W. never heard of, was vouched from S. Augustine. But, upon view
of the place, I neither find a word of S. Augustine put down to vouch it; nor
so much as a citation of any place in that father* where we may look it: only
he barely tells us that S. Augustine long ago so understood it, leaving us
without any direction to look for this sentence in whole volumes, where he is
sure we are not likely to find it; and this he calls vouching his
interpretation. Is not this neat? But, I commend his wit; he loves not be
confuted, if he can help it; which, had he told us where to find this vouching
it from S. Augustine, he providently foresaw was likely to follow.

By the same prudentiall method he govern's himself in the two other
Testimonies he adds to that of S. Augustine, in these words; to whom I may
also add Hilarious Pictaviensis, and the Author imperfecti operis; and this in
all, without either relating us to the places, or quoting the words. But, since
he is so reserved, I will take the pains to do it for him, knowing well that
the Reader by this time grown acquainted with the Drs tricks will expect some
mystery of iniquity in such aldesign'd omission. Not will Dr. H. suffer him to
be deluded in that his expectation, being very apt to give his Readers
satisfaction always in that point.

Note, Reader, what is in question at this time. We interpret this place to
relate to the day of judgment* and to mean the Apostles sitting upon twelve
thrones to judge, the Dr. interprets it of the regeneration of the world by
faith in Christ or the first beginning or settling of Christ's Church
immediately, or not long after his Ascension, and the Holy Ghost's coming; and
of the Apostles sitting then upon twelve Episcopal chaires, to judge ( id est
says he) to preside in the Church. Now, to our Testimonies.

Hilarious Pictaviensis his interpretation of this place is found in his
explication of some passages upon S. Matthew. the title of that particular
Section is, De adventu filij hominis ad iudicium in maiestate sua, of the
coming of the son of man to judgment in his majesty. After this follows the
Text which he is to interpret to mean the time of the regeneration by grace
according to Dr. H. put down thus, Canon 28. Cum autem venerit filius hominis
in maiestate sua and omnes Angeli cum eo, and reliqua. But when the son of man
shall come in his majesty, and all his Angels with him, and the rest. This
seems very ominous to Dr. H's interpretation of this place for the regeneration
by grace; and to relate as expressly to the day of judgment as words can
signify. But let us proceed to the Authors own words, upon which Dr. H builds.
De iudicij tempore aduentuque commemorat quo fidelis ab infidelibus separabit,
atque ab infructuosis fructuosa discernet, hoedos, viz. ab agnis, and in dextra
and sinistra collocans, vnumquemque digna aut bonitatis aut malitiae suae sede
constituet. He speaks of the coming and time of judgment, in which he will
separate the faithful from the infidells, discern the fruitful from the
unfruitful, to wit, the goats from the Lambs, and placing them on his right
hand, and his left, shall set every one in the seat of his goodness, or
wickedness. And now I appeal to the judgment of the most partial friend of Dr.
H. whether this be not to renounce all shame, honesty, and conscience, respect
to his Readers, care of his own and other men's salvations, to name fathers as
vouching his explication, so expressly opposite to it, that it is impossib^e to
invent words more fully signifying mine, more palpably contradicting his
interpretation.

His third testimony from Author imperfecti operis upon the words sedebitis and
vos etc you also shall sit upon twelve thrones, etc. afford's us first this
comment; futurum autem erat vt in die iudicij responderent Iudaei, etc. It was
to happen in the day of judgment that the Jews would answer, Lord we did not
know thee the Son of God when thou wast clad with thy body vos respondeb^tis,
etc. ye shall answer; we also were men as you are, etc. Thus he literally.
But, we will grant that this Author whoever he was (for he is not certainly
known) more inclined to the mystical sense; and we pardon Dr. H. at present
that extreme weakness of dogmatizing not upon the literal, but mystical sense
of an interpreter, let us see whether (though in that one point of relating to
the resurrection it be for him according to the said mystical sense yet
whether) in all the rest it be not expressly against him, and absolutely
inconsistent with his whole doctrine. His transition from the literal to the
mystical sense is this. Adhuc autem audeo subtiliorem introducere sensum, and
sententiam sapientis cuiusdam viri refer. But I dare be so bold as to
introducere a more subtle sense, and relate the opinion of a certain wise man;
that, as the people of the Jews were divided into twelve tribes secundum
quasdam proprietates animorum, and diuersitates cordium, quas solus Deus
disce^n^re and cognoscere potest; according to certain propenties of their
minds, and diversities of their hearts, which only God can discern and know;
that some should be, as it were, of the tribe of Ruben, others of the tribes of
Simeon, Levi, or Judah, etc. Omnes autem in quibus habitat Christus, seeds sunt
Christi. All Christians, in whom Christ dwells, are the seat of Christ- then
coming to his mystical explication of the day of judgment, he has these
words; in sedem autem, etc. Christ begun to sit in the seat of his majesty ever
since the Gentiles begun to believe in him; wherefore, since the time that
Christ sit upon the seat of his majesty, the Apostles also sit upon twelve
thrones, that is, in all Christians, secundum diuersita^es animorum quos supra
tetigimus, according to the diversity, of minds which we have touched
before-Omnis enim, etc. For every Christian which receives the word of Peter is
the throne of Peter, and Peter sits in him; so also they are they thrones of
all the Apostles who have received and keep in themselves the doctrine of all
the Apostles-Sic ergo, etc. So therefore, the Apostles sitting in Christian
thrones, distinguished into twelve parts, according to the differences of
Souls, judge the twelve tribes of Israel, that is, all the Jews. For when the
words of the Apostles judge the Jews, also the Apostles themselves seem to
judge them. Hence.

Note first that Dr. H. makes (...) signify an Episcopal chair, whereas this
Author, who was brought to second him, makes it signify any Christian soul that
receives Christ's faith.

Note secondly, that these twelve parts of Christianity, subject to the twelve
Episcopal chairs of the Apostles, are, according to Mr. H's doctrine, twelve
lesser Provinces, distinguished and appointed by Apostolical consent; whereas
this Author makes them only, to be differenced by the diversity of their
Spirits, and Souls.

Note thirdly that if governing and presiding in twelve Episcopal chairs be
signified here (as he pretends) it follows that the Apostles governd and
presided over they knew not whom; for these twelve parts of Christianity
(according to this Author) are distinguished secundum diuersitates animorum,
according to diversities of minds, quas solus Deus discernere and cognoscere
potest, which only God can discern, and know; and this Author makes here the
Apostles sitting upon twelve thrones, to be their sitting in all Christians
according to this diversity of minds.

Note fourthly, that he makes the Apostles sitting in them to be their
receiving the Apostles doctrine; that is, there being converted by them; which
Dr H. told us before ( Answ. p. 51. l. 25. 26.) was nothing to the matter of
Jurisdiction.

Note fifthly, that their being judged by the Apostles, which Dr. H. makes to
signify their being governed by them; is explicated by this Author to be this;
that the Apostles thaught them their doctrine, and put their words in them, by
which they were judged; not that they sit in Episcopal chairs, ruled, and
presided, as Governors preside, as the Dr expresses himself, Answ. p. 67. l. 25.

Note sixthly, that this place cannot be pretended to relate more properly* and
really to the time immediately after Christ's resurrection than the concomitant
circumstances already scanned, really and properly signify those things they
mystical allude to; since ^he agreeing of them to this explication is that
which sustains and countenances it: Seeing then it is a madness to pretend that
a Christian soul is really, and properly, a throne of an Apostle, that those
twelve parts of Christianist's whose distinction is unknown to the Apostles
should be really and properly ^welve Provinces to be governed by their
Episcopal presiding, or that their planting (Christ's doctrine in their hearts
should be really and properly to judge and preside over them; so it is equally
a madness to pretend that the Apostles life time (and not the day of ^udgment)
is signified here really and properly; since, the word it self not necessarily
denoting it, this interpretation is only built upon the applicablenes of the
circumstant expressions; which being all mystical, and improper, cannot make
it proper and literal but mystical, and improper only.

Thou see then, Protestant Reader, to w^^t rare Drs thou entrustest thy hopes
of salvation, who either bring Testimonies for their tenet, which is most
expressively against them, when the Author speaks literally; or else dogmatize
upon a mystical sense, and pretend it is meant really. Which method were it
followed there is no such contradictions in the world but might be made rare
truths. The testament given in Mount sina would be really a woman, and ^gar,
Abraham's handmaid. Gal. 4. v. 25. Christ's doctrine would be real corn;
preaching would be real sowing; men would be in reality mere vegetables; the
good, wheat; by bad, tares; Heaven nothing in reality but a barn; the Angels
would be really reapers, and sweaty tanned country-drudges, with sickles, rakes
and forks in their hands preaching, loding into carts, driving home, and
unloading into this barn men's Souls by Dr. H's learned Metamorphosis (far
out-vying Opid's) turned really into mere Vegetables, and so many grains of
wheat. These and millions of others perhaps greater absurdities might an
Atheist object to Christianity, and make it the most ridiculous absurdity nay
the perfectest madness that ever abused the world, by interpreting mystical
things really; that is, by following Dr. H's method here; who, out of a place
evidently mystical, and so expressed by the Author, deduces dogmatically as a
real truth that the promise was made for twelve real, and properly called
thrones, for each Apostle to si^ on one, to rule, and preside in the Church in
the Apostles time And, were it worth the pains to look for the omitted place
in S. Austin, I doubt not but we should find it of the same mystical strain
in some Homily, or other: for he writ no comments upon S. Matthew (that I know
of from whence we may certainly expect such a literal explication.

Sect. 5.
How Dr. H. goes about to prove the donation of equal power from the Descent
of the Holy Ghost and from fathers, by an heap of weaknesses; contrad^ction of
his own, calumnies of our tenet; forg^ries of his Advers ary's sense and words,
denying his own; avoydings to answer, and other shuffling impertinencies.
IT follows in Dr. H. of Schism p. 88. in the half-side of a leaf, parenthesis,
and when that promise ( to wit of twelve Episcopal thrones) was fina^ly
performed in the descent of the Spirit. Act. 2. the fire that represented that
Spirit was divided, and (...), sat upon every one of them, without any
peculiar mark allowed S. Peter, and they were all filld' with the Holy Ghost,
and so this promise equally performed, as it was made, to all.

Observe, Reader, these words particularly; and then I an confident if thou
know what Controversy is, thou with pity me for being task to answer such a
dreamer. Here is not a word here which even seems to make against us but these,
without any particular mark allowed to S. Peter, and the having the Holy Ghost
equally; neither of which are, or can be proved by any man living (for who can
see man's heart, or know in what degree he has the Holy Ghost, but God only?
or who can tell us now that S. Peter had no peculiar mark, or greater tongue of
fire, than the rest, as the wise Dr. pretends and builds upon, nothing being
recorded either pro, or con, concerning that impertinent curiosity. Nor can
these ridiculous arguments seem in the least sort to make against S. Peter's
higher Authority, and our tenet, but by supposing Dr. H's false, and weak
principle to be true, that none can be higher in Authority but he must
necessarily have more of the Holy Ghost in him. As for all the other words,
they nothing at all concern our purpose, or impugn our present tenet; since we
hold that each Apostle had the promise made, had a performance of that promise,
that the fiery tongues sat on every of them, etc. And, as for his saying that
this promise of twelve thrones was finally performed in the descent of the Holy
Ghost, though it be most miserably weak, (as shall be shown) yet it nothing at
all impugns us; inducing only that each Apostle had power in the Church, which
we voluntarily grant.

To answer these fantastic toys the better, I will take the whole piece a
sunder into propositions, and impugn them singly.

The first proposition is, that the promise of the twelve thrones of Episcopal
presidency was finally performed in the descent of the Spirit. Observe, Reader,
that our question is about Authority and Jurisdiction (as Dr. H's chairs to
rule and preside in tells thee) and then ask Dr. H. whether it was ever heard
of before in this world that the coming of the Holy Ghost gave Jurisdiction or
Authority to the Apostles, but zeal, charity, knowledge, courage, vigor,
strength, and such other gifts only. See the Scripture, Luke 24. 49. Tarry ye
in Jerusalem until ye be endued, virtute ex alto, that is, with power, or
powerfulnes, efficaciously to prosecute what they were a ready designed and
commissioated for; not, till you have finally Authority and Jurisdiction given
you. Again, the Holy Ghost fell upon all the 120. as appears by Act. 1. and
upon multitudes both of men and women in many places and occasions afterward,
and yet, no man ever dreamed that they got by this means any Authority, or
Jurisdiction But to show the absurdity of this conceit there needs no more but
to reflect upon the Drs words. He says that the promise of twelve thrones of
presidency or ^^welve Episcopal chairs (as he expresses him self A^sw. p. 67.
was finally performed in the descent of the Spirit, if so, then the Holy Ghost
consecrated the twelve Apostles actually Bishops, for the final performan^e is
the actual giving a thing, and the thing, to be given then, is by him expressed
to be twelve Episcopal chairs: wherefore actually then, and not before, the
Apostles were made Bishops, and had so many Episcopal chairs given them: so
pretty a foolery that laughter is it is properest confutation. But, to mend the
jest, himself in other places strenously defends that the distinction of the
Apostles presidencies of Provinces by Apostolical agreement long after the
coming of the Holy Ghost, as appears by the place Gal. 2. on which he relies.
And, if we should ask him how there could be twelve Episcopal chairs to rule,
and preside in without twelve sorts of subjects to be presided over, and ruled,
that is, twelve Bishoprics; and then ask him again where those twelve distinct
Bishoprics were at the coming of the Holy Ghost, I know the good man, in stead
of making good his own argument, would be forced to turn tail (as he does
often) and bid us prove the contrary.

The second proposition is this. The fire which represented that Spirit was
divided and (...) (says the Dr.) sat upon each of them, Who ever denied but
that each of them had a tongue of fire, and that this tongue of fire sat upon
them? what then! what follows hence against us. He tells us Answ. p. 68. in
these words, This I suppose an argument of some validity that the promise
being sealed distinctly to every one of them was meant (in the making of it)
distinctly to every one of them. Grant the inference, shown lately to be
nothing worth, whas tenet of ours does his conclusion contradict? only this,
that the promise of the Keys was meant to one Apostle only or else to them
altogether, or in common, so that each single Apostle could not use it; neither
of which being out tenet, as he wilfully counterfeits, his argument of some
valedity only impugns a calumny forged by himself; and only proves that he
has bid his last adieu to all sincerity, who newly has pretended an endeavor
to clear himself of calumny in making our tenet to be that the power of the
Keys was S. Peter's peculiarity, and enclosure, and yet ever since reiterates
it upon all occasions with the same vigor. Once more Mr. H. I desire you to
take notice, that we hold, and are ready to grant, nay mantain, and ^ssert,
that each particular Apostle had the power of the Keys given him, and that he
could use them singly; the inequality and subordination of this power in the
other Apostles to a higher degree of it in S. Peter is that we assert. If
yoouintend really to impugn it, bring proofs for an equality, and no
subordination; and do not thus wilfully wrong your own conscience, hazard the
loss of your own and other men's Souls, and lastly, thas openly abuse your
Readers by calumniating our tenet, and calling your wise proofs arguments of
validity, whereas they neither invalidate nor touch any thing which our
adversary holds.

The 3d proposition is this. There was no peculiar mark of fire allowed to S.
Peter. In answ. Schism. Disarm. p. 97. called this proof a dumb negative, and
askd him how he knew there was no particular mark allowed S. Peter, since he
was not there to see, and there is noe history either sacred or profane that
expres^es the contrary. Now the Dr. in stead of showing us upon what Grounds he
affirmed this (which properly belonged to him) makes this impertinent and
prevaricating objection ( Answ. p. 68.) It seems a negative in S. W. mouth is
perfectly vocal though it be but dumb in another man's, so that the good Dr.
supposes that I go about to prove S. Peter to have had a peculiar ma^k of fire
because it is no where heard of, so much is the most common sense above his
short reach. Whereas I only ask't him why he did affirm it without knowing it?
or how he could know it having noe ground to know it? perhaps it would clear
his understanding a little better to put his sense, and mine into syllogism;
mine stand's thus; No man not having ground from sense nor Authority can know,
and so affirm a matter of fact; but Dr. H. has neither ground from sense nor
Authority that S. Peter had no peculiar mark; therefore he has no ground to
know it, nor affirm it. His can only make this Enthymene; we read of no
peculiar mark or fire allowed S. Peter, therefore he had none. Or if it be made
a complete syllogism it must be this the Apostles had nothing which is not read
of in Scripture, but S. Peter's peculiar mark of fire is not read of in
Scripture, therefore he had noe such mark. And then, the sillines of the Major
had shown the wisdom of it is Author, who may conclude by the same Logic as
well that the Apostles had no noses on their faces, since this is equally not
mentioned in Scripture as S. Peter's peculiar mark is.

Next, it was ask't him why S. Peter could not be head of the Church but God
must needs watch all occasions to manifest it by a particular miracles? or why
he could not be chief of the Apostles without having a greater tongue of fire?
so that could the equality of fiery tongues be manifested, yet, the silliest
old wife that ever lived could not possibly stumble upon a more ridiculous
proof; but, the position it self which he affirmed, being impossible to be
manifested, it surpasses all degrees of ridiculousnes, and ough^ to move rather
a just indignation in any Christian who understands what belongs to Grounds of
faith, to see it so brought to the lowest degree of contempt and disgrace as to
be debated by such childish nonsense, and by one who professes him self a
Christian and a Dr.

Now Dr. H. against these exceptions made in Schism Disarmed says not a word;
that is, he neither goes about to show that there was no particular mark, nor
that it was to any purpose had there been one, only he tells us ( Answ. p.
68.) that, thought it be a negative argument (that is, though it prove nothing)
yet he hopes by being annex't to the affirmative probation precedent, it will
not be a gagge to make that dumb and negative also. So that he confesses it
does no good at all, only he hopes it will do no hurt to his affirmative
probation; that is, to his a^gument of some validity already spoken of; and
truly no more it does, for it remains still as arrant an affected, and wilful
calumny of our tenet as ever it was.

I added, that if we may judge by exterior actions, and may believe that out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, then perhaps the Dr. may
receive some satisfaction in this point also that S. Peter, had in more
peculiar manner the Holy Ghost. For it was he that first burst out into that
heavenly Sermon which converted three thous and. First, the Dr. calls this (
Answ. p. 68. l. 12. 13.) in a pretty odd phrase, a doubty proof, to evidence
on S. Peter's behalf. Whereas, I only brought it for the Drs sake who good man
uses to fancy any Scripture Proof better then a demonstration, not for mine
own or my tenet's inte^est, having diclaimed the necessity of consequence from
his being fuller of the Holy Ghost to his being higher in dignity Schism
Disarm. p. 97. l. vlt. p. 98 l. 1. 2. Nor did I pretend it as an evidence, as
the Dr. calumniates, expressing both my intent and degree of reliance on it
sufficiently in these moderate words; perhaps the Dr. may receive some
satisfaction, etc. Secondly, he says I bring it to evidence he know's not
what, for it is not expressed but left doubtfully betwixt his being Head of the
Apostles, and his having some peculiar mark* yet one (he supposes) designed to
inf^r, and conclude the other whereas the intended point is expressly put down
in my words now repeated by him self to wit, that S. Peter had in a peculiar
manner the Holy Ghost; and the necessary connection of this with his higher
Authority expressly disclaimed in the place even now cited. Thirdly after he
had repeated my whole discourse, he subjoyn's immediately, here was one honest
word the (perhaps.) As if our Savior's words out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, and those others of the Scripture that S. Peter converted
three thousand by his first Sermon were all dishonest words. But, since I
intended only to give the Dr. some satisfaction, of which (knowing his humor)
I was not certain why was it not honester to express my self ambiguously then
to cry a loud, Certainy, surely, no doubt, unquestionably, irrefragably, as Dr.
H. does all over before his Testimonies; whereas, all is obscure, uncertain,
falsified, not a word in them sounding to the purpose, as has been shown all
over this book. It may be the Reader may accound Dr. H. the greater wit for
using such confident, and loudcrying expressions when there is so little wool,
but I hope he will think S. W. the honester man for speaking withim compass.
Fourthly, he says that the Dr. (meaning himself) may not be satisfied thence
that S. Peter had received the Holy Ghost in a more particular manner, to which
he adds of his own falsifying invention, or was designed head of the Apostles,
as if I had pretended this either as equivalent, or necessarily consequent out
of the former whereas he knows I absoluty disclaimed against him any such
pretense; This done without having afforded own word of answer or sense, he
bids us farewell in these words, I shall answer it no further then by
repeating. Good night good Dr.

But to let the Reader see how much stronger my [ perhaps] is than the Drs
surely, I will briefly put down the import of this late proof ad hominem; and
it is this, that since out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: it is
probable that S. Peter had the Holy Ghost in his heart more abundantly or in a
higher degree, since he first expressed it is interior motions by speaking, and
speaking so vigorously, and powerfully: Now then, since, in Mr. H's Grounds,
the receiving the holy Ghost sealed the Commissions of the Apostles, and finally
performed the promise of their ruling, and presiding in the Church whence he
contended also that all had this promise equally performed, that is, according
to him, had equally the Holy Ghost lest one should exceed another in
Jurisdiction; it follows unavoidably ad hominem it against him, that if be
probable S. Peter had the Holy Ghost in an higher degree, it is probable
likewise that he had a higher rule, and presidencie in the Church performed to
him. The argument bearing this sense, who sees not it is Dr. H's task to let us
know why this so early and vigorous pouring forth argued not a fuller measure
of the Holy Ghost within? what does he? He calumniates me to bring this as a
cl^ar evidence, putting the words, clear evidence in other letters, as if they
had been mine; falsifies my known pretense twice, calls the word [ perhaps] the
one honest words; says the Dr. may not be satisfie'd by the reason alleged
that S. Peter had received the Holy Ghost in a more particular manner; and
then, in stead of telling us why he may not be satisfie'd, immediately
concluding that he shall not answer it further than by repeating it. Thus Dr.
H's reason, like some sorry creature, taken tardy in a tale, first mutters, and
stammers, as if it would say something or were hand-bound with some bad excuse;
but, seeing it could make no coherence, at length very honestly hands down it is
head, and says just nothing.

The fourth proposition is, And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, which
he tells us here, was sure no distinct argument of his. But, why it should not
be as good, and sole suffi^ient a proof as this, that the fire was divided and
(...), (as he pedantizes it ( sat on every one of them, which he called Answ.
p. 68. l. 3. an argument of somevalidity* I had no ground in the world to
imagine; both of them equally impugning our tenet, that is, not at all. For we
equally grant that each single Apostle had power given him, to bind, and loose,
or Authority in the Church (which he without any ground will have signified by
the division of this fire) as we do that they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost.

The fifth and last proposition immediately follows the former, and is this;
and so this promise equally performed as it was made to all; that is, all had
equally the Holy Ghost; and this is pretended as deduced out of the fourth*
saying that they were all full of it. Schism Disarm. p. 98. showd the weakness
of this arguing from fulness to equality by the instances of our Savior and
Barnabas, who are both said in Scripture to be full of the Holy Ghost, as also
of the saints in heaven being full of glory, though there were an inequality
between them in those respects; and, by the parallel ridiculousnes of the plow
man's silly argument, who concluded alleggs equal, and that none had more meat
in it than another, because all were full. To take of these exceptions, and
strengthen his feeble argument, the Dr. offers nothing; though he braggs at the
end of the Section that he has attended me (...) only he tells us here p. 69
gentily that he is not concerned to doubt but that they which are full of the
Holy Ghost may have it unequally if by unequally be meant the inequality of
divine endowments. How he is concerned to doubt it, shall be seen presently; in
the mean time let us reflect on his other words, and ask him what is meant by
the Holy Ghosts abiding in the Souls of the faithful? or by what other way he
imagins him to be there than by divine endowme^ts only. I hope he thinks not
that the Holy Ghost is hypostatically united to them or incarnate in them. An
inequality then of divine endowments is all the inequa'ity which can be
imagined in this matter; and thefore, if any inequality prejudice Dr. H's tenet
he is concerned to avoid this.

Now, how much it concerns Dr. H's circumstances to avoid an inequality of the
Holy Ghosts being in the Apostles, is as plain as it is that it concerns him to
say any thing to the question, and not talk only in the air. He is about to
impugn S. Peter's higher Authority by the performance of the promise of
Authority, and Commission made finally (as he thinks) by the descent of the
Holy Ghost upon them; wherefore, unles he prove that the Holy Ghost descended
equally upon each, he can never argue hence against the inequality of S.
Peter's Authority pretended by us, and so it avalis him nothing. He saw this in
his book of Schism, where he used these words They were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and so this promise equally performed to all. But, being shown the
infinite weakness of his arguing from fulness, to equality he shuffles about,
neither positively standing to his pretended proofby going about to make it
good, nor yet granting or denying any thing positively or giving any ground to
fix upon any word he says, but telling us first, in a pretty phrase, that he is
not concerned to doubt of the consistance of fulness, and inequality of the Holy
Ghost if it be meant of the inequality of divine endowments, and then, when
he should tell us the other part of his distinction, and of what other
inequality besides that of endowments and graces, the Holy Ghost can be said to
be in the Apostles founding Commission, and so concerning him to impugn and
deny he shufflingly ends thus; Our question being only of power, or Commission
to Authority and dignity in the Church, and every one having that sealed to him
by the Holy Ghost descent upon every one, there is no remaining difficulty in
the matter. Where first he says, the question is of power, and dignity,
whereas indeed it is of the equality or inequality of this dignity, not of the
dignity it self, since none denies, but that each Apostle had power in the
Church, but that the rest had equal power to S. Peter. Secondly he never tells
us, in what manner of the Holy Ghosts inexistence, besides that of divine
indowments, this Authority was founded. Thirdly he instances only against us,
that every Apostle had power; so tacitly calumniating our tenet, again, and
leaves out the word eq^ally which could only contradict and impugn it.
Fourthly, that this coming of the Holy Ghost gave Commission and Authority is
only his own wor^s, and proved from his own fancy* And lastly when he has
used all these most miserable evasions he concludes that there is no remaining
difficulty in this matt^^; when as he has not touched the difficulty at all,
but avoided it, with as many pitiful shift's, as a crafty insincerity could
suggest to an error hardened Soul.

Sect. 6.
Our Argument from the Text, Tues Petrus, urged; his arts to avoid the least
mentioning it, much less impugning it is force, which he calls evacuating it.
With what sleights he prevaricates from it to the Apocalypse. His skill in
Architecture, and miserably-weak arguing to cure his bad quiboling.
Dr. H. of Schism p. 89. 90. alleged some Testimonies out of the fathers
affirming that the power of binding was conferred on all the Apostles; that the
Church is built upon Bishops; that all in S. Peter received the Keys of the
Kingdomio of Heaven; and that Episcopacy is the presidency of the Apostles. Now
since Dr. H. pretends to impugn our tenet by these, and these infert only that
more Bishops have the power of the Keys besides S. Peter; it follows
necessarily that he counterfeihed our tenet to be that none had this power but
S. Peter only. Hence Schism Disarmed charged this either insincere or silly
manner of discoursing upon him as a pitiful ingnorance, or else as malicious
to pretend by objecting these that we build not the Church upon Bishops in the
plural, nor allow any Authority to them but to the Pope only. He replies
Answ. p 69. that it is apparent those words inject not the least suspicion of
that. I answer, it is true indeed; for it was, not a suspicion they injected (as
he phrases it) but plain and open evidence, see of Schism p 89. l. 28. 9. where
after the testimony had told us that the Church is built upon Bishops the Dr.
adds within a parenthesis [in the plurall] so placing the particular energie,
and force of that place in the plurality of Bishops founding the Church. See
again p. 90. l. 11. 12. etc. S. Basil calls Episcopacy the presidency of the
Apostles; the very same (adds the Dr.) that Christ bestowd upon all, and not
only on one of them* Yet as long as Dr. H. can deny it, and say with a gentile
confidence that it is apparent his words did not inject the least suspicion of
that, words shall lose their signification, and his Readers (if he can compass
it) shall be fooled to deny their eye sight.

As for the Testimonies themselves, there is not a word in them expressing that
this power was in like manner entrusted to every single Apostle, as well as to
S. Peter, (which yet he says p. 90. l. 16. 17. etc.) if by as well he mean's
equally, as he must, if he intend to impugn our tenet; And the other sense
which Answ. p. 70. l. 2. 3. he relies on, that from the Donation to S Peter,
all Episcopal power which in the Church flows, and in which he puts force
against our tenet, it as much favors, and proves it, as the being the fountain
and source of all honor, and Magistracy in a Commonwealth, argues that that
person from whom these flow is highest in dignity, and supreme in command in
the same common wealth.

After this he catches at an expression of mine, saying that the former
Testimonies rather made for us; which moderate words though I hope the later
end of my former paragraph has sufficiently iustify'd them, yet we must
answer the impertinent carpings of our Adversary, else the weak man will be apt
to think that the shadow he caught at is most substantial, and solid.

My word's in relation to the said Testimonies were these; Nay rather they make
for us; for the Church being founded on Apostles, and Bishops, prejudices not
S. Peter to be the cheifest; and, if so, then the Church is built most chiefly
on S. Peter, which is all w^e Catholics say. Now my discourse stands thus, If
so, that is, if S. Peter be the cheifest then the Church is built more chiefly
upon him, and I made account (as I lately showed) that those Testimonies rather
made S. Peter the chiefest; but, this piece of wilful insincerity first makes
my if so, relate to, if it prejudices not, etc. and disfigures my discourse by
making me say, if it prejudices not S. Peter to be the chiefest, then the
Church is built chiefly upon him, and that I infer from Testimonies not
preiudicing that the thing is true. Next, he calumniates me most grossly, and
manifestly Answ. p. 70. l. 35. 36. by making me bring this for a clear Evidence
on my side; whereas, my words ( Schism Dism. p. 99.) are only, Nay rather they
make for us; which are so far from pretending a clear evidence from them, that
they neither express the least reliance on them, not say positively that they
make for us at all. He shall not catch me calling toys Evidences, as is his
constant guize: yet, to render his calumny more visible, he prints the words
clear evidence, in a different letter, so that the honest Reader would easily
take them to be my words. Then* when he has done, he grows suddenly witty,
an^ insults over me without mercy calling me an immortal disputer; and truly
I shall not despair of being immortal, if nothing be likely to kill me but
Dr. H's harmles blunt reason.

Next he tells me that I have deformed his answer to the Text tu es Petrus; but
in what I have deformed it he tells me not Nor, indeed, was it an answer at all
to us, since he not at all put our argument, much less impugned it. Our
argument stands thus, that the name Peter, signifying a Rock, and this name
being not only given particularly, to S. Peter, but also after a
particularizing manner; in all probability S. Peter was in particular manner a
Rock to build Gods Church. Now the way for Dr. H. to take in this wit contest
about words of Scripture (according to the method already set down) is to show
out of the words, that it was not either given to S. Peter in particular, and
after a particularizing manner; or else, that, though this were so, yet that
there was no ground (prudentially speaking) to think that S. Peter was in an
higher degree or in a particular manner a Rock than the rest. As for the first
to wit the giving the name to him in particular we argue thus from it. Suppose
there were twelve Orators, and yet one of those twelve called antonomastically
or particularly Orator and were as well known by that name, and as commonly
called by it, as by his own proper name; certainly if that name were suppo^ed
to be prudently appropriated to that one, it were great imprudence not to think
that that person was in an higher degree an Orator, than the rest. Since then
our ^aviour made this common appellative of Rock the proper name to S. Peter
(none being called Peter but he) and that we cannot doubt of our Saviors
prudence in thus appropriating it to him, we expect what Dr. H. can show us
(not out of his own head, but) out of plain reason working upon the words
Grammatically attended to) sounding to our disadvantage so much as this sounds
to our manifest advantage. As for the second, to wit the repeating the words
after a particularizing manner, besides all other circumstances concerning the
power of the Keys heretofore which are competent to this also, two things in
particular are energeticall or of force here; to wit that repeating the name
Pe^er to him [ Tues Petrus] follow^d immediately after his confession of
Christ's divinity; an occasion as proper to make him confirmed a Rock in a
particular manner and degree, as it would be to confirm the Antonomasticall
title of Orator to that other parallel person upon occasion of some excellent
oration made and pronounced by him. Wherefore, as the repeating and confirming
the name Orator to him, by some eminent, and knowing Governor, upon such a
proper occasion, would in prudence argue that this person was in an higher
proportion and degree an Orator, so the repeating this name in such a way to
S. Peter [and I say unto thee thou art Peter, or a Rock] after a parallel
occasion, his particular confession of Christ's divinity, as much fitting him
for it, ought in prudence to infer that he was in an higher degree a Rock than
the rest. The other thing in which a particular energie is placed is in the
allusion of the words [ hanc Petram] as impossible to relate to the other
Apostles in the same particular manner, as it is to pretend that all their
particular names were Peter.

This in the sense of our argument from the Text [ Tu es Petrus] as joined with
the antecedent, and subsequent circumstances in stead of solving which or
showing that his opposite sense more probably or connaturally follows from the
very words Grammatically, or rationally explicated, Dr. H ( of Schism p. 91.)
first puts down the bare word (...), says that it and (...) are directly the
same then relinquishes both the signification which the Scripture and their own
translation gives that word (as shall be shown) and shows out of an odd place
in Homer, that it is an ordinary stone, though he knows well that Poets are the
worst Authors to fetch the propriety of words from, than by Math. 16. that
applied to a building it must needs signify a foundation-stone thence, by the
Apocalypse, a precious stone; this done he falls to deduce from the measuring a
wall in the same Apocalypse, and dogmatizes upon it, though he knows it is the
obscurest and most mystical part of Scripture; and then thinks he has played
the man, and that this rare proof is worthy to shut up finally the discourse
against S. Peter's Supremacy, and (as himself confesses) the most substantial
part of ^his Controversy; now to his toys.

He assures us Answ. p. 71. that his answer cannot miss to have this
discernable efficacy in it, that there b^ing no more meant by it, then that
Peter was a foundation stone, and all the other Apostles being such as well as
he this cannot constitute him in any Superiority over them, etc. I Reply:
first, that pretended answer Misses of being an Answer to the place Tu es
Petrus and is turned to be an argument from the foundation-stones in the
Apocalypse. Why did not he show that the particularizing circumstances in the
objected place had noe force in them, or were as congruously explicable some
other way but in stead of doing so, ramble as far as the Apocalypse, ferrying
over the question thither by the mediation of Homer, and such another
unconnected train of removalls as was used once to prove, that Cooper came from
King Pipin. His answer therefore has mis't to be an answer at all to that
place, that is, of being all it should be. Next, how knows he no more is
meant by it than that S. Peter was a foundation-stone, unles he can answer
first the particularizing circumstances in the Text, which entitle him to be a
Rock after a particular manner, or show that his contrary sense more genuinly
emerges out of or a grees to the words there found: Thirly, that the other
Apo^tles are such as well as S. Peter, if by [ as well] he means that the rest
were so too, it is true, but nothing against us, who hold voluntarily that the
Church was built upon all the Apostles: but, if by [ as well] he means equally
as he ought, this being the question between us, then we expect he should
show us out of the words that this is equally probably their sense. Till he
show this, our argument from the words makes still in his prejudice, and is
justly presumed to constitute S. Peter in some higher degree a Rock then the
rest were.

His reason against S. Peter's Superiority upon these Grounds, is, that Christ
only is the (...), chief cornerstone, and no other place in the foundation
gives any (...) of power to one foundation above another, which he manifest's
from the known position of foundation-stones, one by, not on the top of
another. Thus this Apocalypticall Architect. In answer, first, I ask him how he
knows that this place in the Apocalypse was designed to signify the order of
dignity amongst the things there specified, which is in question, or only
this, that all the Apostles were foundations upon which the Church is built,
which is granted, till he manifest the former he can not pretend to deduce any
thing from it against us. Secondly it is impossible to p^etend that it was
designed to prove any such order of dignity: for, it neither shows us which was
the chief corner stone, or that the chief cornerstone was higher, bigger, or
more precious then the rest. So that, if the bringing no positive sign of an
higher position prejudices S. Peter's Superiority it prejudices Christ also as
much, expressing noe peculiar eminency to the head cornerstone at all more
than to the rest. Thirdly the cornerstone signifying some eminency of power as
appears by our Savior's being called the head cornerstone, and this wall
being-four-square Apoc. 21. v. 16. it follows that there are other corners
besid's that which is allowed to our Savior, and consequently three chiefs in
power over the rest of the Apostles, which being against both our principles,
it is manifest that the order of dignity was not intended to be here signified,
and consequently the whole place is quite besides the Drs purpose, and our
question.

Fourthly, (...) being directly the same with (...) as Dr. H. gra^ts and (...)
being in near three score places of Scripture taken for a Rock and so
translated by themselves; and in particular, in this very place in Controversy
Mat. 16. v. 18. super hanc Petram, upon this Rock, etc. although the other
Apostles be called (...) foundations, yet, since none of them is expressed to be
a Rock but S. Peter only, nor that the Church is built on any of them else as
on a Rock, still he has good title in all reason to be in a more eminent
notion a foundation-stone. For the notion of a foundation-stone not consisting
in this that it rise higher, that it be longer upwards or shorter, but that it
be unmovable, and the strongest bearer of the superstructure; and, a Rock in
the Scripture being expressed to be the best for that purpose, as appears Mat. 7.
v. 24. 25. it follows that S. Peter was in a more eminent manner a
foundation-stone, and that the Church had a particular firmnes, and
immoveablenes in being built upon him; yet the Dr. can imagine noe distinction
amongst foundation-stones under that notion, as long as they lie one by, not on
the top another. So wise an Architect is the good man that he forgets, that to
be in a higher degree a foundation-stone is to be in a higher degree of
firmnes, but in a lower degree of position. Thus Reader tho see what
advantage Dr. H. would gain should I delight to quible with him in his own, and
only way. But I am already weary of this wordish stuff.

Next he undertakes to solve an argument which none objects but himself, and
it is this, that if S. ^eter be the first stone, and so Superior, then the
next stone (that is the second) must needs be Superior, to all the rest, etc.
So kind an Adversary have I that he leav's untouched the argument, from Tu
es Petrus, which he pretends in this very place to answer; and, in stead of
doing so, help's me with an argument of his own coining from the Apocaly^se not
worth a straw, ad then demolishes at pleasure, and very easily what his own
ayrie fancy had built. But, as I never made any such argument as this which he
thrusts upon me, so in that which I made Schism Disarm. p. 103. from the Jasper
stone, I both expressed my self to do it for the Doctor's sake, and renounced all
reliance upon it in these words, that Catholics who understand the Grounds of
their faith slight such poor supports as a self-fancied explication of the
obscurest part of Scripture, Schism Disarm. p. 103.

I objected, that his argument was negative, thus; no distinction was put among
the foundation-stones therefore there was none* He answers that his conclusion
only (not his proof) was negative. Therefore the words tu es Petrus neither
give nor affirm more of him than is given and affirmed of every of the other
Apostles. Whereas, first he neither made any such conclusion, no not any
conclusion at all against the Text Tu es Petrus, as we object it; nor tak^s
notice of any particularizing circumsta^ce in the whole place so full fraught
with them; much less concludes against them. And, secondly his wise proof
which inferrs this worthy conclusion is no other than this, that (...) and
(...) a Rock and foundation are the same. As if there could not be
foundation-stones less firm then a Rock, and so less worthy the notion and
name of a foundation, or a thing fit to build on which if there be, as common
sense tells us, then the notion of a Rock superadded to the bare notion of
foundation, and that within the limits of that common notion; that is, it
signifies a thing in an higher degree apt to sustain the building, or, which is
all one, in a higher degree a foundation.

Next, I objected that it was a most pitiful piece of ignorance to persuade
the Reader from a plurality and naming twelve Apostles that all were equal, He
Answers p. 72. that that was not his reasoning, but the rest of the Apostles
were foundation stones as well as Simon; and therefore that, that title of tu
es Petrus was not proof of inequality Thus the Dr. rowls the same stone still:
for, (to omit that he impugns not the Text, Tu es Petrus, as found in it is own
place attended by a throng of manifestly particularizing circumstances, but the
bare word Petrus only, nor that neither, according to it is particular
efficacitie as it signifies a Rok) either the words [ as well as Simon] mean
that the other Apostles were foundations also, and then he calumniates our
tenet not impugns it, since, we never denied but that each of them was such;
or else, [ aswell] signifies equally, and then I would know whether he suppose
it (that is the whole question) gratis, or infer it? or from what he can be
imagined to infer it there* but from a plurality only of the common
appellation. Neither could I wrong Dr. H's reasoning faculty in thinking so,
whose common custom it is all over to argue for an equality from a plurality,
and most expressly of Schism p. 87. l 2. 3. 4. 5. where also he calls it an
evidence, and, why he should not think the self same proof, an evidence, here
as well as there, or why he should omit it if he thought it such, I confess I
was so dull as not to apprehende.

Thirdly I objected that he had quite overthrown his own cause; since, granting
that a foundation stone, and (...) being the same and only S. Peter having the
name of (...), it followed on the Drs Grounds that he only, and in good reason
more particularly should be a foundation-stone. Dr. H. replies, first, that
this is a st^ange argument were it put into form. Next, (observe his kindeness)
he will not trouble him self with that; but in stead of doing this, that is, in
stead of showing my argument nothing worth, he recurr's to his own confident
sayings that it is certain (...), and (...) are the same; which I have shown to
be certainly otherwise, and that there may be foundation, and yet not a Rock
neither. Then, building upon his own certain, he introduces his so often
repeated conclusion, with a Sure, and then all is evident, After this he puts a
pretended parallel to my argument thus. It Is as if I should say Man, and Enosh
being the same and only the Son of Seth having the name of Enosh it follows
on these Grounds, that he only, and, in good reason, that he more particularly
should be a man, And when he has done he finds out a way for S. W. to defend
himself from not being a man; not considering that if Enosh be the only man,
it unmans Dr. H. as much as S. W. But, I thank him, I will none of his
assistance; and as for his pretended parallel I answer that when the ordinary
appellative, properly signifying the special notion, is appropriated prudently
to some one thing or person, that thing or person ought to be esteemed as
participating in a higher, and more eminent manner of that notion or nature Now
that Enosh properly signifies the species of man I deny; the Hebrew Critics
assuring us that it signifies man, not in his own nature, but as subject to
miseries and afflictions, in such a manner as mortalis does in Latin. Whereas
the word Adam signifying man according to his nature, denotes also that he in a
particular manner was a man, who had that name appropriated to him by God, the
whole species being ingrost in him.

So likewise the common name of Filius hominis, Son of man, being
appropriated (...) to our Savior, and of Orator to Cicero, it argues that they
had a particular right to these titles; that is, were in a higher and more
eminent degree the thing which was signified by those words. Again the name
Enosh might be in a manner accidentally imposed by his parents, and was his
first name, which therefore cannot be imagined to have any mystery in it more
then the bare conceit of his Parents; unles we suppose his parents to have
been prophetical, and then it had an especial reason, whereas, this name of
(...) signifying a Rock, was imposed by our Savior; who in each action guided
himself by the highest prudence; and imposed on S. Peter in particular, nay on
him having another proper appellation, sufficient to call him by, before; all
which argued a particular mystery, and designs in order to that name; and
denote him by the Antonomasticall appropriation of that common word, to be
(...) and eminently what it signified by it; to wit, a Rock.

Hence appears with what reason I made my fourth objection to Dr. H. that he
would have all the Apostles called Peter. For since it is not imaginable why
our Savior should appropriate and particularize to S. Peter the common
appellative, Rock, without some propriety in S. Peter fitting for that
particular name; and that, according to Dr. H. each Apostle was equally (that
is without any propriety or peculiarity) such, (for he makes (...) and (...)
the self-same) it follows that our Savior had equal reason to give to each of
the rest also the same name of Peter; for, there ought to be noe
particularizing in any action, where there is a pure indifferency in the reason
of the action. Now then, since our Savior governed him self ever by perfect
reason, he ought to have given to all the rest, the name Peter, by the same
reason by which he gave it to one, the reason according to Dr. H. being equal.
But this man who pretends to evacuate (as he call's it) our argument from Tu es
Petrus, never tells us why S. Peter had the name of a Rock in particular, and
no one of the rest; but recurs still ( Answ. p. 73. l. 14.) to his old mistake
that (...) and (...) are all one and therefore that all are equa^ly
foundation-stones, whereas indeed (which much strengthens our argument from the
word Petrus) (...) dot^ not signify a foundation-stone but a foundation only,
and so is rendered by their own translation Apoc. 21. v. 14. which abstracts,
Grammatically speaking, from Sand, straw, wool packs, wood, rock, or whatsoever
else can be competent to a foundation good, or bad. Now then, since S. Peter is
called a foundation, according to him equally with the rest, and also a Rock
which is given to none of the rest, let him either deny that to be a Rock and a
foundation both is not to be in a more excellent manner a foundation, or let
him grant that S. Peter was such.

Sect. 7.
Dr. H's master piece of affected weakness. Attendance (...), or step by step,
interpreted by his carriage to signify the neglecting to answer all that was of
importance or difficulty. A Review of his total performance in answering this
last Section, acknowledged by himself to be most important and fundamental.
AFter this Professor of Mystical Architecture had done dogmatizing from his
foundation stones; in the next place he falls to descant upon the measuring a
wall in the same Apocalypse; gravely objecting that I make much game at his
arguing thence. And truly, I still account it the most ridiculous method that
ever a weak reason stumbled on, to undertake to dogmatize, that is, to build
his faith and destroy his own interpretation of a Mystical part of Scripture,
so beyond all controversy obscure in the highest degree, that it seems to need
another revelation to know the meaning of it, as great as that which first
inspired it. And that it is the most openly-pernicious folly that can be
imagined, first to tell his Readers that Schism is as great a sin as
Sacrilege, Idolatry, Antichristianisme, etc. as he does ( of Schism. c. 1.)
and then, in stead of bringing evident, convincing, and demonstrative reasons,
which only can secure the Soul of any conscientious man, (especially
confessing that salvation may be had, if he had still remained with the
obedient party) to bring obscure mysteries, which have puzzled all the world
hitherto; of which also his own head must be the interpreter, and without
manifesting first, nay doubting himself (as shall shortly be seen) whether the
place was meant of our question, or made for his purpose. And yet after all
this calling this piece of midnight obscurity, and his cimmerian proof thence,
an Evidence. Of Schism. p. 91. l. 22.

His argument is this. It b^ing there in vision apparent, that the wall of the
City, id est of the Church, being measured exactly, and found to be 144 id est
( repeats the Dr.) twelve times twelve cubits, it is evident that this
mensuration assigns an equal proportion whether of power, or Province to all
and every of the Apostles the sense of which he repeats again here Answ. p. 73.
To show the ridiculousnes of this proof Schism Disarm p. 102. ask't him,
whether none of those precious stones, which equally made up this wall, be
richer then the rest? and why, if it were so, the inequality in richnes, should
not more argue an inequality in dignity and Authority amonst those who were
represented by them, than the equal bulk can argue an equality, since the
worth, dignity and value of precious stones is taken from their richnes and not
from their bulk. Next arguing against him in his own way I inferred, that
since the first stone in this wall represented S. Peter, ( as appeared by Dr.
H's Grounds allowing that Apostle a Primacy of order) and was there expressed to
be a Jasper, the same stone whose luster shined in our Savior Apoc. 4. 3. and
also in his Church, Apoc. 21. 11. it would have been prized for a rare argument
by Dr. H. were he in my case, (though slighted by me) that S. Peter only
having the same luster with our Savior, was like him in representation; and
so, he only resembles him as his Vicegerent, and Vicar. As also, that, being
the same stone the Church is made of and the first of all the rest, that he is
consequently the first part of the Church, that is, her head.

In answer to those first exceptions the Dr. says nothing at all; and so, is
nothing punctual in his promised attendance (...); that is, he vindicates not
his argument to be worth a rush; for, if the luster and richnes be more
valuable, and worthy in it is self, and so more apt to express dignity than the
bigness or bulk; then the inequality of richnes is more significative of
inequality of dignity than the equality of bulk is of an equality under the
same notion of dignity: nay more, (as he was told) there being an equality in
the bulk found amongst them all, if there be found besides an inequality in
richnes, as there is amongst those stones, every Lapidary, and even common
sense will inform us that an inequality in dignity is unavoidable. But the good
Dr. who at first thought his nice argument a rare business, seeing it marred, and
all unravelled, as easily happens to such cobweb stuff, sees, and acknowledges
now that it was neither worth, nor capable of repairing and so grew wise and
let it alone; hoping that his Readers would easily be persuaded that he had
answered me perfectly and made good his argument, if he did but tell him in the
end of the Section, that he had attended me (...). It Is a rare method of
answering to make two little peda^tick Greek words, which a man would think had
nothing in them, stop such great holes.

In answer to that which concern's the Jasper stone, he tells us first (if we
will believe him) that i^ is most proper to signify the luster of zeal, and
other gifts. But, why it should be most properly significative of those he
affords not the least attempt of any reason to oppose my contrary exceptions.
Next, he tells me, that he can allow me (in this sense) to make my advantage of
it: And, seeing we must have no other signification of that particular luster,
nor yet know any reason why, I shall take his allowance, and make my advantage
of it thus against him.

His Grounds made the coming of the Holy Ghost finally perform, that is,
actually give Authority to the Apostles; since then the Holy Ghost neither was
nor can be any otherwise in the hearts of the Apostles than by his gifts, the
allowing an advantage to S. Peter above the rest in those gifts, is the
allowing him an advantage over them in Authority, according to the same
Grounds. Nor can he deny but that I have gained S. Peter this advantage if I
make good my conditions proposed here by himself; in which I shall find no
difficulty, they being both tacitly granted already.

The first condition is, that I must find mean's to assure my self that S.
Peter was signified by that Iasper-stone. Is not this a sincere man, and a
pretty discourser, who would have me find a thing ere it be lost. I a^ready
found that mean's (he well knows) in Schism Disarm. p. 103. (which he braggs
here he attends on (...)) and that from his own words; for, the twelve
foundation-stones he grants to be the twelve Apostles of Schism p. 91 Now then,
since himself in many places and particularly in that quoted by me Schism
Disarm. p. 103 grants S. Peter a Primacy of order, and Apoc. 21. 19. in the
orderly recounting the stones the Jasper is mentioned to be the first in that
order; I see no possibility for Dr. H. to evade, but S. Peter was meant by the
Jasper. Himself saw the same also; which made him so shufflingly wary that in
stead of replying to it, which was likely to cost him no less than either the
denying his own most express words, or the most express words of Scripture,
he only tells me gentily, I must find mean's to assure my self that S. Peter
was signified by that Iasper-stone; which he knew well I had already found, nor
were they ever lost to me by any Reply of his. But in stead of invalidating
that my assurance ad hominem, he tells me I must find them again the second
time, and this is the signification of that mungrell phrase, to attend (...),
that is, never to take notice of his Adversaries argument but bidding him find
it, or repeat it over again himself.

The second condition is, that I must find mean's to assure myself that the
luster of the Jasper exceeded the luster of every of the other stones. This is
another attendance of the same negligent strain as the former. Schism Disarm.
p. 103. told him that the luster of this stone shined in our Savior Apoc. 4.
3. and also in his Church, Apoc. 21. 11 In stead of answering which, or giving
any reason why our Savior and his Church should be represented by a less
lustrous stone than the rest the sincere man only bids me find it again,
whereas, it remains still visibly extant in it is original integrity and
untouched yet by Dr. H. and so he knew well enough where to find it himself
without my showing him it, did ever answerer so lazily attend his Adversary as
Dr. H. does me? yet, if he still desire a reason of me, I shall give him this:
that, in all reason we should think (unles he knows something to the
contrary) that our Savior and his Church deserved to be represented by the
most lustrous and richest stone in the Company. Wherefore, the luster of the
Jasper being applied to them, we have noe reason to imagine the contrary but
rhat it had a more perfect and glorious luster than the rest.

But this is not all I aimed to induce hence ad hominem against Dr. H. my
pretense was sufficiently intimated in the same place, that the luster of the
Jasper was used in the Apocalypse to represent persons of higher dignity and
Authority to wit, our Savior and his Church and so the same stone
representing S. Peter only, expressed his higher dignity in a double relation,
to our Savior as being like in representation, and so only he resembling him
as his Vicar, or Vicegerent: to the Church, as being the first part of her,
that is her head, since his was the same stone she was of, and the first of all
the rest. These objections I offered to show the Dr. overthrows in his own
wordish way, and in his own weak argument: to which notwi^hstanding he gives no
attendance at all, nor any other solution save only says on his own head,
that the luster of the Jasper most properly signifies the luster of zeal, and
other gifts: but what Grounds he has to think that it signified noe higher
worth, or dignity, as applied to our Savior and his Church, but only zeal,
and gifts; or why, as applied to S. Peter (to whom only a among the Apostles
it is attributed) it should not signify the same as it did in other places, he
offers nothing Only he calls his sitting still when it is his duty thus to be
be stir himself, a precise (...) attendance.

Lastly, for an upeshot, himself knows not whether this still born argument from
the equal mensuration of the wall makes for him or against him; for, he infers
only that it assigns an equal proposition whether of power, or Province to
all, and every of the Apostles. So that, it seems himself is in doubt whether
it relates to an equality in power, or Province. Now then, this being so, and
equality in power being the only question between us, unles he first can show
that it has regard to power, whihc yet he no where so much as attempts, more
than by saying it does so, he is utterly incapable to pretend hence that the
power in all the Apostles was equal. Again (to omit that his conceit of
Apostolical Provinces has been shown to be perfectly chimericall and
Groundles) what does the equality of their particular Province prejudice us?
since with this it may well consist, that one of those Governors though equal
in his private charge, may be either constituted by the Supreme, or agreed upon
by the rest of those twelve to be their chief, and him to whom in extraordinary
occasions, and more universal affairs recourse is to be had, as to a Superior.

Wherefore till Dr. H. afford me Evidence that this Mystical place has
reference to power, or indifferently either to power, or Province (for though
he be in doubt what it signifies yet he tells us ( of Schism p. 91.) it is
evident, I shall take the liberty my nature allows me, to assent unto neither;
but rather to think that it relates to the different disposition of Souls,
only known to God, as his Mystical Author before explicated himself in
another occasion; and, that the heavenly Jerusalem shall be made up of such,
some of them resenting and resembling the Spirit that is the particular manner
of the knowledge; and affection of S. Peter, others those of S. John, of S.
Paul, etc. which the Allwise orderer, and coorderer of nature and Grace saw
most fitly to be signified by such, and such prescious stones, for some
qualites, and properties which he best saw by analogy, commonly agreeing to
both. Mysteries to be venerated by an humble admiration, not to be proudly
presumed as with a literal, and gross familiarity known or seen by our muddy
and flesh-veiled eyes; which they do who pretend to dogmatize and bring
rigorous evidence (the only rational ground of faith) from such depths of
obscurity; the most pernicious and boldest irreverence that can be offered to
be only certain ground of faith ( evidence of Authority) or to the profound
unscrutablenesse of those Mysteries themselves.

Having behaved himself thus gallantly in this point of the donation of the
Keys he takes his leave of us in this triumphant manner, And so much for this
large 13. Section, which I have attended on precisely and (...), as being most
important to our business in hand, the case of our Schism fundamentally
depending on the Supremacy of S. Peter, and consequently of his first part.
Where, first he makes the solving our places from Scripture to be most
important, which we never built on at all for this or any other point of our
faith as applicated by the private skill of Drs or wits. Secondly, his
attendance on me, which he praises for so diligent, and precise, if examined is
only this; that he has prevaricated from his pretense and promise; injured us
in omitting our best place of Scripture, and calumniated our tenet all over;
that he has not shown us from the words that his interpretation is more
connaturall, nor one equalizing word of this power to counterpoise the many
particularizing terms objected by us, nor given us any other explication of
those particularizing Texts, save only his conceit against the Presbyterians
which he pretends not to show deducible from the letter, but says it upon his
own fancy only; that he omits to answer, or take notice of the most forcible
and energeticall parts of those Texts, and the most difficult arguments we
produce ad hominem against him; that he has not brought one Authority to
second his interpretation of twelve thrones for twelve Episcopal chairs,
though he promised us there; but falsify'd and abused one Author, prete^ding
him to vouch his interpretation, though most expressly and point blank against
him; injured another, by taking literally, and in a dogmaticall rigor what he
expressed himself to mean mystically and yet even that Mystical explication
contradicting and disgracing many parts of his doctrine in this point; and
dissemblingly concealing the words, and place where it is found in the third
Author. That he has shuffled about most pitifully to make good his negative
arguments, and his proof of equality from a bare plurality and fulness; that
pretending to answer the place, Tu es Petrus, he leav's the particular and
proper signification of the word, which Scripture, and their one translation
gives it, and all the particular circumstances in the Text which accompany this
word, that is, he leaves and omits so much as to mention all in which we put
force from that Text, and by the assistance of Homer skips aside from answering
that Text to argue from another in the Apocalypse; that, being come thither, he
brings another negative proof argues from plurality, to equality again, gives
for his solution Grounds for all the Apostles to be called Peter; falls to
measure a wall in the Apocalypse to prove equality of power, without proving
first, or knowing nay doubting himself whether it relate to power, or no, that
he omits to reply to those passages which showed him baffled in his own
argument; and lastly, when he has done, to let the Reader see he has used his
utmost here, he praises this point as most important, and brags that he has
attended us (...), and precisely; whereas he left the main passage, and all the
circumstances that force was put in un attended, and untouched; and most
miserably shuffled about, blunder'd and quibbled in all the rest.

THE CONCLVDING SECTION.
Reason why the Disarmer proceeded no further in laying open Dr. H's fault.
Objected Falsifications, cleared; and some of them retorted upon the Objector.
An unparalleled and evidently wilful one of the Drs, presented to himself
and his Friends in requital. Friendly counsel to the Dr at parting.
AND now, understanding Reader, what dos't thou expect further? that I should
lose my own ill employed time, and vex thy patience, already cloyed, with
laying open this Drs weaknesses and false dealings through the rest of his
book? or rather, dos't thou not complain how unnecessary so long a refute is to
such a Trifler; and heartily correct me (as some judicious friends have
already done) that it had bin abundantly sufficient, and as much as he
deserved, to gather together a Catalogue of his manifest absurdities, and then
leave him to the censure of judicious and ingenious lovers of truth and reason?
I confess in the tedious process of this Reply, seeing nothing worthy a man,
that is, nothing which pretended a rigorous or rational discourse, I became
wholly of their mind too: yet, I had such regard to the weakness of the
multitude of Readers, that I still proceeded in laying open minutely the
unparalleld sillines and insincerity of their adored preaching Doctor; and the
tyranny of that consideration had transported me into farther inconveniences,
so as to show him constantly like himself to the very end of his long book, had
not I been partly urged, partly necessitated to desist, and my desistance
warranted by these following reasons.

First, that Wits and Scholars, who are the flower of Readers, are deterred
and disenvited from reading books, especially Controversies, if they grow to
any excessive bulk: And, to those that should read such, it would be in a
manner ungrateful, when nothing is to be seen but the faults of a writer laid
open, which was the reason, that, to give some tincture of solidnes to my
Reply, and so to take of the tediousnes from knowing Readers, I have taken
occasion to discuss some points (as those concerning Possession, the Churches
power to bind to belief, the certainty of Tradition, etc.) more largely than I
was obliged out of any respect due to my Antagonist himself or his slight way
of writing.

Secondly, I have given unexpected satisfaction before hand to more knowing
persons, by laying Grounds before my Reply, which come home to the life of the
question, and at least endeavor to clear it rationally; which therefore I
conceive would be more grateful and profitable to them; and on the other side
(being supererogatory to the task of a Respondent) might deserve to excuse some
part of that which was ungrateful, and to them unprofitable; nay, all of it,
confes't by Dr. H. himself (as shall be seen) to be unnecessary.

Thirdly, I had acknowledged some beholdingnes to the Catholic Gentleman's
letter; and, so, had drawn upon my self an engagement to vindicate it also
against Dr. H's Reply. By which mean's I had two books of his to refute as far
as I proceeded; to both which had I replied quite through, it would have made
too-large a volume.

Fourthly, the B. of Derry had, e're I had answered Dr. H's first part, put out
a refute to my Appendix to Schism Disarmed; which obliged me to leave some room
in my already big book for him, and to bestow on him some part of that my
defensive task otherwise due and intended to Dr. H. and so I had not room
enough to prosecute all the less necessary trifles of that my long winded
Adversary.

Fifthly, the task it self of answering such kind of slight soul'd Writers
was most tedious and irksom to any one who pretends to and ayms at Science; nay
most irrational and senceles; consisting in this, that, rigorous discourse and
the immediate and evident connection of terms (that only proper satisfaction to
a reasonable Soul) being neglected, upon which our Tenor and Rule of faith,
immediate Tradition, is, at least, pretended to be built; to leave this, I say,
and to stand replying to every odd end of a worm-eaten Record or testimony;
which, without the help of this Tradition can claim no original Authority at
all, much less against it; and, for the most part, is falsify'd, unauthentick,
ambiguous in terms, or non-cluding if it hap to be true, and truly-proposed,
besides many other weaknesses invalidating it; which is to neglect sense for
words; and, instead of reasoning from Grounds, fall to quibbling in Sounds

Sixthly, even in pursving this testimony way, I have shown to the eye of the
Reader, this Drs manner of writing, so infinitely faulty and weak, so full
fraught with falsifications, paralogisms, perverting both words and sense of
Authors, omitting words most important for us, adding others most important for
himself, suborning Archhereticks for true fathers, building upon Testimonies
fetched from those of his own side, alleging places as for him, and concealing
the words found to be directly against him, shuffling a way the true point,
with a gentile slines, begging, or else mistaking the question all over; as often
calumniating our tenets and positions, running division upon a dow-bak'd If a
long way, without ever considering the if not; Talking voluntarily, to and fro,
upon his own head in a preaching vein, blundering things in themselves most
clear with needles distinctio^s and explications, which he uses, against their
nature, to involue and confound: recurring to and dilating himself much in the
general terms, so to avoid coming to the particular point; contradicting
himself frequently, and in one point Nine or ten times, flourishing all over
with certainly, surely, irrrefragably, infallibly, unquestionably, accordingly,
plainly, manifestly, demonstrably, undoubtedly, clearly, expressly, we know, it
is manifest, id est, perfectly, unavoidably, evidently, and innumerable such
other expressions, all sprung from his own fancy to give countenance to the
Testimonies, not from the Testimonies or any force of reason to make good those
expressions: to which add his sober sermon-phrases so often repeated, of no
degree of truth, no appearance of force; I did in the simplicity of my heart
verily believe; I shall not deem it necessary to descend to any further proof:
His playing the Pedant all over in Greek to amuse the good women and silly
children; those, I say, and many other faults, follies and weaknesses, I have
shown to any intelligent Readers eye so manifest and so frequent in him, that I
could not conceive any imaginable necessity of laying him open further; and
that if he have been convinced to behave himself so weakly and insincerely in
that part of his book which himself accounts only to have been fundamental;
the like might justly be expected (without showing it by detail) in the rest of
his book, which he acknowledges to be less necessary; in case we may have so
good an opinion of him as to think he would treat more solidly and sincerely
that which more imports and is substantial to the question of Schism, and by
consequence most highly concerns men's salvations, which depend there upon.

Seaventhly I was disenvited by this, that, it is particularly against my
inclination and temper (whatsoever Mr. H's and his friends may conceive of me)
to stand manifesting the faultines of others, further then I can be satisfied
it is precisely necessary; judging it the most illiberall task that a Soul
which longs after Science could be put upon, to be employed in discovering the
disingenuity and weaknesses of the wrongers of Truth; and, professing with all
sincerity, that I had rather heartily confess and acknowledge the virtues, and
advance the fame of good Writers according to the degree I find them to
deserve, than to reveal the vices and shame of bad ones; as my favorable
expressions, on the by, concerning the acutenes of the Lords, Faukland and
Digby, and the wittines of that Giant for fancy, Dr. Done, in my Schism
Disarmed, clearly testify.

Eighthly, I was much deterred even from endeavoring any particular exactnes in
this, much more from attempting the rest by reason of the dangers and in a
manner imposibility to get my books printed here in England, and the great
charge and hazard also I saw I was like to be at in sending them to France. It
is very cheap and easy for them to brag of a quicker Reply, to whom the press
is free, and the book sellers shop licenced, both to print and vent them openly
with security and advantage: whilst those Authors, whose books, are prohibited
printing in England under great penalties and forfeitures, after they have past
the chargeable and tedious press beyond sea, may not be sold here but at the
loss of forty shillings a book if the buyer pleases to prove Knave, are not yet
by their sillily-insulting Adversaries allowed what in reason is due for such
disencouragements, hazards and delayings.

Ninthly, it is a far more secure satisfaction to candid Readers to see a main
part of a book answered co^pleatly and fully, than the whole slubberingly and
imperfectly (as I have, and shall show further, that Dr. H. has answered mine)
for this latter method leaves a way open to omit many things, amongst which it
may happen that some are very important; whereas, the former manner of
proceeding debarrs that licentiousnes, and all pretense of that excuse; and so
makes either the cause or the Writer unavoidably fall under a just suspect if
it chance to fall short of being satisfactory: But especially if that part of
the book, which is thus fully replied to be acknowledged by both sides to be
solely important, a conciser and solider way of satisfaction cannot be
imagined.

Lastly, if all those former reasons alleged will exuse me from performing a
needles duty, Dr. H. himself shall complete my just excuse, and confess this
was needles: who in his book of Schism p. 92. after he had finished his slight
discourse against S. Peter's Supremacy (the part which I have largly replied to)
he adds that it is very unnecessary to proceed to the other part of it, etc.
that this is in effect the only ground of the Romanists pretensions, etc. that
he thinks fit again to remind the Romanist, and peremptorily to insist on this
exception against S. Peter's Pastorship over all the rest of the Apostles, and
p. 94. that what he should add concerning the power of S. Peter's Successor, as
such, would be perfectly, ex abundanti, more then needs, and so he desires it
may be looked on by the Reader. The like he repeats in his Answer to Schism
Disarm. p. 74. Saying that my 13th Section (which vindicated S. Peter's
Supremacy) was most important to our business in hand: that, the case of our
Schism fundamentally depends on that Supremacy, etc. Thus he. Now then, I have
fully replied to and vindicated our tenet in all that he calls fundamental,
only necessary, our only Ground, and which he professes he peremptorily
insists on, it follows that, had I done more, I had done a business not
important, nor fundamental, nor on which they peremptorily insist; and so, it
being also unnecessarily for me to vindicate a point, which he thinks very
unnecessary to prosecute, my further endeavors had been confessedly to no end,
or frivolous, if taken alone; but, joined to my former reasons, absolutely
unwise and temerarious.

I omit that Dr. H. neglecting to answer almost all my 9th Section of the 2d
part of Schism Disarmed, which proved the Protestants guilty of the material
fact of Schism; and all my 10th Section, which proved them guilty of the
formal part of it; that is, neglecting to answer all that part of my book in
which I brought him to terms of reason, and which did intrinsecally,
fundamentally, and substantially concern our question, and passing them over
slightly p. 224. after he pretended falsely that I beg the question, with
telling the Reader that he will leave me to Skirmish with my own shadow whereas
it was the hottest Schirmish in the book (as any ordinary eye may discern) I
conceive it gives me just occasion to neglect answering that in him, which
himself confesses neither substantial nor fundamental.

I omit also that I was often blamed by respected and knowing friends, for
losing so much precious time, in such a worthles foolery; which I might have
employed much better to mine own and others advantage; they assuring me
likewise that his Reply was not valued by any indifferent and judicious
persons; nor by all on his own side but only by a few; who were so irrational
(and therefore inconsiderable) that they never examined any thing, but
immediately took that to be in reality an Answer which was called so: and would
judge him always to have the best, who should speak the last word, whether it
were sense or no.

Thus much to show that I had no precise necessity nor just reason to vouchsafe
Dr. H. a larger Reply. Yet, though in doing this I spare the Drs credit, I must
not neglect to clear mine own, and add something more in vindication of my self
from his senceles aspersions. But, indeed, in nothing can I more discredit and
disgrace him than in rehearsing and clearing what he objects in this Kind.
For, by this the candid Reader seeing how inconsiderable the worst is he can
say against me, will discern that he had an ingenious Adversary, and conclude
thence that it was the power of Truth, not any sleight of tricks, which thus
baffled the Dr.

If then my greatest faults be proved innocent, my lesser ones will (I
conceive) be held so likewise; since it is presumable that no man will accuse
another of a greater faul but upon a better ground. Now the greatest vices of a
Writer are falsifications; for, what credit can ever be rationally given to any
Writer who is once convinced to have belied the Author he cites, and to have
falsify'd wilfully. Faults of this sort he objects to me only in two places,
as far as I observe.

In examining which I crave the Readers exactest diligence, and decline not his
most rigorous censure; nay, if he can in reason judge that I wilfully changed
any thing, that is, gained or endeavored to gain the least possible advantage
by my mistake, (which is the only touchstone, as it is the sole reason of
falsifying) then I give him free leave to brand me in his thoughts for
infamous, and shall in requital pardon Dr. H. the long roll of his wilful or
manifestly advantageous ones.

(...) first of these pretended falfisications is found related in his Answ. p.
201. and also put in the title to his 11th Section p. 195. To clear the
Reader's understanding the better, and mine own credit totally, I will put down
first the substance of the point there handled, and the substance of my Answer
given; next, the circumstances amongst which my wrong transcription is found;
by which means one may easily and solidly judge whether my oversight had any
influence at all upon the point in hand; and conclude, that, if evidently it
had none, then it was only a material lapse in transcribing Dr. H's words,
equally incident to any man living, not a formal fault.

In his book of Schism p. 124, parag. 19. he attempts to prove that Kings have
supreme power in Ecclesiastical causes. Amongst his other marginall notes
aiming to conclude this, in the following page we read these words; So in the
(...) the whole third book is made up of justinians. 1. e. the Emperor's
constitutions de Episcopis, Clericis, and Sacris, concerning Bishops, Clergy
men, and Sacred Offices. This is the substance, nay the total of his objection.

The substance of my Answer, ^ound Schism Disarmed p. 167. is this, that all
the laws found there, must not necessarily be Justinians; since the Keepers of
laws use not only to put in their law books those Constitutions themselves
made, but also those they are to see observed; amongst which are the Canons and
laws of the Church, made before by Ecclesiastical power. This is the main and
substance of my Answer to that objection in general.

How weakly he reply's to this, telling us only Answ. p. 202. that this cannot
possibly be accommondated to the matter in hand, because it is certain (cries
the strong reasoning Dr.) he made many (...) concerning Ecclesiastical
matters, which the Authors name put to them and the persons to whom they were
written; I cannot totally omit to let the Reader see by the way how pitiful
this Reply of his is, how nothing to the point: this being to say over again
what we grant, and leaving untouched what we object: since all this might have
been done, whether those Constitutions had been originally his own or no; and,
will serve for an instance how weak this Dr. is in the following part of his
book, were he duly called to account. But, this concerns not my task at
present; which is only this, to put down substantially the question, his
proof, and my Reply, that it may be thence judged whether I could possibly be
said to gain any advantage by the circumstances I faultred in.

The first of those circumstances is that whereas his words were Justinians
Constitutions de Episcopis, Clericis, and Sacris* I transcribed de Episcopis,
Clericis, Laicis. Now, if he contend I transcribed one word wrong in answering
his whole book, I grant it; and, I conceive, Dr. H will not presume himself
exempt from the like faillings: But, if he pretend that I falsify'd or did it
voluntarily, plain sense will overthrow him quit me. No man does a thing
voluntarily but for some end; and the end an insincere Writer can be imagined
to have in falsifying is to gain some advantage to his cause. If then it be
most manifest that I neither did attempt nor could possibly gain thence the
least advantage, nor that he himself attempts to show I gained any, no man of
reason but will acquit my sincerity, and accuse mine Adversary for a
calumniator.

First then that I did not attempt any advantage thence is clear both in my
words which never put either the least force in the word Laicis, nor so much as
mentioned it or any thing to that sense; nor, yet, in the omission of Sacris

Secondly, it is yet more manifest in that mine Adversary never goes about to
show that I made the least use of this mistake, which yet solely imported in
such an objection; but rather on the contrary calls it a meannes, saying that I
am come to that meannes of changing his words (and indeed it is a strange
meannes to change them to no purpose) and alleges only as the cause of that
meannes (forsooth) that I did it (not to gain any help to defend my tenet by
it) but to get some advantage of carping at them. But, that even this is as
falsely pretended as the other, the Readers eye will inform him, if he please to
peruse my Answer ( Schism Disarm. p. 167.) where he will see that there is not
a syllable which sounds like carping at his words, but a serious Answer to the
point

Thirdly, that I could reap no profit by such a mistake appears by the very
point it self applied to my words: for, since he denies not but I transcribed
right, and grants that he made laws de Episcopis and Clericis; of Bishops and
Clergy men; to what end should I omit Sacris, sacred Officies since he that
could make laws concerning those, who were over Sacred Officies, could a
fortiori make laws for the Sacred Offi^ies themselves: as himself yields of
Schism p. 125. l. 18. 19.

And, lastly, this objection is convinced to be most senceles by this, that my
Answer given was equally pertinent and strong, applied to Sacris, had it been
there, as it was to Episcopis and Clericis, when this was left out: since it
contended that law Keepers use to put in their law books the Constitutions and
Canons of the Church to make them more powerfully observed and received: which
equally fit's the pretense that they made Constitutio^s de Sacris, as that they
made them de Episcopis and Clericis.

In a word, I confess, the infinite tediousnes of my dreaming Adversary made me
write the whole book in some have, caused by my impatience to stand triffling
after that manner; and my particular have here appears also by leaving out the
particle [and] before [ Sacris] (of which I wonder the Dr. made not another
falsification) as well as in mis-writing that word. And, it seems, the
Antithesis or opposition between Clericis, and, Laicis, very obvious to one's
mind, not particularly attentive, which seemed warranted by my fore knowledge
that Justinian (a secular Prince) made laws concerning laymen also, made me not
aware of my mistake; and, on the other side, there was nothing in so
unconcerning a change which could awaken in me an apprehension that I had
erred; which, had there been any force put particularly in that word, I should
have reflected on. But I have said too much in excusing a material error, to
which the best and wisest man living is obnoxious: material, I say; since both
the substance and import of the point there in hand, the perfect silence of
mine Adversary in applying my mistake to the said point, and his only (but
false) pretense that I gained hence advantage to cavil at them, examined by
any Readers eye, all conspire to excuse it from being formal and affected.

Yet, this is my great falsification; the rest are such pitiful toies that
they blush for shame in their objector's behalf as soon as they show their
faces; and instead of blaming me, accuse him of the contumeliousnes he laid to
my charge in the beginning of his book.

The second falsification (found here likewise) is this, that whereas he said
that in the (...), the whole third book is made up of Iustinian's Constitutions
de Episcopis, etc. I call it Iustinian's third book. Where Is the difference?
only here, that Justinian (as is agreed and granted by both) writ those laws,
but another collected them, so that, according to him it is a falsification to
call those laws Iustinian's book, which himself both here and in the following
page confesses Justinian constituted or writ, because another collected them
into a Sy^nopsis. Alas poor man! yet this falsification is plurally expressed
with the former, and put in the title of his Section as a business of great
concern. Now, he never pretends that this empty chimera of a falsification, has
any influence at all upon my cause or Answer, only he tells me I have ill
luck: and, indeed so I have; but it is only in this that I have lost my time in
confuting so weak an Adversary.

My third falsification (alas) is found objected in his Answ. p. 167. Attend
Protestant Readers, and all you that run to this Drs Sermons, with such a
gaping admiration! See in these two present calumnies of his how sillines and
in sincerity are at fisticufs about their just claim to him, leaving it a drawn
Match to which of them he more properly belongs: Either qualification being in
the height, they admit no comparison and so no Vmpirage I shall put down the
very words, the very page, and the very line, where my words and his are found;
and then leave them that love Truth better then his person, to abhor such an
open Affector of Fals-dealing; and those that hug an airbred opinion of him
above the respect due to Truth and honesty, to the just regret, which such
inexcusable follies and disingenuities of their preaching Dr. will cause in
their partial Souls.

In his book of Schism p. 118. l. 11. 12. 13. 14. to prove that Kings had a
proper power to erect Metropolitan's, he cited the 12. Canon of the council of
Chalcedon: where (he said) mention was made of cities honored with letters
Patents from the Kings, with the name and dignity of Metropoles: Now, the Greek
as put down by himself, being only that they were honored (...), which
signifies precisely [ with the name of a Metropolis] no more; and, it being
contended and proved by me out of Dr. H's own friend Balsamon, that they had no
dignity of Jurisdiction, I excepted with good reason against his rendering the
single word (...), which signifies only with the name, by that double and
advantageous expression of [ name and dignity.] My exception Schism Disarm. p.
145. l. 3. 4. etc. was delivered in these words, that the council says only,
those cities were honored with (...), [ the name alone] which the Dr. fluent in
his expressions englishes name and dignity. Now this particle [alone] after [
name] he calls a falsification, insincerity, and alleges it is put in by me;
whereas, it is most palpably manifest, I used the word [ alone] as my own word
not the councill's, and put it in opposition to his double phrase of [ name and
dignity.] And, how it is possible to correct one, who insincerely translates a
single word by two different ones, without using the limitative particle [
onely] or [ alone] to restrain his extravagant interpretation, no man living
can imagine. To evidence yet more clearly that I used the word [ alone] as mine
own not the councils, I was so exact as to put it down in a different letter
from that in which I put [ the name] pretended to be the councils words; to
wit, in the common letter, in which I used to put mine own words throughout the
whole book as contradistinguish't fom the words of others (as is to be seen
Schism Disarm. p. 145. l. 4. 5.) yet all this minute wa^ines, which left no
possible room for any cavil, was not sufficient to secure my sincerity, nor
stave of Dr. H. from his needful, and now grown natural insincerity; look
Answ. p. 167. l 2 and you shall see he changes the word [alone] in which he
contends my falsification consists, from the roman letter in which I writ it
(and by thus writing it, ownd it for mine) into the Italic or translation
letter, which signifies that I pretended it the council's word and translated
it thence. And, when he has thus changed my word, thus distinctively put, and
consequently my intention, and the import or application of that particle, he
calls his manifest falsification of my words, my falsification of the Councils;
and Grounds his cavil and calumny merely upon his own insincere carriage; in
which I must tell him plainly he has committed a piece of most open knavery.
Let the Dr. and his friends patdon me these plain expressions, till they show
me why he that accuses another of falsifying (which is Knavery in the height)
and builds his unjust accusation only upon the same fault committed by himself
at the same time, may not with justice and modesty both be branded with that
qualification, which he would thus unjustly affix upon another.

My fourth falsification ( Si Dijs placet) is found in the same places as the
former, Schism Disarm. p. 1 5. I cited the council that those Metropolitanes
(erected by Kings) should enjoy only the honor; and then alleged Balsamon's
words, that this honor meant no more but that that Bishopric should be
called a Metropolis. Now, Dr. H. in his Answ. p. 167. l. 19. assures his Reader
that [ this is another falsification] such another as the former, you may be
sure. But why good Dr.? Do you go about to show that I put not down the Authors
words aright, but mangledly and corruptly to my only and best advantage, as
your custom is? Nothing less; he pretends to show no such thing; though this
be the very thing we use to call a falsification. Strange! How comes this then
to be a falsification when not one word is shown to be falsify'd? why thus.
Balsamon (alleges the Dr.) Says no more then this that [some asked, or heard,
or were told, etc.] Good! use thine eyes again, Reader, and see whether, Schism
Disarm. p. 145. l. 13. 14. etc. in the very place to which he relates, I did
not put down minutely and particularly both in Greek and English those very
words as told us by Balsamon, with which the Dr. here correc'ts me, and slily
intimates to the abused Reader, that I either disguised or omitted it. The
testimony was this as set down by me verbatim out of Balsamon: [ Some desired
to know what that honor meant; (...), and received Anwer (...) that except
only that this Bishopric, was called a Metropolis, in all other things it was
subject to the former Metropolis.] Now I never pretended that Balsamon told us
this as his own opinion, but as the judgment of others, I quoted him as an
Historian, not as judge: nor can the very words put down by me [ Some desired,
etc.] possibly permit such a conceit. Nor, had it been my advantage (could
common sense have born it) to have pretended this as the sentence of Balsamon;
for, I ever conceived it came from persons of greater Authority and supposed
more knowing in those affairs, that is, from the council or some of the
council, at least from persons, who perfectly understood it is meaning. For, of
whom should we imagine in reason such a question was ask't, but of such persons?
or why should we think that Balsamon, writing upon that council with pretense
to explicate it, should intend to put down a frivolous question and an
impertinent Answer, and not rather a solemn question proposed by some concerned
persons about the sense of that council, and satisfied by some judicious
persons intimately acquainted with, or of that council it self, if not of the
whole council; which is most sit, as it is most able, to interpret it is own
meaning. It had been then both impossible the words put down by my self should
bear it, and also very disadvantageous to my cause to pretend Balsamon spoke
this of his own judgment: and consequently the irrational and perfectly
groundles aspersion of this Dr. ly all at his own door, and challenge him aloud
of the insincerity he objects to others.

The reason he gives why this was a falsification (forsooth) is introduced with
another [ besides] and is still as much besides the purpose as the former.
Besides this, I say (mark the strength of the Drs words) It is clear that this
of being only called M^tropolitans, was the punishment inflicted on them by
the council, which as I said, etc. well Dr. let the council mean what it
please, or let my consequence hold well or ill, that is another question; but,
did I omit any word of Balsamon in this present testimony (which you pretend I
falsify) which seemed to oppose my tenet? did I add or change any title in
favor of it? nay did I add, detract, or change the least particle how
unconcerning soever, or do you go about to show any such thing? how then, and
with what face can you pretend I falsify'd it? If all ill consequences or
deductions be falsifications, then it is impossible, where men maintain
different opinions, but one side or other must necessarily be falsifiers. Since
then I neither pretended not could pretend any more, but that Balsamon told us
what honor meant by relating the Answer given to those demanders, and this is
verbatim avouched in those words as put down by me, nor is my putting them down
reprehensible by my very Adversary, it follows (what ever my consequence or
arguing thence be) that I am acquitted of insincerity; and that the groundles
pretense that I falsify'd is proved to be an undeniable evidence that Dr. H.
most wilfully and weakly calumniated And, as for his endeavor to invalidate
my consequence, laid out here in those pretty terms of, I say, it is clear; as
I said, etc. were time and place proper to Answer it, I dare undertake to show
that these bold words are the best proof he brings for it, what ever Glosses he
makes from the abused council.

And now, kind Reader, I have acquitted my self, and shown to thine eye, that
the greatest faults the most calumniating Adversary could pick out of my
writings are perfectly innocent: but, what worthy requital for so much
injustice can I offer to Dr. H. I could present thee, Reader, with a long black
Scrowl of egregious and wilful falsifications from the rest of his long book,
which I have so mercifully spared; nay, I could show thee a new brood of most
enormous ones in his very book of Schism, which escaped my observation when I
first answered it (so pregnant and fruitful are his writings of such helps) I
could let thee see there, p. 103. how citing the Novels that Justinian ordained
the Archbishop of Iustiniana should have in that diocese, locum Apostolicae
Sedis, (as he puts it) and then Englishes it, the place or dignity of an
Apostolical Seat, which thus put equals him in a manner to the dignity of any
other Apostolical Seat by this independency; the false dealing man leaves out
the word [(...), of Rome] though found closely woven in the context thus (...),
of the Apostolical Seat of Rome; which marrs all his Market, and signifies he
was there in the Pope's place or stead; that is, was his Vicegerent, and so
subordinate and dependent on him. I could show thee, how not content to falsify
thus grosely and wilfully only in the same testimony, he doubles or rather
trebles my former fault and shame; and that, whereas the question was whether
the Emperor could do it dependently on the Church and executing her orders,
which we grant; or independently, and without her orders, which we deny and he
pretends, the Dr. puts down only that the Emperor constituted this Archbishop
should have locum Apostolicae Sedis, the place of an (as he falsifies it)
Apostolical Seat; but leaves out what follows immediately in the same sentence
to his prejudice, and utter overthrow, (...): according to those things which
were decreed by the holy Pope Vigilius; which signifies that the Pope made that
Archbishop his Vicegerent in those Countries by his decree, and that this
order of the Emperor was subsequent, conformable to and only executed the
former intentions and orders of the Pope; all expressly against him and for us,
and therefore both those and the former words being thus important, and thus
industriously singled and culled out by the Dr. it is impossible but his most
partial Admiter, (if he have not absolutely renounced his reason and resolved
the slender fading thing into the Drs Authority) must see and confess he was
wilfully fraudulent, and intended to breed in the Readers mind by the words
thus maimedly and falsely put, another apprehension than the testimony it self,
rightly dealt with, could have caused Yet, as long as this Enemy to Truth and
true dealing, makes zealous professions of his entire desire to speak the full
Truth of God, and that he did in the sincerity of his heart verily believe, and
such like womanish demurenesses, he hopes there will be found a company so
weakly simple as to give him credence, and that his moderate and bashful
language will to these good weak sighted Souls be a cloack thick enough to hide
or excuse his immoderately shameful deeds. Of such kind of falsifications,
Reader, I could afford thee variety were it necessary; but I have already done
enough to secure thee from this Drs Arts, and the consequence of them, Schism,
as maintained and asserted by him. Peruse my book attentively, and thou shall
observe I never call his material error in transcribing, a falsification (I
doubt not but I could show thee one hundred such of his for my single one were
it worth the pains) but only when I manifest the advantage he got by such a
carriage, which he never goes about to show in those he objects to me. Again,
thou ^eest how easily those falsifications he pretends as mine, are cleared;
nay shown to thine eye to be unconcerning toies or groundles wilful
calumnies; His which I objected in Schism Disarmed, are left by him unclear'd,
as this Treatise has from place to place shown thee And so, Reader, I leave
thee to thy candid thoughts, which I desire thee to employ in ruminating upon
the Dr. as put in this pickle; requesting of thee in mine Adversary's behalf
not to be too rigorous in thy censures of him; abate as much as the
consideration of humane errablenes and frailty can suggest to a
rationally-compassionate mind; only be not partial in what is evidently
fraudulent, and then thou shall right Truth, thy self, and me too by one
impartially ingenuous and rational act. I have only one word to speak to the
Dr. and then I take my leave.

You see Dr. H. it will not do; no tricks can prevail against Truth: she will
conquer, and knows how to defend herself by the weakest Weapon. Were it not
better now to give God and his Church the honor due to them, and show at
length your willingness to acknowledge faults so plainly and undeniably open,
than to continue your fruitles pains to show your self unretractably obstinate.
Nor do I impute them (however I may seem rigorous and too plain) originally to
you: I know the necessity of your cause obliges you forcibly to rely on such
uniustifiable ways I know, and your self cannot but know the same, how
miserably you are glad to pervert the words, voluntarily mistake, and thus
mistakingly propose to your Readers, the true import and sense of your
Testimonies; and to content your self with any slight gloss, which (not your
impartial judgment gives absolutely to be the meaning, but what) your partial
fancy can imagine may be defended on some slight fashion to be the meaning. See
in the Index what undeniable self contradictions, weaknesses absurdities,
voluntary mistakes, and falsifications, your task of defending Schism has put
you upon: Be true to your own best interest, a sincere conscience; be true at
least to your own honor, and, neglect, for the future, the defense of that
cause, which must inevitably throw you upon such Rocks. The further you reply
the worse it will still fare with you. For, to clear your self of these
falsifications and other manifold faults satisfactorily, is impossible;
eyesight attesting them; not to clear your self of them is doubly
disgraceful, fluttering up and down (as your way of writing is) entangles you
more: Sit still, and you will be safer. You cannot but see and acknowledge that
your position of a probable faith leads directly to Atheism, if followed, and
that, since none has reason to assent further then he has reason, that is,
further then the reasons given convince; and, since no probability can possibly
convince the thing is true, or, that the Authority speaks true, it is
impossible any man living can have any obligation in your Grounds to assent
that any point of faith is true, or any Authority to be believed; nay, if he
will not renounce his nature, he ought to suspend in both these; that is,
embrace no faith at all. The necessity of holding which tenet so fundamentally
pernicious to all Christianity, so odious to all good Christians, unavoidably
follows out of your principles of Schism, built upon the rejecting the only
certain Rule of faith, immediate Tradition; and the consciousnes to your self
that your weak testimony-way reaches no further than probability, enforces you
to own it, and aim at no higher a pitch of satisfaction, that is, none at all,
for, how can probability satisfy? Look behind you then, and see what a great
deal of industry and time you have fruitlesly lost in turning over
promiscuously multitudes of Authors, without first studying Grounds, that is,
without first laying your thoughts in order, with evident deduction from and
connection with first Principles. This task, only is called knowledge, the
former without this is more apt to lead to ignorance and mistake leaving only
a confusion of motley incohere^t thoughts in a man's head, impossible to be
orderly rank't in the posture of knowledge, unles regulated by fore laid
Grounds. Look before you, and you shall see many late wits, whose gallant
self-understanding Souls, own their nature, and rationally scorn to submit to
any assent but upon rigorous and demonstrative Evidence, either of the thing it
self, in Science, or of the Authority, in faith. Suffer your self to be won to
the imitation of these pursvers of knowledge; leave talking words, and begin to
speak Sense; leave of to diffuse and scatter abroad your fleeting thoughts in a
Sermonary and Preaching way, and begin to connect them into rigorous discourse,
that is, instead of aerie talk, begin to judge and know, instead of empty
flourish, learn to be solid. Ina word aim seriously to know, that is, to assent
upon Evidence, and then, I am confident, our understandings will meet in a
ioynt-assent, and (I hope) our wills in a consent and submission to the
Authority of that Church, whose Rule of faith, immediate Tradition, is
evidently demonstrable. This, S^, is the hearty wish of him who (however you
may apprehend him) protests he preserves a more prompt zeal and natural
alacrity to honor and serve you in what you can justly be concieved deserving,
than he has to discover the faults your tenets made you commit, which yet was
at present his unavoidable duty, the truth of your miscariages being joined to
the certainty and concernment of his cause you injured by them,

YOUR SERVANT, S. W.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX VINDICATED AGAINST THE PRETENDED REPLY OF Dr. Bramhall Ld of
Derry.
THE INTRODVCTION.
LITTLE remains to be replied to my second Adversary in substantial and
fundamental points, either in behalf, of R. C. or S. W. if those passages in
which I bring Dr. H. to Grounds be duly reflected on: since, neither can my
Lord of Derry deny but that there is now a breach made between us in the points
now controverted; nor does he pretend demonstrative and rigorous Evidence that
the Pop'es Authority was an usurpation, and so their renouncing it no criminal
breach but a lawful self-enfranchisement: Nor lastly, does he endeavor to
show that less, than such rigorous Evidence (that is, that probable reasons)
are sufficient ground to renounce, such an Authority; and so strongly
supported by a long possession, an universal delivery of immediate forefathers
as come from Christ, etc. or, that it was prudence to hazard a Schism, and
consequently their salavations upon the uncertain lottery of a probability.
This was all which fundamentally concerned this Controversy; and this is wholly
omitted by his fellow Mr. H. as well as himself; and, consequently, till they
speak out directly to this point (to do which they are ever very warily loath)
they can only hope it from courtesy, not claim it from justice, that they are
vouchsafed any answer at all; since, they who will not be drawn to speak to
the purpose, deserve to been neglected, and suffered to talk to no purpose.

Now, for satisfaction how little can be said to those most concerning points,
to omit other places, I refer my Reader to Sect. 9. and 10th of the 2d part of
Schism Disarmed left in a manner wholly unanswered as yet by Mr. H. and to my
Grounds before the foregoing Treatise.

In answer to the Title Down-Derry he shows himself mystically proverbiall,
and tells the amused Readers, that it were strange if he should throw a good
cast who seals his Bowl upon an undersong. I must confess the Bp. is far the
better Bowler; and that S. W. is so unexpert as not to understand what should
be meant by sealing a Bowl upon an undersong. Only lest he should conceit
some petty victory in having thus posed his Adversary, he may please to take
notice that it nothing concerns him; for the Bp: is beholding for the title
Down-Derry (and consequently the world, for this rare bowling phrase sprung
from that happy occasion) to the merry stationer; who without my knowledge or
approbation would needs make it the postpast to his Bill of fare. The jest was
very proper and fatal; but, whether courteous or no, I leave the Bp. and him
to scuffle for it: and address my self to a serious examine of the Bishop's
Reply. We have seen already that he is a good Bowler, let us see now whether
he be an honestman.

Sect. 1.
How my Ld of Derry omits totally to mention the second part of our charge; and
preuaricates from answering any title of the first, by cavilling groundlesly at
unconcerning toys; giving us general terms in stead of the particular thing;
falsifying openly the Council of Ephesus; contradicting common sense; of
controvertist turning Lawyer, and impugning the Extent of the Pope's Authority,
instead of the substance of it; wilfully misrepresenting every word of our Rule
of faith, as put down by his Adversary; and, lastly, by plainly confessing he
will not answer our charge or Objection.
IT was objected that the crime of Schism would appear to be justly charged
upon his Church not only with color, but with undeniable Evidence of fact; by
the very position of the case and the nature of his exceptions. Meaning, that
there was a manifest fact of renouncing and breaking from an Authority long
acknowledged as of Christ's Institution, upon Exceptions short of
Demonstration; that is, short of power to convince a rational understanding;
that is, Passion and not those reasons must move first the will, and by it the
understanding to a conviction; that is, the breach or Schism was criminal. Now
the good Bishop

First leaves out the second part of these words, [ the nature of his
Exceptions] which concerned himself; and puts down only the first part, to
wit, the position of the case. Whereas, we charge them not with Schism upon
this single account, that they broke from a formerly-acknowledg'd Authority,
which is the position of the case; but, that they broke from it without having
Evident and demonstratiue reasons and Exceptions against it, but, at best,
pretended probable ones only; that is, such as are no ways either able to
oblige the understanding to assent upon them, nor sufficient Grounds to
renounce any Authority at all, much less an Authority held sacred before, and
thus qualified. For, what a slack thing would the world be, if probable
Exceptions of the subjects (I mean, such as are held noe more than probable by
the subjects themselves) should be held sufficient ground to disacknowledge
their Governor's right, and alter the present Government? Would any Government
in the world remain on foot three years to an end, if this method were allowed
and practiced; unles, perhaps, force preuaild over reason? The Bishop had good
reason then to omit that which concerned the nature of his own Exceptions: For,
though himself and his friends love extremely to talk prettily, yet they cannot
endure the reasons which make up their Discourse should be brought to the
test, or their validity to convince the understanding scanned; that is, they
love not to speak out whether they be demonstrative, or probable only. They
dare not assert the former, conscious that their best way of discoursing is
only thetoricall, topicall, and for the most part quibbling and blu^dering in
a wordish testimony, whence no demonstration, or (it is proper effect)
conviction is likely to be expected. Nor yet dare they for shame confess the
latter; knowing that a probability, though never so strong, still leaves room
for a may bee-otherwise; and so can never conclude that the thing must-bee;
that is, can never, without injury to a rational nature, claim it is assent
that the thing (...): for, how can any man in reason assent that the thing is
so upon that motive, which very motive permits that it may not be so? It was
not therefore dishonesty in the Bishop, going about to impugn his Adversary, to
omit one half of that which he grounded himself on; but a great deal of
prudenc^ and warines, or indeed a kind of necessity.

Secondly proceeding upon this mistake of his own, he wrangles with us, for
calling this our chief objection against them; as king us if stating the
question and objecting be all one? No sure; if we speak rigorously: but a
Charge against one is often called, an Objection. Now ours against you (which
you here purposely mutilate) is this, that you left a preacknowledg'd
Ecclesiastical Authority, upon fantastic Exceptions, that is, unpon uncertain
Grounds: Which objection (if verified) so evidently concludes you wilful
Schismatics, that it is impossible to be cloak't or evaded. Now the first
part, which co^cerns your actual rejecting that actual Authority, is
notorious to the whole world, and confessed by your selves. The second, that you
did it upon uncertain Grounds, your self when you are pressed to it will confess
also; for, I presume, you dare not pretend to rigorous demonstration; Both,
because your self would be the first Protestant that ever pretended it; as
also, because your best Champions grant your faith and it is Grounds but
probable. And, should you pitch upon some one best reason or testimony
pretended to demonstrate your point, we should quickly make an end of the
Controversy, by showing it short of concluding evidently, as you well know:
which makes you always either disclaim, or decline that pretense; never
pitching upon any one pretended conuincing or demonstrative reason which you
dare stand to, but hudling together many in a diffused Discourse; hoping that
an accumulation of may-bee will persuade vulgar and half witted understandings
that your tenet is certain, and must be.

Thirdly, the Bp. asks us who must put the case, or state the question? telling
us, that if a Protestant do it, it will not be so undeniably evident. I
answer, let the least child put it; let the whole world put it; let themselves
put it: Do not all these grant and hold that K. H. denied the Pope's Supremacy?
Does not all the world see that the pretended Church of England stands now
otherwise in order to the Church of Rome, than it did in H. the 7ths days?
Does not the Bps. of Schism. c. 7. par. 2. fellow-fencer, Dr. H. confess in
express terms, And first, for the matter of fact, it is acknowledged that in
the Reign of K. H. the 8th, the Papal power in Ecclesiastical affairs, was,
both by Acts of Convocation of the Clergy, and by statutes or Acts of
Parliament, cast out of this Kingdom? Was this power it self thus cast out
before? that is, was it not in actual force till and at this time? and is not
this time extolled as that in which the Reformation in this point began? We
beg then nothing gratis, but begin our process, upon truth acknowledged by the
whole world. Our case puts nothing but this undeniable and evident matter of
fact: whence we conclude them, criminally-Schismaticall, unles their
Exceptions against this Authority's right be such as, in their own nature,
oblige the understanding to assent that this Authority was usurped; only which
can justify such a breach. So that the Bishop first omits to mention the one
half, of that on which we build our charge, (to wit, the nature of their
Exceptions;) and, when he has done, wilfully mistakes, and mispresents the
other: persuading the unwary Reader that the case we put is involu'd in
ambiguities, and may be stated variously; whereas it is placed in as open a
manifestation as the sun at noonday, and acknowledged universally. In neither
of which the Bishop has approved himself too honest a man.

Now, let us see what he answers to the case it self. It was put down, Schism
Disarm. p. 307. thus; that in the beginning of H. the 8ths reign, the Church of
England agreed with that of Rome and all the rest of her Communion, in two
points, which were then and are now the bonds of unity, betwixt all her
Members. One concerning faith, the other Government. For faith, her Rule was,
that the Doctrines which had been inherited from their forefathers, as the
Legacies of Christ and his Apostles, were solely to be acknowledged for
obligatory, and nothing in them to be changed. For Government, her Principle
was, that Christ had made S. Peter first, or chief, or Prince of his Apostles;
who was to be the first Mover under him in the Church after his departure out
of this world, etc. and, that the Bishops of Rome, as successors of S. Peter,
inherited from him this privilege in respect of the successors of the rest of
the Apostles; and actually exercised this power in all those countries which
kept Communion with the Church of Rome, that very year wherein this unhappy
separation began.

It is noe less evident that, in the reign of Ed the 6th Q. Elizabeth and her
successors, neither the former Rule of Unity of faith, nor this second of
Unity of Government (which is held by the first) have had any power in that
Congregation, which the Protestants call the English Church. This is our
objection against you, etc.

This is our case, jointly put by us and by the whole world; which the Bp.
calls an Engine, and pretends to take a view of it. But, never did good man
look so asquint upon a thing which he was concerned to view, as my Ld of
Deity does at the position of this plain case.

First, he answers, that we would obtrude upon them the Church of Rome and
it is dependents for the Catholic Church. Whereas, we neither urge any such
thing in that place, nor so much as mention there the word Catholic; as is to
be seen in my words put down here by himself, p. 3. but only charge them,
that the Church of England formerly agreed with the Church of Rome in these two
a foresaid Principles, which afterward they renounced. In stead of answering
positiuely to which, or replying I or not, the fearful, Bishop starts a side
to this needles disgression.

Next, he tells us what degree of respect they owe, now to the Church of Rome:
Whereas the question is not what they owe now, but what they did or acted then;
that is, whether or no they rejected those two Principles of faith and
Government, in which formerly they consented with her. To this the wary Bp.
says nothing.

After these weak evasions, he tells us, that the Court of Rome had excluded
two third parts of the Catholic Church from their Communion; that the world is
greater than the City: and so runs on with his own wise sayings of the same
strain, to the end of the parag. Whereas, the present circumstances inuit him
only to confess or deny what they did; and whether they renounced those two
Principles of Unity, or no: not to stand railing thus unseasonably upon his own
head what our Church did; she shall clear herself when due circumstances
require such a discourse. Again, whenas we object that they thus broke from
all those which held Communion with the Church of Rome; he falls to talk
against the Court of Rome: as if all those particular Churches, which held
Communion with the sea of Rome, had well approved of nor ever abhominated their
breach from those two a foresaid Principles; but the Court of Rome only. Did
ever man look thus awry upon a point which he aimed to reply to; or did ever
Hocus-pocus strive with more nimble sleights to divert his spectatour's eyes
from what he was about: than the Bp. does to draw of his Readers from the
point in hand? In a word, all that can be gathered from him in order to this
matter consists in these words [ this pretended separation:] by which he seems
to intimate his denial of any separation made in the a foresaid Principles;
but it is so shameless and open an untruth, that he dares not own it in express
terms; nor yet, (such is his shuffling) will he confess the contrary. I know
his party sometimes endeavors to evade, by saying that our Church caused the
breach by excommunicating them: but, ask whether they broke from and renounced
that Government (and so deserved excommunication) ere they were thus
excommunicated by it; and, their own conscience with the whole world will
answer, they did. It is that former breach of theirs, then, and reiection of
that Government, which denominates them Schismatics; till they can render
sufficient, that is, evident Grounds why they rejected it: for, otherwise,
nothing is more weak, than to imagine that Governors should not declare
themselves publicly and solemnly against the renouncers of their Authority;
or, that a King should not proc^ame for Rebels and incapable of any
privileges from the commonwealth, those persons who already had
disacknowledg'd his Right, and obstinately broken it is laws. Either show us,
then, that our Excommunication separated you from your former tenets, to wit,
from holding those a foresaid Principles of Unity in faith and Government; or
else grant that your selves actually separated from them both, that is, from
our Church. This, my Lord, is the separation which uniustify'd, makes a
criminal Schism: Excommunication is only the punishment due to the antecedent
crime.

Order, which consists in Government being essential to a Church if intended
to continue, it follows that since Christ intended his Church should continue,
he constituted the order of the Church, otherwise he had not constituted a
Church, since a Church cannot be without that which is essential, to a
Church. Wherefore, seeing that which Christ instituted is of faith, it follows
that order of Government is of faith, and so, must be, recommended to us by
the same Rule that other points of faith are. Hence, speaking of the two
Principles, one of Unity in faith, the other of Unity in Government, I affirmed
that the truth of the latter is included in the former, and has it is Evidence
from it. Must not he now be very quarelsome, who can wrangle with such an
innocent and plain truth?

The jealous Bishop first alleges, it is done to gain the more opportunity to
shuffle the latter usurpations of the Pope's, into the ancient discipline of
the Church. Not a jot, my Lord: the standing to this Rule, to wit, the
immediate delivery of fathers to sons attestation, renders it impossible for an
usurpation to enter; Nor can you, or any else instance, that any usurpation
either in secular or Ecclesiastical Government ever came in, prerending that
tenor; or show that it ever could, as long as men adhered to that method. It
must be either upon wit explications of word in the laws, or of ambiguous
pieces of Antiquity, not upon this immediate delivery from hand to hand, (in
which we place our Rule of faith) that encroachments are built. Had we, then,
a mind to obtrude usurpations upon you, we had recurr'd to testimony-proofs,
(the Protestants only method;) where with has a large field to maintain a
probability-skirmish of the absurdest positions imaginable: not to this Rule of
so vast a multitude of eyewitnesses of visible things from age to age; Which
Rule is as impossible to be crooked, as it is for a world of fathers to
conspire to tell a world of Children this ly, that ten years ago they held and
practiced what themselves and all the world besides knew they did not.

His second exception is far more groundlesly quarrelsom. It Is against my
making two Principles; one in doctrine, the other in discipline: whereas, every
Child sees that doctrine and discipline, or faith, and Government make
manifestly two distinet ranks or Orders; the one relating immediately to
information of the understanding or speculative holding, the other to action.
But his reasons why they should be but one are pretty: because, frustra fit
per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, It is in vain to make two rules where
one will serve. By which maxim, rigorously misunderstood, as it is by him, one
may dispute against the making several laws, and several Commandments, with
the like Logic, and say, all the treating them with distinction is vain,
because this one Commandment to do well, or, to do no ill, includes all the
rest. Again, he imagins, because the truth of one depends on the other,
therefore they ought not to be treated distinctly: as if it were vain or
needles, to deduce consequences, or, as if Mathematicians ought not to conclude
any thing, but hover still in the general Principles of Euclid, without making
any progress farther, because the truth of the consequences depends on those
Principles. Are these men fit to write Controversies; who cannot, or will not,
write common sense?

After he had been thus frivolously backward, he adds, that he readily
admits both my first and second Rule, reduced into one in this subsequent form:
those doctrines and that discipline, which we inherited from our forefathers
as the Legacy of Christ and his Apostles, ought solely to be acknowledged for
obligatory, and nothing in them to be changed that is substantial or
essential. See here, Reader, the right Protestant method, which is, to bring
the Controversy, from a determinate state, to indetermination and confusion;
and, from the particular thing, to common words. We point them out a
determinate form of Government, to wit, that of one supreme Bishop in God's
Church: it is known what it means: it is known that the acknowledgment of that
Government is now, and was at the time of the breach, the bond of Unity between
those Churches which held that Government, of which the Church of England was
one: it is known they renounced this form of Government, that is, that, which
was and still is, to the Church they formerly communicated with, a bond of
Unity in discipline. Again, it is known that we hold the voice of the Church,
that is, the consent of Catholic fathers immediately attesting that they
received this doctrine from their forefathers, infallible; and, that none
cannot be ignorant of what their fathers teach them and bring them up in:
Which immediate receiving it from fathers we call, here, inheritance.

These, I say, are determinate points, manifesting themselves in their known
particularities Now, the Bishop, instead of letting us know, I or not, whether
they broke that Principle of Unity in discipline (which it is evident they did,
by renouncing the Pope's Authority) or that Principle of Unity in doctrine, to
wit, Tradition, delivery, or handing down by immediate forefathers, (which it is
evident they did, out of the very word, Reformation, which they own and extol;
Or, instead of telling us what particular Rule of faith, what particular form
of Government, they have introduc't into God's Church in room of the former; He
refers us to Platonic Ideas of both, to be found in Concavo Lunae; wrapping
them up in such general terms, as he may be sure they shall never come to
open light, lest by speaking out he should bring himself into inconveniences.

Observe his words. Those doctrines and that discipline which we inherited
from our forefathers, as the Legacies of Christ and his Apostles, ought solely
to be acknowledged for obligatory; and nothing in them is to be changed,
which is substantial or essential. But, what and how many those doctrines
are, what in particular that discipline is, what he means by In heriting, what
by forefathers, what by substantial: none must expect in reason to know: for
himself, who is the relater, does not. Are those doctrines their 39 Articles?
Alas, noe: those are not obligatory, their best Champions reject them at
pleasure. Are they contained in the Creed only? He will seem to say so
sometimes, upon some urgent occasion: but then ask him, are the processions of
the divine Persons, the Sacraments Bap^ism of children, Government of the
Church, the acknowledging there is such a thing as God's written word, or
Scripture, etc. obligatory? the good man is gravelld. In fine, when you urge
him home, his last refuge will be, that all which is in God's word is
obligatory: and then he thinks himself secure; knowing that men may wrangle
with wit conjectures an hundred years there, ere any Evidence, that is,
conviction, be brought. Thus the Bishop is got into a wood, and leaves you in
another, and farther from knowing in particular what doctrines those are, than
you were at first.

Again, ask him what in particular that discipline is, owned by Protestants to
have come from Christ and his Apostles, as their Legacy, (for he gives us no
other description of it than those general terms only;) and he is in as sad
a case as he was before. Will he say, it is that of the secular power being
Head of the Church, or that of Bishops? Neither of these can be: for, they
acknowledge the french Church for their sister Protestant, and yet she owns no
such forms of Government to have come from Christ, but that of Presbyters
only; which they of England as much disown to have been Christ's Legacy. It
remains, then, that the Protestants have introduc't into the Church, at or
since the Reformation, in stead of that they renounced, no particular form of
Government, that is, no one, that is, they have left none; but only pay their
adherents with terms in general, putting them of with words for realities, and
names for things.

Again, ask him what he means by inheriting: and he will tell us, if he be
urged and pressed hard, (for, till then, no Protestant speaks out,) that he
means not the succession of it from immediate forefathers and teachers; which
is our Rule of faith and that which inheriting properly signifies (this would
cut the throat of Reformation at one blow; since, Reformation of any point, and
a former immediate delivery of it, are as inconsistent as that the same thing
can both be and not be at once.) But, that which he means by inheriting is,
that your title to such a tenet is to be looked for in Antiquity; that is, in
a vast Library of books filld with dead words, to be tossed and explicated by
wits and critics: where he hopes his Protestant followers may not without
some difficulty, find convincing Evidence that his doctrine is false; and that,
rather than take so much pains, they will be content to believe him and his
fellows.

Thou see then, Reader, what thou art brought to: namely, to relinquish a
Rule, (that I may omit demonstrable) open, known, and as easy to teach thee
faith, as children learn their A. B. C. (for, such is immediate delivery of
visible and practical points by forefathers;) to embrace another method, so
full of perplexity, quibbling-ambiguity and difficulty, that, without running
over and examining thousands of volumes, (that is, scarce in thy whole life
time) shall thou ever be able to find perfect satisfaction in it, or to choose
thy faith: that is, if thou followst their method of searching for faith, and
pursvest it rationally, thou may spend thy whole life in searching, and, in
all likelihood, die, ere thou chusest or pitchest upon any faith at all.

The like quibble is in the word forefathers, he means not by it immediate
forefathers, as we do, (that would quite spoil their pretense of Reformation;)
but, ancient writers: and, so, he has pointed us out no determinate Rule at
all, till it be agreed on whom those forefathers must be, and how their
expressions are to be understood; both which are controverted, and need a Rule
themselves.

But the chiefest piece of tergiversation lies in those last words, that
nothing is to be changed in those Legacies, which is substantial or
essential: That is, when soever he and his follows have a mind to change any
point, though never so sacred, nay, though the Rules of faith and discipline
themselves; it is but mincing the matter and saying they are not substantial or
essential, and then they are licenc't to reject them. We urge; the two said
Principles of Unity in faith and discipline are substantial points and
essential to a Church, if Unity it self be essential to it: These your first
Reformers inherited from their immediate forefathers as the Legacies of Christ
and de facto held them for such; these youreiected and renounced; this fact,
therefore, of thus renouncing them concludes you absolute Schismatics and
Heretics, till you bring demonstrative Evidence that the former Government was
an usurpation, the former Rule fallible; only which Evidence can justify a
fact of this nature.

It is worth the Readers pains to reflect once more on my Ld of Derry's former
proposition; and to observe, that, though white and black are not more
different than he and we are in the sense of it, yet he would persuade his
Readers he holds the same with us: saying, that he readily admits both my
first and second Rule reduced into one, in this subsequent form, etc. and then
puts us down general terms which signify nothing; making account that any
slight connection made of air or words is sufficient to ty Churches together,
and make them one. Just as Manasseh Ben Israel, the Rabbi of the late Jews, in
the close of his petition, would make those who profess Christ, and the Jews,
be of one faith; by an aerie general expression, parallel to the Bishops,
here, that both of them expect the glory of Israel to be revealed. Thus, dear
Protestant, Reader, thou see what thy best Drs would bring thee to: to
neglect sense, and the substantial solid import of words; and, in stead
thereof, to be content to embrace an empty cloud of general terms, hovering
uncertainly in the air of their own fancies. In a word either the sense of
your co^tracted Rule is the same with that of our dilated one, or not: If not,
then you have broke the Rule of faith held by the former Church, (unles you
will contend this Rule had no sense in it but non-significant words only) and
by consequence are flat Schismatics. But if you say it is the same, you are
reuinc't by the plain matter of fact, nay by the most undeniable force of
self-evident terms: since no first Principle can be more clear than the
leaving to hold what your immediate forefathers held, was not to continue to
hold what was held by the same forefathers; and that to disclame their doctrine
and discipline was not to inherit it.

After he had told us that the Church of England and the Church of Rome both
maintain this Rule of faith, (that is, indeed a different thing, but the same
words;) he immediately disgraces the said Rule, by adding, that the question
only is, who have changed that doctrine, or this discipline; we, or they? the
one by substraction, the other by addition. Which is as much as to say, the
pretended Rule is noe Rule at all; or else that we do not agree in it, which
yet he immediately before pretended; for, sure, that Rule can be no Rule to
him that follows it and yet is misled, as one of us must necessarily be, who
according to him, hold the same Rule and yet different doctrines. Either then
there is no Rule of faith at all; or, if there be, one of us must necessarily
have receded from that Rule and proceeded upon another; ere he could
embrace'an error, or differ from the other. It being known, then, and
acknowledged that we hold now the same Rule as we did immediately before
their Reformation, that is, the Tradition of immediately forefathers; it is
evident out of the very word Reformation, that they both renounced the said
Rule and we continue in it.

Next, he assures his Reader, that the case is clear; to wit, that we have
changed that doctrine and discipline by addition. This he proves, by the
wildest Topic that ever came from a rational head: Because the Apostles
contracted this doctrine into a summary, that is, the creed; and the ancient
Church forbad to exact any more of a Christian at his Baptismall profession;
whereas we now exact more. What a piece of wit is here? did ever Protestant
hold, that there is nothing of faith but the 12. Articles in that creed? do
not they hold that the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the Baptism of Infants,
the Sacraments, etc. are the Legacies of the Apostles, and so of faith: yet,
not found in that creed? Is it not of faith with them, that there is such a
thing as God's words; though it be not in that creed? How then follows it,
that they have changed Christ's doctrine by addition, who hold more points than
are in that creed of the Apostles? may not we, by the same Logic, accuse the
Church at the time of the Nicene Council; who pressed the word Consubstantiall,
to distinguish Catholics from Arians? nay, may not we, by the self-same
argument, charge his own Church, for making and pressing the profession of
their 39. Articles, in which are many things (as he well knows) not found nor
pretended to be found in the Apostles creed? What an incomparable strain of
weakness is it then, to conclude us to have changed Christ's doctrine by
addition; from our obliging to more points than are found in that creed:
whereas, it is evident and acknowledged, that very many points were held
anciently and ever, which are not put there? And what a self contradicting
absurdity is it, to allege for a reason against us, that which makes much more
against their own every way overthrown Congregation?

It being then manifest that the Apostles creed contains not all that is of
faith; it follows, that it was not instituted, as such, by them, or received,
as such, by the ancient Church. Let us see then to what end it served, and how
it was used by them; the ignorance whereof puts the Bp. upon all this
absurdity: which he might partly have corrected, had he reflected on his own
words, [ Baptismall profession.

It is prudence in a Church and in any Government whatever, not to admit any to
their Communion or suffer them to live amongst them, till they have sufficient
cogniza^ce that they are affected to them and not to their Enemies party. Hence
at their Baptism, (the solemnity which admits persons into the Church) they
proposed to them some such form of tenets (which they therefore called a
symboll or badge) as might distinguish them from all the other sects, rife at
that time, for some time, the Apostles creed was sufficient for that, and to
difference a Christian from all others: because, at the time it was made, the
rest of the world was in a manner either Pagans or Jews. Afterward, when other
Adversaries of the Church, that is, Heretics, arose against points not found
in that creed; it was necessary, upon occasion, to enlarge that Profession of
faith or symboll, so as to signify a detestation of, or an aversion from that
heresy. Either, then, the Bp. must say, that no new heresy shall or can arise,
against any point not found in the creed; and then the Anabaptist is iustify'd
and made a member of the Chimericall Geryon-Shap't Church of England: or else
he must grant that the Church, when such arise, must make new Professions or
symbolls to distinguish friends from those foes; unles she will admit
promiscuously into her Bowels, Adversaries for friends; a thing able to
destroy any Commonwealth, either Ecclesiastical or temporal. This is evident
out of natural prudence; yet this is that which my Ld D. carps at, that when
new up start heresies had risen, the Church should ordain such a Profession of
faith and consisting of such points, as may stop the entrance of such into the
Church. As then, if the reformed Congregation were to baptize one now, at age,
and so make him one of their company, none can doubt but it were prudence in
her (had she any Grounds to own herself to be a Church) to ask him such
questions first, as should manifest he were not a Socinian, Anabaptist, or
Papist, but Protestant-like affected, that is, propose to him a Profession of
faith, larger than is that of the creed, (for each of those sects admits this,
and yet differs from the Protestant:) so, it could not be imprudent in our
Church, when new heresies arose, who yet admitted the creed, to propose some
larger form of Profession, which might discover the affection of the party;
lest perhaps she might make a free denizon of her community, an arrant
Adversary, who came in cloakt and unexamind to work her all the mischief he
could. Yet, this due examination beforehand, the Bp. calls: changing of faith
by addition; thus perpetually goes common sense to wrack, when Protestant Drs
go about to justify their Schism; and, to make the nonsense more pithy, he
calls this a clear case, that we have thus offended by addition.

Again, he tells us, to confirm this, that the General Council of Ephesus did
forbid all men to exact any more of a Christian at his Baptismall Profession
than the Apostles creed. Which is, first, a very round falsification and an
open abuse of the Council. For, as may be seen, immediately before the 7th
Canon, Theodorus Mopsuestensis and Carisius had made a wicked creed, which was
brought and read before the Council. After this begins the 7th Canon, thus; His
igitur lectis, decreuit sancta, etc. These things being read, the holy synod
decreed, that it should be lawful for no man to compose, write, or produce
[alteram fidem] another faith; praeter eam quae definita fuit a sanctis
Patribus apud Nicaeam Vrbem in Spiritu sancto congregatis, besides that which
was defined by the holy fathers gathered in the Holy Ghost at the City of Nice.
Where, we see, the intention of the Council was no other than this, that they
should avoid heretical creeds and hold to the Orthodoxe one; not to hinder an
enlargment to their Baptismall Profession, as the Bishop would persuade us.
Hence,

His first falsification is that he would have the words alteram fidem (which,
taken by themselves, and, most evidently, as spoken in this occasion, signify a
different or contrary faith) to mean a prohibition to exact any more of a
Christian at his Baptismall profession: So, by the words, any more, which he
falsely imposes to serve his purpose; making the Council strike directly at the
enlargment of such Profession. Very good!

His 2d is, that, to play Pope Pius a trick, he assures us, the Council
forbids to exact any more of a Christian at his Baptismall Profession; whereas,
there is no news there of exacting, (but, of producing, writing, or composing
false creeds) less of Baptismall profession. And, though the Council forbide
this to be done, his qui volunt ad cog^itionem veritatis conuerti, to those
who are willing to ^ee converted to the knowledge of the truth: yet, the
punishments following, extended also to Laymen, in those words, si vero Laici
fuerint, anathematiz entur, if they (the proposers of another faith) be
Laym^n, let them be excommunicated, makes it impossible to relate to Baptism;
unles the Bishop will say that, in those days, Laymen were Ministers of
Baptism, or exacted, (as he phrases it) Baptismall Professions.

His third falsification is, that he pretends the Council forbad to exact more
than the Apostles creed: whereas, the Council only forbids creeds different
from that which was defined by the Council of Nice. So that, according to the
Bishop, the creed defined by the fathers in the Council of Nice, and the
Apostles creed, are one and the sasame creed.

His fourth is, that he pretends from the bare word [ fidem] a Baptismal
profession, for no other word is found in the Council to that purpose. Now, the
truth is, that, upon occasion of those creeds containing false doctrine, the
Council only prohibits the producing or teaching any thing contrary to the
doctrine anciently established; as appears more plainly from that which follows
concerning Carisius, Pari modo, etc. In like manner, if any either Bishops,
Priests or Laymen be taken, (sentientes aut docentes,) holding or teaching
Carisius his doctrine, etc. let them be thus or thus punished. Where you see
nothing in order to exacting Baptismall professions, or their enlargments, as
the Bp. fancies; but of abstaining to teach false doctrines which those
Heretics had proposed.

Ere we leave this point, to do my Ld D. right, let us construe the words of
the Council according to the sense he has given it, and it stands thus; that
the holy synod decreed it unlawful for any [ proferre, scribere; aut
componere] to exact, [alteram] any more, or a larger, [fidem] Baptismall
profession, [praeter eam quae a sanctis Patribus apud Nicaeam Vrbem definita
fuit] than the Apostles creed. Well, go thy ways brave Bp. if the next synod
of Protestants do not Canonize thee for an Interpreter of Councils, they are
false to their best interests: The cause cannot but stand, if managed by such
sincerity, wit, and learning; as long as women prejudiced men and fools, who
examine nothing, are the greater part of Readers.

Having gained such credit for his sincerity, he presumes now he may be
trusted upon his bare word: and then, without any either reason or Authority
alleged, or so much as pretended, but on his bare word only, he assures the
Reader, if he will believe him, that they still profess the discipline of the
ancient Church, and that we have changed it into a sovereignty of power above
General Counsels, etc. Yet, the candid man, in his vindication, durst not
affirm that this pretended power was of faith with us, or held by all; but
only, p. 232. alleges, first, that it is maintaind by many; that is, that it
is an opinion only, and then it is not his proper task to dispute against it,
our own Schools and Doctors can do that fast enough and afterward p. 243. he
tells us, that these who give such exorbitant privileges to Pope's do it with
so many cautions and reservations, that they signify nothing. So that the
Bishop, grants that some only and not all, add this to the Pope's Authority;
and that this which is added signifies nothing: and yet rails at it here in
high terms, as if it were a great matter deserving Church-unity should be
broken for it, and claps it upon the whole Church.

After this he grants S. Peter to have been Prince of the Apostles, or first
mover in the Church, in a right sense, as he styles it: yet tells us, for
prevention sake, that all this extends but to a Primacy of order. Whereas all
the world, till my Ld D. came with his right sense to correct it, imagined,
that to move did in a sense right enough, signify to act; and so, the first
mover meant the first Acter. We thought likewise that, when God was called
primum mouens, the first mover, those words did, in a very right sense, import
actiuity and influence; not a primacy of order only, as the acute Bp. assures
us: But his meaning is this, that though all the world hold that to move first,
is to act first; yet that sense of theirs shall be absolutely wrong, and this
only right, which he and his fellows are pleased to fancy: who are so
wonderfully acute, that, according to them, he that has only Authority to
sit first in Council, or some things, (which is all they will allow S. Peter
and the Pope) shall, in a right sense, be said to move first or to be first
mover.

I alleged, as a thing unquestionable even by understanding Protestants, that
the Church of England actually agreed with the Church of Rome at the time of
the separation, in this Principle of Government, that the Bishops of Rome, as
success^urs of S. Peter, inherited his priviledg^s, etc. as is to be seen p.
307. by any man who can read English. Now, the Bishop, who has sworn to his
cause that he will be a constant and faithful prevaricatour, omits the
former part of my proposition, and changes the business from an evident matter
of fact and acknowledged by Protestants, (viz: that the Church of Englands
Principle was actually such, and such at that time) into the point and tenet it
self, which is questioned and controverted b^tween us. His words are these, p.
6. Thirdly h^e adds that, [the Bishops of Rome, as successors of S. I^e er,
inherited his privileges;] whereas he ought to have rep^esented my words
thus, that the Principle agreed on by the Church of England and the Church of
Rome before the breach was such; and th^n have told us what he thought of it,
by ^^her expressing a denial, or ^ grant. But positivenes, even in things
manifest and acknowledged, is a thing the Bishop hates wi^h all his heart: for,
were I or not said to any point, the discourse might proceed rigo^ously upon
it, which would mar all the Bp voluntary talk.

It follows in my words put down by him, p. 6. that the Bishops of Rome
actually exercised this power (viz: of first mover in the Church; S. Peter's
privilege) in all those countries which kept Communion with the Church of
Rome, that very year wherein this unhappy separation began Me thanks, it is
not possible to avoid being absolute here. But, nothing is impossible to the
Bp. he either will not speak out at all, or, if he does, it must be of no
lower a strain than flat contradiction He tells us, first, that it comes much
short of the truth in one respect: and why? for the Pope's (says he)
exercised much more power in those countries which gave them leave, than ever
S. Peter pretended to. So that according to the Bp. he did not exercise S.
Peter's lesser power, because he exercised a power far greater, that is he
did not exercise S. Peter's power, because he exercised S. Peter's power, and
much more; which is as much as to say, Totum est minus part, and more does not
contain less A hopeful disputant, who chooses rather to run upon such rocks,
then to grant that the Pope actually governed as supreme in those countries
which were actually under him A point which it is shameful to deny, dangerous
positively to confess; and therefore necessary to be thus blunder'd.

Secondly, he tells us, that it is much more short of that universal
Monarchy, which the Pope did then and does still claim. And why? for (says
he) as I have already said (observe the strength of his discourse, his saying
is proving) two third parts of the Christian world were not at that time of his
Communion; meaning the Greeks, Armenians, etc. Are moderate expressions of
shamelesnes sufficient to character this man, who in every line manifests
himself in the highest degree deserving them? Our position as put down even by
himself was this, that the Pope's did actually, then exercise this power in
those countries which kept Communion with the Church of Rome; and the Bps
answer comes to this, that he did not exercise it in those countries which
kept not Communion with the Church of Rome.

But, to give the Reader a satisfactory answer even to the Bps impertinences, I
shall let him see that the Pope exercised his power at that time even over
those countries; as much as it can be expected any Governor can or should do
over revolters, whom he cannot otherwise reduce. As, then, a Governor
exercises his power over obedient subjets, by cherising them and ordering them
and their affairs so as may best conduce to their common good; but cannot
exercise it over contumacious and too potent Rebels, any other way than by
proclaiming them Outlaws and incapable of privileges or protection from the
laws of the Commonwealth: so, neither could it be imagi^'d or expected by any
rational man that the Pope, in those circumstances, though he were supposed
and granted by both sides law^ull Governor) could exercise power over them in
any other way, h^n only in i^flicting on them Ecclesiastical punishments or
censures, and excommunicating or outlawing them from that Commonwealth which
remained obed en^ to him; as he Bp. complainingly grant; he did.

Having thus shustled in every tittle of the sta^e of the question, he accuses
his Refuter that he comes not near the true question at all. Can there be a
more candid stating a question and free from all equivocation, than to beg^n
with a known matter of fact and acknowle^ge^ by both sides; and thence to
conclude those acters, (...) is, breakers, Schismatics, unles they can bring
^^ffic^ent reasons to warrant such a breach? But, let u^ exami^ a lit^l^ the
ground of his Exception. The true question (says he) is not, whether the
Bishop of R^me had any Authority in the Catholi^e Church. Good Reader ask the
Bp. whether his Refuter, or any Catholic, or even moderate Protestant, ever
mou^d such a question: and, whither it be not frivolousnes and insincerity in
the abstract, to impose on us such as stating of the question; whenas every
child sees, it is not barely his hav^ng any Authority, but his having a supreme
Authority, which is questioned and deba^ed between us and the Protestant?

It follows in him immediately, The Pope had Authority in his Diocese, as a
Bishop, in his Province, as a Metropolitan, in his Patriarchate as the chief
of the five Protopatriarchs; and all over, as the Bishop of an Apostolical
Church, or S. Peter. Where, all the former words are totally besides the
purpose, nor ever made the question by us, as the Bp. calumniates. But, the
last words* which grant the Pope had Authority all over, as successor of S.
Peter, deserve consideration and thanks too, if meant really: for, these words
grant him an Authority more than Patriarchall; nor a ^^y primacy only but an
Authori^y all over, that is a power to act as the highest in Gods Church and in
any part of the Church, that is, an universal Jurisdiction all over or over
all the Church, at least in some cases. Now, in this consists the sustance of
the Papal Authority; and had they of England retained still practically a
subjection to this Authority, as thus charactered; they had not been
excommunicated upon this score only. But, the misery is, that this our
back-friend, after he has given us al^ this fair promising language, that the
Pope's Authority is higher than Patriarchall, (as the Climax in his discourse
signifies;) that it is all over or universal; and lastly, that he has this
universal Authority as he is successor of S. Peter: after all this, I say,
if he been pressed home to declare himself; as before he granted S. Peter the
first mover in Church, and then told us that, in a right sense, it meant but a
Primacy of order; so he will tell us the same of these flattering expressions,
and that the words [ Authority] does not, in a right sense, signify a power to
act as a Governor, (though all the world else understand it so) but only a
right to sit, talk, or walk first: Et sic vera rerum nomina amisimus.

Thus, my Refuter has shown that I stated the question wrong: now, let us hear
him state it right. The true question (says he) is, what are the right bounds
and limits of this Authority: and then reckons up a company of particularities,
some true, most of them co^^erning the extent of the Pope's Authority i^self
and debated amongst our own Canon-Lawyers, some flat lies and calumnies; as,
whether the Pope have power to sell palls, pardons, and Indulgences, to impose
pensions at his pleasure, to infringe the liberties and customs of whole
nations, to deprive Princes of their Realms and absolve their subjects from
their Allegiance, etc. Was ever such stuff brought by a Controvertist? or was
ever man so frontles as to make these the true state of the question between
us; that is, to pretend that our Church holds these things as of faith?

To manifest more the shallownes of my Adversary; the Reader may please to take
notice of the difference between the substance of the Pope's Authority, as held
by us, and the extent of it The substance of it consists in this, that he is
Head of the Church, that is, first mover in it, and that he has Authority to
act in it after the nature of a first Governor. This is held with us to be of
faith, and acknowledged unanimously by all the faithful as come from Christ
and his Apostles; so that none can be of our Communion who deny it: nor is
this debated at all between Catholic and Catholic, but between Catholic and
Heretic only. Hence, this is held by our Church as a Church; that is, as a
multitude receiving it upon their Rule of faith, universal Attestation of
immediate Ancestors, as from theirs, and so upwards as from Christ; and not
upon critical debates or disputes of learnedmen. The, extent of this Authority
consists in determining whether this power of thus acting reaches to these and
these particularities or no; the resolution of which is founded in the
deductions of divines, Canon-Lawyers and such like learnedmen: and, though
sometimes some of those points be held as a common opinion of the schoolmen,
and (as such) embraced by many Catholics; yet, not by them as faithful, that
is, as relying upon their Ancestors, as from theirs, as from Christ; but, as
relying upon the learnedmen in Canonlaw; and; implicitly, upon the reasons
which they had to judge so and the generality's accepting their reasons for
valid: which is as much as to say, such points are not held by a Church as a
Church, no more than it is that there is an Element of fire in Concavo Lunae,
or that Columbus found out the Indies. The points, therefore, are such, that
he who holds or deems otherwise may still be held one of the Church or of the
Commonwealth of the faithful: nor be blameable for holding otherwise, if he
have better reasons for his tenet than those other learned men had for theirs,
as long as he behaves himself quietly in the said Commonwealth.

Perhaps a parallel will clear the matter better. The acknowledgment of the
former Kings of England to be supreme Governors in their Dominions was
heretofore (as we may say) a point of civil faith, nor could any be reputed
a good subject who denied this; in the undifputable acknowledgment of which
co^sisted the substance of their Authority: But, whether they had power to
raise ship money, impose subsidies, etc. alone and without a Parliament,
belonged to the extent of their Authority, was subject to dispute, and the
proper task of Lawyers; nor consequently did it make a man an Outlaw, or (as
we may say) a civil Schismatic to disacknowledge such extents of his
Authority, so he admitted the Authority it self: I concieve the parallel is
so plain, that it will make it is own application.

This being settled, as I hope it is; so let it stand a while, till we make
another consideration.

A Controversy (in the sense which our circumstances determine it) is a dispute
about faith; and so a Controvertist, as such, ought to impugn a point of faith;
that (...) he ought to i^ pugn that which is held by a Church as a Church, or
that which is held by a Church upon her Rule of faith Hence, if the Government
of that Church be held of faith according to it is substance, and not held of
faith according to it is extent; he ought to impugn it according to the
substance of the said Government, and not it is extent: otherwise, he totally
prevaricates from the proper office of a Controvertist, not impugning faith but
opinions, no^ that Church as a Church and his Adversary; but, falsely supposing
himself as it were one of that company, and to hold all the substance of it is
Authority, he sides with one part of the true subjects and disputes against
the other, in a point indifferent to faith, unconcerning his duty.

These things, Reader, observe with attention; and then be thine own judge,
whether he play not the Mountebank with thee instead of the Controvertist,
who, in his former book, pretended to vindicate the Church of England (which
renounced the substance of this Authority) by impugning the extent of it only:
and here, undertaking to correct his Refuter and state the question rightly,
first grants, in very plain but wrong meant terms, the whole question, to wit
that the Pope has Authority over the whole Church as successor of S. Peter;
and then tells thee, that the true question is about the extent of it and what
are the right limits and bounds of this Authority, which kind of questions yet
he knows well enough are debated by the obedient and true members of that
Commonwealth whence he is Outlawed and which he pretends to impugn.

His 8th page presents the Reader with a great mistake of mine: and it is this,
that I affirmed it was and is the constant belief of the Casholike world, (by
which I mean all in Communion with the Church of Rome, whom only I may call
Catholics) that these two Principles were Christ's own ordination recorded in
Scrpture. Whereas, he cannot but know, that all our Doctour^s de facto did and
still do produce places of Scripture to prove that former Principle, to wit
that Tradition is the Rule of faith, as also to prove S. Peter's higher power
over the Apostles: nor is it new that the succession of Pastors, till we all
meet in the Unity of Glory, should be Christ's own Ordination, and recorded
there likewise: Nor can I devise upon what Grounds he and his fellow-Bishops
of England, who hold Scripture only the Rule of faith, can maintain their
Authority to be iure divino, unles they hold likewise that it be there
recorded, and be Christ's Ordination, that following Pastors succed into the
Authority of their predecessors.

But the pretended mistake lies here, that whereas I said the Bishops of Rome
inherited this privilege from S. Peter, m^aning that those who are Bp^ of Rome
being S. Peter's successors, inherited this power; he will needs take me in
a reduplicative sense, as if I spoke of the Bishop of Rome, as of Rome: and
then he runs on, wildly and boldly challenging me that I cannot show out of
Scripture that S. Peter was at Rome, that our own Authors say S. Peter might
have died at Antioch, and the succession into his power have remained th^re,
etc. Answers so frivolous, so totally impertinet to the point in hand, that I
wonder how any man can have the patience to read such a trifler or the folly as
to think him worth heeding.

To omit that he picked these words, which he impugns here, out of a
paragraph following a leaf after, which totally concerned a dangerous and
fundamental point, as shall presently be seen; and so, it importing him to
neglect it, he culled out and mistakingly glanc't at these few loose words,
which he thought by a device of his own he could best deal with, for a color
of his necessary negligence.

What he adds of the Council of Chalcedon has been answered an hundred times
over, and by me, Schism Disarm. p. 109. 110. etc. nor deserves any
reiteration, till he urge it farther; especially being so rawly put down.
Only because he builds upon their giving equal privileges to
Constantinople* without manifesting what those privileges were: we shall take
leave to think that, as Rome still remained first in order, (as his late words
granted, and Protestants confess) notwithstanding those equal privileges; so,
for any thing he knows, it might still remain Superior in Jurisdiction; and,
till he evince that privileges in that place meant Jurisdiction, to which
the word will be very loath, he is far from bringing it to our question, or
to any purpose.

His next task is a very substantial and important one, striking at the Rule
and Root of all our faith: yet, by voluntary mistaking no less than every
syllable of it, he quickly makes clear work with it. He was told, that we
hold our first Principle by this manifest Evidence, that still the latter age
could not be ignorant of what the former believed, and, as long as it adhered
to that method, nothing could be altered in it Which the wily Bp. answers, by
telling us that the Tradition of some particular persons or some particular
Churches, in particular points or opinions of an inferior nature, which are
neither so necessary to he known, nor firmly believed, nor so publicly and
uniuersally professed, nor derived downwards from the Apostolical age by such
unin^or upted succession, does produce no such cer^a^nty either of Evidence or
adherence. Where.

First, he knows, we mean Tradition of all the Churches in Communion with the sea of Rome, that is, of all who have not renounced this Rule of immediate
Tradition: for all who differ from her never pretended this immedi^te delivery,
for those points in which they differ from her, but receded from that Rule; as
the Apology for Tradition has manifested, indeed plain reason may inform us:
It being impossible and self condemning, where there was an Unity before, for
the beginners of a Novelty to pretend their immediate fathers had taught them
that which the whole world sees they did not. Now, the Bp. talks of Traditions
of some particular persons, or some particular Churches: desirous to make his
Readers believe we rely on such a Tradition and so defective as he expresses;
that is, he makes account our pretended Tradition must not be styled
universal, unles it take in those persons and those Church also who have
formerly renounced and receded from this Rule of Tradition. Which is as much as
if he had said, a thing cannot be absolutely white, unles it be black too.

Secondly, we speak of believing, that is, of points of faith: but, the Bp.
talks of opinions, and those not concerning ones neither, but (as he styles
them) opinions of an inferior nature. And then, having, by this slight,
changed faith into opinion, he runs giddily forwards, telling us fine things
concerning questionable and controverted points, of Opinions in the Schools,
and how hard a thing it is to know which opinion is most current, etc. Is not
this sincerely done and strongly to the purpose?

Thirdly, he cants in these words [ So necessary to be known.] I ask, are
they necessary or no? If they be not necessary, why does he seem to grant
they are, by saying only that they are not so necessary? But, if they be
necessary, then why does he call them opinions only, and that too of an
inferior nature? Can that be necessary to be held or known, which has no
necessary Grounds to make it either held or known? Opinions have neither.

Fourthly, he speaks of points not so publike^y professed: whereas, every
point of faith is public and notorious; being writ in the hearts of the
faithful by the teaching of their Parents and Pastouts, signed by all their
expressions, and sealed by their actions: Nor is there any point of faith (for
example, in which the Protestant differs from us, which is not thus visible and
manifesting our Church now, and was then when they first broke from that
doctrine of their immediate? ^ncestours.

Fifthly, he speaks of points not universally professed: that is, if any
heretic, receding from immediate Tradition of his fathers, shall start a
novelty, and propagate it to posterity* the Tradition and profession of this
point in the Church must not be said to be universal, because that heretic
professes and delivers otherwise: and so, Socinians, by the Bps argument, may
assist their cause and say, it was not universally professed that Christ was
God, because the Arians anciently professed otherwise. The like service it would
do an Arian or any other Heretic, to allege (as the Bp. does) that the
Christian world must be united, otherwise the Tradition is not certain; for,
as long as that Heretic has a mind to call himself and his friends Christians
(which he will ever do,) so long he may cheaply cavil against the Authority
of the whole Church. But, empty words shall not serve the Bps turn: Let him
either show us some more certain Rules to know who are Christians, who not,
that is, some certainer Rule of faith than is the immediate and practical
delivery of a world of fathers to a world of sons: o^ else let him know, that
all those who have receded from this immediate delivery, (as did
acknowledgd'ly, the Protestants at the time of their Reformation, as also the
Greeks, Arians, etc. in those points of faith in which they differ from us) are
not truly, but improperly, called Christians; neither can they claim any share
in Tradition or expect to be accounted fellow-deliverers of faith, who have
both formerly renounced that Rule and broach't now doctrines against it, which
like giddy whirlpools run crossely to that constantly-and directly flowing
stream.

Lastly, he requires to the Evidence and certainty of Tradition, that it be
derived downwards from the Apostles, by such an uninterrupted succession. We
are speaking of the Rule of faith itself, that is, of Tradition or the deriving
points of faith from the Apostles immediately from age to age, (or, if he
pleases, from ten years to ten years; and we tell him that this Rule is a
manifest Evidence, because it is impossible the latter age should be ignorant
of what the foregoing age believed: He runs away from Tradition, or the
delivering, to points delivered, and tells us they must come downwards from the
Apostles uninterruptedly, ere they can be certain: Whereas, this point is
confessed by all and avouched most by us, who place the whole certainty of faith
in this uninterrupted succession. The point in question is, whether there be
any certain way to bring a point downwards uninterruptedly from the Apostles,
but this of Tradition or attestation of immediate fathers to sons? or rather,
we may say, it is evident from the very terms, that it could not come down
uninterruptedly bur by this way: since, if it came not down, or were not ever
delivered immediately, the descent of it was mediate or interrupted, and so it
came not down uninterruptedly.

The like voluntary mistake he runs into, when he calls the Apostles creed a
Tradition: since, he knows we speak of the method or way of conveying points
of faith downwards; not, of the points conveyed. But, I am glad to see him
acknowledge that the delivery of the Apostles creed by a visible practice is an
undeni^ble Evidence that it came from the Apostles; If he reflect, he shall
find that there is scarce one point of faith, now controverted between us and
Protestants, but was recommended to his first Reformers by immediate
forefathers as derived from the Apostles, in a practice as daily visible, as is
the Apostles creed; and, that the lawfulnes of Invoking saints for their
intercession, the lawfulnes of Images, Praying for the Dead, Adoration of the
B. Sacrament, etc. and, in particular, the subjection to the Pope as supreme
Head, were as palpable in most manifest and frequent circumstances, as was that
creed by being recited in Churches and professed in Baptism.

After I had set down the first part of the matter of fact, to wit, that, at
the time of the Reformation, the Church of England did actually agree with the
Church of Rome in those two Principles; I added the second part of it in these
words, It is noe less evident that, in the days of Edward the sixth, Q
Elizabeth and her successors, neither the former Rule of Unity in faith, nor
this second of Unity in Government have had any power, in that Congretion,
which the Protestants call the English Church. The Bp. who must not seem to
understand the plainest words lest he should be obliged to answer them, calls
this down right narration of a matter of fact my Inference; and, for answer,
tells us he holds both those Rules. Well shuffled my Ld pray let me cut.
Either you mean you hold now the sense of those Rules, that is, the thing we
intend by them; and then you must say you hold the Pope's supremacy, and the
Tradition of immediate forefathers, both which the world knows and the very
terms evince you left of to hold at your Reformation: or else you must mean
that you hold only the same words taken in another sense, that is, quite
another thing; and then you have brought the point, as your custom is, to a
mere logomachy, and shown yourself a downright and obstinate prevaricatour, in
answering you hold those words, in stead of telling us whether you hold the
thing or not. Possum-ne ego ex te exculpere hoc verum? The Principle of Unity
in Government to those Churches in Communion with the sea of Rome immediately
before your Reform, was de facto the acknowledgment of the Pope's Authority as
Head of the Church; the Principle of Unity in faith was, then, de facto the
ineheriring from, or, the immediate Tradition of Ancestors: De fac^o you
agreed with those of the Church of Rome in those two Principles; de facto you
have now renounced both those principles and hold neither of them; therefore
you have de facto broke both those bonds of Unity; therefore de facto you are
flat Schismatics.

As for what follows that there is a fallacy in Logic ^all'd of more
interrogations than one, I answer that there is in deed such a fallacy in
Logic, but not in my discourse who put no interrogatory at all to him. As for
the two positions which so puzzle him, the former, of S. Peter's being supreme
more than merely in order, he knows well is a point of my faith, which I am at
present defe^ding against him, and have sufficiently expressed my self, p. 307.
l. 1^ etc. by the words first Mover ^o mean a Primacy to act first in the
Church, and not to sit first in order only. The latter point is handled in
this Treatise in its proper place.

No sincerer is his 12. page than the former: I only put down, p. 308 what our
tenet was, and he calls my bare narration my second inference; and, when he
has done, answers it only with voluntary railing, too silly to merit
transcribing or answering.

The matter of fact being declared, that actually now they of the Church of
England had renounced both the said Principles; it was urged next, that, his
only way to clear his Church from Schism is, either by disproving the former
to be the necessary Rule of Unity in faith, or the latter the necessary bond
of Government? for, if they: be such Principles of Unity, it follows
inevitably that they, having broke them both, (as the matter of fact evinces)
are perfect Schismatics; since a Schismatic signifies one who breaks the
Unity of a Church, What says my Ld D. to this? this seems to press very close
to the Soul of the question, and so deserves clearing He clears it, by telling
us we are doubly mistaken, and that he is resolved to disprove neither;
though, unles he does this, the very position of the matter of fact does alone
call him ^chismatick.

But, why is he, in these his endeavors to vindicate his Church from Schism,
so backwards to clear this concerning point? Why? first, because they are the
persons accused: By which method, no Rebel ought to give any reason why he
did so; because he is accused of Rebellion by his lawful Governor. Very
learnedly. Now, the truth is wheresoever there is a contest, each side accuses
the other, and each side again defends it self against the the others
accusations: but, that party is properly called the defendant, against which
accusations or objections were first put; and that the Oppone^t or Aunswerer
which first moved the accusations. It being then most manifest, that you could
not with any face have pretended your Reform, but you must first accuse your
former actual Governor of usurpation, your former Rule* of faith of
Erroneousnes: it follows evidently, that we were the parties first accused,
that is, the defendants; you, the accusers or opponents: for, whoever
substracts himself from a former actual Governor, and accuses not that
Governor of something which he alleges for his motive of rising; that
person, eo ipso, accuses himself: since then we never accused you of breaking
from our Government till you had broke from it; and, you could not have broke
from it, without first accusing the said Government, and objecting some reason
against it, as the motive of your breaking: You must therefore oppose, and
allege those reasons, and show them sufficient ones; else, your very fact of
renouncing that former Government does unavoidable convince you of Schism.

Next, he tells us, that if the proof did rest on their sides, yet he does
not approve of my advice. And, I dare swear in the Bps behalf that he never
spoke truer word in his life; and will be bound for him that he shall never
follow any advice that bids him speak home to the point or meddle with such a
method as is likely to bring a speedy end to the Controversy. Make an Heretic
speak out (says S. Augustine) and you have h^lf-confuted him But, what reason
gives he why he disapproves of my advise? Will he show us a more easy,
efficacious or likely way to bring the dispute to a final Conclusion. His
reason is, because, says he, it is not we who have altered the doctrine or
discipline which Christ lef^ in the Church but they, etc. and so runs rambling
forwards with his own sayings to the end of the Section. All the world sees and
Dr. H. acknowledges you have altered the discipline left in the Church of
England in K. H's days; and now you are to give a reason to justify this
alteration. you tell us you have made none. I am not ignorant of the dexterity
with which you have shuffled a reserve into those words, [ which Christ left in
the Church] to persuade the Reader the discipline of the Church of England in H
the ^th's d^yes was not the same which Christ left to his Church. But, I pressed
no more than that it was used then as a thing held to have been inherited from
Christ* and that it was then and still is a bond of Unity to all those that
communicated in it; and, therefore, that you now rejecting it must either show
it to be no necessary bond of Unity, or necessarily remain convinced of
destroying Unity, that, of Schism. Me thinks a man who pretends to answer
should either say I, or No; they are usvally the returns we make to questions
But S Austin's saying is Oracle; no speaking out, he thanks you. He knew well
enough that either part of the Contradiction owned would have some means to go
about to disprove; which, by destroying all doubt in the case, would have
destroyed his own and the Authority of all those who speak against Evidence.
Altum silentium is all you can get from him; only, in the hard straight he is
driven to of either saying nothing or nothing to the purpose, he tells you he
is not obliged to answer, because he has not altered the discipline left by
Christ to his Church of England in K. H. the 8th's days, of which my objection
runs, it is false even to ridiculousnes; for, I cannot imagine he fancies his
Authority can so much over sway the simplicity of any Reader his book will meet
with, as to hope to make him believe the Church of England in his Lops time had
the same discipline she had in K. H's days. If he mean of the discipline left
by Christ to the Primtive times, it is no less false and more impertine^t:
first* in answering of the Primitive times, to an objection concerning the time
of H. the 8. Secondly, whenas I begun with an evident matter of fact, beyond
alldispute, and thence grounded a progress to a decisive discourse, in skipping
aside to a point mainly disputable between us, in stead of answering to that
Evidence, and, which is still weaker, by thinking to carry that whole matter by
barely saying it. And, if the Reader please now to review the Bishops first
Section with a narrower eye, I am confident he will percieve that (besides
that he has not said a word in answer to us) above three quarters of the said
Section is made up of this stuff: to wit, of reuolving and repeating over his
own tenets and the very question, and talking any thing upon his own Authority
without a syllable of proof; and, twice or thrice, where he pretends any, they
are mere falsifications and abuses; as has been shown.

I must request the Reader, whom the love of truth may invite to seek
satisfaction in perusing a book of this nature, to right himself the Bp. and
me, by giving a glance back upon my words, p. 306. 307. where I affirmed that
it would appear that Schism was justly charged upon his Church with undeniable
Evidence of faith, by two things, viz: out of the very position, of the case,
and out of the nature of his Exceptions. How he has replied to the first,
which is the position of the case, has already been shown: to wit, that he
would not speak one positive word, I or no to a plain matter of faith; nor be
willing to step forwards one step by answering directly to any thing which
nearly concerned the question; but stood continually capering and flickhering
up and down in the air, at the pleasure of his own fancy. As for the second
thing, to wit, that it would appear out of the nature of (...) Exceptions; I
showed that he, in reciting my charge, had purposely omitted that as loath his
Exceptions should be brought to the test of Reason, or have their sufficiency
examined. And, to let thee see that he did this purposely, look Schism
Disarmed p. 309. and thou shall see the whole paragraph, which concerned that
second point, omitted, without any Reply pretended. I shall therefore repeat it
again here, and leave it to the Bishop's second thoughts. They must remember
how their forefathers, who began that which they call Reformation, were
themselves of this profession before their pretended Reform. They ought to
weigh what reasons their Ancestors should have had to introduce such an
alteration. They must confess themselves guilty in continuing the breach, unles
they can allege causes sufficient to have begun it, had the same ancient
Religion descended to these days. For, the constant belief of the Catholic
world was, at the time of our division, and still is, that these Principles are
Christ's own ordination, recorded in Scripture, derived to us by the strongest
Evidences that our nature is capable of to attain assurance what was done in
Antiquity: Evidences inviolable by any humane either poweror proof, except
perfect and rigorous demonstration; to which our Adversaries do not so much as
pretend; and, therefore, without farther dispute, remain unanswerably convicted
of Schism.

I suppose I need not inform the Reader, what service it would have done to the
Controversy, and how necessary it was for my Ld D. to tell us, whether his
reasons were rigourously evidencing or demonstrative; or else, that less than
demonstrative reasons, that is, probable ones would serve: This would quickly
have decided the business. For, nothing is easier than to show, that a wrongly
pretended demonstration does not conclude evidently or convince that the thing
is; nothing easier, than to show, out of the very terms, that a probability
cannot rationally convince the understanding: But, the danger of this
disadvantage and the fear of this quick decision is the reason his Ld. will
tell us neither.

Thus, Protestant Reader, thou see how dexterously thy Bp. has behaved
himself in answering both parts of our charge against him; and which alone
fundamentally concern our question: to wit, how he has, by shuffling about,
avoided to say a positive word to one; and totally omitted so much as to
mention the other. And this, in the Bishops right sense, is called vindicating
the Church of England and replying to S. W.

Sect. 2.
How my Ld of Derry goes about to acquit the Protestants both (a tanto) and (a
toto) as he styles it: grounding his violent pr^sumptions of their innocence
on contradictions both to common reason and his good Friend Dr. H. on his own
bare word that his party are Saints; and his non-sencicall plea that those who
began first to separate from our Church, were, ere that, united to it.
HItherto I have been somewhat larger in replying, than I intended, because the
former points were fundamentally concerning and totally decisive of the
question. His Exceptions (since he dares not own them for demonstrations,)
are, consequently, in our case, trifles, toys, and nothing to the purpose: and
therefore, as they cannot challenge any at all, so I ought not to wrong my self
in giving them too large an Answer; unles in those places where they touch upon
a point that is more important.

In the first place he maintains, that, it many ways acquits the Protestants
continuing the breach, because, not they, but the Roman-Catholikes themselves
did make the first separation. We will omit the perfect nonsense of this
plea; which equally acquits any Villain in the world, who insists in the steps
of his forefather Villains. For, may not he argue against honest men by the
same Logic, and say, that they are acquitted; because, not Villains, but they
who were honest men formerly, begun first the Villainy: It being equally
infallible and necessary, that he who first turned naught, was, ere he turned
so, good before; as it is, that he who first separated was, ere he separated,
united to that Church, that is, a Roman Catholic. But I have said enough of
this, Part 1. p. 92. 93. therefore: let us now examine his reasons, why this
many ways (as he says) acquits them.

First, he says, it is a violent presumption of our guilt, that our own best
friends did this. The word best might have been left out: they were ever
accounted better friends who remained in their former faith; and the other Bps
looked upon as Schismatics, by the obedient party. But yet, it might seem some
kind of argument against us, did those, who were friends in all other
respects, voluntarily oppose us in this, and out of a free and unbiassed
choice; as the Bp. must pretend, else he does nothing. Let us examine this
then. Your own good friend, Dr. H. shall give you satisfaction in that point (
of Schism p. 136) where, speaking of this Act of the Clergy in renouncing the
Authority of the Roman see, (the palpable truth obliging him) he has these
words, It is easy to believe, that nothing but the apprehension of dangers,
which hung overthem by a praemunire incurred by them, could probably have
inclined them to it. Thus he. The, violent presumption, then of our guilt,
which you imagine concluded hence, is turned into a just presumption, or rather
a confessed Evidence, of the King's violent cruelty and their fearful weakness.
Rare Grounds doubtless, to acquit you for being led by their Authority, or
following their example.

Secondly, he tells us that, though it do not always excuse a toto, from all
guilt, yet it excuses a tanto, and lessens the guilt; to be misled by the
examples and Authority of others, etc. Let us examine this, as applied to the
Protestants. How could they think their example to be followed or their
Authority to be relied on, whom they confess to have done what they did out of
fear, that is, out of passion, and not out of the pure verdict of reason and
conscience? Again, if their example were to be followed, why do not they
follow it rather in repenting of their Schism, and renouncing it; as those Bps
did after the King's death? since, the imminent fear, which awed them at the
time of their fall and during the King's life, joined with their retraction
after his death, of what they had done, render it a thousand times more
manifest that their conscience took part with the obedient side, had they had
courage enough to stand to it.

Moreover, sometimes, the first beginners of a fault may be less culpable then
their followers; according to the degrees of the provocations which press upon
their weaknesses. Theirs we have seen to be no less than the expectation of
death and destruction; such was the violence of the King's in humane cruelty,
and their present disadvantageous case which exposed them to it. Your
con^inuance in Schism, compared to the motiv^s of their fault, is, in a manner,
gratis; All your reason, heretofore, of thus continuing being for your Livings
and interest; and, at present, only a vainglorious itch to approve your
selves to your party for brave fellows; in railing against the Pope and
defending a Chimera bom^inans in vacuo (the Church of England) found no where
save in the imaginary space of your own fancies*

Thirdly, he assures us, that, in this case, it does acquit them not only a
tanto, but, a toto, from the least degree of guilt; as long as they carefully
seek after truth, and do not violate the dictates of their own conscience: and
then bids me, if I will not believe him, believe S. Austin; who says, that
they who defend not their false opinions with pertinacity, but are ready to
embrace truth and correct their errors when they find them, are not
Heretics. I Answer, S. Austin says well; only obstinacy makes an heretic:
and so far we believe him. But, does S. Austin say that Bp. Bramhall ad his
fellows are not obstinate, or that they neglect not to seek, not refuse not to
embrace truth found; and, by consequence, are not Heretics and Schismatics?
The general words of the father signify nothing to your purpose; unles they
be applied to your party: and who makes the application? The Bp. himself: and
upon what Grounds? upon his own bare word; and then cries, They are totally
acquitted from Schism: That is, he makes an acquittance himself for himself;
writes it with his own hand, set his own seal to it, and subscribes it with his
own name; and then brings it into the Court to clear himself of the whole debt,
and that by his own Authority.

Reader, trust neither side as they barely testify of themselves: but, trust
what Evident reason and thine own eyes tell thee. Reason tells thee, it is
evident they renounced those tenets which were the Principles of Unity to the
former Church both in faith and Government: Reason tells thee, that such a fact
is, in it is own nature, schismatic; unles they can produce sufficient
motives to justify it: Reason tells thee, that noe motives less than certain,
that is, demonstrative ones, can suffice to allege for such a revolt; which
yet they never pretend to: Therefore, reason tells thee and any one who
understands morality and nature, as evidently as that two and three are five,
that their revolt did not spring from the pure light of reason; but, from an
irrational Principle, that is* from passion and vice: And, so, we cannot but
judge them obstinate and, consequently, Schismatics; unles they can show us
these sufficient, that is, demonstrative reasons to excuse their, otherwise
manifestly schismatic fact: or, if we do, we must renounce the light of
our own reason to do them an undeserved favor.

Thus much in general. Now, as for this Bp. in particular; Thou have seen him
shuffle up and down when he should have answered to the charge objected: Thou
have seen him wilfully mistake all over, to evade answering: Thou have seen him
totally omit so much as to mention one half of the charge, and totally to avoid
the whole import, nay, every tittle of the other. There needs nothing but thine
own eyes, directed by any first Section, to make all this evident to thee. It Is
by these evident testimonies of thine eyes, these undeniable verdicts of thy
reason, Reader, by which thou must judge of these men, whether they be
carefully inquisitive after and readily embrace the truth, or rather be
obstinate Schismatics; and not by the dark holes of their consciences; which
they assert to be sincere by their bare sayings ouely; obtrude them, thus
weakly authorized upon they easy credulity, and then tell thee thou must
believe S. Austin that they are guiltles and acquitted from Schism.

In the second place, I glanced at the inconsequence of his proof, that those
Bishops were not Protestants because they persecuted Protestants; instancing in
some sects of Protestants, which persecuted others. He replies: what then were
Watham and Heath, etc. all Protestants? Then, My Ld (which is only the
question between us) your argument was naught: for, let them be accidentally
what they will, you cannot conclude them no Protestants from the persecuting
Protestants; as long as it is shown and known, that those who were Protestants
did the same. Secondly, if they were Protestants, he demands, of which sect
they were? I answer, that, as, between every species of color which we have
names for, there are hundreds of middle degrees which have no names; or, as, in
a perpetual motion, there are millions of unnam'd proportions sowed all along
in it is progress, to whose quantities we can give no particular names: so,
within the latitude of the name Protestant or Reformer and every sect of it,
there are thousands of others so petite and minute, that they have not
deserved a name from the world. I see the Bp. mistakes us and his own sect; for
he makes account the Protestant Profession and it is subordinate sects are fixed
things, which may be defined: whereas Experience teaches us, that the fellow
in the fable might as easily have taken measure of the Moon, to fit her right
with a coat, as one can imagine one notion to fit the word Protestant. It Is ever
in motion, like the rolling sea, and therefore has such an alloy of no ens in
it, that it admits noe positive definition; but, must be described, like a
privation in order to the former habit. No-Papist and a Reformer is the best
character I can make of it. Since, then, those Bishops were Reformers and
no-Papists, (for they renounced the Pope's Authority which gives this
denomination, and reformed in that point:) it follows, that they were
Protestants, though the newborn thing was not as yet christend with any other
name than that common one of Reformation* But, my Ld. D. makes account that
none can be a Protestant, unles he hold all which the now-Protestants do:
Whereas, it is against nature and reason, to expect that the Protestants could
at first fall into all their present negative tenets; nemo repent fit
turpissimus. The former faults must by degrees get countenance, by growing
vulgar and quotidian, an by little and little digest their shamefulnes; ere the
world could be prepared to receive or men's minds apt and audacious enough to
broach new ones. First, they renounced one point, then another, and so
forwards, till at lenghth they have arrived to Quakerism; which therefore is
the full-grown fruit of the Reformation.

Thirdly, whereas I told him, those Bishops, by renouncing the Pope, held the
most essential point of their Reformation, and so had in them the quintessence
of a Protestant: The Bp. first, calls this, our Reformation; as if we had not
ever held them Schismatics, that is, separated from our Church, for doing so.
Since, then, they went out from us, by that fact; they left to be of us: and,
if they were not of us, how was it our Reformation, in any other sense, than as
the Rebellion of those who were true subjects before is to be imputed to those
who remain true subjects still? was ever common sense so abused? Next, he
braggs, that, then (to wit, if renouncing the Pope be essential to a
Protestant) the Primitive Church were all Protestants; which is only said, and
flatly false: that then, all the Greci^n, Russian, Armenian, Abyssen Christians
are Protestants at this day; which is only said, again, and partly true,
partly false, and that which is true only steads him so far, as to evince
that the Protestants are not the only men but have fellow-Schismaticks: And
lastly, that then, they want not store of Protestants even in the bosom of the
Roman Church it self; which (to speak moderately) is an impudent falsehood, and
a plain impossibility. For, who ere renounces the substance of the Pope's
Authority and his being Head of the Church, does, ipso facto, renounce the Rule
of Unity of Government in our Church, and, by consequence, the Rule of Unity of
faith, which Grounds and asserts the former; that is, such a man renounces and
breaks from all the Unity of our Church, and, so, becomes totally disunited
from our Church: Now, how one, who is totally disunited and separated from the
whole body of our Church, can be intimately united to her still, no
understanding but the BPs can reach; which, as Mithridates could use poison for
his daily food, can, without difficulty, digest contradictions, and finds them
more connatural and nutritive to his cause than the solidest demonstrations.

Now, if my Ld D. be not yet satisfied with my reasons, p. 311. that the
renouncing the Pope is essential to Protestantism; to which yet he is pleased
to give no answer: I send him to learn it of his friend, Dr. H. who ( of Schism
p. 145. l. 5.) seems even to strain sense it felf to express this; calling this
disclaiming the Pope's power tbe Bottom upon which the foundation of
Reformation was laid, that is, the foundation of their foundation, their
fundamental of fundamentalls. Now then, how those Bishops should not be then
Protestants, who held the fundamental of fundamentalls of Protestantism,
passes my skill to explicate, and, as I am persuaded, my Lds, too.

Sect. 3.
How my Ld of Derry endeavors to clear his Church from Schism, by bringing
Protestants to speak in their own cause, nay the very Act or statute for which
we accuse them, as an undeniable Testimony for them. Likewise, how he
produces for his chief Plea a Position opposite both to his own and our party's
acknowledgment, nay, to the very eysight of the whole world; twisting in it
self a multitude of most direct contradictions; and, lastly, quite annihilating
at once all the Papists in the world.
HIs third Section pretends to make good his second grownd for dividing from
the Church; which was this; because, in the separation of England from Rome,
there was no now law made, but only their ancient liberties vindicated. This I
called (as I could do no less) notoriously false, and impudence it self;
alleging that a law was made, in H. the 8th's time, and an oath invented, by
which it was given the King to be Head of the Church, and to have all the
power which the Pope did, at that time, possess in England. He asks, if this
be the language of the Roman Schools? No, my Ld, it is and ought to be the
language of every sincere man who bears any respect to truth, shame, or
honesty, against those who are professed and sworn Enemies of all three; in case
his circumstances have put him upon the task to lay such persons open and
confute them. He appeals to any indifferent Christian judge. I decline not the
Tribunal; nay more, I shall be willing to stand to the award of the most
partial Protestant living, who has but so much sincerity as to acknowledge
the Sun's shining at noonday, or that the same thing cannot both be and not
be at once. But.

First, he goes about to acquit himself, by confessing that he said no new
law was made then; but denying that he said no new statute was made. We will
not wrangle with him about the words; only, I say, if there were something
new, it was new; and, a statute, made and approved by the King and his
Parliament, (as this was,) we Englishmen use to term a law: if then there were
a new statute made (as he confesses,) I concieve I have not wronged in the
least the common language of England, to call it a new law. But, his meaning
is, that King H. the 8th did noe new thing when he renounced the Pope's
Authority, but what had been done formerly; and therefore.

Secondly, he quotes Fitz-herbert and my Lord Cook, who say, that this statute
was not operative to create a new law, but declarative to restore an ancient
law: That is, he quotes two of his own party to prove he said right; and two
Protestants to speak in behalf of Protestants. Convincing proofs, doubtless
against us.

Thirdly, he promises to make it appear undeniably. Whence, or from what
Authority? from the very statute it self; which says, That England is an
Empire, and that the King as Head of the body politic, consisting of the
Spirituality and temporality, has plenary power to render final justice for
all matters. That is, he quotes the schismatic King himself and his
schismatic Parliament, (who made this statute,) to speak in their own
behalfs. Does such a trifler deserve a Reply? who, in a dispute against us,
cites the authorities of those very persons against whom we dispute; nay, that
very Act of theirs which we are challenging to have been schismatic: and
relies upon them for undeniable Testimonies.

Fourthly, he alleges another statute, made in the 24. of King H. the 8th:
the best he could pick out, you may be sure; yet, there is not a syllable in
it concerning spiritual Jurisdiction; directly, that is, not a syllable to his
purpose. It Is this, The Crown of England has been so free at all times, that
it has been in no earthly subjection; but immediately subjected to God in all
things touching it is Regality, and to no other; and ought not to be submitted
to the Pope. We are disputing about spiritual Jurisdiction, and whether it
were due to the Pope: and, the Bp. brings a statute which fpeaks of the Crown
of England it self, as not to be submitted to the Pope, as touching it is
Regality; that is, a statute which expressly speaks of temporal Jurisdiction.
He tells us, that Ecclesiastical greivances are mentioned in that statute;
but slightly omits so much as to name them, much less to urge them; which were
they worth it, we may be sure he would have done with a triumph. And,
besides, he knows we hold every good King is to take order to see
Ecclesiastical grievances remedied, and the Canons of the Church observed:
Nay, he knows (if he knows any thing) our own Lawyers grant that
Ecclesiastical affairs sometimes fall under temporal power indirectly; as, on
the other side, temporal affairs fall indirectly under the Ecclesiastical.
Yet, that there is any more than this, nay even so much in this statute my Ld
D. has not shown us; and, if we will be judged by the words of the statute
which he cites, they look quite another way. But, what matters it what this
statute says? being made two years after his unlawful marriage with Anna
Bullon: which was the source of all his rebellion; intended, in all Likelihood,
when that match was made up. As for his pretense that I concealed some of his
particulars; he knows, I undertook no more than to answer the substance, and
to show that such kinds of particularities were not worth alleging: as I did
in this very place, and shall do again presently more amply.

Fifthly, he quarrels with me for calling his Authorities, mere Allegations,
which he tells us are authentic Records, etc. whereas my words were only
these, (p. 311. l. 30.) that he brought diverse allegations, in which the
Pope's pretenses were not admitted, etc. Now, I concieve, a Record or any other
Authority alleged, is an Allegation; which was the word I used: the word [
meer] was merely his own fiction, to gain an occasion to cavil; as the place
now cited, where my words are found, will inform the Readers eyes.

These straws being stepped over, with which the learned Bp. thought to block up
our passage; We come to the point it self. Whether King H. the 8th did any
more than his Ancestors. My Ld of D. in his vindication; to show he did no
more or made no new law, gathers up Instances from our former laws and
reiterates them here, (though sometimes he uses a phrase louder than h^s
proofs) how the Pope's were curbed or limited in their pretenses. We answered,
that, to limit an Authority implies an admittance of it, in cases to which the
restraints extend not: He replies, that this (meaning those laws) was not
merely to limit an Authority; but to deny it (p. 20. l. 20.) yet, in the next
page, he denies not equivalent laws in france, spain, Germany, Italy, and, in
his ( vindication (p. 73. l. 7. 8. etc.) he affirms that the like laws may be
found in Germany, Poland, france, spain, Italy, sicily, and, if we will trust
Padre Paolo, in the Papacy it self. These things being put, granted, and
confessed, from his own words, I shall now appeal, even to the Bps best and
bosom-friend, whether impudence was not a moderate character for that man's
genius or humor, who should go about to pretend that King H. the 8th did no
more in this particular, that is, renounced the Pope's Authority no more than
his Ancestour Kings had done before him. For.

First, this is opposite to the common notion and general opinion of the whole
world, both Catholics, Protestants, Puritans, and of what ever sect or sort:
who ever deemed Henry the 8th to be the first King of England who renounced
the Pope's Supremacy and challenged it to himself: Nor had they ever that
conciet of France, Spain, Italy, etc. in which, notwithstanding, the Bp. grants
equivalent laws to the former laws of England, to which (according to him) K.
H. superadded nothing. This particularity, I say, in K. H. the 8th all the
world, as far as I ere heard, always held in their free and natural thoughts:
though, when they are put to it to defend a desperate cause, artifice wrongs
nature and puts some of their non-plust Controvertists to assert and maintain
the most open absurdities.

Secondly, it is, in particular, against the confession and profession of his
own party, the Protestants; who sing Halleluiahs incessantly to this happy
time, in which England was freed from the yoke of Rome: which is an evident
argument of their pretense, that, till now, they groaned under this yoke; that
is, that, till now, the Pope's Headship was acknowledged here; and, by
consequence, that K. H. the 8th did more than his Ancestors did formerly, when
he shook it of.

Thirdly, this position contradicts in terms their Reformation in this point of
the Pope's Supremacy, which yet rings in every man's ears and is confessed by
themselves: for, it is impossible and contradictory there should be a
Reformation in any thing which was not otherwise before. It was, therefore,
otherwise in England before K. H. the 8th's time, notwithstanding all these
former power-limiting laws alleged by the Bp. and consequently, it is evident
from the very terms, that K. H. superadded to these laws in renouncing the
Pope's Authority; and that the contrary position is most absurd, impossible and
contradictory.

Fourthly, it being confessed by themselves, and particularly by Dr. H. ( of
Schism p. 132.) in these very words, For the matter of fact, it is acknowledged
that, in the reign of K. H. the 8th, the Papal power in Ecclesiastical
affairs was, both by Acts of convocation of the Clergy and by statutes or Acts
of Parliament, cast out of this Kingdom. This, I say, being confessed; and it
being also evident in terms, that nothing can be said to be cast out of a
place unles before it were in it: it is likewise evident in terms, that this
power was in England before, notwithstanding the former laws, cited by my Ld D.
then in power in this country: and, that those statutes and Acts of Parliament,
made by K. H. which cast it out, did some new thing against that Authority,
that is, did create new laws, and not only declare the old.

Fifthly, since, according to him, these laws made by H. the 8th did no more
than the former laws, those former laws also must be pretended to have cast
out the Pope's Supremacy, and to have begun a Reformation: which yet we never
heard pretended, and he must show us when and how this Authority of the Pope
in England twinklingly went out and in again; otherwise it could never be said
to be cast out a fresh in K. H's reign.

Sixthly, this position of his is particularly opposite, also, to the common
consent of all Catholic countries, (in which notwithstanding the Bp. affirms
there are found equivalent laws;) who all looked on K. H. the 8th, after those
Pope renouncing Acts, as a Schismatic, and on England, both then and ever
since, as schismatic. Now, that they should esteem and abhor England as
schismatic, for doing the same things themselves also did, is against common
sense and impossible.

Seventhly, since ( just vindication, p. 73. l. 8.) he quotes Padre Paulo,
that the like laws were to be found in the Papacy it self: and it is perfect
nonsense to affirm that, in the Papacy, of which the Pope is both spiritual
and temporal Governor, he should not be held for Head of the Church: it is
most manifest that the like laws in other places, and in particular amongst our
Ancestors in England, did not take away from him that Headship in
Ecclesiastical matters; and, by consequence, that K. H. the 8th, who denied
him that Headship, did something new which his Ancestors had not done, and,
when he enacted this, created new law. It Is most manifest, likewise, that
those like laws in the Papacy are only to distinguish the Pope's spiritual
power, there, from his temporal, that is, to limit it is bounds, not to deny
it: and, consequently, those mutually-like laws in other countries and in
England formerly, did only limit it likewise: Whence follows inevitably, that
K. H's law, which totally abolish't, renounced, and denied it, was of another
far different strain, and new law.

Eighthly, this position is demonstratively convinced of falsehood, by the
evide^t and acknowledged effect: for, who sees not that, upon this new law made
by K. H. England stood at another distance from Rome than formerly? for,
formerly, notwithstanding all their laws, they held still the Pope was Head of
the universal Church, reverenced him as such, held this as of faith* and this
till the very time of the breach: Whereas, after K. H's law, he was held, by
the party which adhered to that law, no Head of the universal Church, nor
reverenc't as such; and (if any thing) rather the contrary, that England was
absolutely independent on him was held as of faith. Is not this as evident, as
that the sun shines; and may it not, with equal modesty, be den'yd that there
ever was such a man as K. H. the 8th?

Ninthly, this very position takes away the whole question between us, and
makes both us and all the Controvertists in England on both sides talk in the
air; wrangling, pro and con, why K. H. cast out the Pope's Authority here:
whenas, (according to this illuminated Adversary of mine) he had actually noe
Authority there, at that time, to cast out.

Lastly, this position is so thriving an absurdity, that, from nonsense and
contradiction, it prosperously proceeds to perfect madness and fanaticknes; and
comes to this, that there neither is nor ever was a Papist country in the
world. For, since it is evident in terms, that the King and his accomplices, who
made that Pope disclaiming Act, were not Papists or acknowledgers of the Pope's
Authority, after they had thus renounced the Pope's Authority: Again, since,
according to the Bp. the same laws were formerly made received, and executed in
England; it follows, that our Ancestors equally renounced the Pope's Authority
also, and so could be no Papists neither: and, lastly, since he grants
equivalent laws infrance, Spain, Italy, Sicily, Germany, Poland, etc. it
follows by the same reason, that those countries are not Papists neither, no,
not the very Papacy it self. And, so, this miraculous blunderer has totally
destroyed and annihilated all the Papists in the world, with one self
contradictory blast of his mouth.

And now, Christian Reader, can I do any less, if I intend to breed a due
apprehension in thee of the weakness of his cause and falsehood of this man, than
appeal to thy judgment, whether any mad man, or born fool could have stumbled
upon such a piece of non sense? Dos't not think my former words very moderate
and very proper to character this man's way, when I said, How ridiculous, how
impudent a manner of speaking is this, to force his Readers to renounce their
eyes and ears and all Evidence? Could any man, without a visard of brass on
pretend to secure men's Souls from Schism, (a sin which of Schism c. 1.
themselves acknowledge as great as Idolatry,) by alleging such sublimated
nonsense for a sufficient excuse or ground; when the acknowledged fact of
schismatizing and renting God's Church, cries loudly against them: nay more,
(since less motives and reasons cannot justify such a fact, nor a continuance
of it) to bring such an heap of contradictions, for perfect Evidences and
demonstrations?

Pardon me you, whose weaker or seldomer reflections on the certainty of
faith, and, by consequence, of the certainty of an eternal concernment in
these kind of Controversies, make you think courtesy violated by such
home-expressions; which may breed a smart reflection, and stir up a more perfect
consideration in the Readers mind's. Examine my harshest words in the utmost
rigor, as applied to his Demerits; and, if they exceed, hold me for blamed;
if not, then think, (as reason grants) that it is equally moderate, (but far
more necessary) to call great and wilful faults by their right names of
Cosenage, impudence, etc. if they deserve them; as it is to call smaller lapses
by theirs of a mistake or an oversight. How can it ever be hoped that Truth
should be righted; as long as her Adversaries may take the liberty to act
impudently against her, and her Defenders must be afraid to tell the world
their faults and to say what they do?

Again, were this shameless position of this Bps some odd saying on the by, or
some petty branch of his discourse, it deserved less animadversion: but, it is
the substantiallest part of his vindication, where he huddles together many
laws, which, de facto, consisted with the acknowledgment of the Pope's
Authority both in England and other Catholic countries, to parallel K. H's
which were absolutely inconsistent with it, and to show that K. H. did no more
than his Ancestors and other Catholics did. So that, he alleges this as a
chief ground of their vindication, and we shall see again afterward an whole
Section built on this one particular ground. Now, had he grounded himself on a
foundation of some sandy probability, it had been (though still insufficient,
yet more pardonable and (in comparison of the other) honorable; or, on an
aerie fancy of some odd Crotchet of his own head (as was Dr. H's conciet of the
Apostles Exclusive Provinces,) it had been to be pitied, if sprung from
weakness, or laughed at, if from wilfulnes: but, to ground his vindication, that
is, to build his and his adherents security from Schism and eternal damnation,
on the mere vacuum of non sense and perfect co^tradiction, confutable by the
contrary tenet, acknowledgment and sight of the whole worlds eyes; is such a
piece of shamelesnes that it can admit no sufficient character; as a non ens is
incapable of a definition.

As for his particularities entrenching or pretended to entrench on the Pope's
Authority, whether they were lawfully done or no, how far they extended, in
what circumstances and cases they held, in what not, how the letter of those
laws are to be understood, etc. all which the Bp. omits, though he press the
bare words; it belongs to Canon and secular Lawyers to scuffle about them, not
to me: I hold my self to the lists of the question, and the limits of a
Controvertist. And,

Whenas he asks me, what lawful Jurisdiction could remain to the Pope in
England, where such and such laws had force? I answer, the same that remains
still to him in france, where you confess equivalent laws have force; the same
that remains to him still in Spain, Italy, Sicily, etc. So that either you must
speak out according to the Grounds, and say there it not a Papist country in
the world, that is, not a country that acknowledges the Pope Head of the
Church; which is to put out the eyes of the whole world, for we see de facto
that he is acnowledg'd and exercises Jurisdiction in Catholic counttries or
else confess that they retain still something, notwithstanding those equivalent
laws, which you renounced. This something, which they still retain more than
you do, is that which makes you Schismatics for rejecting it; and is so far
from grounding your excuse, (for which you produce it,) that it enhances your
guilt and Grounds a most just accusation against you: that, Whereas such and so
many strong curbs were set by the former laws of England (as are also in
Catholic countries) to secure you from the least fear of any extravagant
encroachme^ts nay by which you confess here p. 36. they kept their privileges
inviolated, yet, your desperately-seditions humor could neither be contented
with that freedom from too much subjection which your own forefathers and all
other countries then in Communion with you enjoyed, but you must quite
extirpate the inward Right it self, totally abolish and renounce the very
substance of the former Ecclesiastical Government, and cast it out of the
Kingdom.

Sect. 4.
My Ld of Derry's senceles plea from the Church of England's succeeding the
British Church in her pretended exemptions from foreign Jurisdiction, and the
uniustifiablenes of those pretensions. The perfect weakness of his Corroboratory
proof, and utter authenticknes of the Welsh Pueriles.
THe scope of his fifth Chapter, as himself here acknowledges, was to show that
the Britannik Churches were ever exempted from foreign Jurisdiction for the
first 600. ye^rs. Now, his book being entitled a vindication of the church of
England, to show this whole process frivolous I ask't what this belonged to us;
unles it be proved that their practicks were an obliging precedent to us? To
show more the impertinency of this allegation; I denied, that the Church of
England has any title from the Britannick Churches, otherwise than by the
Saxon Christians; who only were our Ancestors, and by whose conquests and
laws all that is in the Britannick world belongs and is derived to us. The Bp.
replies: yes, well enough? and, why? first (says he) Wales and Cornwall have
not only a local but a personal succession; and therefore noe man can doubt
of their right to the privileges of the Britannick Churches. Grant it: what is
this to our purpose? how does this vindicate the Church of England or take of
my exception? For, let their succession be what it will, it follows not that
the body of England (of which our Controversy is) has any such privileges by
descending from Cornwall or Wales. Again, it is evident that for these many
hundred years, they acknowledged the Pop'es Authority as much as England. And
lastly, it is a clear case, they were under those which were under the Pope.
But, the wily Bp. being ask't an hard question, to wit, whether the Church of
England had any title from or dependence on the Britannick Churches, answers
quite another matter, and then tells us he has done well enough.

Secondly, he says, that there is the same reason for the Scots and Picts,
who were no more subjected to foreign Jurisdiction than the Britans themselves.
I answer none of the Picts are now extant but totally exterminated, and so no
succession from them: And, as for the Scots, what do they concern the Church
of England's vindication, our purpose, or my question; unles he can show,
which he never pretends, that his Church of England receives title to any
thing by way of the scottish Churches? Again, since they have been submitted to
the Pope, what avails it if they had any exemption anciently: for, they could
never derive it to us, for want of continuation of succession? yet as long as
he tells us he does well enough, all is well.

Thirdly (he should have said first, for, the two former answer are nothing to
the purpose,) he tells us, that, among the saxons themselves, the great
Kingdoms of Mercia and Northumberland were converted by the ancient Scots, and
had their Religion and Ordination first from them, afterward among themselves,
without any foreign dependence; and so were as free as the Britons. where, all
the force lies in those words, [ without any foreign dependance] which he
obtrudes upon us on his own credit only, without a word of proof: or, if there
be any shadow of reason for it there, it must be this, that ^hey were
converted by the ancient Scots, which himself tells us, two pages after, is
nothing at all to Jurisdiction. But, that which is of main importance is, that
he brings, here, no proof, that the Britons and Scots and Picts had no foreign
dependence, save his own word only: And, the trifles he brings afterward are
of less credit than even his own words; as will be seen when they come to
scanning.

Fourthly, he assures us, ^^at, after the Conquest, throughout the rest of
England, a wo^^d of British Christians did still live mixed with the saxons. And
how proves he, this? because otherwise the saxons had not been able to people
the sixth part of the Land. I ask, did he measure the Land, and number the
saxons? If not, how does he know, or how can he affirm this? Or how does he
prove the Land must necessarily be peopled, as fully as before, immediately
after a Conquest so universal and cruel? Our historians tell us that, to
avoid their barbarous cruelty which spared none, the ancient Britains retired
into Wales: yet he would persuade us, both without and against all history,
that a world stayed behind; and this, not because the saxons stood in need of
them (as he pretends,) who as it is known, brought their whole families with
them; but, indeed, because the Bp. stood in need of them, to make good his
cause. But, granting the likelihood, that some few of them remained still in
their former homes, how can the Bp. make any advantage of it? Thus: Who can
deny (says he) those poor conquered Christians and their Christian
posterity, though mixed with saxons, the just privileges of their Ancestors?
A compassionate man! who speaks a great deal of tenderhearted nonsense,
rather than he will seem unmercifull, not to the ancient Britons (as he
pretends,) but to his own cause; which he shows to be good-naturd, at least,
though it be destitute of reason: for, unles he can show,) which yet never
was pretended by any Protestant or man of common sense) that those who remained
had yet British Bishops amongst them; or, unles he can pretend that they
remained not subject to the Bishops of the saxons; it is a madness to imagine
those few lay people should inherit those former supposed privileges: For,
since, all the world grants that they (if there were any such) became subject
to the Bishops of the saxons, which were subject to the Pope; all pretense of
their exemption from that power to which their Governors were subject is taken
away: And the Bps merciful reason is all one, as if some few Englishmen by
some accident remaining and settling in France, should pretend an exemption
from the french laws both Ecclesiastical and temporal, and to enjoy the
privileges they had while they were in England, that is, while they were under
another Government. But,

His last reason is to the purpose and a rare one; it is this, that the saxon
Conquest gave them as good title to the privileges, as to the Lands of the
Britons. As if he made account, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is a thing of
that nature as to be won by the sword; or that the Saxons could plunder the
Britons of their spiritual privileges as well as of a bag of money. But, the
jest is, he would have those privileges at once go into Wales, with the
British Bishops, and stay at home in England: not considering that
Ecclesiastical privileges are things inherent in men, that is, in the
Ecclesiastical Governors, as enioyers or else as conservers and dispensers of
them to the people; and, in the Governed, as subject to those Governors and
laws; not, in stones, woods and mountains, as he fancies. Again, whereas those
privileges originally belong to Ecclesiastical Governors and are annex't
unto them as such, as they are supposed to do in the Bps case; they cannot be
transmitted to posterity but by a succession into the Authority of the former
Governors: wherefore, let him either show that the after Bps of the Church of
England ever had succession of Authority from or were empowered by the British
Bishops; or else let him confess that they could inherit no privileges from
them; and, by consequence, that his pretense of it is groundles and impertinent.

What is said hitherto was to show the inconsequence of deriving those
privileges from the British to ^he English Church, in case the British had any
such privilege of independency, as the Bishop contends: But,

My second objection was, that this pretended exemption of the British Church
was false. My reason was, because the British Bishops admitted appellation to
Rome at the Council of Sardica. In answer

First, he tells me, that, ere I can allege the Authority of the Council of
Sardica, I must renounce the divine Institution of the Papacy: and why? for
(said he) that Canon submitted it to the good pleasure of the fathers, and
groundeth it upon the memory of S. Peter, not the Institution of Christ. Which
is, first, flat falsification of the Council: there being not a word in it
either concerning the Papal power it self, or it is Institution; but concerning
Appeals only. Next, since we call that of divine Institution which Christ
with his own mouth ordained; and never any man made account or imagined that
Christ came from heaven to speak to the after Pope's, and so give them a
Primacy; but* that he gave it by his own mouth to S. Peter, whiles he lived
here on earth: This, I say, being evidently our tenet; and the Council never
touching this point at all; what a weakness is it to argue thence against the
divine Institution of the Papacy, and to abuse the Council, saying, that it
submitted this to the good pleasures of the fathers?

Secondly, he asks, how does it appear that the British Bishops did assent to
that Canon? which a little after he calls my presumption: And truly, I shall
ever think it a most just presumption, that they, who confessedly sat in the
Council, assented to what was ordained by the Council in which they sat (as
was their duty) unles some objection be alleged to the contrary; as the Bp
brings none.

Thirdly, he says the Council of sardica was no general Council after all
the Eastern Bishops were departed; as they were before the making of that
Canon. What means he by the Eastern Bishops? the Catholics, or the Arians?
The Arian Bishops indeed fled away, fearing the judgment of the Church, as
Apol. 2. and ep. ad solitarios S. Athanasius witnesses: but how shows he that
any of the 76. Eastern Bishops, were gone, ere this Canon, (which is the third
in that Council) was made? So that, my Ld of Derry is willing to maintain his
cause, by clinging to the Arians against S. Athanasius and the then Catholic
Church (as he does also in his foregoing Treatise, p. 190. 191) denying, with
them, this to have been a general Council, because his good Brother Arians had
run away from it, fearing their own just co^de^mnation.

Fourthly, he says the Canons of this Council were never received in England
or incorporated into the English laws. I ask, has he read the British laws in
those times? if not, for any thing he knows, they were incorporated into them;
and so, according to his former Grounds, must descend down to the English. But,
we are mistaken in him: his meaning is only that the advantages and
privileges should be inherited from the Britons, not their disadvantages or
subjection: So sincere a man he is to his cause, though partial to common
sense.

Lastly (says he) this Canon is contradicted by the great general Council of
Chalcedon, which our Church receives. Yet it seems he neitheir thought the
words worth citing, nor the Canon where the abrogation of the Sardica Canon is
found worth mentioning: which argues, it is neither worth answering nor looking
for I am confident he will not find any repealing of the Sardica Canon expressed
there: It must therefore be his own deduction, on which he relies; which,
till he puts it down, cannot be answered. As for their Church receiving the
Council of Chalcedon; the Council may thank their ill will to the Pope, not
their good will to receive Councils: For any Council, in which they can find
any line to blunder in mistakingly against him, they receive with open arms;
But, those Councils which are clear and express for him, though much ancienter
(as this of Sardica was) shall be sure to be rejected and held of no
Authority; and, when a better excuse wants, the very running away of the guilty
Arians shall disannul the Council and deprive it of all it is Authority.

He subjoyns, there appears not the least footstep of any Papal Jurisdiction
exercised in England by Elentherius: (I answer nor any certain footstep of any
thing else in those obscure times:) but the contrary: for, he referd the
legislative part to King Lucius, and the British Bishops. Here you see my Ld D.
positive and absolute: But, look into his Vindication, p. 105. and you shall
see what Authority he relies on for this positive confidence; viz. the Epistle
of Eleutherius; which, himself, conscious it was nothing worth and candid to
acknowledge it there, graces with a parenthesis, in these words ( If that
Epistle be not counterfeit:) But, now we have lost the candid conditional [
If,] and are grown absolute. Whence we see, that the Bp. according as he is
put to it more and more to maintain his cause, is forced still to ab^te some
degree of his former little sincerity: And thus, this if-not counter feited
testimony is become one of his demonstrations, to clear himself and his Church
from Schism.

Now, though our faith relies on immediate Tradition for it is only and certain
Rule, and not upon fragments of old Authors: yet, to give some instances of
the Pope's Jurisdiction anciently in England, I alleged S. Prosper, that Pope
Celestin [Vice sua] in his own stead sent S German to free the Britons from
Pelagianism, and converted the scots by Palladius. My Ld answers, that
converting and ordaining, etc. are not acts of Jurisdiction: yet himself says
here, p. 193. that all other right of Jurisdiction does follow the right of
ordination. Now what these words [ all other] mean is evident by the words
immediately foregoing, to wit, all other besides Ordination and Election; by
which it is plain he makes these two to be rights of Jurisdiction. So
necessary an attendant to error is self contradiction and nonsense. But the
point is, he leaves out those words I relied on [ Vice sua, in his own stead,]
which showed, that it belonged to his office to do it. These words omitted, he
tells us, that he has little reason to believe either the one, or the other:
that is, he refuses to believe S. Prosper a famous and learned father, who
lived near about the same time and was conversant with the affairs of the
Pelagians; and chooses to rely rather on an old obscure Author, whence no
prudent man can Ground a certainty of any thing, and which, if he would speak
out, himself would say he thought to be counterfeit.

What follows in his 25. page is only his own sayings? His folly in grounding
the Pope's Supremacy on Phocas his liberality has been particularly answered
by me heretofore, Part. 1. Sect. 6. whether I refer him.

I found fault with him for leaving the Papal power and spending his time in
impugning the Patriarchal^: And, I concieve it stands with very good reason to
reprehend mine Adversary, and call him back, when he runs away from the whole
question. First, he observes how readily we decline all manner of discourse
concerning the Pope's Patriarchall power. When it is not the question, we do;
as any man, who understands what it is to dispute, would: But, does he ever
find that we decline it when it is the question? I suppose, by this time, my
largenes in handling it in this foregoing treatise, Part. 1. Sect. 15. has
corrected his wrong apprehension in that point. Next, he is puzzled to know
the reason of this, but he may well conjecture (he says,) that it is because
we find that our spiritual Monar^hy, and a Patriarchall dignity are
inconsistent in the same subject. What insuperable difficulties the Bp's
sooth-saying fancy proposes? As if it were so hard a matter for Bp. Vscher to
have beenat once Bp. of Armagch, and yet Primate too of Ireland; and, as such,
my Lord of Derry's Superior: what greater difficulty he imagins, that a
Primate and an higher, (that is, a Papal) power should join in one person,
than there is that a Primacy, that is, the highest in that continent, should
be thus linkt with an inferior dignity in the same continent, needs a
revelation from the fancy that first dreamed it. Lastly, he is is shrewdly
peremptory, and shuts up thus, And yet, a Patriarch the Pope was, and so always
acknowledged to be, and they cannot deny it. Is not this a pleasant man to
wanton it thus with a needles cruelty; who puts us upon the rack, and will make
us by force confess a truth, which himself knows every Catholic in the world
ever granted, held, and maintained? And, what weak-iudging Reader, seeing such
confident expressions, would not remain astonished at it and admire the Bp. for
a most terrible disputant; who over bears his Adversary with such an
unresistable career of Authority, and all to beats with such mighty strokes the
hissing air?

Amongst other proofs of the British liberties, (as the BP. tells us here,) he
produced the answer of Dinoth to Austin; which he deems so choice and rare a
proof that he reiterates it, and with new vigor insists on it here: gleaning
those exceptions he thought the easiest, from this treatise, my former against
Dr. H. and partly from the Appendix to the Manual of Controversy.

My first exception, in this place, was, that the word Pope was not then used
alone to signify the Bp. of Rome: He quotes Bellarmin against me, and (so
wise a man he is) expects that Catholic Writers shall be of the same mind in
all things, even in controvertible and indifferent point, that is, he makes
account there are neither Catholic Schools, nor that any difficulties occur in
Historians; nor, to come nearer the point, that Catholics should disagree even
so much as in a Criticism about a word, as this is. As for the instance from
the Council of Chalcedon, Beatissimus and Apostolicus vir Papa, hoc nobis
praecepit, I answer that, though there be neither Vrbis Romae or any such like
expression immediately conjoined to the word Papa, yet, which is equivalent,
the comitant circumstances sufficiently de^ermin'd and indigitated the person;
nay, although the word Papa had been totally omitted, yet the person had been
perfectly known: for, these words are down in the Council as spoken by
Boniface, sedis Apostolicae vicarius, the Pope's vice gerent, in answer to a
demand of the Council what orders he had received from Pope Leo. So far then
is the word Papa in that place from being emphaticall or expressive of the BP.
of Rome, taken singly and alone; that it was rather, rigorously speaking, a
needles word as found in that place.

My second exception against their being called Bishops of Caerleon, after the
remouall of the seat to S. David's, was not put by me in this place nor urged
against him at all, but against Dr. H. But, conceptum sermonem retinere quis
potest? though it concerned not his Province he must still needs be doing.
He had found by chance an odd testimony, (the best Minerva of a word stuff't
brain;) and he was with child till he had brought it to light. Nor has he
yet any thing to take of my exception, besides one testimony of an historian,
(for Sr Henry's is either built on the welsh paper or on this same Author's
words:) and, on the other side, himself must confess, that it is a passage
unparalleled in history, perhaps ever since the beginning of the world, that a
seat should be translated from one place to another, as this was from Caerleon
to Menevia; and yet retain the title of the seat whence it was translated; and
this during the successive Government of five and twenty Bishops, as this
testimony says. Again, had the name Caerleon been translated likewise to
Menevia, that is, had Menevia changed it is name into Caerleon, it had been more
likely; or, had Caerleon's Arch Bishops, only for some convenience, resided at
Menevia, and the right of Jurisdiction belonged still to Caerleon, it might
more easily be conceived feisible: but, that the seat it self should be
translated, and Menevia be made the lawful Metropolis, and yet not own her
self for such, but let a cashiered place so long keep the title due in right to
her, is highly improbable. But, the maine is, that it is most evident in
history, the Bp's of S. David's or Menevia were called Menevenses, (as himself
cannot but know, is frequent in history;) and so styled by their good friend,
Dr. H. in his Appendix, p. 176. by Ranulphus Cestrensis, l. 1. c. 52. by Daniel
Powell, a Protestant, who set forth Giraldus (the BP's Author,) in his
marginall notes on Itinerarium Cambriae, ^. 1. c. 1. and lastly by Dinoth
himself, the title of whose book (cited by Pi^seus) is Defensorium
Jurisdictions sedis Menevensis: I conceive all these Testimonies will easily
outweigh the BP's single one: which yet is all that secures it from being
contradictory to co^fest history; and so, it is uterly undeserving any credit.
Add, that, grant the name of Caerleon had been retained by them, so that the
Bishops of menevia were called Bishops of Caerleon; yet they could not but very
unhandsomely be, called BP's of Caerleon upon Vske. This particular exactnes
then in this expressing the locality of his Bishopric, which is found in the
Abbot's words, argue that the counterfeiter of this paper imagined this Bishop
still to have resided near Vske at Caerleon, after the local translation of
the seat thence; and so, still it remains an argument of it is imposture.

My third exception, as he calls it, is such that the Bp. cannot, he
confesses, find the edge of it. Perhaps the bluntnes lies in his apprehension,
not in my exception. Let us see. I objected, that S. H. spilman found no other
Antiquity in that Welsh manuscript worth the mentioning; and, that this
shrewdly implied, it was made for this alone. He asks how I know Sr H. found
no other Antiquities in it? and alleges, that there might be many more, and
yet not proper for a Collection of Ecclesiastical Councils. Pray does Sr H.
neglect all passages which are not of this grave nature? How came he then to
take notice of this toy? was this single Abbot either pretended to be a
Council, or these words of his some authentic act of a Council? I conceive you
will not conclude it was; otherwise Dr H. would not have undervalued it as
inconsiderable, and a proof you could unconcernedly and easily partwith as he
does in his Appe^dix, p 168. How then was it so proper for a Collection of
Ecclesiastical Councils? whereas the Collection might have been entire and
perfect, though this had been omitted. Since then Sr H. who adored any new
reuived piece of Antiquity, found nothing in this manuscript worth mentioning
but this; in all likelihood it was made for this only. Secondly, he replies,
in case there had been no other Antiquity in it, would S. W. condemn his creed
for a counterfeit, because it is not huddled together confusedly with some
other Treatise in one Volume. No; my Ld: my creed is sufficiently authorized to
my hand, nor has any just exceptions against it: This poor manuscript has
nothing at all to assert it is Authority, and lies under many and very
suspicious Exceptions. But, in case one, who holds not his creed, should be
dealt with to believe it only upon these Grounds, that it was found in a
certain manuscript newly brought to light by one who holds the same creed; and
this manuscript not authorized by any testimony asserting it to have been writ
by the Apostles, but only that it might be it was; and against this very
might be many exceptions brought, and amongst the rest, that the style was
very new and modern, and so unlikely to have been the Apostles own words;
again, in case this manuscript, whence only this creed is pretended to be
evinced, had nothing in it worth note but this very creed: that man were very
weak and foolish, to believe his creed thus slenderly proposed or rather
totally unauthoriz'd; nor can they be judged less weak who can think such a
manuscript, absolutely unauthentick and manifoldy excepted against, a fit
Ground to build their assent upon to clear themselves from Schism, that is, to
secure themselves from, otherwise, due damnation, as themselves confess. Will
he have me reckon up again the exceptions against it? To omit then what has
been said here,

First, it is only Sr H's conjecture, that M. Moston's manuscript was
transcribed out of an ancienter Copy: now, if this mere conjecture happen to
fail, the wise business is at an end.

Secondly Sr H. who brought it to light, confesses, he knows not when and by
whom that manuscript was composed: which is as much as to say, it has nothing
to authorize it.

Thirdly, it is only Sr H's conjecture, that those words were the answer of
Dinoth to S. Austin upon that occasion.

4ly the same conjecture is all the Ground that the famous Dinoth was that
Abbot.

5ly the English found, in an interlineary manner with the Welsh, in that
manuscript, is evidently modern and later than K. H. the 8th: which altogether
disgraces the pretended Antiquity of that manuscript, and Grounds a just
presumption of it is being forged to countenance his or his successors
renouncing the Pope's Authority.

6ly the learned in Welsh affirm, that both the welsh language is modern, and
the spelling it is unlike to the ancient manner; and does manifestly and
particularly resemble externs smattering, when they first learn or write that
language. Diverse instances of which are found in few lines, which evidences a
forgery.

7ly, the Protestants are challenged to have abused it in the translation; and
yet (so brave a proof it is) they are glad to add paraphrases to make sense of
it.

8ly, it is not past seventeen or eighteen years, since this new piece of
Antiquity came to light. All which and much more to the same purpose may be
seen in the Appendix to the Manual of Controversies.

9ly, considering the foresaid exceptions; as also that an English line is put
always word by word under each welsh line, (a method unheard of in Antiquity)
as our Ianua linguarum or the Praxis at the end of Clenard's Greek Grammar uses
to be; it was in all likelihood invented (after the form of our ^ueriles, or
Ianua linguarum) by some Minister, who was a Schoolmaster, to teach the welsh
School boy's English, and withal to instill into them a dislike of the Pope:
the chief and most necessary point of their Cathecism in those days; when all
art was used to pervert the minds of the welsh and English, and to blot out and
disgrace, (as much as in them lay) whatever concerned the Catholic Church or
it is Government.

10ly, in case all these exceptions were waved, still the book is of no
Authority in the world: for, there is no difficulty, but a craf^y fellow may
counterfeit a passage, and pretend it to have been found in Antiquity, which
may cohere so handsomely together, that no great flaw can be found in it, nor
grounded exception taken against it; yet, it follows not hence that this piece
of handsome forgery must therefore be relied on as authentic, unles he can
produce sufficient Grounds to authorize it: viz. prove from Antiquity that such
a person was held to be the Author of it; and that this pretended saying of
this Author, or the book which recommended it, was acknowledged by the common
consent of good and learned men (which is that which gives Authority to all
books) to have come down not corrupted, (at least in that passage) to our
times. Unless these be shown, still such a book, however it tells it is tale
handsomely, fall^ short of having any Authority; since it wants all things which
can Ground Authority.

See then Reader, what weak men we have to dispute with; who think the deed
done and that they may justly obtrude upon the easy credulity of the world any
pretended scrap of Antiquity; so they can solve exceptions against it, (which
yet they will never do) though they bring not nor even go about to bring the
least proof to gain it Authority, but totally neglect that necessary task; nay
more, confess themselves to seek in those points, as we have seen lately, and
as Mr Fuller tacitly grants by waving to patronize it; who (in his Church
History, Cent. 7. part. 3.) going about to rehearse this wise testimony, bid it
in plain terms Shift as well as it could for it is own authenticalnes. In a
word, the business comes to this, that, had there been some welsh pamphlet or
ballad, made in Ed. the 6th's days against the Pope, found in some Library in
manuscript, printed and put forth by some Protestant Author, and supposed by
the partial Antiquary, without the least proof, extracted out of ancienter
copies, presently there needs no more to authorize it, so it be but against
the Pope: that Ballad shall be confidently asserted to have been sung by the
old British Bards, and to have signified the sense of the British Churches in
those days And thus, Protestant Reader, thou see what demonstrations thy BP's
and Dr's bring thee, to secure thy Soul from the horrid sin of Schism; which
yet (Dr. H. of Schism, c. 1.) they tell thee is greater than Idolatry.

Lastly* put case all had been true, yet what had they concluded; unles they
had proved likewise that this Abbot, in saying so, had spoken the mind of the
then Catholic world? for, no man that has any sense in his head will
undertake to defend, that, in the space of fifteen or sixteen hundred years,
there cannot be found some few who, either out of disgust, ambition, interest
or ignorance, might speak or act against the Pope's Authority or against the
most inviolable right that can be imagined, but it is clearly sufficient to
maintain that in so saying, they pronounced not the sense of the then Catholic
world. Have there been heresies, against almost all other points of faith
arisen in several ages; and shall we imagine noe possibility of opposition
against that point which concerns Government? Or, will it be deemed by any
indifferent man a competent proof against true faith, to say, that such and
such heretics denied it? No more ought it to be held sufficient, that such or
such persons now and then denied that point which concerns Government; unles
such a denial can Ground an inference that God's Church in that age held
otherwise. If then the Bp. will, first, clear his welsh copy book of all the
exceptions brought against it; next, assert and establish it is Authority; and
lastly, evince that this Abbot, in thus saying, spoke the thoughts of the world
at that time; he will conclude strongly against us: and, till he does this
he does nothing; For, only the belief of a Church, relying on immediate
Tradition, pretended and evinced, can be possibly held able to counterpoise
the tenet of a Church which confessedly relies on immediate Tradition possessed.

As for what the Bp. adds concerning his corroboratory proof from the British
Synods, I must confess indeed that corroboratory is a very thumping and robust
word; but what does it corroborate? Does it prove that the Author of this
welsh manuscript was worth a straw? Not a jot. The chief strentgh of this
corrobototy proof lies in this, that all the British Clergy did, in those
Synods, renounce all obedience to the sea of Rome: as he tells us here, p. 29.
and urges me to answer it. I shall; and reply, that it is an arrant
falsification at once of all Historians: for, if he means that they only
disobeyed the Pope, in not conforming themselves to his commands, I grant it is
clear in all history they did so; and so have many, who remain Catholics,
done, who yet own the Pope's Authority it self: but, if it signifies, as his
circumstances and words make it, that they renounced the Pope's Authority and
denied his power to command or Supremacy, 't, is absolutely false; no such
thing being debated or deny^d in those Synods. Yet, to corroborate this, this
Bp. tells us, (in his just vindication p. 104.) That Austin, S. Gregory's
Legate, proposed three things to them; first, that they should submit to the
Roman Bishop: 2ly that they should conform to the Roman customs about the
observation of Easter, and administration of Baptism; and Lastly, that they
should ioyn with him in preaching to the saxons. All which are pretended to be
denied in those Synods. Whereas, again, the first pretended proposal of S.
Austin's is a very flat falsification of the Bp's; no such thing being there
proposed: The three proposalls were concerning Easter, Baptism and preaching to
the English, as your friend, Dr. H. (who happened here to be more ingenuous)
tells you expressly out of Bid (Appendix p. 181. l. 8. 9.) Yet the Bp. cites
there for this proposal and denial, Beda and omnes alij, in the margent; that
is, at once belies Bid and all our Historians: and, to complete the jest (in
his vindication, p. 104. l. 1. 2.) he brags that this would strike the
question dead And truly so it has: for, whereas the question before depended
most upon the Bp's own words, and partly on his sinc^rity; nothing is more
questionles now than this, that he is a most unquestionable falsifier. Now, to
falsify, we are told, signifies to corroborate, that Protestant cause; and so
is no shame, but a beautiful stain and an honorable scar.

Again, he assures us here from his corroboratory proof, that all the British
Cler^y, did r^nounce all obedience to the Bp of Rome, of which all our
Historiographers do bear witness. You see by his many [ All's] what care he
has of sincerity. Whereas the Right of their subjection never came into play,
much less did they profess a renouncing all obedience, but only in not
conforming to the customs of another Church. Nor shall he find one
Historiographer who affirms that they denied all subjection due, or
disacknowledg'd the Pope's Headship (though in some things they disobeyed him)
except his welsh paper, and those of his own side who presume it upon their own
conjecture. And to confute his [ All] Pitseus tells us only, that neque in
maiori tonsura, neque in ritu baptismatis, neque in celebratione Paschatis se
Romanae Ecclesiae ulla ratione conformare voluerunt. Which shows that there was
no talk there of the Pope's Authority, but of conforming to rites and customs.
Yet this the corroborating Bp. there calls an evident demonstration, that I but
trifle vainly against the testimony of Dionothus.

But, in case this British Clergy which made these laws had renounced the
Pope's Authority: Let us see what cause he had to brag of them. S. Bid, l. 2.
c. 2. calls them unfaithful, naughty and detestable people. Their own Country
man, Gildas, says they were wolves, enemies of truth, and friends to lies,
enemies of God, and not Priests, merchants of mischief and not Bp's, impugners
of Christ and not his Ministers, more worthy to be drawn to Prison, than to
Preisthood. And the Bp's dear friend, John Fox, tell us, out of an old
Chronicle, ( Acts l. 2. p. 114.) that all things, whether they pleased or
displeased Cod, they regarded alike; and, not only secular men did this, but
their Bishops and Teachers without distinction. Thus my Ld D. has again
corroborated the Protestant cause by crying Hail Brethren well met, to those
folks who have been proved to be detestable fellows and enemies of God, that
is, as good as Atheists: of which gang if this Dinoth were one, we shall
neither wish the Pope such friends, nor envy them to the Protestants. And this
may serve for another of the Bp's demonstrations against the Pope, to vindicate
his Church from Schism, and secure his Readers from damnation, (which he
acknowledges due to that vice;) by their relying on such proofs, and adhering
to such good company.

I am not ignorant that there is a thing, called an Answer or account to H. T's
Appendix, which confuted this forged manuscript, writ by Dr. H though I briefly
hinted here some exceptions found in it, without taking notice of their
pretended answer; partly, because I know by long experience, that nothing but
shuffling impertinences* paralogisms, and falsifications are to be expected
from that Author; and principally because I understood that the said Appendix
is patronized by the same learned pen that writ it; and those Exceptions shown
untouched by the mock shirmish of his Adversary. Thither I refer the Reader for
complete satisfaction where he will see my BP. more fully confuted, and my
present charge against the slight Accountant, most amply made good.

Sect. 5.
How my Ld of Derry digresses from a Papal Authority to a Patriarchall; that
is from t? whole question. His prafest resolution not to return to it but upon
conditions, and such as he is sure no Catholic can yield to. His waving the
whole scope of his Adversary's Discourse: together with diverse impertinent,
non sencicall and unskilful Replies.
MY Lord of Derry undertook to prove three things in his 6th Chapter: first,
that the King and Church of England had sufficient Authority to withdraw their
obedience from the Roman Patriarch. 2ly, that they had just Grounds to do it;
and 3ly, that they did it with due moderation.

I objected, that this was to shuffle away the whole question. For, whereas the
question is of the Privilege given by Christ to S. Peter, and from him
descended to the Pope's his successors; that is, whereas our Controversy is
about a Papal Authority, or that of the Head of God's Church, held by us and
by themselves formerly to be of faith, and of divine Institution; he leaves
this to talk of a Patriarchall Authority, not held as from Christ, but of
humane Institution. By which slight he tacitly intimates that the Authority
actually in force in England at the time of the Reformation, and then
renounced, was only Patriarchall, not Papal: which waves the main, if not the
whole charge, and is plainly contradictory to the whole world's eyes at that
time.

Now, what excuse brings the Bishop for this fundamental shuffling, importing
no less than the avoiding the whole question? He tells us here p. 30. that
when he first undertook this subject he co^ceived the great strength of the
Roman sampson did lie in his Patriarchate. By which words if the Bp. pretends
that he intended to express himself finely, I shall grant it, but if he says
that he intended to speak truly, I have so good an opinion of those of his own
party, that I am confident the most partial and simplest of them will be too
candid and too wise to believe him. For, how can it be imagined that a Bp. and
so well read a man as he is accounted to be should be ignorant that the
Reformers renounced a Papal Authority and higher than Patriarchall, and that a
Papal Authority, that is a Supremacy over the whole Church in Ecclesiastical
matters, was held immediately before the Reformation or rejection of it. Who
knows not likewise that they stand accused by us of the fact of renouncing an
Authority far higher than Patriarchall? yet this Bp. undertaking that subject
(that is to vindicate his Church from Schism in renouncing that higher
Authority) pretends he conceived that the great strength of the Roman sampson
lay in his Patriarchate; though he knows the Patriarchate was held but of
human, that Papacy of divine Institution; the Patriarchate limited to some
particular part within God's Church, the Papacy, (which they actually
renounced) held to be universally extended and to have no other bounds or
limits but God's Church; the Papacy superior, nay supreme; the Patriarchate
inferior and subordinate to the former. This is the notion which both the
former and present world nay themselves too had of the Papacy, at least ere
they rejected it; which a man would think supperadds a great and manifold
increase of strength above the other. But the sincere Bp. thinks otherwise now,
though in his former book he confesses the Pope had quitted the Patriarchall
power, that is, pretended none for these last 600. years, and here enlarges it
to a 1000. Which shows that Dr. H. and he are the Simeon and Levy of the
Protestant fraternity, and have the same fundamental faults common to both.

But now being taken tardy, and caught running away from the question, he is
well contented (he says) to give over that subject, (to wit his disgression
to the Patriarchate) but yet, not but upon two conditions; wise ones you may
be sure. Observe by the way, Reader, that though other disputants make account
it is their duty and absolute obligation to speak to the point in hand; in the
Bp. it is a courtesy and to be condescended to conditionally, it is against his
nature and inclination to hold to the question, and therefore we must bribe
him to it (...) s^bscribing to the bargain he proposes. The first condition
he requires ere he will leave of rambling to a Patriarchate, and come home to
the question, is, that we must not presume the Pope is a spiritual Monarch
without proving it. What he means by spiritual Monarch I know not; It Is a
word without sense till it be explicated: For, either he means by Monarch a
Commander in whose breast all concernments of the subjects are put, so that his
will is a law to dispose of them as he lists; and then we held not the Pope
to be such a Monarch; for this, however it be called Monarch, is indeed flat
Tyranny: or else, he means a Monarch is the ordinary chief Governor, and such
we hold the Pope to be in the Church, and shall ever presume he is so, till
his subjects who actually rebelled against his Authority disprove it. We hold
on the Governors side; your first Reformers were, before their separation,
actually his subjects; actually they denied their subjection, and rose against
his Government: 'This actual rising against him, this very fact, I say, proves
you Rebels; his former long-enjoy'd possession stands a proof of his Right
unles you evidence and demonstrate him an usurper; or, though none, yet that
the Government ought to be abolish't. But the Bp. will not hold to the
question, unles we will grant that when a subject rises against a former long
possessed Governor, he shall at pleasure call the Governor to account, and
oblige him to prove his title ere he will acknowledge him; and, on the other
side, that the subject must be freed from all obligation to give account of
his rising against his Governor, or from being bound to prove that the
Authority he rebelled against was an usurpation and unjust. Good sense, but
hard law!

His second condition ere he will come to the question is, that we must not
attempt to make Patriarchall privileges to be Royal Prerogatives, what he
means by Royal Prerogatives, I know not, there being no determinate certainty
what Royalty is; the notion varying according to diverse countries. But, he
understands perhaps that a Patriarch shall not be independe^t of the King in
Ecclesiastical affairs within his own Patriarchate, and that this is the
King's privilege; to which condition he knows no Catholic will ever yield
any more than to the former; otherwise we must grant that S. Peter could not
preach at Rome, if Nero were a King; not S. James at Hiernsalem without
unkinging Herod. Yet the Bp. will be even with me; for, as I will not
condescend to his conditions, so, on the other side, he neither has
heretofore, nor ever will hereafter be brought to hold to the question or
speak directly to the point; as has been seen hitherto all along, and shall
more particularly be seen hereafter. Nor will he long defer his revenge, but
puts it in execution the very next thing he does; being assured to have
demanded such conditions, as should never be granted; for,

Whereas he had removed the question from a Papal Authority, held of divine,
to a Patriarchall acknowledged but of human Institution; not to desert our
question totally, and to give him fair law, I put the case that the Papal
Government had been only of human Institution, it ought not to have been
rejected unles the abuses had been irremediable. I urged that considering, this
Head was chosen, in that case, to preserve Unity in Religion, and that eternal
dissentions would inevitably follow upon it is rejection, and a separation of
the rejecters from the rest of that commonwealth which acknowledged that Head,
therefore far weightier causes must be expected, or greater abuses committed,
ere, not only the person, but this very Government should be abolish't. Now
the matter of fact being evident, and confessed that the first Reformers
consented with all the Churches in Communion with the Church of Rome in their
submitting to that Authority, till they began to reject it; that they
acknowledged it lawful, ere they began to disclame it as unlawful; that they
held none at that time true Christians but those who agreed, consented and
submitted to that Authority; that the acknowledging this Head then was, (as it
still is to us) the Principle of Unity in Government for all Christianity, and
as such then held by them: Likewise, it being equally evident and confessed that
they have now actually renounced that Authority thus held, acknowledged, and
submitted to by all, whom they then deemed Christians, as the Rule and Ground
of all Unity in that commonwealth: These things, I say, being so, I had good
reason to put that supposition, not as our bare tenet, (as the Bp. seems to
imagine) but as the evident matter of fact, as the case stood then. One would
think it were the Bp's task now to show that, notwithstanding all this, the
first Abolishers of this Authority had sufficient reasons to disannull it; and
that the abuses of the said Authority did outweigh the right use of it, so that
it might and ought have been rejected by one part of that Christianity, though
once established; or, (which is all one) long accepted by their common consent,
as this was de facto. What does the Bp.? He tells us what he and the
Protestants now held concerning that point, putting (as it were) his counter
tenet to ours, says the Pope is only as a Proclocutor in a General Assembly,
was their steward, that is, not their Governor, (all contrary to the matter of
fact which my case is built on) that they nourish a more Catholik-Communion
than we, and such other stuff all out of his own head, without a word of
proof, and then thinks the deed is done. Was ever such an Answer contrived? the
poak-full of plums was pertinent, if compared to 'this. But still the Bishop is
innocent; it was my fault, who would not accept of the two conditions he
proposed which should have been the guerdon of his returning to the question;
that is, without the performance of which he thinks himself not bound to speak
a word to the purpose; And so the Reader must look upon him hereafter as on a
man who has got or took license to run astray.

Observe, Reader, in what a different manner the Bp. and I treat thee. I still
bring thee to evident and acknowledged matter of fact, or such suppositions
which need only application, and another name to be so, according as the case
stood at the time of the first breach; Whereas, the Bp. brings thee his own
sayings, their party's tenet for Grounds and proofs: things not acknowledged,
but disputable, nay disputed in this present debate; that is, obscure, as far
as concerns this question. And this is his solemn manner all over this
treatise; which shows that he hates the light, his unfriendly betrayer, but
truth's Glory; and, that the obscurity of ambiguities is most proper and least
offensive to his errour-darkned eyes.

I demanded of him whether he would condescend to the rejection of Monarchy,
and to the extirpation of Episcopacy for the misgovernment of Princes, or
abuses of Prelates. He answers that never such abuses as these were objected
either to Princes or Prelates in England. Not objected? that is strange! Read
the Court of K. James, and the charge against King Charles in Westminster Hall.
Did not the Scots and Puritans object Popery, intolerable pride, and
overburthening weak consciences to your Brother Bp's. Can there be greater
abuses objected than these in your Grounds? or is not the design to bring in
Popery (which makes such a noise in your book, as a Pandera's box of all
mischiefs and inconveniences) as horrid an accusation against you, as the same
inconveniences were against Popery when it stood on foot in K. H's days. I was
told by a worthy grave person and whose candor I have no reason to suspect,
that in a private discourse he had with the late Archbishop of Canterbury in
his own garden concerning the point of Schism, the Archbishop confessed, upon
his urging the evident matter of fact, that he was in a Schism; upon which
free confession of his, being pressed again by that Gentleman how he could in
conscience remain in a Schism and separated from God's Church, he replied that
it might lawfully be done if warranted by an intention to reunite by such
compliance a schismatizing Congregation to the Body it broke from: citing to
make good his plea, a place from S. Austin, in reference to some Catholic
Bishops complying with the Donatists for the same end. Now, I ask, whether in
case the Archbishop had endeavored to bring in Popery, Episcopacy (held to
be of divine right) ought therefore to be abolisht? If be answer; No, (as I
suppose his interest will prevail above his Grounds to make him) then I ask
again why an inferior actual power, to wit, Episcopacy, should not be held
to merit abolishing for Popery's sake; and introducing it so fraught with
inconveniences, which Popery, (so full alas! of grievances) though held
immediately before equally of divine Institution, and of far higher Authority,
deserved to be abolish't for it is own sake, as accompanied with the said
grievances!

Secondly, the Bp. tells us that they seek not extirpation of the Papacy, but
the reducing it to the primitive constitution: which is as good sense, as to
give a manabox on the ear, and then tell him you intend not to strike him. They
have already totally extirpated it in England, in such sort as all the world
sees and acknowledges the Pope has not the least influence upon the English
Congregation, over which before he had the greatest; yet, they hope to be
taken for moderate men, as long as they speak courteous nonsense and tell us,
they seek not to extirpate it. Thus the Bp. wanders from the purpose; but still
all is my fault who would not grant him his two conditions.

Thirdly, he tells us that Monarchy and Episcopacy are of divine Institution,
so is not, (says he) a Papal sovereignty of Jurisdiction. That Monarchy
should be of divine Institution, I much wonder, surely the Venetians and
Hollanders are in a sad case then, who thus continue without relenting to break
one of God's Commandments; especially, their Brethren, the Hollanders, who
renounced the Monarchical Government of the King of Spain. But the learned Bp.
has some text or other in Scripture which he interprets only according to
Grammar and Dictionary-learning without ever looking into Politics, the
science which concerns such points and passages; which would have taught him
that Government was instituted for the good of the Governed; and, that, since
human affairs are subject to perpetual mutability and change, it happens that
in some countries and some circumstances one form of Government is convenient,
in others another, according as it happens to be best for the Governed: which
comes to this that no particular form of Government is of divine Institution,
and constituted to endure ever, seeing the end to which all Government is
directed, the good of the Governed, is mutable and changeable.

As for the next part of his third excuse that the Pope's Authority or Headship
in Jurisdiction is not of divine Institution, as Episcopacy is; you see it is
his old trick; only his own bare saying, and which is worse, saying over again
the very point in dispute between us. Whereas, the point which we urge here is
a plain matter of fact, that those who first renounced the Papal Authority,
held immediately before they renounced it as firmly that it was divine
Institution, as the Protestants do of Episcopacy now; and therefore ought to
have renounced it, upon the pretended pressure of inconveniences, no more than
Episcopacy ought to be abolish't upon the like inconveniences. Nay more, the
first Reformers ere they grew newfangled and changed their mind, held it much
more firmly; for they held it a point of faith, and abhorred all them who
renounced it as Schismatics and Heretics both; whereas the Protestants
acknowledge the Huguenots of France for Brothers, who yet deny Episcopacy,
which the Bp. tells us upon another occasion is of divine Institution. But,
it is all one with the Protestants whether they renounce all Christ's
Institutions or no; if they do but hate Rome; they are saints and Brothers. The
common faction against the Pope is more powerful to unite them, than the
professed and obstinate rejecting Christ's ordinances, is to disunite them. As
for his Bravado how rarely he could justify his Parliamentary Prelacy, what
weak performances it would afford were it put to trial, may be judged from
his numerous and enormous contradictions in this present treatise, bragged on
by the Protestants to be his Master piece.

Sect. 6.
How my L^ of Derry states the whole question false, by pretending, against the
plain matter of fact, that they separated only from the Court, and not from
the Church of Rome. His Grounds of separation shown insufficient in many
regards; nay confessed such by himself, granting there was another remedy besides
division. That the Reformers have neither left any open and certain method of
coming to Christ's faith, nor any form of Government in God's Church, nor by
consequence any Church. His weak plea for England's independency from the
Council of Ephesus. Five palpable contradictions clustered together, which the
Bp. calls the Protestants more Experience than their Ancestors.
HIs sixth section pretends to vindicate his Grounds of separation; to take
notice of which the Bp. is violently importunate with the Reader bidding him
observe and wonder. Nor can I do any less, seeing such monstrous stuff
throughout this whole Section.

It begins, we are now come to the Grounds of our separation from the Court of
Rome. And this is the first Monster, which the Bp's pen more fruitful of such
creatures, than Africa it self, proposes to our observation. Which, if it be
not as foul and uncouth an one as error could hatch, and obstinate Schism
maintain, you shall pay but pence a piece to see it, and say I have abused you
too.

The charge against the Protestants was this, manifested by undeniable matter
of fact; that they had rejected the acknowledgment of S. Peter's, and his
successors, (the Pope's) Headhip over God's Church; and that they had receded
from this Rule of faith, that nothing is to be adhered to, as of faith, but
what was inherited, (that is immediately delivered) by their forefathers, as
the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles? That they renounced the former is
manifest by the whole worlds and their own Confession; That they renounced the
latter, is no less manifest, by the same undeniable attestation; and indeed out
of the very word Reformation, which signifies a not immediate delivery. It is
no less evident that the acknowledgment of the former, both was at the time of
the Reformation, and now is the Principle of Unity in Government to those
Churches in Communion with the sea of Rome; that is, to all the Churches they
themselves communicated with, or were united to, before they broke; for, it is
as visible as the sun at nonday, that France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, etc.
consent and center in a joint acknowledgment of the Pope's Headship, and are
therefore held by Protestants, Puritans, and all contrary sects for Papist
Countries. It is evident likewise that the acknowledgment of the latter was,
and is to the said Churches the Principle of Unity in faith, for they ever held
the living voice of the Church, that is, the immediate Tradition or delivery of
Pastors and forefathers an infallible Rule of faith; wherefore, 'it is
unavoidably consequent that the Protestants dissenting from, and disagreeing in
both the said Principles, in which these then-fellow- Churches consented and
agreed, were and are separated from all those Churches, and all that belong to
those Churches: And this according to the two said Principles. Again, since
nothing can be more essential to a Church than that which is the Rule, and
Root of Unity both in faith and Government, it follows that the Protestants
dissenting in both and acting accordingly, that is, having separated according
to both, separated and broke from the former Church, consisting of those
Churches thus united, according to the Essentialls and fundamentalls of a
Church* Now then after all this, as evident as that two ad three make five, to
wave answering this true charge, that they broke by this double dissent from
all those Churches, and to make as though they separated from the Court of Rome
only and to defend themselves as breaking only from that Court, is to say,
that none hold those two Principles but only the Court of Rome; which (to
speak moderately (is perfect Impudence, the most proper and characteristicall
expression of this Bp's manner of writing; but the blame is mine, for had I
performed those two powerful conditions, the Bishop, had not thus ^huffled of
the true charge, nor avoided thus the whole question.

I shall desire the Reader to consider once again the true charge, for
otherwise it is impossible he should judge of the sufficiency or insufficiency
of their Grounds for separation; as likewise to reflect that, though he
pretend here they had sufficient Grounds, yet he thinks it not safe to speak
out to the point (as I urged him heretofore) nor tell us whether those Grounds
of his exceptions be demonstrative, that is apt to infer with absolute
necessity, therefore the Authority was an usurpation, and not come from Christ;
or, though come from Christ, yet, for those reasons, to be rejected: nor dares
he confess that they are only probable, yet sufficient: For, if probable
reasons were sufficient to abolish an Authority as an usurpation, held, till
those reasons appeared, to have been of Christ's Institution; what Government
in the world could stand? Nor lastly, that there is a middle sort of proof
between demonstration and Probability; that is, above a may be, yet below a
must be, which can convince sufficiently the understanding and oblige it to an
assent contrary to it is former faith. These points are of too hard digestion
for verb ^ll souls, and come so near the first Principles, that they would
quickly end this and all Controversies, should they come to be perfectly
scanned. Wherefore, as before he totally omitted to answer those words of mine
which pressed him to declare himself in that point; so, here, constant to his
Principles, he absolutely declines to inform us what kind of proofs they must
be; only he calls them Grounds, and says they are just and sufficient.

His pretended Grounds I reduce to three general Heads: some of them entrench
upon Eternity and conscience: some urge only temporal inconveniences; Lastly,
some are of a middle nature, and pretend to more knowledge of Right.

Those of the first sort are all mere falsehoods and calumnies, and equally
competent for any Heretic in the world to object against the Church in a like
occasion; that is, are no ways proper or serviceable to his cause. For, may
not any Heretic voluntarily object that the Church imposed new Articles of
faith upon him, when he had a mind to believe or hold nothing of faith, but
what agreed with his own fancy? Might not he complain of new creeds imposed,
when the Church, upon occasion of new emergent heresies, added to her public
Professions some points of faith (held so formerly) which might distinguish her
old friends from up start foes? Might not he complain of Peril of Idolatry,
as your Brother Puritans did for surplisses, and your reformed Communion Table,
when he had a mind to deny that Christ was more than a man as did the Arians,
or to renounce any decent or rational practice in God's Church; might not he
pretend that all Heretics and Schismatics in the world were good Christians,
and that the Church was tyrannical in holding them for excommunicate? Might
not he shuffle together faith with opinions, and allege falsely, as you do
here, you were forced to approve the Pope's rebellion against general
Councils, and taking Oaths to maintain usurpation of the Pope; whenas, you know
and confess your self, one may be of our Church, and yet neither hold the Pope
above the Council nor accept of such Oaths (Just vindic. p. 200.) Again, all
these Exceptions you produce are the very points you pretend to dispute against
us; wherefore it depends upon the goodness of your reasons, whether those
Articles pretended to be new were indeed such, and endangering Idolatry, or
no; in judging which concerning points Fancy must be allowed to pass no
verdict only rigor of reason, that is, demonstration, can be presumed
sufficient to render points, held formely by themselves, and their immediate
forefathers as of faith, sacred and Christ's doctrine, to be obnoxious to
Exceptions of new, false and Idolatrous. Yet nothing is more evident than that
you have no such reasons, for our Drs have vindicated these very points against
your Reformers, in such a manner, that (to speak much within compass) the
unpassionate part of the world never imagined you have carried the cause
clearly, and conclucluded decisively against us; which is an Evidence, that you
have not evidenced against us, nor demonstrated the counter Authority upon
which you build your contrary tenet. To omit that the Evidence of our Churches
Authority has been pretended by our late Controvertists, and as yet unreply'd
upon by your party; nay that your own best writers confess you have nothing but
pro^ability whereon to Ground your faith. All which shows the vanity of your
pretended fear of Idolatry, and new points of faith, and co^cludes your breach
temerarious and irrational. And as for your fear of separating from the
Communion of three parts of that which you call Christendom, it shall be
shown hereafter ( Sect. 10) from your own side, that you had ten times more
Communion even with that in material points, when you were in our Church, than
you can pretend to have had since.

His second sort of Grounds are those which relate to temporal inconveniences,
and injuries to the civil state, by reason of the Pope's pretended
encroachments; against all which he has told us before (p. 21.) that diverse
Catholic countries have laws in force; that is, that men may remain Catholics
without holding, nay resisting those pretended encroachments; and tells us here
p. 36. that al* other Catholic countries maintain their privileges
inviolated. Yet these pretended inconveniences he huddles together in big
terms, and puts them for a ground of their separation from our Church, in which
Church yet he confesses they might have continued still in union, and have
stood out against them* Now whether many of these were Abuses or just Rights
he knows is disputable between cano^ and civil Lawyers; of which kind of
Co^troversy I neither think my self nor the Bp. a competent judge, since this
kind of learning is not our proper profession. Yet he will needs have me
engage into such questions, nothing concerning our present quarrel, which is
about a point of faith, not a point of law. Our question is whether these
Exceptions of his were sufficient Grounds of renouncing the Authority it self,
and separating from the former Church. That they were not, I show.

First, those inconveniences he reckons up, as extortions, usurpations of more
than belonged to them, causing animosities between the crown and the miter,
etc. though they had been true, are evidently abuses of the Officer and argue
no fault in the Office it self of Head of the Church, nor that the Right use of
it ought therefore to be taken away.

Secondly, some of those pretended Abuses are his own deductions only; as that
it is against the right ends of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; which he
endeavors not to show evidently out of the science of Politics, which is
proper to those matters, nor any thing else of this nature; but out of two or
perhaps three matters of fact which only inferred that it happened so
sometimes; and then by the same reason Episcopacy and all the Offices in the
world must be abolish't and abrogated.

Thirdly, that some of those pretended Abuses are indeed such, and not rather
just Rights. he no way proves; for he only puts down that such and such
things were done, but whether rightfully or no I presume he will not think
himself such a rare Iuris vtriusque Doctor, as to make a fit umpire to decide
law quarrels of this highe'st nature* And, on the other side, none is ignorant
that either party had learned lawiers for them to avouch their pretenses. I
omit that the Kings were worsted so metimes and renounced their pretense, as in
that of investitures.

Fourthly, the temporal laws he cites, conclude not evidently a Right; for,
it is as easy for a Canon-lawier to object that the temporal laws wrong the
Ecclesiastical, as it is for civil lawiers to say that the Ecclesiastical
wrong theirs; but with this disadvantage to the latter that reason gives more
particular respect and charines ought to be used in disannulling or
retrenching Ecclesiastical laws, than temporal, by how much they are nearer
allied to the Church, and by consequence to the order of mankind to Beatitude.

Fifthly, he abuses those pretended Abuses most unconscionably; saying, that
the Pope usurped most unjustly all Right, civil, Ecclesiastical, sacred,
profane, of all orders of men, Kings, Nobles, Bishops, etc. Which is such a
loud-mouthed calumny; such a far-stretching fiction, that it is as big as all
Christendom. For, by this, no man in the Church was master or owner of his own
Kingdom, Estate, house, nay not of the very bread he eat, but by the Pope's
good leave. Thus the Bishop in a fury of Schism runs himself out of breath; nor
will any thing pacify him or bring him into temper to speak a word of truth or
sense, but my granting him his two conditions, that is my denying my own tenet,
which I am defending.

Sixthly, grant all those Abuses had been true; was there no other remedy but
division? Had not the secular Governors the sword in their hand? did it not ly
in their power to choose whether they would admit or no things destructive to
their Rights? yes: for the Bp. tells us p. 36. that All other Catholic
countries, (which he knows held the Pope's supremacy, as well as England) do
maintain their own Privileges inviolated: And, as for England, he tells us,
in a slovenly phrase, that our Ancestors were not so stupid as to sit still,
and blow their noses; meaning that they did the same which other Catholic
countries did; so that, according to himself, there was a remedy still, and a
means to keep their privileges inviolated.

Seventhly, put case, these temporal inconveniences had not been otherwise
remediable, I conceive there is not a good Christian in the world that
understands what a Church is, will say that Ecclesiastical Communion is to be
broken for all the temporal concernments imaginable: For, first, that the well
being and peace of a Church cannot consist without Unity, is so evident, that
the very terms would convince him of a contradiction who should deny it; since
distraction and dissension, (the parents of dissolution and ruin) must needs
be where there is no Unity. Secondly, not only the well being of a Church,
but the very Being of it consists in it is Unity; for what scholar knows not
that things of this nature have no other Unity, (nor consequently Entity or
Being) but that of order, that is of Superiority and subordination: Whence
follows, that, if this Order be broken, which is done by disacknowledging the
former Ecclesiastical chief Magistrate, the Unity of the Church is dissolved,
that is, her Entity is annihilated, that is, there is no one Church, that is,
there is no Church. This act then of yours since it dissolved that which was
the chief bond of Unity in the former Church, was in it is own nature
destructive, of a Church. A mischief which out-weighs the necessity of
remedying the highest temporal inconveniences imaginable. Thirdly, since
Christ came from heaven to plant a Church, and the Being of a Church consist in
Order, it follows that Christ instituted the Order of the Church; otherwise he
had not constituted a Church; that is, he had not done what he came to do:
Wherefore that fact which breaks the Order of the Church, and that in the
highest manner by disacknowledging the highest Magistrate in the Church, is by
good consequence in the highest manner against Christ's Institution and
command, that is, in the highest manner sinful and criminal; and so, no
temporal inconveniences can be a competent plea for such a fact; since no
temporal inconvenience can be a sufficient reason for a man to sin. Fourthly,
if the Communion of a Church may be broken for temporal miscarriages it
follows that all the general Councils were to no purpose; since whenever the
observation of these general Councils hapens to be inconvenient to the
temporal state, that is, suit not with the humors of the Governed, but are
likely to breed combustion, the remedying the temporal ills (according to the
Bp.) ought to oversway. The consequence is evident; for general Councils cannot
be more sacred than the Communion of the Church, since they are the effects of
it; or rather, indeed, they have their form and Essence from this Communion.
Since then this fact of theirs as appears by the charge broke Church Communion,
and by the Bishop's plea, because of temporal inconveniences, they may for the
same and with better reason break Councils too, and there is an end of all.

Fifthly, faith, that is, the supernatural knowledge of God, is so essentially
necessary for the salvation of mankind, that no worldly consideration ought to
balance it. Now then since faith, if not one is none; nor can it be preserved
one but by some certain Rule to keep it one, it follows that no temporal
mischief can deserve a remedy accompanied with the renouncing this certain Rule
of faith: Wherefore, temporal inconveniences cannot with any face be alleged
by a Christian who held formerly no certain Rule of faith but the living voice
of the present Church, that is immediate Tradition (as did the first Reformers)
for a plea for them to renounce the said Rule of faith; which brings faith to
an uncertainty, that is, to a nullity, or no obligation of holding any thing to
be of faith. Yet this former Rule of faith, the first Reformers renounced,
when they renounced the Pope's Headship recommended by that Rule.

Sixthly, the matter of fact not only charges you to have rejected the Rules
of Unity in faith and Government in the Church you left, and by consequence
(since both then and now you acknowledge her a true Church) broke Church
Communion, but it is also equally evident, that your Grounds since have left
the Church no Rule of either, but have substituted opinion in stead of faith,
or obscurity of Grammatical quibbling in stead of Evidence of Authority, and
Anarchy in stead of Government. For, the Rule of faith if the former Church was
so easy and certain a method of coming to Christ's law that none that had
reason could be either ignorant or doubtful of it; what easier than Children
to believe as they were taught, and practice as they were shownd. What more
impossible than for fathers to conspire to either error or malice, in teaching
their Children what was most evident to them by daily practice of their whole
lives to have been their immediately foregoing fathers doctrine, and was most
important to their and their Children's endless bliss or misery? And, what more
evident than that they who proceed upon this principle, (as Catholics do) will
always continue, and ever did to deliver and embrace what was held formerly;
that is, to conserve true faith. Now in stead of this, though the Protestants
will tell us sometimes upon occasion that they hold to Tradition and at present
believe their immediate forefathers, yet if we go backward to King H. the
8th's time, their chain of immediate delivery is interrupted, and at an end,
(the Reformation, which they own, broke that, and shows their recourse to i^ a
false hearted pretense) ours goes on still: Whether run they then finding
themselves at a loss here, for an easy, open, and certain method of faith. Why,
they turn your wits a woolgathering into a wilderness of words in the
Scriptures: ask them for a certain method to know the true sense of it; they will
tell you, it is plain, or that you need no more but a Grammar and a dictionary
to find out a faith; nay less, and that common people, who neither understand
what Grammar nor dictionary means, may find it there, though our eyes testify
that all the world is together by the ears about understanding the sense of it.
Ask them for a certain interpreter; perhaps sometimes they will answer you
faintly that the general Councils and fathers are one; that is, you must run
over Libraries ere you can rationally embrace any faith at all; and, if you be
so sincere to your nature, reason, as to look for certainty which books are
legitimate fathers, which not; which Councils general, authentic, and to be
believed, which not? you are engaged again to study all the School-disputes,
and Controversies which concern those questions. And, if you repine at the
endless laboriousnes of the task, the insecurity of the method, and the
uncertainty of the issue, and urge them for some other certainer, shorter, and
plainer way of finding faith; they will reply at length, and confess, as their
best Champions, Chillingworth and Faulkland do very heartily, that there is no
certainty of faith, but probability only; which signifies that no man can
rationally be a Christian, or have any obligation to believe any thing; since
it is both most irrational and impossible there should be any oblig^tion to
assent upon a probability. And thus, Reader, thou se est what pass they bring
faith and it is Unity to; to wit, to a perfect nullity and total ruin.

Next, as for Government, let us see whether they have left any Unity of that
in God's Church! That which was held for God's Church by them, while they
continued with us were those Churches only in Communion with the sea of Rome;
the Unity of Government in this Church was evident, and known to all in what it
consisted, to wit, in the common acknowledment of the Bishop of Rome as it is
Head. Since they left that mother, they have got new Brothers, and sisters,
whom before they accounted Bastards and Aliens: so that, God's Church now,
according to them, is made up of Greeks, Lutherans, Huguenots; perhaps
Socinians, Presbyterians, Adamites, Quakers, etc. For they give no Ground, nor
have any certain Rule of faith to discern which are of it, which not. But we
will pitch upon their acknowledged favorites. First the Church of England
holds the King the Head of their Church. Next the Huguenots, (whom they own for
dear Brothers, and part of God's Church) hold neither King, nor yet Bishop, but
the Presbyte^y only: strange Unity which stands in terms of contradiction!
Thirdly, the Papists are accounted by them, lest they should spoil their own
Mission, part of God's Church too; and these acknowledge noe Head but the Pope.
Fourthly, the Lutherans are a part of their kind hearted Church; and, amongst
them, for the most part, each parish-Minister is Head of his Church or Parish,
without any subordination to any higher Ecclesiastical Governor. Lastly the
Greek Church is held by them another part, and it acknowledges no Head but the
Patriarch I omit those sects who own no Government at all. (Is not this now a
brave Unity where there are five disparate forms of Government, which stand
aloof, and at arms end with one another, without any commonty to unite or
connect them? Let them not toy it now, as they use, and tell us of an union of
charity; our discourse is about an Unity of Government, either then let him
show that God's Church, as cast in this mold, has an Unity within the limits
and notion of Government, tha^ is, any commonty to subscribe to some one sort
of Government either acknowledged to have been instituted by Christ, or agreed
on by common consent of those in this new-fashion'd Church; or else, let him
confess that this Church thus patch't up, has no Unity in Government at all.
We will do the Bishop a greater favor, and give him leave to set aside the
french Church and the rest, and only reflect upon the form of Government they
substituted to that which they rejected; to wit, that the King, or temporal
power, should be supreme in Ecclesiastical Affairs. Be it so then, and that
each particular pretended Church in the world were thus governed, we see that
they of England under their King, would make one Church; they of Holland, under
their Hogen Moghen Magistrates another; France under it is King a third, and so
all the rest of the countries in the world. Many Churches we see here indeed
in those Grounds, and many distinct independent Governors; but where is there
any Unity of Government for the whole? where is there any supreme Governor, or
Governors to whom all are bound to submit, and conform themselves in the
common concerns of the Church? Or, without this, how is it possible there
should be any Unity of Government or a Church, that is, a thing connected,
united, or made one by Order, or by Unity of Government? The Church is God's
Family; can that be called a Family, where mutually independent persons live in
several rooms of the house, (that is are many families) without any Master, or
Mistress of the house, or some person, or persons higher than the rest, by
subordination to whom they become united or made one. The Church is a City,
whose Unity is in it self: can that be called a City, where each Master of a
family is supreme, that is, where there are an hundred distinct supremes which
stand aloof from one another without any Colligation of themselves under the
notion of Governed; by which means those many otherwise wholes become now parts
and make up one whole, which is done by submitting to some superior Magistrate
or Magistrates? The Church is a Christian Commonwealth; can there be a
Commonwealth which can be called one, if every City and town have a particular
supreme Governor of it is own, without owing deference to any superior or
superiors? Does not common sense inform us that in this cause each City is a
particular, that is, one complete self bounded Commonwealth? that is, that
those many Cities are more ones, that is, many Co^mon-wealths? Wherefore either
show us some one standing, ordinary form of Magistracy or Government to which
all Christendom ought to submit, and some Magistrate, or Magistrates,
Governor, or Governors to whom they owe a constant obedience, (which is
impossible in your Grounds) or else acknowledge plainly that you have left no
Unity of Government in God's Church at all, but have unravelled all the frame
and disannulled all the Being of a Church, which consisted essentially in
Order; and made that parts of it have no more connection or Unity than a rope of
sand. Yet as long as these pitiful shufflers can but tell the abused Reader
in general terms that they acknowledge the discipline left by Christ and his
Apostles, they make account their adherents will renounce both their eyes and
common sense, and be content to follow hood-wintk't after the empty tinkling
sound of these hollow and nothing signifying phrases.

Perhaps, the Bp. will reply, that a general Council is acknowledged by them
as of obligatory Authority; and that, therefore, there is yet a means left for
Unity of Government in the whole Church. Upon which answer the good Protestant
Reader thinks them humble and reasonable men. But this is indeed the greatest
mockery that can be invented. For, first, they give us no certain Rule to know
which is a general Council, which not, that is who are to be called to that
Council, who not; for once taking away a certain Rule of faith, there is no
certainty who are Heretics, that is, men not to be called to a Council as to
sit in it and vote; who good Catholics, that is, to be called thither to sit
and vote there. Next, general Councils being only called upon extremities, if
the Church's Unity in Government consist only in them, it follows that the
Church has actually no Unity of Government but just at that pinch when a
general Council is to be called; that is, it is never a Church, but at that
happy time only, when it is most unhappy. But, the greatest piece of foolery
is, that, they having renounced an actual standing Authority, pretend (to show
their goodness,) a readiness to submit to the Authority of a general Council,
which themselves will acknowledge with the next breath impossible to be had;
that is, they profess themselves very humbly and heartily ready, though they
have renounced one Government, yet to submit to another, which can never be,
and so is never likely to trouble or control them. Is not this a piece of
hollow hearted humility. Yet that such Councils as they will daign to call
general are held by them impossible, Dr. H. tells us Reply p. 30. in those
words, general Councils are now morally impossible to be had, the Christian
world being under so many Empires, and divided into so many Co^munions, that it
is not visible to the eye of man, how they should be regularly assembled;
Here, Reader, thou see all n^y discourse asserted; to wit, that God's Church,
as they have formed it, is so divided into disparate parts, that, as there is
no Unity of Government in it now, (for if there were, there would be also a
means to assemble a general Council) so it is impossible there should be any
for the future according to their Grounds, till some one temporal Governor
come to Lord it ov^r the whole, or greatest part of the Christian world, which
in all likelihood will be never. Consider again their candor, they have
renounced the former notion of God's Church, and his Authority whose proper
office it was to call a general Council of that whole Church, as he did
often, and then profess a willingness to submit to such a Council, or a
Representative of their new notion'd Church; but, with the next breath, lament
(alas) that such a general Council, or Representative cannot possibly be had,
(after themselves had taken order to hinder all means of having it) and so they
are free and need obey no body. How much better and stronger were it argued
thus; that, since it is most irrational and unbeseeming God's Providence, that
his Church should be destitute of a means to remedy her extremities, that is;
of means to gather a general Council, and that there was a means to do this
before you rejected the Pope's Authority, and by your own Confession no
possibility of it since; that therefore, you have renounced the right notion of
a Church, and the right Government of that Church.

This then is our total charge against you; that you have broke the Unity of
the former Church, (and not of the Court only, as you trifle it) which you
were in, by renouncing those Principles in which consisted her Unity both in
Faith and Government, and to which Principles the whole Church, you broke from,
consented. Thus far the matter of fact evidences. Nor is it less evident that
you have substituted no certain Rule of faith, nor any certain or particular
form of Government; which can ground an Unity, to your new fashioned Church in
either respect, but, that you have turned Evidence of Authority (the only
certain Rule and Root of faith) into a drowsy probability; and, by consequence,
faith thus grounded, into Opinion; as, likewise, that you have turned the
former Government of the Church into a perfect Anarchy; there being no
colligation or Unity of the whole together, ty any by of Government; and that
(had not God's mercy been above your malice) you had made the Church, our
Jerusalem, which is built as a City at Unity with it self, (that is which has
an Unity of Government) an heap of stones; without, connection, without order,
and consequently without being which consisted in that Order. This is your
crime, in this lies your sinful guilt of Schism and heresy, that your fact and
tenet is intrinsecally destructive to the very being of God's Church, and that
it tears and rents it peece-meal all asunder. A mischief equally pernicious to
man-kind's attaining Beatitude, as the renou^cing the supreme Government in a
Kingdom or commonwealth would be in order to their safe enjoyment of their
temporal livelihoods; and, therefore, no ways to be balanced or excused by
alleging temporal inconveniences; since it as far ouerpoises it is excuse as
Eternity of bliss does a piece of earth; that is, infinitely.

His third sort of Grounds, is the weakness of the Pope's pretenses, and the
exemption of the Britannick Churches from foreign Jurisdiction by the Council
of Ephesus. For the fitst, the Bp. never so much as directly mentions that in
which we place the strength of the Pope's pretense, of his supreme Authority,
much less impugnes it, save only a little on the by (as it were) in his
slight way: it is this, that it was held and delivered by a world of immediate
fathers to sons as from their fathers, and so upwards as from Christ, that this
Authority was sacred, of Christ's Institution, of faith, and recommended to us
by the same Rule that assured us Christ was God. Upon this tenure as strongly
supported as nature could bear, held demonstrably evident, and so shown by us;
not yet answered or pretended to be answered by the Protestant party, we
Ground this Doctrine of the Pope's Headship, or the substance of his Authority:
But, I fear, the Bp. either understands not our tenure, (for, otherwise, sure
he would have named it) or else he is impugning some Canon Lawier, and the
extent of the Pope's Authority; in stead of impugning the Church, and the
substance of the said Authority As for his second trifle; I have already shown
( Sect. 4.) that the Britannick Churches have no influence upon our Churches
descended from saxons; nor shall he ever show a syllable in the Council of
Ephesus exempting them from the Pope's Jurisdiction, as Head of the Church;
however Cyprus and some others are there exempted from a neighboring superior
falsely pretending a Jurisdiction over them; But of this more shall be said
hereafter in this present Section.

The Unity of the Church being of such importance, and the fact breaking it, by
consequence so heinous, the alleging the greatest abuses imaginable are
absolutely concluded insufficient excuses for such a fact; much more, unles it
be shown, there were no other possible means to remedy them. Hereupon I
alleged that it was of little concernment to examine whether his complaints
were true or false, since he does not show there was no other remedy, but
division. First, the Bishop replies sharply. What? is it of little concernment
to examine whether the Grounds be sufficient or no? well leap't my Lord; I
speak of the inconsiderablenes of their truth, or falsehood; your L^ talks of
inconsiderablenes of their s^fficiency, and pretends against both plain words
and conscience that I wave that. There may be ob^ections against the Abuses
perhaps of all Governors in the world, and these also true: but their truth
does not infer their sufficiency for rejecting that very Government as long as
they are less considerable than good of the Government it self, and that there
is another cure: This it that in which I showed your manner of arguing
defective in the main, because you never proved nor ever shall, that there was
no other remedy except division; for, unles you put in this (and more too) your
argument stands in this posture, True complaints against Governors, whether
otherwise remediable or no, are sufficient reasons to abolish that very
Government. At which position, if spoke out heartily, I hope you will blush:
though it be perfectly your own, cloak't a little in other, (but equivalent)
terms. Next, he tells us it is a negative and so it belongs not to him to
prove it. Yes, my Ld, it belongs to your party, or any one who rises against an
actual Authority, either to show that that Authority was none, or else that
though it was a lawful one, yet there was no other remedy for it is Abuses, but
a total Abolishment of it. Otherwise, the very majesty which Government
carries in it is notion, the Unity, peace, and a thousand blessings and
conveniences which spring from that Unity, found in the common acknowledment of
that Authority, oversway the private credit, or any other less public
concerns, which the disobedient party can pretend to; and render's their fact
of rising, irrational and destructive to the common, engaging them needlessly
in a thousand distractions, and by consequence, hazards of ruin which attend
such divisions. Thirdly, he would persuade the Reader that a negative is not
capable of proof, or at least not so easily capable of it; for answer I refer
him to any boy who has been two years at the Universities, who will inform him
that negatives may witht equal evidence be concluded in Celarent and Ferio as
affirmatives may in Barbara, and Darij. Lastly, the proof which he proposes
for his negative to show no other remedy, (but dares not much stick to them)
are both equally competent to France, Spain, etc who yet (as he tells us in
the next page in contradiction to himself, here) found other remedies to
preserve their privileges inviolated, and his pretended proofs are such
pitiful ones, (though on them is built the sufficiency of their motives) that
they evencry for mercy as soon as they show their faces. They are these that
the King of England could not call the Pope and his ourt to a personal
account, and that the Pope would not ease them upon many Adresses made? what
then? Had not the King the sword in his own hands? did it not ly in his power
to right himself as he ^isted, and to admit those pretended eneroachments
only so far as he thought just and fitting? Nay do not your self lay open and
repeat in many places that not only Kings of England but also those of all
other countries both could and did do it often, and by doing so preserve their
privileges inviolated? How does this prove then that there was sufficient
Grounds of dividing from the former Church, since your self confess so often it
could have been remedied otherwise? Or, how is it a sufficient motive to
abolish an Authority for the Abuses, which very pretended Abuses they had power
to curb and keep within compass without dividing, and so that they should not
violate their privileges? Not a word then has the Bp. brought to prove they
had sufficient Grounds of division, that is, that there was no other remedy:
but, in stead thereof, expressly told us the contrary, and manifoldly
contradicted himself.

I added. And much more, if the Authority be of Christ's Institution no just
cause can possibly ^ee given for it is abolishment. The merry Bp. laughs at
this, (as he calls it) Kind of arguing; which neither looks like an Argument,
nor was pretended by me as such; but as a consideration which much aggravates
the charge and obliges in all reason the renouncers of this Authority to look
very charily to the sufficiency of the causes of that their division: For since
it follows out of the terms, that, ere they renounced it, and by thus
renouncing it left to be Catholics, they immediately before held it as
Catholics do, that is, held it as a point of faith, and of Christ's
Institution; and since it is evident that none ought to change his faith which
he and his Ancestors immemorially embraced but upon evident Grounds; again,
since it is evident likewise and confessed that temporal motives ought not to
make us break Christ's commands, which is done by rejecting a Government which
he instituted: Two things are consequent hence to their disadvantage; one,
that their motives ought to be rigoro sly evident and demonstrative for their
renouncing it, since d^nger of damnation ensves upon their miscarriage, and
this even in their own thoughts as they were laid in their minds when they
first began to meditate a breach: The other, that the pretended causes
(especially temporal inconveniences) for the abolishing this Authority can no
ways justify the first breakers who held it formerly a point of faith, since
no just causes can be given to renounce an Authority held to be instituted by
Christ; As then it had been rational to Reply to King H. the 8th remaining yet
a Catholic, and beginning to have thoughts to abolish this Authority, upon
such and such temporal inconveniences that his majesty and his Ancestors had
held it of divine Institution and that therefore there could be no just cause
to abolish it, so it is equally seasonable to Reply to my Lord of Derry, who
undertakes here to vindicate him by alleging the same thing, that these causes
nor any else were sufficient to make them begin to break, because ere they
begun the breach, they held this Authority to be of Christ's Institution; and
therefore it is a folly for him to think to justify them by huddling together
causes and motives, and crying them up for sufficient till he can show they
had Evidence of the Truth of the opposite point, greater than the pretended
Evidence of Authority, universal Tradition, which they actually had for their
former tenet

If a cause be sufficient to produce an effect, and equally applied it is
manifest the same effect will follow. Hence, as an argument of the
insufficiency of their motives of Division, I alleged that all other Catholic
countries had the same exceptions, yet neither broke formerly, nor follow your
Example. He answers, first; Few or none have sustained so great oppression;
which signifies, I know not well whether any have or no: or, for any thing I
know, some have; Nor does he prove the contrary otherwise than by a pleasant
saying of a certain Pope. Any thing will serve him. Next he tells us, all
other countries have not right to the Cyprian privileges, as Britain has.
And how proves he that this country had any by that Council? Is England named
in the Council of Ephesus, which exempted Cyprus from the Patriarch of Antioch?
No. Is Britain at least? No. How come we then to be particularly priviledg'd
by that Council. Why the Bp. of Derry thinks so. His Grounds? Because that
Council ordains, that no Bp. should occupy a Province, which was not from, the
beginning under his Predecessors. And how proves he the application, that
England was never anciently under the Pope as Head of the Church? from Sr Henry
Spelman's old-new manuscript, and two or three rags of History, or
misunderstood Testimonies. Are they demonstrative or rigorous Evidences? Here
my Ld is wisely silent. Will less serve than such proofs to justify such a
separation? He is silent again. Were they a thousand times as many, are they
of a weight comparable to a world of witnesses proceeding upon the Grounds of
immediate d^livery from hand to hand, which recommended and ascertained the
contrary? Alas! he never thinks of nor considers that at all; but very wisely
puts his light grains in one end of the scales, negl ^cting to put our pounds
in the other; and then brags that his thin grains are overweight.

The third particularizing motive is his own unprou'd saying, and is concluded
with a boast that he is not the only schismatic in the world but has
Brothers. Is this the way to argue against us! To call all those Christians
which profess the name of Christ, and communicate with himself in the same
guilt, and then say he has fellows in his schism? He knows we grant them
not to be truly-call'd Christians, but in the name only and equivocally, as a
painted man is styld' a man; If he will show that any Congregation of
truly-call'd Christians partakes with him in the separation from Rome, let him
show that these pretended Christians, for those points in which they differ
from us, did not renounce the only certain Rule of faith, Tradition, or
delivery of immediate forefathers; or, that there is any certain and infallible
Rule but that. Otherwise, they are cut of from the Rule and Root of faith, and
by consequence not in a true appellation to be called faithful or Christians;
otherwise, they heard not the immediately foregoing Church for those points
which they innovated, and so are to us no properly called Christians, but,
according to our saviors counsel as Heathens and publicans: I mean those who
knowingly and wilfully separated. Talking voluntarily, my Ld, according to the
dictates of your own fancy will not serve in a rigorous Controversy. First,
show that those you call Christians have any infallible or certain Rule of
faith, and so any faith, and, that they have not only a probable and fallible
Ground, that is opinion only for their faith; and then you shall contradict
your own best and more candid writers who confess it in terms; and do such a
miracle as your Ancestors never attained to; nor any of wit and ingenuity
attempted, seeing it impossible to be done rationally.

I alleged, in the next place, to show more their inexcusablenes and the
infussiciency of their pretended motives for breaking, the example of our own
country and forefathers, who had the same cause to cast the Pope's Supremacy of
the Land, yet rather proferr'd to continue in the peace of the Church, than to
att^mpt so destructive an innovation. The Bp. replies, first, that we should
not mistake them, and that they still desire to live in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, etc. No, my Ld, I do not mistake you, but know very well you
would be willing and glad too, the former Church should own you for hers; I
doubt not but you are apprehensive enough of what honor would accrue to you if
we would account you true Catholics; and what disgrace you get by being
accounted Heretics and Schismatics by us. But yet your desire of staying in
the Church is conditional, that you may be permitted to remain in her
Communion, and yet have liberty still to do and hold what you list. Do you not
think every Rebel, that renounces both the former Government and laws, loves
not still to be held a good Commonwealths man, and not to be outlawed or
punished, but permitted to enjoy the privilege of the Commonwealth, whose
Unity he has broken, so he may have his own intentions? Had Jack Straw, or
Wat Tiler, after they had rebelled, a mind to be thought Rebels, or to be
hanged; or, upon the Governors declaring them Outlaws and punishable, was it a
competent plea for them to say they desired to remain in the peaceable
Communion of the Commonwealth as far as the Court would give them leave? Your
fact, my Ld, of breaking the Unity of the former Church is much more evident
than theirs, being visible to the eyes of the whole world; and infinitely more
heinous, since it concerns the order to Eternity. After this fact so visible,
so enormous; it is no charity nor courtesy in you, but a request of an
unreasonable favor from us, to admit you into Communion; and would be most
absurd in Government, most contradictory in terms; signifying thus much that
they should be still held by us for good subjects, who profess and defend
still their Rebellion against the former Church Government; and for the right
faithful, who have no Rule of faith at all, nay pretend themselves to no more
than an opinion-grounding or probability.

Secondly, he tells us, our Ancestors did not stupidly sit still and blow
their noses, when they saw themselves thus abused? I answer whether they blew
their noses or no it matters not; but, did they renounce the Pope's Authority
as Head of the Church? This is the thing I denied of them, and charge upon the
Bp. what says he to this? He denies it too, after he had shuffled about a
while; (for he must have the liberty to take his swing) that is, he says the
same I do, and grants, what he pretend's to confute. For, after he had
reckoned up what things our Ancestors had done against the Pope, he adds, as
the top of the Climax, that they threatened him further to make a wall of
separation between him and them. Which shows that this is the most they did.
For, if they but threatened they did it not. But, it is evident that you have
done what they only threatened to do, and in excuse of your doing it, you add
immediately, that you have more Experience than your Ancestors had. Thus the
Bp. something heartily at present: Yet, we have seen him heretofore, in
contradiction to himself here, both affirm and maintain that K. H. the 8th when
he renounced the Pope made no new law, but only declared the ancient law of
England; which signifies that the wall of separation was not only threatened
but made formerly; for the former laws were actually in force before K. H's
time, nay in the very beginning of his Reign, as himself confesses p. 2s. l. 7.
8. And we shall see him hereafter bring an whole Chapter to make good the same
impudent assertion, which would put out the eyes and blot out the acknowledged
notions of the whole world. An excellently bad cause needs an excellently good
memory.

Now then since you have at unawares acknowledged so much truth as that they
who had the same causes of separation which you have, yet did not separate as
you do, let us reflect a little upon the reason you give of this difference.
It Is this, that you have more experience than your Ancestors; but whence this
greater experience springs, or out of what Experiments which they had not, you
gathered this experience, you have not one word. Are you wiser than they were
in the Art of Governing as to this point? Sure your self do not believe it, nor
can say it with modesty; since by professing you made no new law in this
matter, (that is retained the old, which you received from them) you confess
you know not how to make better. Were they cowards and durst not make those
provisions they saw necessary for the common good! Neither. They actually did
(say you) exclude the Pope's Supremacy out of England as far as they judged it
necessary for the tranquillity of the Kingdom. Well then, if they did as much
as they judged necessary, and knew as well what was necessary as you, why did
you do more, Because, forsooth, you had more experience. But does this
experience, furnish you with a reason sufficient to justify your separation! If
it do, produce it; if not, why do you allege this more experience? And,
indeed, how come you to pretend to it! For, since experience of necessity
supposes an Experiment whence it is derived, either some new thing happened by
which this great necessity of separation which your Ancestors were ignorant of
came to be discovered to you, or else you had no more experience than they.
Therefore, good my Ld, tell us what this new Experime^t was: But, it seems you
thought it either not handsome to be owned, or not worth the owning that
assign us none at all, telling us only in general terms you have more
experience than your Ancestors had, etc. that is, in stead of producing some
cause of separating which might vindicate your Church from Schism, to assign
an effect without a cause; and defend it with the same plea as a man would do
his Rebellion, who rising against his actual Governors, and upon that score
standing accused of Treason, should go about to maintain it was therefore
lawful for him to Rebel, because he was wiser than the former sub^ects; and
then tell that troublesome Adversary who should press him to prove this greater
Wisdom, that he has more experience, and that he is so.

However, since you are resolved to make a secret of this rare Experiment, and
that, by consequence, we are not to expect from you any Grounds of your
greater experience, let us see at least what it is you pretend to have more
enperience of. It Is this, that their Ancestors remedies were not soueraign or
sufficient enough, etc. Now these remedies of theirs being their rational
laws, (as he intimates presently after) do but observe how, like a reeling
Dutchman making indentures with his legs, the Bp's discourse staggers now to
the one, now to the other far distant side of the contradiction. He tells us
here that the remedies, that is, laws of our Ancestors were not sufficient
enough; yet maintains stoutly before that in the separation no new law was
made, that is, that the same laws or remedies were formerly as then, but were
not formerly sufficient; that is, that the same thing is not as sufficient as
it is. And this signifies for the Bp. to have more experience than his
Ancestors. Again, it being alleged here that the former laws were
insufficient, and acknowledged the page before that all other Catholic
countries do maintain their privileges inviolate, by means of their laws (as I
conceive and he intimates) which laws he says, p. 21. are equivalent to
those of England which he pretends here not to be sufficient; it follows that
the laws of other countries were equivalent to those of England, but those of
England not equivalent to them; or, that, though equivalent to one another,
that is, of equal force, yet the one was sufficient, the others not, that is,
of less force: And, thirdly, that all Catholic countries did maintain their
privileges inviolate by means which did not maintain them, or by laws which
were not sufficient to do it. Lastly, he tells us, p. 20. that the former laws
denied the Pope any Authority in England, and p. 21. l. 9. that those laws were
in force before the breach, that is, did actually leave him no Authority in
England; and here, that those national laws were not sufficient remedies;
Whence it is manifestly consequent, according to him, that those laws which
denied the Pope all Authority, and were actually in force, that is, actually
left him none, were not sufficient remedies against the Abuses of that
Authority, which they had quite taken a way. And this plenty of contradictions
the Bp's book is admirably stored with; which are his demonstrations to
vindicate his Church from Schism; only he christens the monstrous things with
a finer name, and calls them their greater experience. Whereas, indeed, as for
more experience he brags of, God know (poor men) it is only that which Eve got
by eating the Apple, the expeperience of evil added to that which they had
formerly of good. Their Ancestors experienced an happy Unity, Unanimity,
Uniformity and constancy in the same faith while they remained united to the
former Church; and they since their breach have experienced nothing but the
contrary; to wit, distractions, dissentions, Vnconformity, with a
perpetually-fleeting Changeablenes of their tenet; and, at last, an utter
dissolution and disapparition of their Mock Church, built only in the Air of
fantastic probabilities.

In the last place I alleged, that the pretenses upon which the Schism was
originally made were far different from those he now takes up to defend it.
For, it is well known that had the Pope consented that K. H. might put away his
wife and marry another, there had been no thoughts of renouncing his Au^hority.
Which shows that at most, the scales were but equally ballanc't before, and the
motives not sufficient to make them break, till this consideration cast them. A
great prejudice to the sufficiency of the other reasons you allege, which you
grant, in the next page, were most certainly then observed or the greatest part
of them. For since they were observed then, that is, since the same causes were
applied then, apt to work upon men's minds, those same causes had been also
formerly efficacious, that is, had formerly produced the effect of separating
as well as now, had there not been now some particular disposition in the
patient; and what particular disposition can be shown at the instant of
breaking, save the King's lust, which was most manifest and evident, I confess
I cannot imagine, nor (as I am persuaded (the Bp. himself; at least he tells us
none, but only in general terms says they had more experience than their
Ancestors.

Sect. 7.
The first part of the Protestant's Moderation, expressed by my Ld of Derry in
six pieces of nonsense and contradiction; with an utter ruin of all Order and
Government. His pretended undeniable Principles very easily and rationally
denied. His Church's inward charity, and the special external work thereof
(as he calls it) her Good-friday-Prayer, found to be self contradictory
Pretenses. His Moderation in calling those tenets Weeds, which he cannot
digest; and indifferent Opinions, which he will not be obliged to hold. That
according to Protestant Grounds it is impossible to know any Catholic Church,
or which sects are of it.
HIs next Head is the due Moderation of the Church of England in their
reformation. This I called a pleasant Topic; He answers so were the saddest
subjects to Democritus, I Reply, the subject is indeed very sad for never was a
sadder piece of Logic produced by a non-plust Sophister, yet withal so
mirthfull, as it would move laughter even in Heraclitus.

The first point of their Moderation, is this, that they deny not the true
being to other Churches, nor separate from the Churches but from their
accidental errors. Now, the matter of fact has evidenced undeniably that they
separated from those points which were the Principles of unity both in faith
and Government to the former Church with which they communicated, and
consequently from all the persons which held those Principles; and, had their
separation been expressed in these plain terms and true language, nothing had
sounded more intolerable and immoderate: wherefore my Ld took order to use his
own bare Authority, to moderate and reform the truth of these points into
pretended erroneousnes, and the concerningnes or fundamentalnes of them into an
only accidentalnes, and then all is well, and he is presently (if we will
believe his word against our own eyes) a moderate man; and so are the
Protestans too who participate his Moderation. But, if we demand what could be
Essential to the former Church if these too Principles (renounced by them)
which grounded all that was good in her, were accidental only? or how he can
justly hold her a true Church whose fund^mentall of fundamentalls, the Root and
Rule of all her faith, was, as he says here, an error; his candid answer would
show us what common sense already informs us that nothing could be either
Essential or fundamental to that Church. And so, this pretended Moderation
would vanish on one side into plain nonsense, in thinking any thing could be
more Essential to a Church then Vni^y of faith, and Government; on the other
side into mere folly and indeed co^tradiction in holding her a true Church,
whose Grounds of both (that is of all which should make her a true Church) are
Errors and Lies.

His Church of England defines, Art. 19. that our Church erres in matters of
faith; Art. 22. that four points of our faith are vain fictions and
contradictory to God's word. The like character is given of another point Art.
28. Our highest act of devotion, ( Art. 31. is styled a blasphemous fiction and
pernicious imposture; and ( Art. 33.) that those who are cut of from the Church
publicly (I conceive they mean Catholics or at least include them, whom they
used to excommunicate publicly in their Assemblies) should be held as Heathens
and Publicans. Again, nothing was more uncontrollably, nay more laudably common
in the mouths of their Preachers, then to call the Pope, Antichrist; the Church
of Rome, the whore of Babylon, Idolatrous, Superstitious, Blasphemous, etc.
And, to make up the measure of his fore fathers sins the Bp. calls here those
two Principles of Unity both in faith and Government, without which she neither
has nor can have any thing of Church in her (as has been shown in the
foregoing Section) both Errors and falsehoods. Now, these expressions, if taken
as falling from their mouths and pens, I conceive sound not over much of
Moderation. All the Moderation consists here, that my Ld of Derry had a mind to
break a good jest, and assure us very Sadly p. 39. l. 7. that (notwithstanding
all this) they forbear to censure us; which signifies, first, that they do not
censure at all whom they have already censured in the height (as is manifest by
their former expressions;) next, that though they believe those former
expressions to be true, and that we are indeed such, that is though they hold
us for such, yet they do not censure us for such: Awitty contradiction! And
lastly that though our Church err in credendis, contradict Scripture
blasphemously and perniciously in her doctrine, nay though her all grounding
Principles be flatt Errors, and that she pertinaciously and unrelentingly
persist in those doctrines (as she does) nor is ever likely to change or
retract them, yet for all this she is not to be held as heretical (though this
be the very definition of Heresy) but as a true Church still, nor is to be
censured to be otherwise. Good charitable nonsense!

He tells me, first, that he speaks of forbearing to censure other Churches,
but I answer of communicating with them, and that therefore I err from the
purpose. Yet himself six lines before (so forgetful he is) quotes S. Cyprian
for removing no man from our Communion, etc. And how they should refuse to
communicate with any, unles they first judge him and censure him to deserve to
be avoided, that is, naught, I must confess I know not.

Next, he tells us one may in some cases very lawfully communicate with
material Idolaters, Heretics, etc. In pious offices, though not in their
Idolatry, Heresy, etc. Thus we have lost the question. Who for bids them to go
to visit the sick with them, or such like religious duties? The question is
whether they may communicate with them in any public solemn act, performable
by Catholics, as they are subjects of such a common wealth, from which the
other is out law'd, or performable by those others, as belonging to a distinct
sect? Again this position of Moderation destroies all order and Government both
of Church and state; for, by this, out law'd persons may be traffick'r and
treated with so we join not with them in their rebellion; and all the whole
world ( heathens too) may be of one Communion; especially all Heretics, who
all agree in some common Principle of Christianity with the rest. The Bishop's
Proviso makes all the world Brothers and friends, though one part should remain
most obstinate enemies both to God and his Church; for still, as long as this
Principle holds of communicating with them in all things but their Errors,
God's Church shall become a courteous gallimafry of all the filth Hell and
Error could compound to deform her, and wear in her external face a motley
mask of as many colors as there are sects in the world: Perhaps Heathens too
must make up a part of this Communion, provided we abstain only to communicate
with them in their Idolatry. Thus they who want Grounds to give nerves to their
Government, are forced to embrace a counterfeit Kind-heartednes; and under that
plausible vizard vent much refined perniciousnes as is able at once to ruin all
sense, reason, order, discipline, Government, common wealth, Church.

Thirdly he tells us that the Orthodox Christians did sometimes communicate
with the heretical Arians. By which you see he is a kind disposition to admit
even those to his Communion who deny Christ's divinity. The Arians were known
to cloak themselves so craftily in words, that they could not for a long time
be certainly discovered; nor is it any wonder that for a while Heretics be
tolerated, until they be both heard and a time of repentance be prescribed
them.

Fourthly, he tells us he has shown how the Primitive Catholics communicated
with the Schismatic Novatians in the same public divine offices. But he is
so reserved as not to direct us where he has shown this; nor could an ordinary
inquiry find it out; and in his p. 282. which place seems most proper for that
discourse, he only names the word [ Novatians] without proving any thing
concerning them. Now the Novatians were simply Schismatics, and transported
only by a too rigorous zeal to a disobedience to the Church in a formerly
received practice; with such as these it is lawful to communicate, till, upon
their contumacy, the Church shall excommunicate them. Again, as long as
Schismatics and those who are erroneous in faith, are only in via (as we may
say) and not in termino, and hardened into an obstinacy, there is a prudentiall
latitude allowed by the Church, delaying her censures as long as she can
possibly without wronging her Government, as was de facto practiced in England
till the 10th of Q. Elizabeth: But this is not enough to prove they were
admitted into Communion, because they were tolerated for a certain time while
there was hope they would not be obstinate, but would return, the Apostle
himself prescribing a time of trial, before they are to be avoided upon
necessity. But, can my Ld of Derry show a parallel to our case, that any
renounced the former Rule of faith, immediate Tradition of Ancestors, the
former Government, and many other points recommendedy that Rule, and
obstinately persisted to disavow both, reviling, writing against,
excommunicating, nay persecuting with loss of Estates, and often times of life
the professors of the thus renounced faith and Government; can he show, I say,
that such were ever admitted by the Church into Communion? unles he can show
this, he beats the Air, for this only comes to our point. S. Cyprian's case
reaches not hither; he had no reason to remove any from his Communion, since he
was in the wrong; nor could he possibly see with evidence that the immediate
Tradition of all those Churches with whom he communicated did avouch his
tenet, for he was the man that brought in the noveltie; your renouncing the
former Rule of faith, immediate delivery of fore fathers, and the former
Government, with many other points recommended by that Rule, is most evident,
nay confessed, avouched, and still maintained by your own obstinate selves.

Fifthly, he told us that the Catholics called the Donatists their brethren.
I answer, so are Catholics bound to call the Protestants now; nay Turks,
Heathens, and in general all men who are yet in a capacite to attain
beatitude, that is, all but the damned in hell, who are eternally hardened in
enmity against God. S. Peter (Art. 3. v. 17.) called the Jews who crucyfy'd
Christ, his Brethren, yet never meant by that appellation that they were good
Christians.

Sixthly, he objects that the Donatists proceeding upon my Principle would not
acknowledge the Catholics their Brethren. And what is this Principle of mine?
It Is this, as put down here by himself; that a man cannot say his own religion
is true but he must say the opposite is false; nor hold his own certain without
censuring another man's. Good Reader, reflect a little upon this proposition he
cavills at, and then take, if thou can, the just dimensions of the
unmeasurable weakness of error and it is Abettors. Do not truth and certainty
involve essentially in their notions an oppositenes and contrariety to
falsehood and error? Does not true signify not-false? How is it possible then a
man endued with the common light of reason can hold a thing true and yet not
hold it is opposite false? yet this plain self evident proposition, in other
terms the selfsame with this, that a thing cannot both be and not be at once,
is denied by the Bp. nay accounted disgraceful to hold it. Whereas, indeed, it
is not mine nor the Donatists only, but the common Principle of nature, which
the silliest old wife and least boy come to the use of reason cannot but know.
Error pressed home cannot burst out at length into less absurdities than denying
the first Principles.

The Bishop of Derry having shown us how well skilled he is in Principles by
renouncing that first Nature-taught one, proceeds immediately to establish some
Principles of his own, which he calls evident and undeniable, so to confute the
former. The first is, that particular Churches may fall into error: where, if
by Errors, he means opinions only; it is true: if points of faith, it is not so
undeniable as he thinks; in case that particular Church adhere firmly to her
Rule of faith, immediate Tradition, for that point already there settled; that
is, if she proceed as a Church. If he wonder at this, I shall increase his
admiration by letting him know my mind, that I see it not possible how even
the pretended Protestants Church of England (could it without self condemnation
have owned the immediate delivery of fore fathers, and only proceeded and
stuck close to that Rule) should ever come to vary from the former Protestant
Belief; for, as long as the now fathers taught their Children what was held
now, and the Children (without looking farther) believed their fathers and
taught their Children as they believed, and so successively, it follows in
terms that the posterity remote a thousand generations would still believe as
their fathers do now. But, as their religion, built on Reformation, that is,
not immediate Tradition, will not let them own immediate Tradition for their
Rule of faith, so neither, did they own it, could their certainty arrive to
that of our Churches, strengthened by so many super-added assistances.

His second Principle is, that all errors are not Essential or fundamental. I
answer that if by Errors he means only opinions, as he seems to say in the
next paragraph, then none at all are Essential; but what is this to my
proposition which spoke of Religion not of opinions; unles perhaps (which is
most likely and consonant to the Protestant Grounds) the Bishop makes account
that Religion and opinion are all one. But, if he means Error in a matter of
faith, then every such error is fundamental and (to answer this third
Principle with the same labor) destroies the being of a Church. For, since a
Church must necessarily have a Rule of faith, otherwise she were no Church, and
that it is impossible to conceive how man's nature should let her proceed so
quite contrary to her Principles as to hold a thing as a matter of faith, not
proceeding upon her only Rule of faith, this being a flat contradiction;
Again, since the Rule of faith must be both certain and plain (without which
properties it is no Rule) it follows that an error in a matter of faith argues
an erroneousnes in the Rule of faith, which essentially and fundamentally
concerns the being of a Church.

His fourth Principle is that every one is bound, according to the just extent
of his power, to free himself from those not essential errors. Why so, my Ld?
if those errors be not essential, they leave according to your own Grounds,
sufficient means of Salvation, and the true being of a Church: How prove you
then that you ought to break Church Communion which is essentially destructive
to the being of a Church to remedy this, or hazard your Salvation) as you know
well Schism does) when you might have rested secure? Is it an evident and
undeniable Principle that you ought to break that in which consists the being
of a Church to remedy that which you confess can consist with the being of a
Church? or, is it an undeniable Principle that you ought to endanger your soul
where you grant there is no necessity? Say not I suppose things gratis, your
friend Dr. H. tells you out of the fathers how horrid a crime Schism is, how
utterly unexcusable; the undeniable evidence of fact manifests you to have
broke Church Communion, that is to have Schismatized from the former Church,
which you must be forced to grant unles you can show us that you still maintain
the former Principles of Unity both in faith and Government. These are the
points which you violently broke and rejected; show either that these were not
fundamentally concerning the Unity and consequently the Entity of the former
Church, or else confess that you had no just cause of renouncing them, and so
that you are plainly both Schismatic and Heretic. But it is sufficient for
your Lp's pretense of Moderation without so much as mentioning them in
particular to say here in general terms that the points you renounced were not
essential, were accidental, were errors, ulcers, opinions, hay and stubble,
the plague, weeds, etc. And thus ends the first part of your wisely maintained
Moderation, as full of contradictions and absurdities as of words.

The second proof of their Moderation is their inward charity. I love to see
charity appearing out-wardly: me thinks hanging and persecution disguize her
very much, and your still clamorous noises against us, envying us even that
poor happiness that we are able with very much a do to keep our heads above
water and not sink utterly. He proves this in ward charity by their external
works, as he calls them their prayers for us; He should have said, words, the
former were their works, and proved nothing but their malice. But let us examine
their prayers: they pray for us he says daily; and we do the same for them;
nay more, many of ours hazard their lives daily to do good to the souls even of
themselves, our enemies; and to free them, as much as in us lies, from a
believed danger. Which shows now the greater charity? But their special
external work, as he calls it, is their solemn anniversary prayer for our
conversion every good friday. And this he thinks is a special piece of charity
in their Church; being ignorant (good man) that this very thing is the solemn
custom of our Church every good friday, as is to be seen in our Missall, and
borrowed thence by their book of common prayer, among many other things; But
let us see whether the Protestants, according to their Grounds, can be said to
pray for us at all in particular on Good friday, or for our conversion, as he,
forget-full of his own tenet, affirms. Their prayer is this, Merciful god, who
have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made, nor would the
death of a Sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live; have mercy
upon all Jews, Turks, Infidells, and Heretics, etc. Fetch them home to thy
flock, that they may be saved, etc. I ask, now, under which of these heads does
he place Papists, when he pretends their co^version is here prayed for in
particular? Under that of Heretics? How can this stand with his Principles,
who acknowledges ours a true Church, that is, not heretical? and, lately told
us, as a point of his Churches Moderation, that she forbears to censure others.
Again, they grant us to be of Christ's flock, already, and in a capacy to be
saved, whereas those they pray for here are supposed reducible to Christ's
flock, (that is, not yet of it) and by being thus reduced, capable of
Salvation; that is, incapable of it before they be thus reduced; none of these
therefore are competent to us, nor are we prayed for there, as Heretics, if
his own Grounds and his own pretended Moderation are to be held to by himself.
Much less will he say we are prayed for there under the notion of Jews, Turcks,
or Infidels, for this were to censure us worse, nor was ever pretended by
Protestants. It follows then that our conversion in particular is not there
prayed for at all, but that there is such a pitiful dissonancy between the
pretended Church of England's doctrine and her practice, that her greatest Bp's
and Doctors cannot make sense of one related to the other. Nay more, since he
culls out this Good friday, prayer for the special external work of their
charity toward us, and that this cannot concern us at all (without a self
contradiction) it follows that their other external works argue no charity at
all toward us. And this is the great inward charity the Bp. brags of, as a
proof of their due Moderation.

He adds, that we excommunicate them once a year, that is the day before
Good Friday. I reply, that to expect a Church should not excommunicate those
whom she holds to be Schismatics and Heretics, is at once to be ignorant of
the Churches constant practice, and the common Principles of Government. It
being equally evident, that the Church in all ages took this course with
obstinate Adversaries of faith, as it is, that Society in the world can subsist
without putting a distinction and separating avowed enemies and Rebels from
true subjets and friends. If then they hold us Heretics, (and unles they hold
us such, they do not pray for us in particular as is pretended) they ought in
all reason to excommunicate; as indeed sometimes they did some particular
Catholics in their Churches; though not all our Church in general, their new
started congregation was conscious to herself, that she had no such Authority;
which made her also instead of those words in our Goodfriday prayer, ad sanctam
Matrem Ecclesiam Catholicam atque Apostolicam revocare digneris, recall them to
our holy Mother the Catholic and Apostolic Church, vary the grave and too
authoritative phrase, (too loud (alas) for her as taken in contra distinction
to us) into that dwindling, puling puritanicall expressions of one flock, the
rem nant of the true Israelites, one fold, under one Shepherd, etc. equally
pretendable (if taken alone) by Quakers, as by them, since they include no
visible Marks in their notion, which can satisfy us of any distinction between
the one and the other.

The third proof of their Moderation is, that they added nothing but took away
only from the former doctrines of the Church, which he expresses by saying
they pluck up the weeds, but retain all the plants of saving truths. I answered
that to take away goodness is the greatest evil, etc. He replies that he spoke
of taking away errors. No my Ld, this was not the intent of your discourse
there; both because you pretended there to prove something whereas I conceive
to rely on only the cheap saying that all is erroneous you took away, proves
nothing, but is a mere self supposition, as also because it is not a proof of
Moderation to take away errors, but a rigorously requisite act of Justice. Your
intent then was to show the Moderation in your method of proceeding, which you
pretended all the way long, to have been that you added no new thing but only
took away something of the old. This I glanc't at as a fond and idle pretense;
since till you prove evidently and demonstrably from your new Rule of faith,
that the former of immediate Tradition which asserted those points denied by
you did there in err, the presumption stands against you that it was Christ's
doctrine which you maimed by thus detracting from it; or, if you suppose gratis
that 'twas not Christ's doctrine, but errors and falsehoods, then it is not
proper to call it Moderation, but rather an act of necessary charity to root it
out: I know it is an easy matter to call all weeds which your nice stomachs
cannot digest; but if that point of immediate Tradition renounced by you, which
only could ascertain us that there was any such thing as Christ or God's word,
be a weed, I wonder what can deserve to be called a flower. What he vapors of
holding what the primitive fathers judged necessary and now Catholic Church
does, is an empty brag and vanishes into smoke by it self, since (as shall
shortly be shown) their Grounds can never determine what is the Catholic or
universal Church.

In order to the same proof of his Moderation, I likewise answered that he who
positively denies ever adds the contrary, to what he takes away; and that he
who makes it an Article that there is no Purgatory, no mass, no prayer to
Saints, has as many Articles as he who holds the contrary. He replies that he
knows the contrary: instancing that they neither hold it an Article of faith
that there is a Purgatory, nor that there is none. I ask, what kind of things
are their thirty nine Articles? Are they of faith, or opinions only? I
conceive his Lp. will not say they are mere opinions, but contra-distinctive
of the Protestant faith from ours; at least the good simple Ministers were made
believe so when they swore to maintain them, and unles they had certainty as
strongly grounded as divine belief for those points or Articles; how could they
in reason reject the contrary tenets which they held by divine belief. Now the
22. Article defines the negative to Purgatory and three other points of our
doctrine; yet this ill-tutour'd Child tells his old crasy mother, the Church of
England, that she lies and that he knows the contrary. Now his reason is better
then his position; it is this because a negative cannot be an Article of faith.
So that he would not have held it of faith against the Manichees, that there
are not two God's; because the proposition is negative; nor that the Devils
shall not be saved, nor the Saints in Heaven damned, nor that there is no
Salvation but through Jesus Christ; all these by the Bishop's Logic must cease
to be Articles of faith, and become indifferent and unconcerning opinions,
because they are all negatives. After this he talks ramblingly again as his
custom is, of Theological opinions, indifferent opinions, etc. and then on
his own kind word assures us that these points are such, and so wipes his
hands of them.

His last proof of their Moderation, is their preparation of mind to believe
and practice what ever the Catholic Church even of this present age does
universally believe and practice. Proofs should be visible and known; and he
brings us here for a proof a thing hid in the dark hole of their own breasts,
nor ever likely to come to light but by their own sayings only; all other
Symptoms standing in opposition to it. But the greatest foolery is, that, as I
told him, they first say there is no universal Church; or, if any,
indeterminate, so that no body can tell which it is, and then make a
hollow-hearted profession of a readiness to believe it, and conclude themselves
moderate Reformers. My Ld replies that then they have renounced their creed the
badge of their Christianity. I answer, we doubt not but they have; and that,
as they hold only the word Church and not the thing, so they hold only the
word, the creed, and not the sense of it both in that and what other Articles
their fancy pleases. Is it not then wisely argued, to think to confute us by
bringing us to this absurdity (as he imagins) that then they have renounced
their creed; whereas it is our known tenet, which we hold as undoubtedly as we
do that they are out of the Church. The next absurdity he brings me to upon
this account, is, that then they have renounced their reason also. As little
can we doubt of this as of the former, having seen lately how you denied the
first Principles and common sense almost in every particular of this discourse;
and, even this present manner of arguing testifies how little reason your bad
cause will allow you the use of. But how proves he that then they must have
lost their reason? Thus; for, if there be many particular Churches wherefore
not one universal Church, whereof Christ is the Head and King. Very good, my
Ld, but if you give us no certain Rule to know what congregations are to be
truly accounted Churches and which not such, but heretical, and show us no
some common ty of ordinary Government in the Church, how will you make up of
them one universal Church, which may be known for such? This is the thing we
object (as you well know) that you give us no such Rule to know a true Church
by; This is the reason why we affirm you deny an universal Church, because you
deny all Grounds which can establish such a Church.

As for what I alleged that if they say there is a Catholic Church it is
indetermin'd, that is none knows which it is; He answers, first, that then it is
all one as if it were not. Very true, for if there be no determinate one, there
is none at least to us. Next, that this is a calumny, to say they know not
determinately which this Church is. Let us examine whether it be or no.

Two things are requisite to the notion of an universal or Catholic Church.
One, that the particular companies, which compound it, be indeed true Churches;
that is, consisting of true believers, and not heretical Congregations;
without certain knowledge of which none can possibly know which is the
universal Church, made up of them; The other that these particular
Congregations of true believers cling together, by mean's of order, into one
entire company, to be called, when thus united, one universal Church.

For the first, I appeal to any candid and learned Protestant, whether he ever
in his life knew any of their Authors who gives us a positive Catalogue of
which particular Congregations are to he held for true Churches and a part of
the universal; which no, but to be excluded from it as heretical: or whether
himself can stand to it positively upon Grounds given and agreed upon by them,
that such and such a Congregation is without the verge of the universal
Church, such with in it. My self have lived in circumstances to be as well
acquainted with their doctrine as most men are; and I profess sincerely were my
life at stake and only redeemable by the resolving this question, I could not
determine absolutely upon any Grounds constantly acknowledged by them, whether
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, or Quakers are to be excluded from the universal
Church, or no. And if we cannot determine of sects so near at hand, though pressed
to it by our conversation and carriage to declare and express our selves
distinctively, much less can we expect it in order to the Armenians,
Ethiopians, Iacobites, with whose customs and tenets we are so little acquainted

But alas! how vain is it to expect from Protestants such a distinctivenes of
true believers from false, who have no Grounds to make such a distinction. For
what Principles have they to character a true believer? Is it to acknowledge
the letter of the Scripture sufficient? All Heretics in the world almost own
this; Arians and Socinians who deny Christ's divinity most of all. Is it the
true sense of it? how shall they agree in this without some certain mean's or
Rule to interpret it and make them agree. Must the common doctrine of the
universal Church interpret it? This is the very thing we are in quest of, and
(till we know what particular Congregations are to be held true Churches)
know not yet which it is. Must consent of fathers? They have no Authority but
from the Church in which they lived, and as declarers of her doctrine; unles
therefore we have some Rule to conclude antecedently, that the Church whose
doctrine they taught was the true Church, we are still ignorant whether they be
true fathers and to be believed, or no. Is it the private Spirit? The most
frantic Enthusiasts then have an equal pretense? Is it private reason? In
steps the Socinian, and indeed all heresies in the world, for every one has a
private reason of his own, and can use it to his power in interpreting
Scripture. But my Ld of Derry seems to drive another way, affirming here p. 43.
that he knows no other necessary Articles of faith but the Apostles creed,
though other Protestant Authors affirm more. This then according to him must be
the fundamental Rule of faith and the Touch stone to try who are true
believers, who not. The Puritans therefore who denied one of those Articles, to
wit Ghrists descent into Hell, must be excluded quite from the universal
Church; yet we see Protestants communicate with them as well nay more than with
Anabaptists, nor are they looked upon with a different eye from the other
sects, or as more separated from the Church than the rest. Again, as Puritans
are excluded by this Principle, so all that reject any thing but these twelve
Articles are admitted by it, as part of God's Church. Hence it follows that
though any sect deny the Government of the Church by King, by Bishops, by Pope,
by Patriarch, by Lay Elders, by private Ministers, nay all Government, the
Procession of the holy Ghost, all the Sacraments, nay all the whole Scripture,
except what interferes with those twelve points, are members of God's Church.
Reader, can thou imagine a greater blasphemy? Again, when he says the
Apostle's creed is only necessary and fundamental, he either mean's the words
of the Apostles creed only, or the sense and meaning of it. If the former, the
Socinians and Arians hold it, whom yet I conceive he thinks no part of God's
Church. If the latter, either the Protestants or we must be excluded (contrary
to his tenet) from the universal Church; for since points of faith are sense,
and we take two Articles, to wit, that of Christ's descending into Hell and
that of the Catholic Church, in a different sense, it follows that we have
different points of our creed, or different creeds; and therefore either we or
they must fundamentally err and be none of the universal Church. Where then is
this determinate universal Church, or how shall we find it by the Protestants
Principles, no certain mean's being left to determine which Congregations are
worthy to be called particular Churches and so fit to compound that universal;
which not, and to be excluded from her.

For the second point; in case there were many particular Churches, yet an
universal signifies one universal, every universality involving an Unity; and
so, they must have some ty to unite them, according to the natures of those
particulars: Now those particulars consist of men governable according to
Christ's law; and so the whole must be a body united by order and Government,
for things of the same species or kind cannot be otherwise exteriorly united.
But I have already shown (in the foregoing Section) that the Protestants
Grounds have left no such order and subordination of universal Government in
God's Church; therefore no universal Christian Commonwealth, that is, no
universal Church.

To show then this determinate universal Church being the proper answer for
the Bishop let me see how he be haves himself in this point. First, he toys it
childishly, telling us that the Protestants acknowledge not indeed a virtuall
Church, that is one man who is as infallible as the universal Church. I answer
nor we neither: Ere he calumniates the Church with any such pretended tenets,
let him show out of her decrees they were hers, otherwise if he will dispute
against private men, let him quote his Authors and fall to work. Secondly, he
tells us they acknowledge a Representative Church, that is a general Council:
with signifies nothing, unles they first determing certainly who are good
Christians and fit to vote there, who Heretics and so unfit; that is, till
they show what Congregations are truly to be called Churches; and what Church,
made up of such and such, is to be esteemed universal; otherwise, how can a
Representative of the universal Church, which is a relative word, be
understood to be such, unles it be first known which is the universal Church
it ought to represent. Thirdly, he tells us they acknowledge an Essential
Church. I marry, now we come to the point. Expect now, Reader, a determinate
universal Church, so particularly charactered that thou can not fail to
acknowledge it. The Essential Church, that is (says he) the multitude or
multitudes of believers. His [ that is] seemed to promise us some determinate
mark of this Church; and he only varies the phrase into [ beleevers] a word
equally obscure as the former, equally questionable, nay the self same
question. For it is all one to ask which is a Congregation of right believers,
as to ask which is a true Church. But this is his usual and even third bare
trick, with which Mountebanklike he deludes his Readers, and is too much
inveterate in his manner of writing ever to hope to wean him of it. They can do
no more than shuffle about in General terms and hold still to indeterminate,
confused, and universal expressions, who have no Grounds to carry home to
particular things.

He concludes with telling his Reader that we are in five or six several
opinions what Catholic Church is into which we make the last resolution of our
faith. Whither away my Lord? The question at present is not about the
resolution of faith, nor about the formal definition of a Church. but about
what visible material persons and countries make up the Church. That you
cannot pitch upon these in particular I have already shown; that we can, is as
visible as the sun at noon day; to wit those countries in Communion with the Sea of Rome. These and no other are to us parts of the uniuersall Church. Every
ordinary fellow of your or our side can tell you what these are; it is as easy
to do it, as to know which is a Papist-Country (as you call it) which not: And,
even in those places where they live mixed with others, as in England, they are
distingvishable from others by most visible Marks. Our Rule to distinguish our
flock from Stragglers, is the acknowledgment of immediate Tradition for the
Rule and Root of faith; and of the present Government of our Church under S.
Peter's successor; who so ever renounced this Government, or differed from us
in any other point recommended by that Rule, at the same time and in the same
act, renounced the said ever constantly certain Rule (and, by renouncing it,
their being of the Church;) as did your selves confessedly in the reign of King
Henry the 8th and the Greeks with all out casts for those points in which they
differ from us. To this all Catholics agree, what ever school men dispute
about the Resolution of faith. Show us a Church thus pointed out visibly, and
such evident and manifest Grounds why just so many and more can be of it, or
else confess you have lost the notion of an universal Church, nor hold or know
any.

Sect. 8.
Nine or ten self contradictions in one Section. How he clears our Religion
and condemns his own. The Incoherence of the former Protestans blody laws with
their own Principles. How he steals by false pretense from showing a visiblety
of Unity in the Church, to invisible holes. The reason why the succession into
S. Peter's dignity should continue to the Bp. of Rome Plentiful variety of
follies, nonsense and quibbling mistakes. The slight account he gives of the
order Brother hood and fundamentalls of his Church.
HIs 8th Section presents us with his fifth Ground to justify their separation;
and it is this that the King and Church of England did no more than all other
Princes and Republikes of the Roman Communion have done in effect. This word [
in effect] deserves a Comment; and then, if it be heartily explicated, we
shall find it ^ignifies the whole business, though it seem to speak coyly and
mincingly. Did they ever make laws to renounce and abrogate the Popes
Authority, and define absolutely against essential right? Did they ever erect
an Ecclesiastical Superior (as you did the Archbishop of Canterbury) and
pretend that he was in no manner of way subordinate to the Pope, but utterly
independent on him? Did any of them ever separate from the Church by
disacknowledging his Head ship, and by consequence the Rule of faith, immediate
Tradition, which asserted it? Not one: Did not your self in your vindication p.
184. after your had put down the parallel acts of Henry the 8th to other
Princes, when you came to the point confess that Henry the 8th abolished the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome within his Dominions, but the Emperors (with
whom you run along with your parallel in other points) did not so. Did not your
self here p. 37. where you put down a gradation of the oppositions of the
former Kings to the Pope tell us only, as the highest step of it, that they
threaned him further to make a Wall of separation between him and them. If then
they but threaned to do what K. H. (as appears by this law which utterly
renounces the Pope) did, it follows plainly that they did nothing, and King
Henry did all, as far as concerns our Controversy; which is not about extent
of his Authority, or in what cases he may be checked from exercising particular
Acts of that Authority, but about the denying the very Right it self, and
(which is consequent) by denying joyintly the Rule of faith, and by those
denialls separating from the Body of the former Church, which held both. The
signification then of this iuggling phrase in effect (as applied to our
purpose) by his own interpretation, is this; that other Catholic countries did
just nothing, and King Henry the 8th did all. To no imaginable purpose then
save only to show his diligence in nothing the political wranglings between
Kings and Popes, are all the instances produced by the Bishop that Catholic
Kings in such and such particular cases permitted not the Pope to execute what
he intended, unles he can deny his own words and prove that they did as much as
K. Henry and not threaned only.

But my Ld of Derry having taken a great deal of pains to gather together these
notes, which (the way being new) he made account would come of bravely, grows
much perplex't to see them all defeated at once by showing plainly that they
are nothing to the purpose, and therefore both heretofore and especially at
present complains much that we answer them not in particular, assuring the
Reader, that would our cause have born it, we had done so. Was ever man so
ignorant of the common laws of disputing? Needs any mory answer be given to
particulars which one yields to, than to say he grants them? We grant therefore
all his particular instances of these contess between Kings and Popes, and
yield willingly that such and such material facts happened and many more; not
entering into that dispute how far they were done justly, how far un justly,
which is little to our purpose, since the Authority it self was still
acknowledged on both sides. What need we answer each in particular, by saying,
first I grant this, next I grant the other. Now the use or application he makes
of them, that is, to pretend thence that they did as much as King Henry the
8th, so to justify him, is a particular point and, one; and to this I have
answered particularly, both here and also in my third Section, where I have
demonstrated it to be the most shameless and manifoldly contradictory absurdity,
that ever bid defiance to the universal acknowledgment and ey-verdict of the
whole word.

Upon occasion of his alleging that all Catholic countries do the same in
effect against the Pope as the Protestants, I raised an exception of his
incoherent manner of writing; To which he thus replies p. 45. But what is the
Ground of his exception? nothing but a contradiction. As if he made account
that a contradiction is a matter of nothing, nor worth excepting against. His
contradiction is this, that our doctrine concerning the Pope is injurious to
Princes and prejudices their crowns, and yet that we hold and do the same
against the Pope in effect as Protestants do. He would salve the contradiction,
first, by alleging that Papists may be injurious to Princes in one respect and
one time, and do them right in another respect and another time. Well, my Lord;
but, since the doctrine of the Papists concerning the substance of the Pope's
Authority is ever constantly the same (for none can be Papists longer then they
hold it) it knows no varitie of respectt not times, and so if it be
prejudicial in it self once it is prejudicial always. The extent of it varies
upon occasions: this consists in an indivisible and cannot alter. This
substance of his Authority, is the point which belongs to you to impugn, if you
go to work consequently, since you are only accused of Schism for rejecting
this, not for hindering him from acting in particular cases. Either grant then
that this tenet is not pre^udiciall to Princes, being like yours, and then you
contradict your former pretense, that it was; or say that yours is prejudicial
to Princes also, being the same in effect with it; and then you have evaded
indeed a contradiction, but by as great an absurdity.

Secondly, to show his former answer was nothing worth, he alleges that I have
changed the subject of the Proposition, and that he spoke not of Papists, but
of the Pope and Court of Rome; No Ld, but I would not let you change the
subject of the whole question. It Is a separation from all the Churches in
Communion with Rome that you stand accused of; the undeniable fact evidences
that you have broke from all those Churches by renouncing those two said
Principles of Unity in which they agree. This is our accusation against you,
and so your excuses must be applied to this or else they are no excuses at all.
Now one of your excuses is that the Pope's Authority is prejudicial to
Princes; and it must be meant of the Pope's Authority as held universally by
all those Churches, else why did you separate from all those Churches upon that
pretense. But those Churches universally (as you say) hold the same in effect
with the Protestants (for you say you separated from the Court only:) what
needed them excuses from you to them, unles there had been a contradiction in
the business. Had you opposed only some attempts of the Court of Rome by your
tenet, you might have remained still united with France, Spain, etc who did (as
you confess) the same in effect; but now you remain disunited from Catholic
countries and their Churches in the very tenet of the Pope's Authority, held by
them as our eyes testify, therefore it is evident 'twas the doctrine of all
those Churches you lest, and would vindicate your self for leaving by
pretending that doctrine injurious to Princes, and by consequence you
contradict your self.

In order to the same point, and to let him see that those restrictions of the
Pope's Authority avouched by the laws and practice of Catholic countries
concerned not faith as the Protestants renouncind the Authority it self did, I
told him ( Schism Disarm. p. 321.) that the Pope's did not cast out of
Communion those Catholic divines which opposed them; and that this argues that
it is not the Roman Religion nor any public tenet in their Church which binds
any to these rigorous assertions which the Protestants condemn. He replies
first thus, I know it is not the Roman Religion, their Religion and and ours is
the same. So you say, my Ld to honor your selves which such good company; but,
answer seriously, are not the Roman Religion and yours different in this very
point of the Pope's Supremacy, which is the thing in hands? and do not the
Romanists excommunicate you and think you of another Religion because you hold
it? True it is you may account them of your Religion because you have no bounds
but voluntary, and so can take in and put out whom you please; but they who are
bound to a certain Rule of Religion, cannot do so; because your new fashioned
tenets stand not with their Rule: To what end then is this show of
condiscension, to shuffle away the point? Again, if these rigorous assertions
which you impugn be not their Religion, some other more moderate tenet
concerning the Pope's Authoritz is their Religion; for it is evident that all
Catholic Doctors defet something to the Pope as a point of their Religion, or
as received upon their Rule of faith; why did you then reject the more moderate
tenet which belongd to their Religion, because some men attribute more to him
by their more rigorous tenets, which you acknowledge belong not to their
Religion? or how do you hope to excuse your self for rejecting the more
moderate tenet of the substance of the Pope's Authority, by alleging that
others held the extent of it too rigorously? Is this a sufficient Plea for your
breaking God's Church?

Secondly, he confesses that those rigorous assertions extending thus the
Pope's Authority are not the general tenet of our Church. Whom do you impugn
then? or to what end do you huddle together those pretended extravagancies for
your vindication? must you necessarily renounce the substance of the Popes
Authority which was generally held by all, and so break the unity of the
Church, because there was a tenet attributing too much to him, which you
confess to have been not generally held, nay generally resisted? what Logic
can conclude such an Act pardonable by such a Plea?

Thirdly, he affirms that the Pope's many times excommunicated Princes,
Doctors and whole Nations, for resisting such rigorous pretenses. True, he
excommunicated them, as pretending them disobedient, or infringing some
Ecclesiastical right, as he might have done, for violently and unjustly
putting to death some Ecclesiastical person, and in an hundred like cases: and
no wonder, because as a Prelate he has no other Weapons to obtain his right
when it is denied him. But did he ever excommunicate them as directly
infringing the Rule of faith, or did the Catholic world ever look upon them
as on Heretics when thus excommunicated, as they looked upon you renouncing in
terms the very Authority it self? Nay did not the Pope's when their Passion
heated by the present contest, was over, admit them into Communion again,
though still persisting in their unretracted opposition? what weaker then than
to think they were separated from the Church for oppositing those more rigorous
pretenses? or that those came down recommended by that Rule of faith, as did
the Authority it self which you rejected, and for rejecting it be came held by
all the Churches of that Communion for Schismatics and Heretics.

Fourthly, to let us see that he will not stand to his former Answer he tells
us that the Pope and his Court had something else to do than to enquire after
the tenets of private Doctors. That is, after himself had taken a great deal of
pains to prove that all Catholic Kings, abetted by their Doctors and Casuists,
had thus resisted the Pope in these particular cases that is, that it was
Publicly done all over the whole Church, he alleges in the next place that
only private. Doctors held it. So fruitful is error of contradictions.

Fifthly, he alleges, that perhaps those Doctors lived about the time of the
Counsels of constance and Basile, and then the Popes durst not meddle with
them. Yet many, if not most of the instances produced by him are modern, some
of them, as that of Portugal, in our days, and not past seven years ago,
another of the Venetians in this very last age; which no [ perhaps] can make
happen in the time of those Counsels. Score up another self contradiction.
What he means by their living perhaps out of the Pope's reach, none can tell.
The Pope's Spiritual Jurisdiction, by which he acts such things, and
excommunicates, reachers as far as those Churches in Communion with Rome, as
all men know, and if our Bishop speak of those who lived in other places, he
changes the subject of the question, for we speak of Doctors abetting Roman
Catholic Kings and Kingdoms, in such opposition.

Sixthly, he asks what did the Sorbon Doctors of old value the Court of Rome
S. Trifle not my Ld; they ever valued the tenet of the Popes Supremacy as a
point of faith; what they thought of the Court concerns not you, nor our
Question; nor are you accused or out of the Church for not over valving or not
justly valuing the Court, but for under-valuing the very substance of the
Pope's Authority, and calling that an Error which the Rule of faith delivered
us as a point of faith. In a word all your process here is convinced to be
perfectly frivolous and to no purpose; since none of these things you allege
as done by Catholic countries are those for which you are excommunicate, cast
out of the Church, and accused for Schismatics and Heretics by us: but
another far greater, not at all touched by you; towit, the renouncing and
disacknowledging the very inward Right of the Pope. Which shows that all your
allegations are nothing but laborious cobwebs, signs of a fruitles industries,
but utterly unable to support Truth.

I upbraided them upon occasion, for their bloody laws and bloodier execution.
He referrs me for Answer, to his Reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon. Where he
makes a long-law preamble no ways appliable to the present case; which even by
his own Confession is this, whether (though treasonable acts be punishable)
acts of Religion ought for any reason be made treason, and the exercisers of
them punished as Traitors merely upon this Score because they performed such
acts. That this was the case, is evidenced most manifestly out of the laws
themselves every where extant; which make it treason and death to hear a
Confession, or to offer up the unbloody Sacrifice of our Saviors Body, etc.
and out of their own remitting this strange treason at the very last gasp, nay
rewarding the persons osten, if they would renounce their tenets and accompany
them to their Churches. These are our manifest and undeniable proofs: what
arguments does he hring to blind the Evidences? nothing but obscure conceits
to be looked for in men's breasts, pretended fears and ielousies that all who
exercised such acts of Religion were Traitors, and meant to kill and slay the
Governors, or at most some particular attemps of private persons, either true
or counterfeited; if some were true, it was, no wonder that such heart burnings
and passions should happen, where people were violently forced to renounce the
faith they had so zealously embraced and were bred and brought up in; and per
adventure no Protestant party living under Catholics but have had the same or
greater examples of the like attempts. Yet I excuse not those who attempted any
thing against Government, nor accuse the Governors for treating them as they
deserved: only that the faults of some should be so unreasonably reflected
upon all, nay upon Religion it self, as to make the formality of guilt consist
in the performing such acts of Religion, was most senceles, malicious, nay self
condemning, since their own Profession admits the hearning a Confession to be a
lawful act of Religion, and you would yet willingly hear them, if the people
were not wiser then to go to such slightly authorized Ghostly fathers. Nor do
I apprehend that you would think your selves very well dealt with if the
present Government because of some ^isings of some of your party against them,
which they know to have been backed, promoted, and fomented by some of your Lay
Clergy, should there upon presently make laws to hang as Traitors every one of
the said Clergy, whom they found either hearning a Confession or speaking of
the Church Government by Bishops; a point as much condemned by the present
Government as any of our tenets was by Queen Elizabeth. If then you would think
this very hard dealing, acknowledge others comparatively moderate, and your
selves to have been most unreasonably cruel.

In his p. 48. if he mean as he says, he clears our Religion from
destroying subjection to Princes, I subsume; But, the Supremacy of the Pope is
to us a point of faith, that is a point of Religion, therefore the holding the
said Supremacy, is according to him (if he means honestly, that is, as he
speaks) no ways injurious to Princes. If any extent of this power, pretended
to be beyond it is just limits, has been introduced by Canon-Lawyers or
others, let him wrangle with them about it; our Religion and Rule of faith owns
no such things, as is evident by the universality of Catholic Doctors
declaring in particular cases against the Pope, when it is necessary, as the
Lawyers in England did against the King, without prejudice to their Allegiance;
which I hope characters those Doctors in his eye to be good sujects to their
Governors. Yet he is sorry to have done us this favor, or to stand to his own
words, even when they signify only Courtesy. He alleges therefore that these
instances cited by him (of Catholics disobeying the Pope in behalf of Kings,)
were before these poisonous opinions were hatched, and so they do not prove
that all Roman Catholics at this time are loyal subjets. Yet himself in his
vindication p. 194. (so natural is self contradiction to him) told us of as
violent acts done against the Pope in Cardinal Richlieu's days; in Portugal
very lately, and in a manner the other day, in which also the Portugeses were
abetted by a Synod of French Bishops in the year one thousand six hundred fi^ty
one, who were positive and very round with the Pope in their behalf. These were
some of his instances in this very seventh Chapter; which now (a badd memory
and self contradiction is ever a certain curse to falsehood) he tells us were
before our seditions, opinions were hatched. Now what seditious opinions have
been hatched or can be pretended to have been hatched within this five years,
I dare say he is ignorant: And, lest you should think I wrong him, you shall
hear him contradict himself yet once-more (so fully does he satisfy his Reader
on all sides) and affirm here p. 49. that he hopes that those seditio^s
doctrines at this day are almost buried. So that spell the Bishop's words
together, and they sound thus much, that those pretended seditious doctrines
had their birth and burial both at once, and were entombed in their shell;
that is, were never hatched at all: So cruelly if you but confront the two
faces of the same Ianus does he fall together by the ears with himself, baffle
and break his self divided head, and with one splay leg trip up the other.

After this, he presents the Reader with a plat from of the Church fancied by
me, as he says; for which greevous fault he reprehends me ironically,
telling me that it is pity I had not been one of Christ's Counselors when he
formed his Church; that I am saucy with Christ, what not? Now I never
apprehended Christ had any Counselors at all when he first formed his Church,
till the Bishop told me he had, and wished I had been one of them; or fancied
any thing at all, unles he will say that what Catholics received from their
forefathers and what with their eyes we see left in the Church still, is only
the work of my fancy: which is nonsense; for I only took what was delivered,
as of faith, by immediate Tradition, to wit that S. Peter was constituted by
Christ Prince of his Apostles, and that the Pope was his Successor into that
Office; and then showed the admirable conveniences, the moderation, the
necessity of that form of Government, how innocent if taken in it is due limits
(as held out to us by the Rule of faith) to temporal Government, nay how
beneficial to the same, how absolutely necessary for and perfectly concerning
the Unity in the Church; how impossible the said Unity is without it, etc.
which, if it be Saucines, he may with the same reason accuse all divinity of
Saucines which takes what faith has delivered, for example that Christ was
Incarnate, and thence proceeds to show the convenience, necessity, etc. of the
Incarnation; But the poor Bp. who has busied all his life in not in quaint
concieted stories and odd ends of Testimonies, never had leisure to reflect,
that this is the method which Science takes when it proceeds a posteriori;
first building upon what it finds to have been done, by experience or other
Grounds, and thence proceeding to find out the causes why or by which such
things were done.

In Answer, the Bishop pretends first that he will take my frame in pieces;
whereas he not so much as handles it, or looks upon it; formine concerned a
Visible ty of Church Unity, his discourse reckons up out of S. Paul seven
particulars, all which (except only the common Sacrament of Baptism) are
invisible and latent, and some of them no ways proper to a Church.

The first is, one Body. Well leap't again, my Ld, you are to prove first we
are one Body, if the Unity of Government (conseru'd by all those who
acknowledge the Popes Head ship) be taken away by you; but you suppose this,
and then ask what can be more prodigious then for the members of the same Body
to war with one another? we were inded once one Body, and as long as the
members remained worthy of that Body there was no war between them: But, as
when some member becomes corrupted, the rest of the members if they do wisely,
take order to cut it of, lest it infect the rest, so 'twas no prodigy but
reason that the members of the former Church should excommunicate or cut you
of, when you would needs be infected, and obstinacy had made you incurable: nay
when you would needs be no longer of that Body. The former Body was One by
having a visible Head, common nerves and Ligatures of Government and Discipline
united in that Head; the life^giving Blood of faith, essential to the
faithful as faith^full, derived to those members by the common Channells or
veins of immediate Tradition: You separated from that Head, you broke a^sunder
those nerves of Government, you stop't^up and interrupted those Channells or
veins the only passage for divine belief (that is certainty grounded faith)
your task then is to show us by visible tokens, that is, by common exterior
ties, that you are one Body with us still, not to suppose it, and talk a line
or two slightly upon that groundles supposition.

Secondly, one Spirit; that is the Holy Ghost which he rightly styles, the
common soul of the Church. But his Lp must prove first that they are of the
Body of the Church, ere they can claim to be informed by the Soul of it. It is
not enough to talk of the Spirit, which is latent and invisible; and Quaker or
Adamite can pretend that at pleasure; but you must show us visible Marks that
you are of that Body, and so capable to have the same Spirit or Soul; otherwise
how will you convince to the world that you have right to that Spirit.

Thirdly, one hope of our calling. This token is both invisible again; and
besides makes all to be of one Church; Jews and all, if they but say tthey hope
to go to Heaven; and who will stick to say that?

Fourthly, one Lord; in order to which he tells us we must be friends,
because we serve the same Lord Dark again! How shall we know they serve the
same Lord? Because they cry Lord, Lord? or because they call him Lord? Their
visible acts must decide that. If then we see with our eyes that they have
broke in pieces his Church, and renounced the only-certain Grounds of his law,
they must eithers how us better Symptoms of their service and restore both to
their former integrity by reacknowledging them; else we can not account them
fellow servants to this Lord, but Rebels and enemies against this Lord and his
Church.

Fifthly one faith. But how they should have one faith with us, who differ from
us in the only certain, that is* in the only Rule of faith; as also in the
sense, that is, in the thing or tenet of some Articles in the creed; or,
indeed, how they can have faith at all but opinion only, whose best Authors
and writers confess they have no more than probability to Ground their faith,
he knows not* and so says nothing; and therefore is not to be believed for
barely saying we have one faith.

Sixthly, one Baptism. As if Heretics who are out of the Church could not all
be baptized But he tells us that by Baptism we fight under the same Standard.
That we should do so because of Baptism I grant indeed; But, as he who wears
the colors of his General, and yet deserts his Army and fights against it,
will find his colors or Badgeso far from excusing him, that they render him
more liable to the rigor of Martial law and treatable as a greater enemy; so
the badge of Christianity received in Baptism, is so far from being a plea for
them who are out of the Church or for making them esteemed one of Christ's and
hers, if they run away from her and take party against her, that it much more
hainously enhances their accusation, and condemns you whom the undeniable
matter of fact joined with your acknowledgment of ours for a true Church
manifests most evidently to have done both.

Lastly, one God who is father of all, etc. By which if it be meant that God
is a father by Creation or ordinary Providence, them Jews, Pagans, and Atheists
are of God's Church too; if in the sense as God is fathers of Christians, you
must first prove that you have his Church on earth for your Mother, ere you can
claim God in Heaven for your father.

But, to show how weak a writer this Bp. is let the Reader peruse here my p.
324. and 326. and he shall see our charges is that without this Government,
they have no common ty under that notion to unite them into one Christian
common wealth; and therefore, that having rejected that Government, unles they
can show us what other visible ty they have substituted to that, they cannot be
shown to be Christians or of Christ's flock, but separates and Aliens from it.
We deny them to be truly-nam'd Christians for want of such a visible ty; now
the Bishop, instead of showing us this, supposes all he was to prove; towit
that they are of Christ's Church, and reckons up some invisible motives
proposed by S. Paul, to Christians already acknowledged for such, to unite
them, not into one Church* (for that was presupposed) but into one harmony of
affections. There is no doubt then, but all the seven points alleged are
strong motives to unite Christians in Wills; but it is as undoubted on the
other side that none of them only pretended, (and being invisible they can be
but pretended) is a sufficient Mark to know who is a true Christian, who not:
nor was this S. Paul's intent as appears by the quality of the persons he
writes to, who were all Christians. Now Christians being such because of their
faith, it follows that the Unity in faith is the property to Christians as
such, and consequently in Government (which, by reason of it is concernment,
ought in all reason to be a point of faith) and not in charity only, for this
extends it self to Infidells and all the world. Since then, the Bp. goes not
about to show visibly their Ground for unity of faith, that is, a common Rule
of faith to his fellows and the rest, nor yet a common Government which may
show them visibly, and to us, to be of the Church, and on the other side stands
indicted by undeniable matter of fact to have rejected those points which were
and are visibly such to the Church they broke from, it is no less evident that
he has not said a word to the purpose but stole it away (as his custom is)
from the open field of the plain charge to invisible holes. In a word those
proposalls of S. Paul are motives why Christians should be united in Wills, and
also why those who are not Christians should be of the Church, and Christian
common wealth, not the proper ties which make them of it; for these must be
visible, remarkable and known, as are de facto, our form of Government, our
Rule of faith. The frame then of the Church, as put by me, was thus visible;
the joints of it recounted by the Bp. out of S. Paul invisible; yet the sincere
man pretends here when he brings these invisible points to take my frame in
pieces; and to look upon it in parcells. Which is to prevaricate from the whole
Question, and, instead of answering, to abuse and wrong his Adversary.

Secondly, he says he will not dispute whether Christ did give S. Peter a
Principality among the Apostles, so we will be content with a Principality of
order; and he wishes I had expressed my self more clearly whether I be for a
beginning of order and Unity, or for a single Head of power and Jurisdiction. I
answer, I contend for no such singular Head ship of power, that no Bishop in
the Church has power but he; for this is known to be the Heresy which S.
Gregory did so stoutly impugn when he writ against John of Constantinople; A
Principality or Primacy of order I like well; provided this order signify not,
as the Bp. would have it a dry order which can do nothing; but such an order as
can act and do something, according to it is degree and rank; as the word order
imports, if taken in the Ecclesiastical sense; and as it is taken when it is
appl^'d to the Hierarchy, as for example to P^triarch^* Primates, Arch Bishops,
Bishops, etc. Which ought to be the proper sense of it in our Controversy, it
being about an Ecclesiastical preeminence. As for what he tells us that the
Principality of power resi^es now in a general Council, besides other faults
already noted, it falters in this, that general Councils are extraordinary
Iudicatures, and never likely to happen in the sense you take a general
Council. But, our Question is, whether the nature of Government require not
some ordinary standing, Supremacy of power ever ready to over look the public
concerns, to promote the interests and conserve the peace of the Christian
Commonwealth, by subordination to whom all the faithful remain united in the
notion of Governed; If this be necessary, as plain reason avouches, then we
ask where you have lest this standing ordinary Principality of power, since you
have renounced the Pope's Supremacy?

Thirdly I added, and consequently to his Successors. This consequence expressed
in general terms, he tells us, he likes well enough, and that such an
head-shippe ought to continue in the Church; but he cannot digest it that such
an Head ship should be devolued to the Bp. of Rome: yet, what other Successor
S. Peter had that could be properly called such, (that is such a one who
succeeded him dying) except the Bp. of Rome, himself will never attempt to show
us. This consequence then of ours, applying in the Principality of S. Peter's
to the Bishop of Rome) which he calls a rope of sand) hangs together thus,
that whenever Christ conferrs any power to any single person to be continued
for the future good of the Church, and has taken no further order for it is
continuance he is deemed likewise to have conferd it upon those to whom
according to the order of nature it is to come. Now the natural order requires
that offices and dignities should be devolu'd to those who succeed those
persons dying who were vested with them, in case there be no other ordinary
and convenient mean^ instituted to elect or transfer it to another. That Christ
lest any such institute that his Church should continue this dignity by
election, or traverse the common method of succession, we never read; but on
the contrary we fide de facto that the Bishops of Rome in the Primitive Church
enjoyed a Principality by succession, and not by nomination of the Catholic
Church; nor is it convenient but extremely preter natural, that this
Principality being of perpetual necessity (as he grants) the Church should
remain without it at the death of every Pope, till all the Churches in Iapan,
China, India, or where ever remotely dispersed in all parts of the habitable
world, should be ask't and give their consent whether the Bishop of Rome
should still continue with this Principality, or no. No other means then being
laid or lest to cross this way of succession, as appears by common sense and
the practice of the Church, it follows that this natural order must take
place, and so the particular dignity of S. Peter remain to those who succeeded
him dying in his see of Rome. His Argument then which he pretends parallel to
mine, that such a Bishop of such a see died Lord C^ancellor of England,
therefore all succeeding Bishops of the same see must succeed him likewise in
the Chancellor ship of England, comes nothing home to my case; for here is a
supreme standing Magistrate, to elect another and traverse succession; the
transfering that charge is easily and conveniently performable; here are
positive laws and institutes made known and accepted that a King should do
this; But, put case that there were none of all these means of electing a new
person, on foot in the world, and that the Chancellor ship were to be
perpetuated, there would be no doubt in that case but the natural order would
take place there also, and the Successors of that Bishop would succeed also
into the Chancellor ship.

Christ left (he tells us) the chief managing of his family to his spouse,
that is, the Church. Pretty sense! signifying thus much that the Church or
universality of ^hristians must govern themselves, and have no chief Governor
at all; Is it not rare that the Bishop should think Christ's family, and his
Spouse or Church are two distinct things! What he adds, that he lest it not
to any single servant further then as subservient to his spouse; is very true;
and all Governors in the world are or ought to be subservient to the common
good of the governed, as even the Angels are Spiritus administratorij, yet no
more can the subjects command their Governors, than we can command Angels.
And so the chief Church, and her Bishop the chief Governor of Christ's family
are for the good of the Church, thouh over the Church; however my Ld who looks
into the sounds of words and not the meaning of them, enflames the expressions,
and improves them to flanting and proud sense.

He tells us that Rome may be destroyed with an Earthquake; I answer it must
be an unheard of Earthquake which can swallow up the whole Diocese; for, if the
City only run that hazard, the Clergy of the Roman Diocese yet remain who can
elect to themselves a new Bishop; And no harm will succed to our cause. Next,
he says, it may become heretical or Mahumetan? True, so may the whole Church
if it had pleased God so to order causes. But that it pleases him not we have
this strong presumption, that the good of his Church, so much concerned in the
perpetuity of this succession (as has been shown) will crave his perpetual
assistance to that see. We have also for pledge of this perpetuity the
experience of his gracious conservation of it for sixteen hundred years, and
the establishment of it at present, not giving us the least Ground to think
it is ruin likely. If his Lp do, and that this trouble him, at least let him
yield his obedience till that happens, and then preach liberty from Rome's
Jurisdiction to those that shall live in that age. What he adds concerning
the Churches disposing of her offices is mere folly: Himself granted in the
foregoing page that Christ himself (and not the Church) instituted this
Principality; let him them show first that the Church has Authority to change
Christ's Institutes, ere he thus frankly presume it left to the Churches
disposal.

Next, he tells us that between Tyranny and Anarchy there is Aristocracy
which was the ancient regiment of the Christian Church. We blame them not for
renouncing any one sort of Government but all Government in the Church; and
allege that there is no Kind of Government which actually unite? God's Church
in one but this of the Pope's Headship. An Aristocracy signifies a Government
by some chief persons, who sit either constantly or else often, and easily
meet that the difficulties occurring in the ordinary Government of the
Commonwealth may be settled by them. Was this the ordinary Government of the
Primitive Church? Had they any general Council (which the Bishop means by
Aristocracy, as appears by his p. 56. l. vlt. till Constantine's time? Nay have
we had any this six handred years or indeed eight hundred last past which they
will acknowledge to be such! or, shall we have any for the future? they tell
us not till toward the end of the world, and that even then it is but probable
neither (See Dr H. Reply p. 30.) His position then comes to this, that
Aristocracy in a general Council being the Ecclesiastical H^ad (p. 56. l.
vlt.) or the Government which unites God's Church, the said Church had no Head
nor Government at all till Constantine's time; none between Council and
Council afterward; none at all again this six or seven hundred years past; and
lastly perhaps shall have none at all for the future. Farewell Church
Government, and many thanks to my good Ld of Derry and Dr. Hd. But I most
wonder that a man of his Principles could find no middle sort of Government
between Tyranny and Anarchy but Aristocracy; Is Monarchy with him none at all,
or none of the best, which even now he told us was of divine Institution? You
good people who depend so zealously of this new Prelacy, observe how your
Dooctrs have either a very short memory to inform you right, or a very strong
will to cheat you into the wrong.

Heed adds, that a Primacy of order is more sufficient in this case to prevent
dangers and procure advantages to the Church than a Supremacy of power. Which
signifies thus much directly in other terms, that he who has no power to act
at all in order to the universal Church or as a first, has power to procure
her more good, and prevent more harms toward her, that is, has power to act
better for that Church, than he, who has power to act, has. And thus my
friend here feasts his Readers with contradictions, his whole discourse being
such in it is self and wants only to be put into something more immediate
terms of the same signification.

After I had put down the necessity and yet moderatenes of the Pope's Authority
as held of faith by us, I added, that this was the bridle our Savior put in
the mouth of his Church, to wield it sweetly which way he pleased. My Bp.
replies that I make the Church to be the Beast and the Pope's office to ride
upon the Church. No, my Lord, I styled the Pope's office, the Bridle; do
bridles use to ride upon horses? or did your Lp ever meet a bridle on horsback?
I see the Bishop is a better Bowler then he is an Hors-man. Next, he tells us
that our Savior put his bridle not into the mouth but hand of his Church. Good
my Ld inform us (for you chop your Logic so snall and are grown so
mysteriously acute that without a revelation none can understand you) when the
Church holds the bridle in her hand, as you say, whom does she govern by that
bridle? Do the whole multitude of believers hold the bridle and govern
themselves? Then there are no Governors at all, o^at least none distinct from
the governed, which is all one. Or, do some Governors only hold the bridle and
weild by it the multitude of believers? then returns his Lp's cavil and
buffets himself, that then the Church is the Beast (as he irreverently wantons
it) and those Governors ride upon the Beast, and the bridle gets into the Mouth
of the Church again, for as Governors are said to hold the reins or bridle, so,
if we will prosecute the metaphor into an Allegory, the Governed must be said
to have it in their Mouths, that is to be ruled and guided by it. So
unfortunate is his Lp that he can neither approve himself a good
Controvertist, nor a tolerable guibbler; but, while he pretends to be solid in
the former, he still runs into contradictions; when witty in the latter he
rambles into absurdities; and, in either performance, his own both Arguments
and Quips light upon his own head.

I represented the advantages and co^veniences this Headship brought to the
world when duly observed by good Pope's. He replies that I write dreaming as
Plato did, and look upon men not as they are but as they ought to be. This
mistake is of the same strain, only something more voluntary. I look not my
Lord upon men at all in this place, but speak of the Office it self; how
admirabily convenient it is if rightly performed. What men do, or how they
execute it, whether well or ill concerns not a Controvertist no^ me; the point
or tenet concerns me. The personal managing this office is not of faith, and
belongs not to me but to Historians and Lawyers to talk of; the Office it self
is of faith, falls under the sphere of Controversy and is my task to defendit.
What say you to the Office it self, as put down here by me. Return my Ld
whence you strayed; and tell us, is not the Office it self thus moderately yet
substantially expressed naturally conducing to the peace, Unity, Faith,
Discipline, and other universal conveniences of Christendom? or is it,
though thus advantageous to the whole Church, to be rejected because of the
abuses of particular persons? These are the points between us; what say you to
these? why, in the next parag. he would have us look upon the case without an
if or as a Pope should be; no my Lord, I ought not in reason to quit that
method; you and I are not disputing about men's lives, but the Catholic tenet
and whether the very tenet be advantageous to the Church or not. If we leave
this we leave the whole Question. Yet we must leave the Question, else my
Lord will not proceed nor dispute; telling us that if we look upon the case
without an if, or, as the Pope should be (that is indeed if we look not upon
the case) then we shall find the Papacy as it is settled or would have been
(says he) the cause of Schisms, Ecclesiastical dissentions, war amongst
Princes, etc. Where first, if nothing follows out of my words but this
disiunctive ( as it is settled, or would have been) then it remains for any
thing he expresses, that, as it is settled, it is not apt to cause any of
these inconveniences; but only would have been, in case some vicious
attemptors had had the power to corrupt that which was actually well in the
Church. Next, if he speak of the Papacy, as it is settled, he must look upon
it as held by the Rule of faith and acknowledged by all Roman Catholics;
otherwise if he considers it according to what is disputable and wrangled
about between Catholic and Catholic, he considers it not as settled, for
this is to be not settled: nor indeed is this to speak of the Papacy it self
(about which Catholics have no debates) but of the extent of it. Now, let him
either evince that Papacy as settled or held universally by all Catholics, is
in it is own nature the cause of Schisms, dissentions, Wars, etc. Or grant that
it is not such, but the contrary; as he does here tacitly, by yielding that if
it were as it should be it would be faultles, and presently doubting whether
it be right settled, (that is, as it should be) or no.

The substance of the Pope's Authority being stated, I showed all the Bishop's
arrows falling on his own head; because, not with standing such disputes, it is
evident that the nature and notion of one Church is entirely conserved; the
Papacy standing firm in those very Catholic countries, which resisted the
Pope, and those countries governing themselves in an Unity of faith and
Sacraments, and correspondence like one Body, as is visible; whereas their
Reform or renouncing the Pope has cut of England from all this Communication or
correspondence, and made it no part of one Church greater then it self, but an
headles Synagogue without Brother hood or order. He replies; Neither so, nor
so. How then, my Lord? why he tells us first that the Eastern Southern and
Northern Churches admit none higher then the chiefest Patriarch. Well, my Ld,
are you and they both jointly under the Government of those Patriarchs, or any
other common Government? If not, how are you then of one community or
Brotherhood as Governed? Next, he alleges that agreat part of the Western
Churches have shaken of the Roman Yoke. Grant it were so, and that those
Congregations were in reality Churches, (which we deny) yet are you united
with those Churches under some common Christian Government, joining you and
them into one Christian Commonwealth? If not (as your eyes witness it is not)
then how are you their Brothers or of their community? Show us this visible ty
of order uniting you together; To say you are one or united to them, without
showing us this extern ty, is very easy, but convinces nothing. Thirdly, he
tells us that the rest of the Western world which acknowledge the Papacy, do it
with very many reservations, cautions, and restrictions. Very good, my Lord! if
they only restrained, they restrained something which they admitted, as thus
restrained; to wit, the substance of the Pope's Authority. Are you at least
united with them? Alas no: you are disunited from them, by totally renouncing
(and not restraining only) that Authority which visibly united them. Where
then is your Brother hood? where is your order? Fourthly, he answers, that for
order, they are for it as much as we. That you are for it and desire it (if
your Grounds would let you (we doubt not: But have you any such order uniting
you visibly to the rest of the Christian world? To say you are for it, when the
Question is whether you have it no, without ever attempting to show us this
visible order, signifies you neither have any nor can show any; or, that you
have indeed a feeble wish for it, but not efficacious enough to make you use
means to obtain it.

Fifthly, he tells us, that for Christian Brother hood they maintain it three
times larger then we; But he never goes about to show us any visible ty of
Government, uniting them into one Commonwealth or Brother hood. It Is a
sufficient proof with him to say they maintain it; that is, they call more
Brothers then we do; but, whether they are so indeed or no it is so evident
with him (though he knows his own fellows say the contrary, as may be seen in
Rosse's view of Religions) that it needs no proof though it be all the
Question; Sixthly, as for their being an headles Synagogue, he replies that
they want no head who have Christ a spiritual Head. We are demanding a
visible common Head or chief Government of the whole Church common to England
with the rest, and he relates us to Christ in Heaven. Such an Head is God
Amighty to all mankind, must they therefore because of this invisible relation
become one Co^monvealth. Again, this latter, towit, whether Christ be their
spiritual Head or no, is invisible and unknown, and is to be judged by the
other thus; that, if Christ have lest any Unity of Government in his Church and
commanded it to be kept, and they have taken a course to leave no such Unity,
it is evident that they have rebelled against Christ as well as his Church, and
so falsely pretend to have him for their spiritual Head. Next, he tells us
that they have a general Council for an Ecclesiastical Head. Which is to
confess that there is no ordinary Unity of Government in God's Church, but
extraordinary only, when a Council sits, that is, there is none de facto at
present, nay morally impossible there should be any (as Dr. H. says Reply p.
39.) and it is a great chance when there is any, perhaps toward the end of the
world, as the same Dr. imaginarily ghesses; which you must conceive will be in
Antichrist's time, who (according to their principles) will be the Head of the
Church. And, lastly, that they have a gracious Prince for a political Head.
Whose inward right if it be lost by long prescription as the whole world
grants it many, it follows that they can in that case pretend to no Head at all
in case the successor hap to be no Protestant. But I wonder the Bishop is so
discourteous to his own tenet, that whereas they ever held the King to be Head
of the Church, or chief in Ecclesiastical matters, he should now deny it and
put him to be only a political Head, as contradistinguish't from
Ecclesiastical; that is, give him no more then France, Spain, etc. Use to do
to their Kings, where the Pope's Headship is acknowledged. Again, we ask not
how they are one amongsts themselves in England under one pretended visible
Head or Government, but how they are one with the rest of the Christian world,
though having that pretended Head? Is there any orderly common ty of Government
obliging this Head to correspend with the other Head? If not, where is the
Unity or common Headship of the whole, Church? or how is England visibly*
united to it, under this notion? If there be, why should the Bp envy us the
happy sight of this rarity which (and only which) would satisfy the point,
clear his credit, and vindicate his Church.

His cavil that sometimes we have two or three Heads, sometimes never an
Head, is false and groundles; since there can be but one true or
rightly-chosen Pope, however there may be more pretended ones; and, till he
who is chosen be known and euidenced to be such, the Headship or chief
Government is in the chief Clergy of the chief see, whom we call Cardinals;
unles a general Council actually sit. As secure a method for the peace and
Unity of a Commonwealth governed by an elective power, as man's wit can invent;
though (as in all humane affairs) the contingency of the subject admits
sometimes of miscarriages, sidings and animosities.

He promises us (to show the Unity of Protestant Churches amongst themselves)
that the Harmony of Confessions will demonstrata to the world, that their
Controversies are not so many, nor of so great moment as imagining. I answer,
that truly I am so far from imagining any thing concerning their differences,
that I know not even what the word Contreversy means; till they give us some
certain Rule to settle Controversies, and to tell us which Controversies are of
faith, which of opinion only: But does the Harmony of Confessions show us (not
in the common expressions of the word, but) in the particularity of the thing,
that they have one common certain Rule of faith, infallibly securing then that
such points and no other were taught by Christ and his Apostles, or any
particular sort of Government, obliging them to an Unity under the notion of
Governed, as a common ty? Nothingless; that is, it does less than nothing: and
leaves my other objection good, that otherwise they have no more Unity then a
body composed of Turks, Jews, Heretics, and Christians; Nor does the Bp.
disprove it otherwise than by reckoning up again the former motives to Unity in
affections out of S. Paul: Six of which are invisible; and some of them equally
pretendable nay actually pretended by Turks, Heretics, etc. As deniable to
them by him; nor can they be in reason refused them, till he gives us some
certain Rule of faith, obligingly and satisfactorily convincing that such sects
in particular are to be admitted, such to be absolutely rejected, which he
will never do without entangling himself worse than formerly. And, as for
Baptism, the seve^th motive; it is out of doubt amongst all the world, that
Heretics may have true Baptism, though the Bp. here forgets himself, and says
the contrary. At least the Turks Ianisaries who are children of Christians, and
so Baptized, cannot be refused according to his Grounds to be his
Brother-Protestants; this being the only visible ty the Protestants have with
the three parts of the world the Bp. so brags of.

Lastly, I alleged, that their pretended faith consisted in unknown
fundamentalls, which is a mere Shist until they exhibit a list of such points
and prove them satisfactorily, that they, and only they, are essential to
Christian Communion. He replies, they need not do it. Why? me thinks the
point seems very needful; yes, but the Apostles have done it (he says) to
their hands in the creed. And how proves he that the Apostles intended this
creed as a list of all fundamentalls? only (for he put neither before, nor
yet here any other proof) in that the Primitive Church (says he) has
ordained that no more should be exacted of any, of Turks, or Jews in point of
faith, when they were converted from Paganism or Iewism to Christianity. And,
how proves he the Primitive Church exacted no more? out of his own manifold
falsification of the Council of Ephesus already manifested (Sect. 1.) And this
is the whole Ground of his certainty, that those points are only fundamental,
or that they have any list of fundamentalls, and consequently that there is any
Grounds of Unity in material points amongst the Protestant Churches, or that
they are of the Church, since the Church has in her self Grounds of Unity. I
omit that the learned Bp. makes account Turks are Pagans, or to be converted
from Paganism; whereas, it is known they acknowledge a God: and affirms that the
Primitive Church in the Council of Ephesus (for to this he relates as appears
p. 5.) held in the year 430. ordered any thing concerning Turks, which sect
sprang not till the year 630. that is 200. years after. Both good sport, did
not the Bp. cloy us with such scenes of mirth.

Again, when he says the Apostles creed is a list of all fundamentalls;
either he means the letter of the creed, and then he grants Socinians and
Arians to be Christians; both which admit the letter of the creed, interpreted
their own way; and excludes the Puritans from all hopes of Salvation for
denying a fundamental, towit, Christ's descent into Hell. Or else, he means
the sense of the creed; and then he excludes the Roman Catholics, whom yet in
other circumstances he acknowledges to be of the Church; for they hold some
Articles found there, in another sense than do the Protestants. Let him then
prove evidently that no points of faith were held formerly as necessary save
those Articles in the Apostles creed; next tell us whether he means the letter
only or the sense of the creed; then show us satisfactorily which is the only
true sense of it; and, lastly, apply that piece of doctrine to particulars, and
so show us which sects are of the Church, which excluded, and we shall remain
very much edifyd.

Sect. 9.
How the Bp. of Derry falsifies his Adversary's words and brings a Testimony
against himself, attended by a direct contradiction, which he terms,
Fortifying. With what incomparable art he clears himself of another. And, how
he totally neglects the whole Question and the Duty of a Controvertist in
impugning opinions acknowledg'dly held only by some in stead of points of
faith held by the whole Church.
HHis Eighth chapter pretends to prove the Pope and the Court of Rome most
guilty of the Schism. Which he makes account he has done so strongly that
he needs not fortify any thing; yet, he will needs do a needless bufines, and
goes about to fortify (as he calls it) in his way not with standing.

To the first argument (says he) he denies that the Church of Rome is but a
sister or a Mother, and not Mistress to other Churches. Which is first flatly
to falsify my words, to be seen Schism Disarm. p. 327. which never deny her to
be a Mother but a Sister only; and this is his first endeavor of needles
fortifying. Next, whereas the words Mistress may signify two things; to wit a
person that imperiously and proudly commands; in which acception it is the same
with Domina, and correlative to Serva, a slave or hire ling slave: Or else a
Teacheress (as I may say) or one which instructs, and so is coincident with
Magistra, and correlative to Discipula, a Disciple or scholar; Again, it being
evident both out of the Council of Florence (where it is defined Romanam
Ecclesiam esse Matrem Magistramque omnium Ecclesiarum) and also out of common
sense that we take it in this latter signification; the quibbling Bp. takes it
in the former; that is not as understood by us but by himself, and then impugns
his own mistake citing S. Bernard who exhorting Pope Eugenius to humility, bids
him consider that the Roman Church, Ecclesiarum Matrem esse non Dominam, is the
Mother not Lady of all Churches. And this is another attempt of his needles
fortifying. My Ld of Derry may please then to understand that when we say that
the Roman Church is Mother and Mistress of other Churches; we take the word [
Mother] as relating to her Government, or power of governing, whose correlative
is a sweet subjection, not a hard or rigorous slavery: and the word [ Mistress]
as expressing her power of teaching. Or, if the Bp. be loath to grant the word
[ Mistress] taken in our sense, (which yet he never goes about to impugn or
disprove) let him but allow and stand to what the testimony himself brings here
avouches, to wit that she is Mother of other Churches, and that she has
right to rule and teach her children as a Mother should do, and it is as much as
we desire.

Now, let us apply this and see how rarely the Bishop has cleared himself of
Schism and laid it at our do^e: He has brought a testimony which asserts the
Church of Rome to be the Mother of other Churches, and so of the Church of
England too, if she be Church; nor does himself in this place deny her that
title, but seems to grant it; But it is manifest de facto and by their solemn
ordinances and public writings, that her good Daughter the Church of England
tells her flatly she will not, ought not obey her; and thus by the Bp's Logic
she becomes acquitted of Schism. Which I must confess is not only a needles
but a sleeveles manner of fortifying. Again, Schism involves in it is notion
disobedience, and the Bishop in this chapter pretends to show her
Schismatic, that is disobedient; to do which he brings us a testimony which
asserts our Church to be Mother of other Churches; and then concludes the
Mother Schismatic, because she is disobedient to her Daughter: Pithy
nonsense! or, if made sense, flatly accusing their Church of Schism for
disobeying her Mother; and this deducible clearly from that very testimony he
brought to prove the contrary, which kind of arguing is in the Bps phrase
called needles fortifying.

His pretense of a new creed (which was his second argument to prove us
Schismatic) made by Pope Pius the fourth, is already shown (Sect. 1.) to be
a calumny: To which I add, that our creed is the points of our belief or faith:
since then it is known that each point in that Profession of faith put out by
him, was held as of faith by the former Church, ere he thus collected them,
it is a contradiction to pretend that he made a new creed till it be shown that
any of those points there contained was not formerly of faith, and prove
satisfactorily that the Apostles contains all necessary points of faith, which
will be manifested at the Greek calends.

His third argument was because we maintain the Pope in a rebellion against a
general Council. To this he says I answer not a word. Let us see whether it
deserves a word of Answer. The difference between a Controvertist and a
Schoolman is the same as is between a Church and a School Controvertists
therefore of several Churches defend those points and impugn the contrary
ones, which are held by those Churches as Churches, that is, as Congregations
relying upon their Rule of faith. Either then let him show that our Church
holds as of faith, or as received upon her Rule of faith the Pope's Supremacy
to a general Council, else in impugning that point he totally prevaricates
from the office of a Controvertist, has done nothing which was his duty, and
so merits no answer save only this, that if he will dispute against private
opinions, he must cite his Authors, and argue against them not the Church;
whose belief is contained in the decrees of Councils, and universal consent of
fathers and Doctors. Which answer I then gave him expressly, Schism Disarm. p.
327*

Now, to show the vanity of this third argument, let him either manifest that
our Church pressed upon them this point of holding the Pope above Councils, so as
to excommunicate them upon their contrary tenet; else all pretense of our
causing the Schism is avoided; for, in case it were not thus pressed, his
argument stands thus; very many Schoolmen and a great party among them held
that opinion, where upon we left their Church; ergo, they are most guilty of
the Schism. Which is as senceles a paralogism as a sleepy brain could have
stumbled on. For, why should any break Church Communion as long as he can keep
it with conscience? or, how is my conscience concerned in other men's opinions
as long as they permit me to hold the contrary: Now, that our Church permits
the contrary tenet, and denies none Communion for it, himself testifies
vindication p. 200. where he puts down as one of the tenets of the now-french
Church, that general Councils are above the Pope, and may depose him, etc.

The Bishop was conscious that he had neglected the office of a Controvertist
by impugning Schoolmen, Lawyers, and Courtiers instead of our Church; and an
opinion held by many, instead of a point of faith held by all. To delude the
Reader, and in reality to oppose the former which belonged not to him, yet seem
to strike at the latter, as he ought, he joins both, however in consistent,
into one; and, being to wrangle against the Pope's Headship, proposes it first
under this Chimericall notion, The Papacy (Qua talis, or, as such) as it is
maintained by many. And this he calls laying the Axe to the root of Shism,
though it be as directly leuell'd a stroke at his own legs, and inflicting as
deep a wound on the supports of his cause as a contradiction can give to
pretended sense. For since all Papists as such hold a Papacy or the Pope's
Headship of Jurisdiction over the whole Church, and differ in this point from
Protestants, it is evident that the Papacy of such, is that which is held by
all; for none can be Papists longer then they hold it. Now then to say the
Papacy as such, as it is now held by many; is the same as to say, the Papacy as
held by all, as held by many only: which is in other language to legitimate an
Hircoceruus, and to clap together non ens and ens into the same notion.

But, how does he clear himself of this shuffling nonsense? why first he
asks, do not some Roman Catholics subject the Pope to a general Council; and
others, nay the greater part of them, etc subject a general Council to the
Pope? What is this to the Question whether these words [the Papacy as such, as
it is now maintained by many] cohere in sense or no?

Secondly, he asks whether he might not then well say [the Papacy qua talis,
etc.] No, my Ld, for, it being evident that all Roman Catholics hold the
Papacy in some sense, if you call it the Papacy as such as it is held by many,
pray how will you style it as held by all? as not such? or the Papacy with
super additions? or can all hold what some do not hold?

Thirdly, he says, his conclusion was not against the Church of Rome in
general, but against the Pope and Court of Rome, that they were guilty of the
Schism. For what? for maintaining the substance of the Pope's Authority held by
all? then you accuse the Church of Rome in general of Schism, for the Church
in general holds what all in her hold. Or was it for this opinion of the Pope
above the Council, and others of this strain? How were they guilty of Schism
for this, unles they had denied you Communion for holding the contrary, or
pressed upon you an unconscientious approbation of it, which you know they did
not Fool not your Readers my Ld; 'twas not for this tenet which you impute to
the Court of Rome, but for that of the Pope's Headship or Spiritual
Jurisdiction over all God's Church, held by all Catholics and by that whole
Church equally then as it is now, for which you are excommunicated: and so,
ought either to submit to that whole Church again in that point, as formerly;
or else (if you would deal heartily) impugn that whole Church (and not the
Court only) thus opposite to you in that mainly-concerning point.

Fourthly, as he says although, aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus, that is,
sometimes honest Homer takes a nodd, and though he had stolen a napp it had
been neither felony nor treason, yet to let us see he did not sleep, he will
put his argument into form without a [qua talis] which is to affect a sleepines
still, or (as our English Proverb says) to sleep fox sleep. He is accused of
a contradiction and nonsense, and to clear himself he tells us he will now
lay aside one part of the contradiction, and endeavor to make good sense of
the other. Now his first argument is that the Court of Rome is guilty of Schism
for preferring the Pope before a general Council, to which I have already
answered. His second, is that ours are thus guilty for making all Apostolical
succession and Episcopal Jurisdiction come from Rome only. By which, if he
means our Church as a Church holds it; (as he ought if he speak like a
Controvertist) it is a most gross and false imputation, as I told him: If of the
Court of Rome only, then, since they neither pressed it as of faith nor denied
you Communion for these points, but for another held by all (as I lately
showed) they cannot hence be concluded guilty nor you guiltles of Schism. This
argument past over, he confesses this tenet is not general amongst us; I add,
but points of faith are generally held, therefore this tenet is but an opinion;
and being not general (as he grants) it follows that it is only a particular
or private opinion; as I called it, and his own words evince it.

Yet he is loath these should be called private opinions because they are most
common and most current: Whereas, unles they come down recommended by our Rule
of faith, immediate Tradition or the voice of the Church, and so become
perfectly common, general, universal, and undoubtedly current, our Church
looks upon them only as deductions of private men's reasons, nor shall I own
them for other.

That the former is a common tenet he brings Cardinal Bellarmine to say that
it is almost de fide, or a point of faith, which the good Bp. sees not that it
signifies it was almost reveald, or that the revelation fell an inch or two
short of reaching our knowledge; or, that God has not indeed reveald it, but
yet that it was twenty to one but he had done it. Next that the Council of
Florence seemed to have defined it: now the word [ seems] signifies I know not
that ever it defined it at all; or, if it defined it so, it is more than I know.
Thirdly, that the Council of Lateran (I suppose he means not the general
Council there held) defined it most expressly Yet the Bp, here descanting upon
the words of that Council, says only that they seem to import no less; that
is, it may be they mean no such thing, or it may be they mean much less.

For the latter opinion (as he heartily here calls it) he tells us Bellarmine
declares it to be most true, that he cites great Authors for it, says that
it seems (again) to have been the opinion of the old Schoolmen; speaking
highly (at least seemingly) of the Pope's Authority. So that all is seeming,
all opinion and uncertainty. Now the use the Bp. makes of this gear is this;
The Court of Rome and many with it, held an over weening opinion of their own
Authority, though they permitted us and whole Churches to hold the contrary,
therefore we very innocently broke God's Church; or, therefore we quite
renounced the Principles of Unity in both faith and Government (as the fact
witnesses you did) because they held an erroneous op nion too much extending
the latter. In a word let Bellarmine and the Bp. wrangle about the opinionative
point, I shall not think my self concerned, as a Controvertist, to interrupt
their dispute or ^oyn mine interest with either party however did I pretend to
treat a point of Canon Law I might. The point of faith I undertook to defend as
a Controvertist, whenever I see any opposition to that, I acknowledge it my
Province to secure it by my resistance.

Sect. 10.
My Ld of Derry's vain pretense of his Churches large Communion. His frivolous
and groundles exceptions against the Council of Trent. How weakly he clears
himself of calumny And how, going about to excuse his citing a Testimony
against himself he brings three or four proofs to make good the accusation.
He pretended that the Protestants held Communion with thrice as many
Christians as we do. I replied that if by Christians hea means those who lay
claim to the name of Christ I neither denied his Answer nor envied him his
multitude; for Manichees, Gnostics, Carpocratians, Arians, Nestorians,
Eutychians, and others without number, do all usurp the honor of this title. I
added that I did not think he had any solid reason to refuse Communion to the
worst of them. Now, the Bp's task is evidently this to give us this solid
reason and show it conclusive why he admits some of these and rejects others.
But it is against his humor to go about to prove any thing; Talking is his and
an angry woman's best weapon; and of voluntary talk he is not niggardly but
deals us largess of it.

First he falls into rhetorical exclamations against our prejudice,
partiality, want of truth, charity, candor, and ingenuity Words are but
vapor; let him put certainly-establish't Grounds to conclude himself or any of
his. sects, true Christians, which may not as well infer that all those other
sects are such also; otherwise his excl^mations which sound so high in
Rhetoric, are very-flat noted and signify just nothing in Controversy, where
the concernment of the subject renders all proofs inferior to rigorous and
convincing discourse, and dull and toyish.

Secondly, he asks, wherein can I or all the world charge the Church of
England, of Greece, or any of the Eastern, Southern, or Northern Christians,
with any of these Heresies, and then reckons up afterward the material points
held by the Manichees, Gnostics, etc. Suppose I could not; are there no other
heresies in the world but these old ones, or is it impossible that a new heresy
should arise! It was not for holding those very material points that I accused
the Church of England or the Bp. as he purposely misrepresents me; but this,
that having no determinate certain Rule of faith, they had no Grounds to reject
any from their Communion who held some common points of Christianity with them
though differing in others. Again, since the Rule of faith Protestants pretend
to is the Scripture, and all those Heretics recurr'd still and relied upon the
same (nay even the Manichees upon the new Testament) it follows that these are
all of the Protestants Communion because they have the same Grounds and Rule of
their faith; if the Bp. reply that the letter of the Scripture is not the Rule
of faith but the sense, he must either show us some determinate certain way to
arrive to the true sense of it, or else confess that this Rule is indeterminate
and uncertain, that is (as far as it concerns us) none at all. Now, though
indeed the Protestants hapt not to light into all the same material errors as
did the Manichees, Arians, etc. Yet they agree with them in the source of all
error; that is, in having denied and renounced the only Ground of faiths
certainty, Tradition of immediate forefathers, which alone could bring down to
us security that Christ was God or that there was such a thing as God's word:
and so, the denial of this is in it is consequences equally nay more
pestilentiall then is the denying the material point it self of Christ's
divinity, or the asserting any other held by the worst of those Heretics; They
agree with them all therefore in the root of all errors, though the branches
chance (and they but chance) to be diverse; as may be seen if you do but
consider what varieties of sects are sprung in England, since your strong hand
which truly did forbid the liberty of interpreting Scripture is taken from you;
whereof some be as learned as yourselves, witness the books of the Socinians;
for it is an easy matter out of affection to turn Scripture to variety of
errors, as was clearly seen in Luther; who because Carolostadius had published
the absence of Christ's Body from the Blessed Sacrament before himself, found
the middle tenet of compresence of both Body and Bread; and so, by that base
affection, saved a great part of the world, through God's Providence, from a
wickeder error.

Thirdly, he tells us that some few Eastern Christians are called Nestorians,
others suspected of Eutychianism, but most wrongfully. Though indeed nothing is
more right full then to call them so, as even Protestants confess. But you see
nature works in despite of Design, and that he has a mind to cling in very
brotherly and lovingly with the Nestorians and Eutychians, though he says he
will not; and those tenets of theirs which in the close of his paragraph he
pretends to detest as accursed errors, here he strokes with a gentle hand,
assuring us they are nothing but some unvs^all expressions: as if all heresies
when expressed were not expressions, and also very unvsuall and new to faith and
the faithful Now their unvsuall expressions were only these, that Christ had
two distinct persons, and no distinct natures; which are nothing in the Bp's
mind; had they denied Christ to be God too, it had been also an unvsuall
expression: but, I must confess, a very scurry and pestiferous one, as were the
former. But our favorable Bishop thimking it necessary to bolster up his
Church with a multitude, boldly pronounces what he knows not in excuse of
those Heretics, though it be contrary to the public and best intelligence we
have from those remote countries.

Fourthly, he is very piously rhetorical and tells us, that the best is, they
are either wheat or chaff of the Lord's floar, b^t that our tongues must not
winnow them. Which is as absurd as the former. That it is best for them to be
wheat, I understand very well, but that it should be best (as he says) that
they are either wheat or chaff, I confess I am at a loss to conceive. Chafe
Ps. 1. v. 5. signifies the ungodly, and Mat. 3. v. 12. (the very place which
his Allego^y relates to) it is said that Christ will burn the chaff (of his
floar) in unquenchable fire: which, me thinks, is far from best. So miserably
the Bp. comes of still, w^ether he intends to speak finely or solidly. Our
tongues indeed shall not winnow them, as he says, nor do we pretend, to do so
by our tongues, or voluntary talking (that were to vsurp the method of
discourse proper to himself only) but our reason will winnow them unles we
turn Beasts and use it not; our proofs, if they be evident, as our charge of
their Schismatic breach is, will winnow them; the Rule of faith (the voice
of the Church or immediate Tradition) will winnow, or rather Christ has
winnow'd them by it, having already told them that if they hear not the Church
they are to be esteemed no better than Heathens and Publicans. Since then it is
evident out of the terms that you heard not the Church for your n^w fangled
Reformations, nor Ground those tenets upon the voice of the Church, nay
according to your Grounds have left no Church, nor common suprem Government in
the Church, to hear, it follows that you have indeed winnow'd your selves from
amongst the wheat of Christians and are as perfect chaff (I mean those who have
voluntarily broken Church Communion) as Publicans and Heathens. Now, to show
how empty a brag it is that they hold Communion with thrice as many Christians
as we, to omit their no Communion in Government already spoken of Sect. 6. let
us see what Communion they have with the Greek Church in tenets (by the
numerosity of which they hope for great advantages) and whether the Protestants
or we approach nearer them in more points held equally by both. I will collect
therefore out of one of their own side, Alexander Ross, the tenets of the
present Greek Church, in which they agree with us, though in his manner of
expressing our tenet, he sometimes wrongs us both. The Greeks place (says
he) much of their devotion in the worship of the Virgin Mary, and of painted
Images; in the intercession, prayers, help and merits of the saints, which they
invocate in their Temples. They place Justification, not in faith, but in
works. The sacrifice of the Mass is used for the quick and the dead. They
believe there is a third place between that of the blessed and the damned,
where they remain who deferred repentance till the end of their life; If this
place be not Purgatory (adds Ross) I know not what it is nor what the souls do
there. (View of all Religions p. 489.) And, afterward p. 490. They believe
that the souls of the dead are bettered by the prayers of the living. They are
no less for the Churches Authority and Traditions than Roman Catholics be
when the Sacrament is carried through the Temple the People by bowing
themselves adore it, and falling on their knees kiss the earth. In all these
main points (if heartily represented) they agree with us and differ from
Protestants. Other things he mentions indeed in which they differ from us
both, as in denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost, not using Confirmation,
observing the Jewish Sabbath with the Ld's day, etc. As also, some practices,
not touching faith, in which they hold with the Protestants, not with us; as in
administering the Sacrament in both kinds, using leauened bread in the
Sacrament, Priests marriage, there is no one point, produced by him, which our
Church looks upon as a point of faith in which they dissent from us and consent
with the Protestants except that one of denying the Pope's Supremacy; for their
only not using Extreme Unction, which he intimates signifies not that they
hold it unlawful, or deny it. Judge then candid Protestant Reader, of they
Bp's sincerity, who brags of his holding Communion with thrice as many
Christians as we do; whereas, if we come to examine particulars, they neither
communicate in one common Government, one common Rule of faith, if we may
trust this Author of their own side (since if the Greeks hold the Authority of
the Church and Traditions as much as Catholics do, as he says, they must
hold it as their Rule of faith, for so Catholics hold it) nor yet in any one
material point in opposition to us, save only in denying the Pope's
Supremacy. And how more moderate they are even in this than the greatest part
of, if not all Protestants, may be learned from the Bp's mistaken testimony,
at the end of this Section, as also from Nilus an avowed writer of theirs for
the Greek Church against the Latin, and one of the gravest Bp's and Authors
of that party, who shuts up his book concerning the Pope's Primacy, in these
words. (...). The sum is this; As long as the Pope preserves order, and
stands with truth, he is not removed from the first and his proper
Principality, and he is the Head of the Church, and chief Bishop, and the
successor of Peter and of the rest of the Apostles, and it behooves all men to
obey him, and there is nothing which can detract from the honor due to him;
but if, when he has once strayed from the Truth, he will not return to it,
he will be liable to the punishment of the damned. Where, the Reader will
easily judge whether the former words sound more incliningly to the Catholic
or the Protestant tenet; and, as for the latter words, But if, etc. There is no
Catholic but will say the same. Thus much then for my Ld of Derry's Communion
with the Eastern Church. And as for his Communion with the Southern, Northern,
and Western Churches, which he thunders out so boldly as if all the world were
on his side and of his Religion, if examined it is no better than the former;
sense his side denies immediate Tradition of forefathers or the living voice of
the present Church to be the Rule of faith, which is to the Roman Church the
fundamental of fundamentalls. Nor has he any other Rule of faith, that is, a
plain and certain method of interpreting Scripture common to him and his weakly
rel^ted Brethren; so that if they hit sometimes in some points, it is but as the
Planets, whichare ever wandering, hap now and then to have conjunctions, which
hold not long, but pursving their unconstant course, decline and vary from one
another by degrees, and are at length crossed by diacentricall oppositions.

The rest of this paragraph insists again upon his often answered saying that
the creed contains all necessary points, which is grounded only upon his
falsifying the Council of Ephesus, as has been shown heretofore. To my many
former replies unto this pretense I add only this, that either it is a
necessary point to believe there is such a thing as God's written word (or the
Scripture) or not: If not, then why do the Protestants challenge it for their
Rule of faith? Is not the Ground of all faith a necessary point? But if it be
a necessary point, then all necessary points are not in the Apostles creed; for
there is no news there of the Scripture: nor is it known how much thereof was
written when the Apostles made their creed, what he adds of our having changed
from our Ancestors in opinions; either he means by opinions, points of faith
held so by us, and then it is calumny, and is to be solidly proved not barely
said; But, if he mean School opinions, what hurt is done that those things
should be changed which are in their own nature changeable? He imagins that
Dr. Field has proved some thing against us in this point, and in answer shall
imagine that those of ours who have replied to his toys have disproved what he
is pretended to have proved: nor am I further concerned, unles the Bp. had
produced some weighty particular out of him which yet wanted answering, as he
brings none at all.

After this he will needs prove the Council of Trent not to have been a
General one. His exceptions that the summons were not general, that the four
Protopatriarchs were not present by themselves nor their deputies; that there
were not some present from the greater parts of all Christian Provinces, are
already shown to be frivolous and impertinent, till he gives us some certain
determinate notion of Church, and some certain Rule to know what sects in
particular are of it, what excluded, as I have already manifested his Ground
could give none. For, otherwise, those who are excluded from or are not of the
Church have no right to be Summoned thither (unles to be called to the Bar as
Delinquents) nor to sit there, nor are to be accounted Christians; and so the
summons may be General, all may be there that should be there, and some may
be present from the greater part of all Christian Provinces, notwithstanding
the neglect or absence of these aliens. He ought then first put Grounds who
are good Christians, and ought to be called, who not; ere he can allege
their not being called as a prejudice to the Council. Our Grounds why it was
general are these. The only certain Rule of faith and (by consequence) root
of Christianity, which can secure us of God's word or any thing else is the
immediate delivery or Tradition of forefathers; Those therefore and only those
who adhere to this root are to be held truly Christians of the Church; those
who broke from it any time (as did the Protestants professedly, the Greeks and
the rest as evidently when they began to differ from us in any point) are not
properly Christians, nor of the Church; therefore a representative of the
Church or Council is entire, universal and General, though those latter (who
are not of the Church) be neither called, Summoned nor present, provided those
others who adhere to this root of faith and so are indeed Christians, or
adherers to Christ's law, be Summoned and admitted: But such was our Council of
Trent; therefore it was General. Now, to disprove this Council to be
General, if he would go to work solidly, the Bp. should first allege that it
was not a sufficient representative of the whole Church, which must be done by
manifesting definitely and satisfactorily, who in particular are of the Church,
who not: nor can this be performed otherwise than by showing some Rule and
root of faith and Christianity better qualified to be such, that is, more
certain and more plain than this, which may distinguish those who are of the
Church from those who are not of it; or else to convince that the Greeks,
Protestants, Lutherans, etc. When they began to differ from the Roman,
innovated not, but were found adhering to that immediate delivery: otherwise
they must confess that all were Summoned that ought to have been Summoned, all
were there or might have been there who ought to have been there, and so the
Council was General. Till this be done all his big worded pretenses of the
absence of the whole Provinces, of the greater part of Christendom, want of
due summons, fewnes of the members present, that the Greeks are not known
Rebels, etc. are convinced to be but voluntary talk as is indeed almost all
this Treatise, this being his peculiar manner of discoursing; more fit for old
wives and Gossips at their frivolous meetings, then for a Bp. and Controvertist
handling matters of faith. He says that the Greeks though Heretics should
have been lawfully heard and condemned in a general Council. What needed
hearing, when themselves in the face of the whole world publicly confessed,
maintained, and avowed their imputed fault: Condemned they were by general
Councils heretofore, though the Bp's particular faculty of saying what he
lists without a word of proof will not allow them to be such, nor yet give us
some certain way to know which Councils are such. Or, had it been an
acknowledged general Council and they heard and condemned there, still the Bp.
had an evasion in lavender; he laid up in store this reserve of words
following, that they were never heard, or tried or condemned of heresy by any
Council or person that had Jurisdiction over them; and then he is secure by
talking boldy and proving nothing.

His saying that though they were Heretics yet they of all others ought
especially to have been Summoned: signifies thus much, that it is more
necessary to a general Council that Heretics be called thither, than that
Orthodox fathers be so. A substantial piece of sense and worthy consideration!

I brought a similitude of a Parliament that known and condemned Rebels need
not be called, he will needs have it run on four feet and prosecutes it
terribly: some of his best trifles I shall reckon up.

First, he says the Pope has not that Authority over a general Council as a
King has over a Parliament. I answer; I am so plain a man that I understand
not what the Authority of King or Parliament either taken singly or one in
order to the other signifies: some Kings have more, some less Authority; so
have Parliaments; witness those of England and France. To expect then I should
know ^ow great the Authority of King or Parliament is by naming only the
common words is to expect that one should know how long a country is by naming
it a country, or how big a mountain is by barely calling it a mountain. That
these have some great bigness and those some great Authority I know by their
common names; but how great I know not. Words, my Ld, may serve you to give,
whose cause will not bear sense, but they must not serve me to take.

Secondly, that the Greek Patriarchs are not known and condemned Rebels.
Answer, this is only said again, not proved, and so it is sufficient to reply
that they who called the Council and all in the Council held them so. Again,
the errors which they publicly maintained have been condemned by Councils, and
for the most part some of their own party being present. Now, why those who
publikly profess those Errors should need a further calling to trial, or why
they are not known Rebels is the Bp's task to inform us.

Thirdly, he says, that the least Parliament in England had more members then
the Council of Trent. They were therefore graver and more choice persons. The
Church summons not parish priests out of every great town, as the common wealth
does two Burgesses out of every corporation. Again, what was, it matters not;
but might not there be a Parliament of England without having the fifth part
of the members found in that Council, and yet be a lawful one too? Rub up
your memory, my Ld. (you pretend to be a piece of a Lawyer) and I believe you
will find an English law that Sixty members is a sufficient number to make a
lawful Parliament; and before that law was made common consent and custom
(which is either equivalent or perhaps above law) gave the same for granted.

Fourthly, he excepts against the super proportioned multitude of members out
of one Province, which he says never lawful Parliament had. I ask, if other
Provinces would neither send a fit number nor they had a mind to come, by what
law, by what reason should it render illegitimate either Parliament or Council?
Now, it is certain and not denied by any, but that Bishop's had as free liberty
to come out of other Provinces as out of Italy had they pleased. Again, the
principal business being to testify the Tradition of former ages, and a small
number of Bishops serving for that; and the collateral or secundary business
being to examine the difficulties those Heretics, which were the occasion of
the Council, produced, that they might be confuted fully, and out of their own
mouths, which is a thing to be performed by committees, in which learned men
that were not Bishops might sit, it little inferred the want of Bishops.
Wherefore, if there were any error in the supernumerarines of Bishops out of
some one Province, it was for some other end than for the condemnation of
Heresies, and so is nothing to our purpose; unles perhaps my Ld will pretend
that had those Catholic Bp's out of other Provinces been there, they would
have voted against their fellow Catholics in behalf of Luther or Calvin. which
were a wise Answer indeed.

Fifthly he excepts that the Council of Trent is not received in France in
point of Discipline. What then? why, by his parallel to a Parliament he
concludes hence it was no lawful Council. Which is to abuse the eyes of the
whole world, who all see that France, who denies the admission of those points
of Discipline, acknowledges it not withstanding a general and lawful Council,
and receives it in all determinations belonging to faith, which are so
essential to it as it were disacknowledg'd, were they denied; though not in
matters of fact, which are accidental to it is Authority, nay allowed by the
Church it self (however made and expressed generally) to bind particular
countries only in due circumstances and according to their conveniences.

Lastly, he alleges that they were not allowed to speak freely in the Council
of Trent. Which is a flat calumny; and though most important to his cause could
he prove it, yet after his bold custom, it is only asserted by his own bare
saying, by Sleidan a notoriously lying Author of their own side, and by a
passage or two in the History of the Council of Trent, whereof the first is
only a ieering expression (any thing will serve the Bp.) the other concerning
the Pope's creating new Bp's nothing at all to his purpose; since both these
new and the other old Bp's were all of one Religion and Catholics; and so not
likely to dissent in vo^ing Doctrines; which kind of votes are essential to a
Council and pertinent to our discourse, which is about Doctrines not about
Discipline.

After this he puts down three solutions (as he calls them) to our plea of
the Patriarchall Authority. First, that Britain was no part of the Roman
Patriarchate. And this he calls his first solution. Secondly that though it
had been, yet the Popes have both quitted and forfeited their Patriarchall
power; and, though they had not, yet it is lawfully transferred And this is his
second solution. The third is, that the difference between them and us is not
concerning any Patriarchall Authority. And this is his third solution; which is
a very really good one, and shows that the other need no reply: our charge
against them being for renouncing the supreme Ecclesiastical Authority of
divine Institution; not a Patriarchate only, of humane Institution. If further
answer be demanded, first, the Greek Schismatics, our enemies, confess that
England was a part of the Pope's Patriarchate if it be truly called a Western
Church; see Barlaam Monachus de Papae Principatu, c. 11 and Part. 1. Sect. 15.
of the adjoining Treatise. Next, it is falsely pretended that the Pope's have
either quitted or forfeited their Patriarchall Authority; and may with equal
reason be concluded, that a Bishop quits Episcopal Authority if he is also a
Patriarch; or that a person must leave of to be Master of his own family,
because he is made King and his Authority universally extended to all England.
Which last instance may also serve against the pretended inconsistency of the
Papal and Patriarchall power, if it need any more answer than what has
formerly been given Sect. 4.

I omit his calumnies against the Papal Authority charactering it falsely as a
mere unbridled tyranny. And his thrice repeated nonsense; when he joins in
one notion Patriarchall Authority: a Patriarchy being a Government by one, an
Aristocracy by many. Nor is his other calumniating expression much better when
he calls the Papal Authority, a Sovereign Monarchical Royalty: since it was
never pretended by Catholics that the Pope is the King of the Church.

The notion of Priest and Sacrifice being relative, the failing of the one
destroys the other: since then the Protestants have no Sacrifice they are
convinced to have no Priests. This point in particular he never touched, but
talked a little in obscure terms of matter and form of ordination, as if it
were not an easy thing to say what words they pleased, and do what actions they
pleased. To this the Bishop only replies that he over did and set down the
point of Sacrifice over distinctly. Next, he tells us their Registers are
public offices, whether any man may repair at pleasure. whereas, our question
is not of the Registers in general, but of that one particular pretended
Register of the right ordination of Protestant Bishops, kept concealed from the
free perusal of Catholics though the circumstances (to wit their alleging
the unlawfulnes of the Protestant Bishops ordination) required it should be
shown.

His next paragraph concerning their uncharitablenes needs not be repeated
unles it could be mended.

My expedient to procure peace and Unity, which was to receive the root of
Christianity, a practical infallibility in the Church, he seems willing to
admit of. Only he adds that the greater difficulty will be what this
Catholic Church is; and indeed to his party it is an insuperableone; though to
us most facil, as I have shown formerly, Sect. 7.

He called the Bishops of Italy, the Pope's parasiticall pentioners; I
replied, it seemed his Lordship Kept a good table and had great revenews
independent on any. He answers, he was not in passion, and that he Spoke
only against mere Episcopelles; which is to show that his passion is nothing
abated yet; by adding such unsavory Phrases to his former calumny. Next, he
says that, as for his self, he never raised himself by any insinuations. I
know, my Ld, you are a Saint: but the point is can you clear your self from
calumny and prove that those Bishops (whom otherwise you calumniate) ever used
such insinuations. He was never (he says) parasiticall pentioner to any man,
nor much frequented any man's table. You are still more Saint then formerly, my
Ld: But, can you prove that those Bishops (whom otherwise you calumniate) are
parasites, or was it ever heard of or pretended that they sit at the Pope's
table? He adds, that, if his own table be not so good as it has been yet
contentment and a good conscience is a continual feast. Much good may it do
you, my Ld; fall to, and eat heartily; cannot you fare well and hold your
tongue, but you must amongst your dainties slander your Neighbors, men better
then your self, by calling them parasites, Episcopelles, the Pope's creatures,
hungry, etc. Or if you do, can you expect less but that it shall be laid in
your dish, to sauce your dainties? But the point is how he proves these worthy
persons to be hungry parasiticall pentioners, which unles he does he yields
himself to be a malicious calumniator. Now, his proof of it is contained in
those words, whether those Bishops were not his hungry parasiticall pentioners
they knew best, who know most. Well argued my Ld; there is none can overthrow
such a proof, because it is impossible to know where to take hold of it. Or, if
any can be taken, it is this that the Bp. of Derry knows better then all the
world besides. As for his pretense of his good conscience, and to free himself
from being a Parasite, I would entreat his Lordship to examine his conscience
truly, whether he does not get his living by preaching that doctrine which he
puts in his books, the which how many notorious falsities contradictions and
tergiversations they have in them may be judged by this present work. Now, if
he does, let him consider whether any like parasitism can be found as to
hazard to carry men to damnation by taking away the highest principle that can
correct them and bring all faith and Ground of faith to uncertainty and
dispute, merely to get his own bread; for your other actions my Ld I neither
know what you do, nor think it handsome to enquire.

In the close he pretends to satisfy an exception of mine found in Schism
Disarmed. 'Twas this, that he quoted a testimony from Gerson against himself,
which showed that the Greeks acknowledged the Pope's Authority, by their
departing from the then Pope (as Gerson says) with these words, we
acknowledge thy power, we cannot satisfy your covetousnes, live by your
selves. He replies and endeavors to show that by [ Power] in that place is
meant not Authority, nor just power, but might. Whereas.

First the very opposition of [ Power acknowledged] to ( covetousnes which they
could not satisfy) argues that their sullen departure proceeded from their
sticking at the latter, not the former, which was there acknowledged: Now if [
might] were signified by the word [ Power] in that place, the sense of the
whole would stand thus; we separate not for want of acknowledging thy might,
but for want of power to satisfy thy covetousnes, which is as good as
nonsense. For, if he had might to force them, what sense is there to say, we
depart because we cannot satisfy your avarice, when departing could not save
them? whereas, in the other sense it runs very currently; we separate not for
de fault of acknowledging thy Authority or just power, but, because (however
this be just, yet) it is impossible we should satisfy your covetousnes.

Secondly, what, might or power, except that of Spiritual Jurisdiction, the
Pope can be pretended to have then had over the Greeks, appears not: It was
meant therefore of no such might, but of a rightfulnes of power.

Thirdly, whereas he says that Gerson apprehended the words in his sense, and
cites the context for it, the very proof he brings for him is against him.
Gersons position (according to the Bp.) is this, that men ought not generally
to be bound to the positive determinations of Pope's to hold and believe one
and the same form of Government in things that do not immediately concern the
truth of our faith and the Gospel. After which testimony the Bp. adds these
words: From thence he proceeds to set down some different customs of the
Greek and Latin Churches, both which he does justify, citing S. Austin to
prove that in all such things the custom of the country is to be observed.
And amongst the rest of the differences this was one that the Creek Church paid
not such subsidies and duties as the Gallican Church did. Thus far the Bishop.
Where it is manifest that the lawfulnes of resisting the Pope's determinations
being in order to the not paying undue subsidies and Taxes, the discourse there
relates to the no obligation of satisfying covetousnes, and touches not at all
the point of power or might, as he will have it. Let us take then Gersons
sense in the former, and mine of just power in the latter, and the discourse
stands thus, that though men acknowledge the rightful power of Pope's, yet
they ought not generally be bound to their positive determinations in things
not of faith, but belonging only to the several forms of Government and
customs in several countries, as paying subsidies, duties, etc. And
pertinently to the same sense, the Greeks might be imagined, as indeed they
did, to answer. We acknowledge thy power, or cannot deny your rightful
Authority, but esteem not our selves bound to obey your determinations
importing such covetous demands, contrary to the custom and Privileges of our
Church; wherefore we think our selves excused not to meddle with you at all.

Fourthly, the Bp. says that it seems the Pope would have exacted those
subsidies and duties of the Grecians, and that there upon they separated from
him. Which countenances all I said formerly, and implies more strongly my
sense; towit, that it was there upon (as the Bp. confesses) that is, upon their
denying subsidies, not upon their denying the rightfulnes of his power as
coming under another and a cheaper notion, that they separated.

Fifthly, the very demanding subsidies, had there not been some preacknowledg'd
power to Ground and countenance such a demand, seems incredibile, and had
required a more positive Answer, then ( we cannot satisfy your covetousnes)
and rather this, you have nothing at all to do with us, nor the least
Superiority to Ground the pretense of paying you any thing at all. Whereas this
answer rather says, we ow you indeed subjection, but not such a subjection as
engages us to satisfy your encroaching demands.

Lastly, he says Gerson hence concludes that upon this consideration they
might proceed to the reformation of the french Churches and the Liberties
thereof, notwithstanding the contradiction which perhaps some of the Court of
Rome would make, which more and more evidences that the acknowledgment of the
Popes just power was retained by the Greeks, and encroachments upon their
Liberties only denied, which the French Church intended to imitate; Now, (...)
cannot be pretended with any shame that Gerson and the french Church meant to
disacknowledge the Pope's just power, as Head of the Church, nor will Gersons
words even now cited let it be pretended; for then without any (perhaps) not
only some (as he doubts) but all in the Court of Rome would most certainly
have contradicted it. Their consideration then being parallel to that of the
Greeks, as the Bp. grants, it followed that they acknowledged the Pope's
Authority though they passively remained separate rather than humor a demand
which they deemed irrational.

Thus the Bishop first cited a testimony against himself, as was shown in
Schism Disarmed; and would excuse it by bringing three or four proofs, each of
which is against himself also; so that as he begun like a Bowler, he ends
like one of those Artificers, who going to mend one hole use to make other
three.

THE CONCLUSION.
The Controversy between us is rationally and plainly summed up in these few
Aphorisms.
1. THat (whatsoever the Extent of the Pope's Authority be or be not, yet)
it is cl ar that all Roman-Catholikes, that is, all Communicants with the Church
of Rome or Papists (as they call them) hold the substance of the Pope's
Authority; that is, hold the Pope to be Supreme Ecclesiastical Governor in
God's Church. This is evident out of the very terms, since to acknowledge the
Papal Authority is to be a Papist or a Communicant with the Church of Rome.

2. The holding or acknowledging this Authority is to all that hold it, that is
to the whole Church of Rome, or to all those particular Churches united with
Rome, a Principle of Unity of Government. This is plain likewise out of the
terms; since an acknowledgment of one Supreme Governor either in Secular, or
Spiritual affairs is the Ground which establishes those acknowledgers in
submission to that one Government; that is, it is to them a Principle of Unity
in Government.

3. It Is evident and acknowledged that ( whateuer some Catholics hold besides,
or not hold, yet) all those Churches in Communion with the Churches of Rome
hold firmly that whatsoever the living voice of the present Church, that is, of
Pastors and Fathers of Fam^lies, shall unanimously conspire to teach and
deliver Learners and Children to have been recieued from their immediate
fathers as taught by Christ and his Apostles, is to be undoubtedly held as
indeed taught by them, that is, is to be held as a point of faith; and that
the voice of the present Church thus delivering is infallible, that is, that
this delivery from immediate forefathers as from theirs, as from Christ, is an
infallible and certain Rule of faith, that is, is a Principle of Unity in
faith. This to be the tenet of all these Churches in Communion with Rome both
sides acknowledge, and is Evident hence that the Body made up of these Churches
ever cast out from themselves all that did innouate against this tenure.

4. It Is manifest that all the Churches in Communion with Rome equally held at
the time of the Protestant Reformation in K. Henry's days these two Principles
as they do now, that is, the substance of the Pope's Authority or that he is
Supreme in God's Church, and that the living voice of the present Church
delivering as above said is the infallible Rule of faith This is manifested by
our Adversaries impugning the former Churches as holding Tradition and the
Pope's Headship; nor was it ever pretended by Friend or Foe that either those
Churches held not those tenets then, or that they have renounced them since.

5. The Church of England immediately before the Reformation was one of those
Churches which held Communion with Rome, ( as all the world grants) and
consequently held with the rest these two former tenets proved to have been the
Principles of Unity both in faith and Government.

6. That Body of Christians or that Christian Commonwealth consisting of the
then-Church of England and other Churches in Communion with Rome, holding
Christ's law upon the said tenure of immediate Tradition and submitting to the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Pope, was a true and real Church. This is
manifest by our very Adversaries acknowledgment, who grant the now Church of
Rome, even without their Church, to be a true and real one, though holding
the same Principles of Unity both in faith and Government.

7. That Body consisting of the then Church of England and her other fellow
communicants with Rome, was united or made one by means of these two Principles
of Unity. For the undoubted acknowledgment of one common Rule of faith to be
certain is in it is own nature apt to unite those acknowledger's in faith, that
is, to unite them as faithful and consequently in all other actions springing
from faith And the undoubted acknowledgment of one Supreme Ecclesiastical
Governor gave these acknowledgers an Ecclesiastical Unity or Church Communion
under the notion of Governed or subjects of an Ecclesiastical Commonwealth.
Now nothing can more nearly touch a Church, than the Rules of faith and
Government, especially if the Government be of faith and recieved upon it is
Rule. Seeing then these principles gave them some Unity, and Communion as
Faithful, and as belonging to an Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, it must
necessarily be Church Unity, and Comunion which it gave them.

8. The Protestant Reformers renoun'ct both these Principles. This is
undeniably evident since they left of to hold the Popes Supreme power to act in
Ecclesiastical affairs, and also to hold diverse points, which the former
Church immediately before the breach, had recieved from immediate Pastors and
fathers, as from Christ.

9. Hence follows unavoidably, that those Reformers in renouncing those two
Principles did the fact of breaking Church Communion, or Schismatizing. This is
demonstrably consequent from the two last Paragraphs, where it is proved that
those two Principles made Church Communion, that is, caused Unity in that Body
which themselves acknowledge a true Church; as also that they renounced or
broke those Principles; therefore they broke that which united the Church,
therefore they broke the Unity of the Church or Schismatiz'd.

10. This renouncing those two Principles of Ecclesiastical Communion, proved
to have been an actual breach of Church Unity, was antecedent to the Pope's
excommunicating the Protestants, and his commanding Catholics to abstain from
their Communion. This is known, and acknowledged by all the world; nor till
they were Protestants by renouncing those Principles could they be
excommunicated as Protestants.

11. This actual breach of Church Unity in K. Henry's, Ed the 6th's and the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign, could not be imputable to the subsequent
Excommunication, as to it is cause. It Is plain, since the effect cannot be
before the cause.

12. Those subsequent Excommunications, caused not the actual breach or Schism
between us. For the antecedent renouncing those two points, shown to have been
the Principles of Ecclesiastical Unity, had already caused the breach,
disunion or division between us; But, those between whom an actual division is
made are not still diuisible, that is, they who are already divided are not now
to be divided: Whefore, however it may be pretended, that those
Excommunications made those Congregations, who were antecedently thus divided,
stand at farther distance from one another; yet it is most senceles and unworthy
a man of reason to affirm that they divided those who were already divided ere
those Excommunications came. Especially, since the Rule of faith, and the
substance of the Pope's Authority consist in an indivisible, and are points of
that nature, that the renouncing these is a Principle of renouncing all faith
and Government: For, who so renounces a y Rule may, nay ought, if he go to
work consequently, renounce all he holds upon that Rule, whether points of
faith, or of Government, nay even the letter of God's written word it self;
that is, all that Christ left us, or that can concern a Church.

13. The renouncing those two Principles of the former Church Unity, as it
evidently disv^ited men's minds in order to faith and Government; so, if reduced
into practice, it must necessarily disvnite or divide them likewise in
external Church carriage. This is clear, since our tenets are the Principles
of our actions, and so contrary tenets of contrary carriage.

14. Those tenets contrary to the two Principles of Church Unity were de facto
put in practice, by the Reforming party; and consequently, they divided the
Church, both internally and externally. This is most undeniably evident; since
they preached, writ and acted against the Tradition, or delivery of the
immediately foregoing Church as erroneous in many points, which she delivered
to them as from immediate. fathers and so upwards as from Christ; and proceeded
now to interpret Scripture, by another Rule than by the tenets, and practice of
the immediately foregoing faithful. And, as for the former Government, they
absolutely renounced it is influence in England, preached, and writ against it:
Nay kept Congregations apart before they had the power in their hands; and,
after they had the power in their hands, punished and put to death (and that
upon the score of Religion) many of the maintainers of those two Principles of
Church Unity.

15. Hence follows that the Protestants breach was a perfect and complete fact
of Schism. For, it divided the former Ecclesiastical Body both internally and
externally, and that, as it was an Ecclesiastical Body, since those two said
Principles concerned Ecclesiastical Unity.

16. The subsequent Excommunication, of our Church was therefore due, fitting
and necessary. Due; for it is as due a carriage toward those who have actually
renounced the Principles of Unity both in faith and Government, and so broken
Church Unity, to be excommunicated by that Body from which those Renouncers
thus broke, as it is toward rebels, who have renounced both Supreme
Government and fundamental laws of a Commonwealth, and so, divided the
Temporal Body, to be denounced and proclaimed Rebels by the same
Commonwealth. Fitting, since the effect of it they most resent, which was to
keep the true faithful apart in Ecclesiastical actions from them, signified
no more than this, that they who had broken both internally and externally from
the former Body should not be treated with, in Ecclesiastical carriages, as
still of it, nor be owned for parts of that Commonwealth of which already they
had made, themselves no parts. Lastly, necessary; all Government and good order
going to wrack if opposite parties be allowed to treat together commonly in
such actions in which their opposition must necessarily, and frequently burst
out and discover it self; which will ineuitably disgust the more prudent sort,
hazard to pervert the weaker, and breed disquiet on both sides.

Thus far to evidence demonstrably that the Extern Fact of Schism was truly
theirs; Which done, though it be needless to add any more to prove them
formal Schismatics, themselves confessing that such a fact cannot be
justifiable, by any reasons or motives whatsoever, of Schism, c. 1. Yet I shall
not build upon their standing to their own words, knowing how easy a thing it
is, for men who talk loosely and not with strict rigor of Discourse to shuffle
of their own sayings; I shall therefore prosecute mine own intended method, and
allege that,

17. The very doing an Extern fact, of so heinous a Nature, as is breaking
Church Unity concludes a guilt in the Acters, unles they render reasons truly
sufficient to excuse their fact. This is evident, a fortiori, by parallelling
this to facts of far more inferior malice. For, who so rises against a long
settled, and acknowledged Temporal power, is concluded by that very fact of
rising to be a Rebel, unles he render sufficient reasons, why he rose.
Otherwise, till those reasons appear, the Good of Peace, settlement, order and
Unity, which he evidently violates by his rising conclude him most
irrational, that is, sinful, who shall go about to destroy them. The like we
experience, to be granted by all Mankind in case a son disobey or
disacknowledge one for his father, who was held so formerly, nay if a schoolboy
disobey a petty schoolmaster; for, unles they give sufficient reasons of this
disobedience, the order of the world, which consists in such submission of
inferiors, to formerly-acknowledg'd Superiors gives them for faulty for
having broken, and inverted that order. How much more then the fact of breaking
Church Unity, since this entrenches upon an order infinitely higher, to wit
Mankind's order to Beatitude, and in it is own nature dissolves, that is,
destroys Christ's Church by destroying it is Unity; and, by consequence, his
law too; since there remaining no means to make particular Churches interpret
Scripture the same way, each of them would follow the fancy of some man it
esteems learned, and so there would be as many faiths as particular
Congregations; as we see practic't in Luther's pretended Reformation, and this
last amongst us.

18. No reasons can be sufficient to excuse such a fact, but such as are able
to convince that 'twas better to do that fact, than not to do it. This is most
Evident; since, as when reason convinces me it is worse, to do such a thing I
am beyond all excuse irrational, that is, faulty in doing it; so, if I be
conuinc't that it is, onely-equally good, I can have no reason to go about it;
for, in regard I cannot act in this case without making choice of the one
particular before the other, and in this supposed case there, is no reason of
making such a choice, since I am convinced of the equality of their Goodnesses,
it is clear my action in this case cannot spring from reason. It Is left then
that none can act rationally nor by consequence excusably, unles convinced that
the fact is better to be done, than not to be done.

19. In this case, where the point is demonstrable, and of highest concern, no
reason merely probable, how strongly soever it be such, can convince the
understanding, that the Contrary was better to be done, but only a manifest,
and rigorous demonstration. For, though in the commoner sort of humane actions
an high Probability, that the thing is in it self better, be sufficient for
action, yet there are some things of a nature, so manifest to all Mankind to
be universally good, that nothing, but rigorous Evidence, can be pretended a
Ground sufficient to oppose them. For example, that Parents are to be honored,
that Government is to be in the world, that Unity of Government is to be kept
up in God's Church, that there ought to be certain Grounds for faith, and such
like. Which, since on the one side they are such as are in their own nature
demonstrable, and indeed self evident; on the other so universally beneficial,
and consequently an universal harm, or rather a deluge of inconveniences, and
mischief break in if the Acter against these should hap to be in the wrong;
he is, therefore, bound in these cases not to act till he sees the utmost
that is to be seen concerning such affairs; but affairs of this nature are
demonstrable, or rather self evident (as is said) on the one side, therefore
he ought not to act, unles he could see perfect demonstration, that it is
better to do the other: Wherefore, it being evidenced most manifestly in the
6th Section of this, Vindication of my Appendix, that this fact of theirs left
neither, Certain Ground of faith, nor Unity of Government in God's Church,
nothing but a perfect and rigorous demonstration, could be able to convince,
the understanding that 'twas better to ^ct.

20. The Protestants produce no such demonstration, that ^was better to act in
this case. For, they never closed with severe demonstration, in any of their
writings I have yet seen to Evidence rigorously either, that the Rule of
immediate delivery was not certain, or that the Pope had no Supreme Authority
in Ecclesiastical affairs, or, lastly, that, though he were such, yet the
Authority was to be abolish't for the Abuses sake; Which were necessary to be
done ere they could demonstrate it better to break Church Unity. Nor, indeed,
does their manner of writing bear the slenderest resemblance, of rigorous
demonstration: since demonstration, is not a connecting of Air and words, but
of Notions and sense, and this from self evident Principles even to the very
intended conclusion. Whereas their way of writing is only to find out the
sense of words by a Dictionary kind of manner; which sort of Discourse, is the
most fallible, most slight and most subject to Equivocation, that can be
imagined. To omit that rigorous demonstration, is pretended by our party for
our Rule of faith, immediate Tradition, which they renounced; and,
consequently, for whatsoever was recieved upon it (as was the Pope's Authority)
as yet unanswered by their side. Nay their own side sometimes acknowledge, our
said Rule of faith infallible. See Schism Dispatched. p. 104. and p. 123.

21. It Is the most absurd, and impious folly imaginable to bring for their
excuse, that they were fully persuaded the thing was to be done or is to be
continued. For, since a full persuasion, can spring from Passion or Vice
as well, as from reason and virtue (as all the world sees, and grants) it
signifies nothing in order to an excuse to say one was fully persuaded he was
to do such a thing till he show whence he became thus persuaded; otherwise
his persuasion, might be a fault it self, and the occasion of his other fault
in thus acting. It Is not therefore his persuasion, but the Ground of his
persuasion, which is to be alleged and looked into. Which, if it were reason,
whence he became thus persuaded, and that he knew how he came to be
persuaded (without knowing which 'twas irrational to be persuaded at all) then
he can render us this reason, which persuaded him; and reason telling us
evidently that no reason, less than demonstration, is in our case able to breed
full persuasion, or conviction, that it was, better to act (as has been proved
Aph. 19.) it follows they must give us a demonstrative reason, why 'twas better
to be done, otherwise they can never justify that persuasion, much less the
fact which issued from it: But, the fact being evidently enormous, and against
a present order of highest concern, and no truly Evident reason appearing, why
'twas better, to do that fact, it is from it self convinced, and concluded
irrational, precipitate and vicious. If they complain of this doctrine, as too
rigorous in leaving no excuse for weak, and ignorant persons who act out of
simplicity; I reply: Either their first Reformers, and themselves the
continuers of the Breach, thought themselves ignorant in those things they went
about to reform, or no. If they thought themselves ignorant, and yet attempted
to make themselves judges, it is a plain self-Condemnation, and irrational. If
they were ignorant, or in some degree ignorant and yet either thought
themselves not ignorant, or in some degree less ignorant, then I ask what made
them think themselves wiser than they were except their own Pride: So that
which way soever they turn, their fault and guilt pursve them. But, if they
were indeed knowing in those things, then it is apparent there are no truly
sufficient, convincing or demonstrative reasons to be given why they acted,
since they were never able to produce any such, though urged and obliged there
unto by the highest motives imaginable. Whence they remain still criminal as
in the former cases, and indeed much more, leaving it manifest, that neither
persuasion, nor their fact which was originiz'd from it, sprung from reason in
their understanding, but from Passion and Affection in their Wills.

THEREFORE THE PROTESTANTS ARE GVILTY BOTH OF MATERIAL, AND FORMAL SCHISM;
SINCE IT IS EVIDENT THEY HAVE DONE BOTH A SCHISMATIC FACT, AND OVT OF A
SCHISMATIC AFFECTION.

FINIS.
THE POSTSCRIPT.
IF my Adversaries will undertake to reply in a rigorously demonstrative way,
which, as it only is conclusive, so none but it can avail them to justify a
Fact of this nature, they shall have a fair return, from their Disarmer.
Otherwise, if they resolve to pursve their old method of talking preachingly,
quotingly and quibblingly, he can be content to leave them to the Applause of
weak and half-witted Readers, and to the Laughter and contempt of rational and
intelligent persons.

INDEX TO THE TREATISE Against Dr. Hammond.
A,
ABsurdtiies in Dr. H. p. 215 three til (this page the Collectour, neglected to
gather them) p. 216. three more. Other three p. 217. Heaps of others from p.
217. till p. 221. Also p. 272 and 274. Two more, p. 279. His Absurdity of
Absurdities that it was forbidden by Moses his Law to converse with or preach
to a Gentile, from p. 308. to p. 319. A shameless Absurdity in making a
Testimony totally against him, speak for him by adding two Parenthesis of his
own in the middle. p. 326, 327, 328. Another heap of Absurditis p. 232, 233.
Absurdity in deducing a Conclusion out of three Testimonies, in stead of
showing one express word in any one. p. 345, 346. etc. with others of an
inferior strain. Absurdities about Saint John's Priority in place. p. 371,
372, 373. Another, p. 374. Many and most gross Absurdities to avoid the
clearing his inexcusable Falsification of Scripture p. 376 377, etc. Absurd
pretenses, and his building on a ^silly, unauthentik and most unlikely
Narration. p. 388, 389. Absurd nonsense in obliging us to confess what we hold
as of Faith, instead of showing us he had expressed we held so, and not
calumniated our tenet. p. 390, 391, 392. More new Absurdites. p. 307, 308.
Absurdity in answering by a Parallel which in nothing resembled our objection.
p. 410, 411. Absurd Nonsense. p. 418, 419, 420. A Cluster of Absurdities about
his twelve Thrones. p. 421, 422. etc. all over. Another Cluster of toyish
Absurdities. p. 435, 436. An whole Army of Absurditias mustered up, which he
nicknames a perfect Reply and attendance (...) to my most important Section. p.
450, 451. Abusing the Reader's eyes four several times. p. 198, 199. Also p.
231, 232, 237, 249, 251, 326, 327. (with what art he does so. p. 327, 328.)
Also p. 329, and 330. and in diverse other places. Abusing a Testimony from
Theophylact. p. 243, 244. Abusing a Testimony from Scripture. p. 283, 284, 285.
Abusing a Testimony from Anacletus. p. 297, 298. etc. Abusing the Jewish Church
and her Practice in their purest times. p. 311. Abusing the Primitive
Christians as most uncharitable, and the Apostles as abetters of their fault.
p. 318, 319. Abusing Saint Peter and his Jewish Prosclytes by making them all
Schismatics. p. 315, 316. His other manifold abuses come under the Heads of
Calumny, cavil, false-dealing, and others. Actual Power of the Pope in
England at the time of the breach. p. 36. 37. The Antientnesse of that Actual
Power, p. 37, 38.
B
BElief, what, according to Dr. H. p. 113, 114. and 134. What truly. ibid.
Blasphemy against Faith, and Ground of Faith; p. 111. Another, p. 112. Three
more, p 114. Other two, p. 200; 201. Doctor Hammonds manner of dogmatizing the
seed of all Blasphemies p. 420.
C.
CAlumny against a pretended Adversary who meddled not with him, p. 27, 28.
Also, p. 33, 34. Calumniating our tenets, p. 96, 103, (twice) 104, 403, 404
(twice) 423, 424, 431, 432, 440. Calumniating his Adversary, p. 366 Calumny
formerly imputed, manifested from his own words to be such, p. 390. 391. Cavil
groundlessly made against a petty lapse, though rectified in the Errata, p.
172, 173. Other groundless and senseless Cavills, p. 186, 230, 276, 277, 278,
302, 366, 367, 368, 426, (thrice) 427. False Cavil that S. W. never considered
his Allegations, when as he had answered them particularly one by one, p. 211. A
Cavil grounded upon a false pretense of his own, p. 342. Another built upon
his own Falsification of his Adversaries words, p. 37^. Certainty of Faith a
just ground for zeal, p. 10, 11, 12, 20. Certainty and strength of Tradition,
p. 12, 13, 16, 45, 46, 97, 119, 120, 132, 134. Challenge made formerly to ^r. H
that he could not show one express word for Exclusive Jurisdictions in any of
those Testimonies he produced to prove it. p. 343. This Challenge how rational
and moderate in the Offerer, how necessary and advantageous for the Accepter.
p. 343, 344. Challenge acceped, ibid. but totally prevaricated from, after
acceptance, p. 345: 346. Changing St. Hierom's words, p. 26. Changiing my
words and intention, p. 31, and 56 Changing the force and sense of the Father's
words thrice by his Paraphrase or Translation, p. 8, 79, 80. 81. Changing the
Question, almost all over. Changing the words of their own Translation, p. 195.
Changing St, Chrysostom's intention and sense by omitting some of his words, p.
265, 266. Multitudes of others of this sort, especially changing the Fathers
and his Adversary's words, `and the letter in which-they were printed to his
own advantage, I omit to recount most of them fall more properly under other
Heads. Contradictions to himself, p. 102, 104, 115, 116, 123, 135, 140, 142,
145, 146, 148, 173, 174, 185 (twice) 196 l. ult. 197, l. 11. 216, 238, 239, 244
(twice) 263, 264, 270, 271 (twice) 272, 287, 293, 294, 369, 392, 393, 405, 423,
432, 446. Contradicting four places of his own, p. 204, 205. Contradicting six
other places of his own, ib. Nine Self contradictions shown from p. 207. to p.
214. Contradicting himself and common sense both at once, 314, 315.
Contradicting himself, in denying his Irrefragable Evidence to be intended for
what his own words evince he brought it, p. 334, 335. In denying it to be a
Proof for the point, p. 336. In denying seven Testimonies, which before he
called, Clear Evidences, to be Proofs, p. 336, 337. Contradicting himself with
one Testimony five times, p. 417, 418. Contradicting the scope of the present
Controversy, and of his whole fourth Chapter, p. 205, 206. contradicting the
whole stream of Scripture, p. 309. 310, 312, 313, 314. contradicting his own
Tenet of Exclusive Provinces, p. 357. contradicting common sense, p. 310. 311,
368, 369. 393. contradicting himself and common sense at once, p. 314, 315.
contradicting at once all the most Substantial part of his Book, p. 350, 351.
E.
Evidences, able to excuse the Protestants from Schism, how they ought to be
qualified, p. 40, 41. That they have no such Evidences, p. 42, 43, 44. A
Testimony. Evidence how it ought to be qualified, p. 382. Dr. H's Evidences how
qualified, p. 383. Evident demonstrably that H. the eighth was, p. 132, 133,
134. Evident demonstrably, that the Papacy was never introduced, p: 168, 169,
170.
F.
Fact evinced out of Histories concludes not Right, p. 51, 52. Falsifications
of Scripture, p. 194, 195, 196, 197, 307, 339, 343, 403. False and common trick
in citing Scripture, p. 354, 355. False pretenses from Scripture, 195, 360,
363. Egregious and most wilful, falssific^tions of Fathers and other Authors,
discoverd, p. 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250 266, 267, 268, 269. 270, 358, 359,
367, 415, 416. Falsifications of S. Ambrose reiterated, and shamelesly applied
to his own advantage, whereas it is expressly for us, p. 349. Falsification of
Falsifications, p. 375. Falsely substituting the Arch-heretick Pelagius his
Testimony for S. Hieroms, p. 239, 240, 241. Falsifying the words of the
Testimony, as well as the Authority, p. 242, 243. Falsifying his Adversaries
words and plain intention, p. 73, 74, 370, 371, 376, 428, 433, 465. An
egregious and most notorious Falsification, as it was put in his Book of
Schism, 468, 469. A voluntary and shameful Falsification left undefended, p.
319, 320, 321, etc. False Pretenses that he answered some passages, p. 186,
187, 322. l. 3. and again; l. 8, 9. Also p. 387, 394, 413. Falsifying our
pretense of Evidences, p. 175. False stating the Question, p. 39, 69, 70, 71,
74. and indeed almost over all the Book. False pretense of a silly Argument, as
put by his Adversary, whereas he feigned it himself, p. 438, 439. Falsification
objected by Dr. H. cleared most evidently from p. 459, to p. 468. Falsifying
his Adversaries manner of Expression, wilfully to accuse him of a
Falsification, p. 464. 465.
G.
GEneral Councels now morally impossible, and when probable to be had according
to Dr. H. p. 141. Their Authority doubted of by him, p. 138. Grounds concluding
the whole Controversy, p. 36, to 55.
I.
IGnorance in Logic, p. 76, 135, 137, 138, 139, 157. 158. 281. (twice) 376,
384. (twice) 424. Ignorance in his Accidence, shown by ten several Instances,
p. 84. to p 90. Ignorance of the signification of the common School-terms, in
telling us the Pope is not a Summum Genus, p. 159. Affected Ignorance of common
sense, in impugning a Name or Title, instead of a Thing, p. 164, 165, 166. in
arguing from Fullness to Equality, p. 261. 262. in concluding from either side
of the Contradiction p. 304. 305. in deducing many consequences from perfectly
unconcerning Premises p. 305. 306. 307. in building upon the reconcilement of
contradictory Testimonies, ere he knows or goes about to prove them true p.
325. 326. in expecting the like from his Adversary p. 364. 365. in arguing from
Plurality to Equality p. 429. Ignorance how the Holy Ghost is in the Faithful
p. 429, 430 Miserable Ignorance in Dogmatizing upon the Mystical sense of
Testimonies p. 417. 418* 419* 443. 444. Ignorance of the way of interpreting
Scripture p. 187. 188. 189 190. 278. 279. Ignorance of the distinction between
a Title and an Argument p. 176. between an Interpreter and a Grammarian p. 187.
between a Parenthesis and a Comma, p. 194. between a Parenthesis and a Comma p.
194. between Samaritans and Gentiles, p 308. affected Ignorance of our Tenet,
p. 340. 341. 354. 369. 370. 385. 386. our Proofs, p. 264. of his being the
Opponent, I the Defendant p. 249. Pitiful ignorance in not knowing the nature
of a Proof, p. 338. Most nonsensical Ignorance, p. 401, 402. Incertainty of
Faith, unable to ground a rational zeal, p 14, 15. Dr. H's. Churches absolute
incertainty of her faith avowed by himself, p. 110. 111. Incertainty of faith,
how absurd and disedifying, if brought into practice, or put in a Sermon, p.
125, 126. Infallibility of our Church, how held by us, p. 97, 98* No Church
without Infallibity, p. 98, 99. No Power to bind to Belief, without
Infallibility, ib. Also p. 108, 109. Denial of infallibility, pernicious to all
Faith, p. 123.
K.
MR. Knots Position vindicated, p. 96. 97. 98, 99. also p. 103. 104.
M.
MIstaking wilfully every line of my Introduction, p. 55, 56, 57, 58. etc. to
69, his other Mistakes sprung from wilfullness or weakness are too many to be
reckoned up: This one instance will abundantly suffice to inform the Reader
what he may expect in his answering the rest and more difficult part of the
Book. Motives of Union in our Church, p. 128.
O.
Omitting to answer to most concerning points, p. 95, 145, 312, 313. (four
times) 329, 330. (other four times) 381, 382, 383. Omitting to reply to my
Answers or Exceptions, and to strengthen his own weak Arguments, p. 157, 173,
174, 117, 158, 329, 330. (six times) 425, 426 (thrice) 429, 445, 446, 447.
(twice) 447, 448. (twice) Omitting to mention those words in my Epistle to the
Reader, which solely imported, p. 31, 32. To answer the true import of my
introduction, p. 65, 66. To answer whether his Reasons be only probable or no,
p. 90, 91. To oppose our true Evidence, though he pretends it, p. 175. To
answer his Adversaries challenge, that he had not one word in his many
Testimonies to prove his main point, but what himself put in of his own head,
p. 203. 204. Omitting to show one testimony which confirmed his own, We know;
but instead of doing so, cavilling and railing at his Adversary, p. 302, 303.
Omitting his Adversaries chief words, and thence taking occasion to cavil
against the rest, p. 278. Omitting to clear himself of his falsifying
Scripture, p. 307, 308. and of falsifying the Apostolical Constitutions, p.
319, 320 etc. Omitting to reply to the Text of S. Mat. urged against him, p.
394, also to two important Paragraphs of Schism, Dis. p 406 Omitting to cite
the place, or even the Book of three authors; whereof those which could be
found, are expressly against him, p. 414, to 421. Omitting our argument from Tu
es Petrus, though pretending he puts it, p. 435, 436, Reasons why the Disarmer
omitted that part of Dr. H's Book, which himself acknowledges unnecessary, p.
452, 453, etc. Opponents part belongs to the Protestants, Defendants to us, p.
47, 48, 76, 77, 274.
P.
PAtriarchy of the Bishop of Rome mistaken for Metropolitical power, p. 145.
Its extent weakly impugned by four Testimonies, which not so much as mention
it, p. 146. 147, by Rufinus, 151, 152, 153. Rather justifiedly the Nicene Canon
pretended to oppose it, p. 149, 150. Acknowledged by the Greeks our Adversaries
to extend to all the West, p. 155, 156. Power of binding to Belief, what it
consists in, p. 118, 119 That our Church rationally claims, this Power, but
that none else can, p. 120, 121, 122. Possession, not to be disturbed without
sufficient motives p. 38, This of the Popes in England not to be rejected upon
less reasons, than rigorously evident that it was usurpt p, 40, 41, 42.
Possession of Catholics justly pretendable to have some from Christ, and so
may be it self a Title, but that of Protestants cann ot p. 49, So the
advantages of ours, the disadvantages of their Possession, p. 129, 130. Again,
most amply, p, 178. 179. Theirs not truly named a Possession, p 180 181.
Prevarication from his own most expres words, the whole tenor of his
Discourse, the main scope of his most substantial Chapter, and lastly, from
the whole Question, p, 202, to 207. From performing a most advantageous
challenge, accepted by himself, p 345 346. Other Prevarications, p. 108, 109,
110, 112, 185, 377, 383, 384, 391, 436 and in many other places too numerus to
be noted. Proofs brought by Protestants against our ground of Faith, arrive not
to a Probability, p. 44, 45, 46, Dr. H's Proofs, which he formerly called
Evidences, metamorphos'd now into Branches of Accordance, Agreeances and
Fancies, and all denied by himself to be Proofs, except one, p. 360, 361, 362.
That one found to be empty and illtreated, p. 362, 363, 364.
R.
REspect for mine Adversaries avowed Ep. to the Reader. Also p. 18, 19, 472.
473.
S.
Schisms Nature and Definition, p. 70. Schisms, Divisions as put by Dr. H. in
his Defense, wanting all the principal sorts of Schism objected, p, 136. to p.
144.
T.
TEstimonies b^ought by Dr. H. against himself, p, 149, 162, 171, 232, 234,
235. 238, 239, 300, 171, 324, (thrice) 368, 433. Testimonies impertinent to the
purpose, four, from Appeals denied p* 159* 160 161. 162, 163 From, Names and
Titles denied, p 164 165 166 167 from S. Amb^ose, 23^. 232. and 234. from S.
Chrysostom. and Theophylact. p 233 from Clemens, p. 258. 259. from S Chrysostom,
again, p. 274, 275, also p 286 287 Three impertinent Testimonies for S. John's
being over the Jews only, p. 366, 367, His Testimony from Scripture for his
Exclusive Provinces truly explicated, and that Explication made good. p. 224,
225, etc. His most serviceable Testimony from the Arch-heretick Pelagius, p.
239. This Testimony mainly relied on, p. 242. 306. 346. 348. Testimony from S.
Hierom, clearing the point of Exclusive Jurisdiction. p. 251. to 255. S.
Chrysostomes express Testimony against himself, whom he cites most for him in
this point, p 279. 280. Three most manifest Testimonies from S. Chrysostom. for
S. Peter's Supremacy, p. 288. to 292. Testimony from S. Cyprian and S. Austinc,
for S. Peter's Authority, p. 292. to 297. Testimony from our own Canon Law
senselesly brought against us, p. 297. to 301. A Testimony expressly against
himself (...) every Tittle brought to make good all his former Testimonies, p.
^26. 327. Six Testimonies of (...) shown invalid by Schism disarmed, left
unmaintained by their Alledger, p. 329. 330. Testimonies from Scripture for the
promise and performance of a particular degree of Authority in S. Pe^^^ urged
p. 393. to 400 His own Testimony from S. Hillary expressly against him, p. 416,
A Testimony produced as for him, which contradicts him in five particulars, p.
418 419. His Testimony from Scripture for twelve Episcopal Chairs, p. 421.
423. The Testimony Tu es Petrus, etc. urged by us p. 434. 435. Testimony from
Justinians Novels ^oubly and notoriously falsified, p. 468. 469.
W.
Weakness in producing blindly places of Scripture unapplyed to any
Circumstance, p. 4, 5. In imputing Contumeliousness to his Adversary, p, 6, 7,
9. Yet using worse himself, p. 6. 8, 9, 10. In expecting that Adversaries in a
scrious quarrel should spare one another, p. 7. In his manner of writing
Epist. to the Reader, p. 6, 17, 19, In quoting Saint Hierom against the
Disarmer to his own utter overthrow, p. 21, 22, 23, etc. In totally mistaking
the common sense of a plain Epistle to the Reader, p. 29, 30. etc. In arguing
by Ifs, p. 77, 78. thrice. Also, p. 138, 182, 183, 356, 357, Thirteen
weaknesses about one point, p. 96, to 106. There are innumerable others, but I
am weary. A List of their common Heads may be seen, p. 454, 455.
The total sum of Dr. Hammond's faults committed in the first Part of his reply
(that is, within the compass of thirty seven leaves) favorably reckoned, is
this. Absurdities, threescore and two. Abuses twenty nine: Blasphemies, seven.
Groundless Cavils, fifteen. Calumnies, twelve. Contradictions, seventy six
False-dealings, forty four, besides his changing the words and sense of others.
Ignorances, great part of which are affected, fifty. Omissions of his necessary
duty, forty Bringing Testimonies for him which are against him, one and twenty.

Mistakes. Prevarications, Shufflings. Weaknesses. for the most part voluntary*
sans nombre.

INDEX
To the Treatise against my Lord of DERRY.
ABsurdities, p. 484, 485, 491, 493, 496, 498, 506, 516, 521, 527, 528, 529,
530, 536, 537, 541, 542, 574, 594, 595, 603, 621, 622, 629, twice 635, 640,
641, 647, 524, 570, 571. Absurdity in bragging of his Churches large Communion,
p, 641, 642, 643, Breaking Church-Unity inexcusable, p. 569. 570. 571. 662.
663. 664. Cavills groundlesly raised, p. 483, 484, 485, 499, 501, 502, 524,
541, 565, 572, 599, 632, 935, 952, 653. Cavills against the Council of Trent
answered, p. 645, 646, 647, 648, 649. Contradictions to himself p. 491, 496
(twice) 500 527, 540 (twice) 554, 565, 571, 576, 577. also, p. 578, 579, (four
times) 590, 591, 594, 601, 602 603, 604, 607 (twice) 610 (twice) 611, 621,
(twice) 631, 632, 633,, 644, 653, 654, 655, 656 Other Contradictions. p. 497,
498, 522, 527, 528, 582, 583, (thrice) 587, 634, 651. Contradicting the whole
world's ages, p. 530, 559, 560. Controversy, what, p. 502. Creed of the
Apostles why instituted, p. 492. why other Creeds or Professions, p. 492, 463.
Defendent, who properly, p, 511. Falsification of the Council of Ephesus in
four respects. p. 493, 494, 495. of his Adversaries words, p. 525, 526, 630,
631, of the Council of Sardica, p. 537, 538, of Bid, p, 550, of all our
Historians at once, p. 549. False pretense of our stating the Question, p. 499.
False stating the question, p, 500, 501. Moderation of Protestants
misrepresented from p. 581, to 601. Mistaking wilfully our charge, p. 479, 480.
Omitting to tell us whether his Exceptions were Demonstrative or only probable,
p, 475. Omitting one half of our charge, p. 477, 478. Omitting to speak one
positive word to the matter of Fact, p. 481, 482. Omitting words most reli'd on
by his Adversary, p, 540. Opponent, who properly, p, 511. Prevarication from
answering and substituting common words for particular things, p. 486, 487,
488, 489, 490, 599. Other Prevarications, p. 497, 498, 534 (twice) 569, 570,
575, 632, 633, 638, twice A most absurd and manifold Prevarication, p. 505,
506, 507, 508. Again, 509, 510. Also, 511, 512, 513, Prevarications from the
question, p. 553, 557, 562, 563, 564, 592, 600, 607, 608, 612, 613, 614, 615,
616, 621, 622, 623, 624, 625, 526, 627, 635, 650, 651. Succession into St.
Peter's Headship due to the Bishop of Rome, p. 617, 618. Testimony from the
Council of Ephesus produced by. Lord D. p. 493, 569, and 573, from English
Statutes, p. 524, from the Epistle of Pope Eleutherius, p. 539, 540. Testimony
from S. Prosper rejected by him, p. 540, 541. His Testimony from the Welsh
Manuscript m^nifoldly weak, from p. 542, to p. 549. Unity of Faith broak by the
Reformers, p. 570, 571, 572, 657, 658, 659. Unity of Government broke by them,
p. 573, 574, 575, 576, 658. 659. Universal Church impossible to be known by
Protestant Grounds, from p. 595, to p. 599.
The total sum of faults committed by my Lord of Derry in his short Appendix,
cast up, amount to. Absurdities, twenty nine, Cavils, sixteen. Contradictions,
forty four. False dealings, twelve. Omissions of most important matters, which
concerned the whole question, four. Prevarications, forty two.

Corrections of the ERRATA
IN the Title l. 2. dispach't. Epist. to the Reader p. 2. l. 11. this method
ib. p. 6. t. 8. oratoriall. p. 12. l. ult. them, being. p. 13. l. 17. I doubt
not p. 14. l. 32. be otherwise. p. 21. l. 15. his award. p. 32. l. 1. ruin
more. p. 53. l. 11. if Christians. p. 54. l. 2. of schism. p. 54. l. 29. these
positions. p 59. l. 17 extern. p. 95. l. 1. chap. 2. p. 105. l. 20 may not
both. p. 108. l. 15. lawful. p. 113. l. 22 most probable. p. 129. l. 20. have
had. p. 142. l. 28. this consent. p. 146. l. 26 Bishops. p. 147. l. 26 quos. p.
149. l. 3 reply p. 34. p. 150. l. 26 in it. p. 152. l. 17 Bishops. p. 154. l.
20 epist. 10 p. 172. l. 7 Province. ib. l. 25 fifth. p. 173. l. 1 fifth p. 177.
l. 11 his side. p. 187. 18. the word is. p. 195. l. 30 prepositive. p. 216. l.
29 offer here p. 22 (...) 1. l. 17. p. 222. l. 22 a pact. ib. l. 28 a pact. p.
241. l. 7 our Doctors p. 252. l. 18 gentilem. p. 236^ l. 7 il phras'd. p. 257.
l. 13 has no. p. 261. l^ 20 same tune. p. 266. l. 12 (...). 301. l. 7
prejudicial. p. 306. l. 34 possibly. p. 308.:. 13 from all other. ib. 33.
hence all. p. 310. l. 34 commanded togather together. p. 318. l. 20 take to be
p. 322. l. 13 in soft-reason'd. ib. l. 17 attending. p. 346. l. 19 which he
affirms. p. 347. l. 12 verse. 1. we. ib. l. 15 Greeks. p. 350. l. 16
argumentative. ib. l. 31 fourth, p. 353. l. 8 ^ad won. p. 359. l. 28 here.
Answer. p. 53. ^ 361. l. 2 to him Answ. p. 49. l. 32. 33. p. 365. l. 1
repugnancies. p. 378. ^28 of asks. p. 381. l. 23, 24 assents not sprung. p.
382. l. 31 it would. p. 391. l. 13 enclosure. p. 393. l. 9. found. p. 87. ^.
406 l. 17 rule p. 407 l. 1. par. 10. Answ. p. 63. ib. l. 11 exhortation. p.
408. l. 12. preferment, Rep. p. 68. Reply. p. 412. l. 13. as our Savior did,
ib. l. 31. expression. p. 420. l. 15. hands, reaping. ^. 424. l. 20. (...)
your. p. 443. l. 33. destroy ours, from his own. p. 448. l. 27. proportion. p.
450. l. 10. explicated, ib. l. 28. us three. p. 459. l. 2. ingenuous. p. 462.
l. 2. grant. p. 469. l. 8. his former fault. p. 480. 4. 5. the Bishops
f^llow-sencer, Dr. H. of Schism, cap. 7. par. 2. confess, etc. p. 484. l. 8.
Sons by attestation. p. 486. l. 5. none can be. p. 490. l. 11. than that the
ibid. l. 33. immediate. p. 496. l. 33. some such things. p. 498. l. 23. all the
Grounds. p. 500. l. 3. Church or Successor of S. Peter. p 502. l. 8. These
points. p. 506. l. 1. and indeed. p. 507. l. 3. manifest in. p. 511. l. 6. does
aloud. p. 511. l. 17. Opponent or Accaser. p. 512. l. ult. have afforded some.
p. 513. l. 7. his Church, since if he means the discipline of the Church of
England, etc. p. 514. l. 11^ flickering, p. 519. l. 24. by my first. p. 520. l.
27. of non-ens. p. 533. l. 26. utter unauthentickness. p. 542. l. 34. the
concomitant, 549. l. 2. are put down. p. 550. l. 32. corroborate the. p. 554.
l. 21. Levi. p. 557. l. 25. now hold. p. 568. l. 11 by any tie. p. 577. l. 11.
conf^sses. p. 21. l. 7. 8. Page 578 l. 33. national Laws. p. 591. l. 28. that
no Society. p. 595. l. 3. have it h^ld. p. 600. l. 30. and no more. p. 603. l.
1. any (...) ib. l. 4. ^ontests. p. 604. l. 17. no, my Lord. p. 605. l. 12.
renouncing, p. 609. l. 2. These Evidencies. p. 612. l. 7. in noting. p. 613. l.
22. evince, p. 617. l. 26. 27. applying the. p. 620. l. 16. unites God's. p.
634. l. 10. as such^ p. 638. l. 20. discourse, dull. p. 642. l. 21. but there
is. p. 644. l. 8. d^ametricall. p. 645. l. 27. or of the p. 651. l. 4. A
Patriarchall A^istocraticall Authority. p. 666. l. 19. neither their.

FINIS.

