A PARAPHRASE UPON JOB; Written in French by J. F. SENAVLT, FATHER Of the
ORATORY: AND Dedicated to the Cardinal of RICHLIEU.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling at the sign of the Kings head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

Imprimatur,

JAMES CRANFORD.

blazons or coats of arms of Scotland, England and France THE TRANSLATOR TO The
READER.
SUre, it cannot be unsuitable to the condition of these Times to publish a
Discourse of PATIENCE, nor has the World ever afforded so incomparable an
example of that Virtue as JOB, whose History seems to be written not so much
for his Honor, as our Instruction, to show us that the highest point of Valor
is to suffer bravely, and to be a standing rule to all Ages, how men should
deport themselves in their misfortunes. The Author of this Work has acquired
so unquestionable a fame by this and other Pieces of his Pen, that it would be
but a diminution to his Greatness for me to commend him. Yet it is not to be
expected that here, where men can agree upon nothing, all men should agree in
the Approbation of this Discourse. If it please those who have Civility and
Judgment, it is enough.

The PREFACE.
THough all be Princely in the Person of Jesus Christ; though his Actions, as
well as his sufferings deserve to be adored, and his greatness exacts from men
as much respect, as his Humility; yet it seems that his Father has taken
delight to make his pains more glorieus then his Miracles, and had more care to
make known to all ages his Innocence, then his Power. Indeed Jesus Christ has
had more Figures of his Passion, then of his Glory; Abel watered the infant
earth with his blood, Jacob was ill treated by Esau, Joseph was sold by his
Brethren, and mounted not upon the Throne of Egypt, but by the stairs of
Servitude and Prison; and without making a tedious Relation of all the just who
have sufferd, it is sufficient to say, that there has been no age which has
not brought forth some Innocent unfortunate: but scarce can there be found
three or four Princes as well amongst the Faithful, as Profane, who have been
figures of Jesus Christ, Victorious or Triumphant; for if you except Josuah,
who has represented him to us in his battles, Cyrus in his Conquests, and
Solomon in his Glory, you shall see nothing but marks of his weakness, and
advices which Heaven gives the Earth of his future sufferings, He has without
doubt permitted it to be so, because the glory of men was not solid enough to
represent that of the Son of God, and because their Miseries were real enough
to express his sorrows: H^ judged likewise that the scandal of the Cr^sse had
need of Precaution, and that if many Innocents were not afflicted, the
Punishments which Jesus Christ was to endure, would do inju^y to his Merit. Now
amongst all those great men who have had the honor to bear the Character of a
Man-God suffering, Heaven has not sent into the world a more illustrious one
then Job: for besides that his birth makes him recommendable, that the Gentiles
amongst whom he lived give a luster to his Piety, his incompa^able Miseries
have acquired him so much reputation in the world, that Moses found no better
expedient to sweeten the Miseries of the captive Isralites in Egypt, then to
make them the Relation of his misfortunes. So that with whatsoever affliction
the Patience of a man has been tried, he might always have observed in the
History of Job matter of Consolation; for his life was traversed with all the
misfortunes, which may be imagined, and his Virtue exercised by all the
disgraces, which might render it more illustrious: his goods which consisted in
flocks were carried away by strangers, or consumed by lightning, his houses
were overthrown by the violence of the winds, his children were buried under
their ruins, and the Devil, who stirred up all these tempests, made advice be
given him of them the same day, to the end, that putting his soul in disorder,
impatience or grief might wrest reproaches or Blasphemies from his Mouth. But
his hopes proved as vain, as his attempts; he assaulted his Body with diverse
strange diseases, that it cannot be conceived how a man could resist so many
sorrows; for their continuance did not sweeten their violence, their excess
did not diminish their Number; and oftentimes the same part was affected with
contrary Evils, which seemed not to aagree together, but to increase the
sufferings of this unhappy Innocent. His wife used all the Artifices, which are
ordinary with her sex, to bring him to despair; his Friends employed all their
Eloquence to persuade him that he was guilty, and to take away the comfort
which he had from the thought of his Innocence. As their reproaches and
complaints are the principal design of this book, so are they the principal
subject of this Preface; and I believe it is very hard to understand the
History of Job, if one does not know the motives, which his Friends had to
accuse him, and the reasons which he had to defend himself. Nothing brought
more prejudice to this great man, then his Misery, and that which should have
given luster to his virtue, gave it but Obscurity: for his friends who thought
that punishment was always an effect of the sin of him, which suffers,
believed him faulty because they saw him Miserable, and not able to accord his
I^nocence with divine justice, they had rather condemn a man, then accuse a
God: the Principle upon which they founded their discourses was probable, the
Consequences which they drew thence appeared to them infallible, the great care
which Job took to defend himself passed in their thoughts for Obstinacy, his
Answers seemed more obscure then riddles, and his Complaints as guilty as
Blasphemies; so that they were not injurious to their Neighbor but because
they were over zealous for God, and hurt not Charity, but because they defended
Religion. As their Proceeding did not want excuse, so could they not exempt it
from fault; for being Jobs neighbors, reputation which pardons nothing in
Princes, and which makes their sins as public as their Virtues, had
sufficiently informed them of his honesty, the Conferences which they had with
him durring his good Fortune, ought to have assured them of the Sanctity of his
life, and if they could not know the causes of his disgrace, they ought to have
suspended their Judgments, and not condemned him whose Virtue was as known as
his Misfortune. The Complaints of Job were well founded upon more just Motives;
for his Conscience reproached him not with Crimes, the Holy Ghost which spoke
to men by his Mouth, spoke inwardly to his Heart, and suffered him not to
believe that he was punished for his sin: All these Reasons though had not
excused his Complaints, if a stronger one had not obliged him to make them; but
as he was the figure of Jesus Christ, who was to unite Innocence in his Person
with the Punishment of sin, and who by a Decree of his Father's Justice, was to
be the most afflisted as he was the most just of all Men, it was necessary that
he defended himself, and that he employed all his Eloquence to persuade his
friends, that if he were unhappy, he was not guilty. It was this potent
Consideration without Doubt, which furnished his Mind with so many exc^llent
reasons: He maintained his own Innocence, for fear Jesus Christ's should be
interested; he spoke with heat, because he pleaded the cause of his Master, and
as he was his Figure as well as his Advocate, he raised himself above the
Condition of a Mortal man, be stood upon Terms with God, and demanded of him
rather Justice, then Mercy; This Truth being well weighed, will make it
evidently appear to all the world, that JOB was obliged to speak in powerful
Terms, and that he could not use more humble, or modest ones, but he must
betray the honor of Jesus Christ, and leave scruple in the minds of the
Auditors, which would have wronged the cause he defended. Now as the eternal
Father has done nothing but by his Son, as he has Created Angels to carry
his orders into the World, Devils to execute his Vengeances, Men to obey his
Laws, Princes to govern his People, Priests to make him sacrifices, the just
to be his Figures, and Prophets to foretell his wonders, he would have the
first Book in the World to be his Apologye, and the most ancient of H^stories
to be consecrated to his Innocence: for the Fathers of the Church agree, that
this Discourse is the first which the Holy Ghost has dictated, that he had
often spoken before by the Mouth of Men, but that he had not written by their
Hands, that his Oracles were not known but by Tradition, and that there was yet
no holy Scripture which they could consult to learn his Pleasure; but they do
not agree so absolutely concerning the Author of this work; the most common
opinion though, and me thinks the most reasonable, is that JOB seeing himself
reestablished in his former greatness, and entertaining himself with his past
Miseries, had written the History of them himself, and that falling into the
hands of Moses, that great Man put them into Verse for the Consolation of his
people, and embellished them with the most rich Ornaments, and the most
glittering Figures of Poetry. Indeed I am certain that there is no Book in the
World, where the manner of speaking is more noble, the conceits more generous,
the Descriptions more rich, and the comparisons more natural. Likewise it is
easy to judge, that he who was the Author of it had great lights, and that
Revelation or study had taught him all that a man can know: sometimes he
reasons like an Exellent Philosopher, and serves himself with all the secrets
of Retorick and Morality, to persuade or move; sometimes he Speaks like a sage
Politician, and describes all the Maxims which States men hold for the conduct
of the people: sometimes he treats like a curious Naturalist, and discovers the
most hidden Beauties of Nature; oftentimes he discourses like a profound
Divine, and describes to us those adorable Perfections, which separate God so
nobly from his works; but on what Subject soever he speaks he is always an
Orator, and his Eloquence never leaves him; yet we must acknowledge that two
things were to be wished in this discourse, not so much for its Perfection, as
for our contentment: one is, that it were more intelligible, for it is certain
there are some places so dark, that they seem rather Riddles then Truths, and
the Earth will never have a perfect Understanding of them, if the Spirit, which
dictated them, do not explain them. Nor do I give my interpretations to the
Public, but as Conjectures, whereof the greatest Part being taken out of the
Fathers, I have this comfort, that I have not failed alone, and that my faults
have Authors, which render them excusable. The other thing, which were to be
desired in this work for the satisfaction of the Reader, is the connection of
Reasons and conceits: but every one knows that it is the style of the Holy
Scripture, and that the connecting its passages, is the shame, and if I durst
say it the despair of interpreters; for whether the History of the time when
these Holy Authors wrote, be unknown to us, whether the secrets of their
language be hidden from us, or lastly whether it be that the Spirit of God has
other laws in its discourses then ours; we must confess that their Contexture
is so delicate, that it is imperceptible, and one must have a great deal of
light, or a great deal of vanity, to promise one self to perceive it.
Notwithstanding I have done what I could to tie together the most part of the
Passages of this discourse by a connection which may satisfy the Reader; but
where I conceived that tying them together would do them Violence, I have left
them in that Holy disorder, which obliges us to adore the greatness of God,
and to acknowledge our own weakness.

A PARAPHRASE Upon JOB.
CHAP. I. The Argument of the I. CHAPTER.
THe Devil envying the greatness, and the virtue of Job obteins leave of God
to carry away his Cattle, to to over throw his Houses, and to bury his
Children under the ruins of them: But as this Prince made his Piety appear in
his Prosperity, he makes his Constancy and Resignation admired in his
Misfortune.

BEtwixt the confines of Arabia deserta and the Banks of Jordan they discover
a little Country called Hus, There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was
Job, and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and
eschewed evil.
Famous heretofore for having brought forth Giants, but more happy for having
been the divifion of the Tribe of Manassa. Here reigned a Prince named Job,
descended of those great men, whom the Jews acknowledge for their Fathers, and
who being no less illustrious for his Merit, then his birth, feared God, loved
his subjects, and according a singular prudence with a rare simplicity followed
virtue and shunned vice. And there was born unto him seven sons and 3 daughters.


Heaven, which blesses Marriages, and makes Fathers live again in the persons
of their children had given him seven sons and three daughters, whose virtues
were so rare that he was esteemed happyer for being their Father, then for
being Sovereign of so many Subjects.

Nothing was wanting to him of all those goods, His substance also was seven
thousand sheep, and three thousand Camells, and five hundred yoke of Oxen, and
five hundred she-Asses, and a very great household; so that this man was the
greatest of all the the men of the East.
which are necessary for the entertainment, or pleasure of life; for his
Shepherds drove into the field every day seven thousand sheep, his husbandmen
cultivated the earth with five hundred yoke of Oxen, and to carry his servants
and his ^aggage, there were seen wan^ing in the plains three thousand Camels,
and five ^undred she-asses. These riches accompanied with all qualities that
may make a Prince great, gave him the first rank amongst the Eastern people.
He had not a neighbor but was his Ally, and he was held to be rash that durst
be his enemy.

His children passed their time innocently, And his Sons went and feasted in
their houses, every one his day, and sent and called for their three sisters,
to eat and to drink with them.
and their most agreeable divertisements were feasts, and every one did it in
his own house as it fell to his turn; and as dissolution was banished thence,
he who entertained the rest, never falled to invite his three sisters.

Although the peace which reigned amongst these brethren, And it was so, when
the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them,
and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the
number of the^ all ^ for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and
cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually.
and which tied the^ souls more straightly the blood and nature did their
Bodies, ought to have quietes the mind of Job; notwithstanding when this circle
o^ days and feasting was finishe^ he sent to visit them, and recommended unto
them not ^ much the care of conservin^ amity amonst themselves, (...)
conserving the respect the owed to God. And becau^^ prayers are more profitable
then counsel, he rose every morning before the Sun, and offered as many
Holocausts, as he had children, to the end that if by weakness or ignorance
they had offendded God, their fault might be expiated by his sacrifices. he was
so exact in discharging these pious duties, that those impediments which
business gives to Princes, could not divert him from them.

But as a calm is the most assured presage of a tempest, Now there was a day,
when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan
came also among the^.
and the happiness of men cannot long endure, a furious storm rose against
this Prince: for it happened that God held Council with those blessed Spirits,
who carry his orders through the world, and that Satan the mortal enemy of
man, and who derives his name from his crime was summoned thither.

God who serves himself sometimes with criminals to execute his designs, And
the Lord said unto Satan: whence come thou? Then Satan answered the Lord, and
said from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
and who imployes devils to make angels, demanded an account of him of his
actions, and his voyages, not that he was ignorant of his designs, but that he
would have from his own mouth what he had read in his heart. This subtle
spirit who knows well enough that God knows all things, confessed to him that
following his inclinations; he had run over all the earth, and that nothing
comforted him so much, as to know he should have many companions in his misery,
because he had many in his sin.

God who disdains not to treat with Devils when the salvation of man is
concerned in it, And the^ Lord said unto Satan, have thou considered my servant
Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man,
one that fears God, and escheweth evil?
replies to him in these terms: Have thou not considered the fidelity of my
servant Job? have not thy eyes seen that excellent Piety, that amongst all men
one cannot find his equal?

The Devil who has no greater pleasure then to exaggerate our faults, Then
Satan answered the Lord, and said, Does Job fear God for naught?
and beat down our good works, replies: the piety of Job deserves not those
praises which you give him, he is well paid for his services; and that slave
would be very wicked who did not love so liberal a Master.

And besides you have so covered him, that one cannot touch him: Have not thou
made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on
every side? thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is
increased in the land.
your Angels watch about his house, and their care extends it self over all
his estate, that it is sufficient to belong to him, for to be safe. The sun
has no favorable influences but for him. Heaven has no dew but to enrich his
lands; and his flocks exempt from those diseases which spoil others, are so
grown that the most firtile fields can hardly feed them. But put forth thine
hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face.


You should try his virtue to know it, and though I read not the hearts of men,
I assure my self that if your hand which punishes us, had lively touched him,
he would change his praises into blasphemies, and make you see that he loves
you not but out of interest. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all that he
has is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan
went forth from the presence of the Lord.


God who knew the strength of Job, and would make his virtue shine by his
misfortune, condescending in appearance to the desires of the Devil, said to
him, I make over to thee the House of my servant, and reserving nothing but his
person, I give thee power to exercise thy cruelty upon all that belongs unto
him. Scarce had he ended these words, when the Devil like lightning descended
upon the earth to search occasions to ruin Job, And there was a day when his
sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers
house
and to triumph over his patience.

The hatred which he has conceived against men permitted him not long to
defer his design, and his ingenuous malice furnished him with means enough
to make it quickly succeed. For as the children of Job were in the house of
their eldest brother who entertained them, And there came a messenger unto Job,
and said, The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding beside the.
and as their father who knew of this meeting seemed to be less prepared
against this misfortune.

A messenger comes and tells him, And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them
away, yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword, and I only
am escaped alone to tell thee.
that while his Oxen were plowing, and his Asses passing quietly by them in the
field, the Sabeans arrived upon a sudden had carried them away, that his
servants who would put themselves on their defense had bin cruelly assassined,
and that he only was escaped from their hands to bring him the news.

This sad messenger had not finished his discourse, While he was yet speaking,
there came also another, and said, the fire of God is fallen from heaven, and
has burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them, and I only am
escaped alone to tell thee.
when there came in another, who advertised him that lightning was fallen from
heaven, that ravaging the plain it had devoured all his sheep, with the
shepherds which kept them, and that it seemed that God had not preserved him
from this disaster, but that he might give him notice of it.

Scarce had he shut his mouth, While he was yet speaking, there came also
another, and said, The Caldeans made out 3 bands, and fell upon the Camels, and
have carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the
sword, and I only an escaped alone to el^ thee.
but in came a third with astonishment in his Countenance, and sadness in his
heart, who told him, that the Caldeans divided into three bands had lead away
all his camells, that in cold blood they had killed the men that kept them, and
that he having placed his safety in his flight was alone remaining to come and
make him a relation of it.

This news was scarce spread over the Palace, While he was yet speaking, there
came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house.
but a fourth messenger more tragical then the rest, came and told him, that
as his children were at dinner in their eldest brothers house, where they were
drowning their cares in wine, and thought of nothing but to divert themselves,
And behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four
corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead, and I
only am escaped alone to tell thee.
there arose from the coast of Arabia a furious wind, whose redoubled blasts
had shaken the four corners of the house, which at last yielding to the
violence of the assaults, fell to the ground, and unhappily buried his children
in its ruins, and that his bad fortune had reserved him to be the messenger of
so fatal news.

At the relation of so many disasters, Then Job arose and rent his mantle, and
shaved his head and fell down upon the ground and worshipped.
Job seized with a mortal sorrow tore his garments, condemned his head to
wear mourning, shaved his hair, then prostrate upon the earth for to adore
the hand which struck him, And said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.
said with sentiments of respect: I came naked out of the womb of my mother,
and shall enter naked into the bosom of the earth; the bounty of God gave me
riches, and his justice takes them from me the loss though it be sensible is
welcome to me, since it is he that ordaines it, and by whatsoever misfortune he
tryes my patience his name shall always receive praises from my mouth.

In all these cross Accidents capable to shake the constancy of the most
virtuous man in the world, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
foolishly.
Job uttered not an insolent word, and his complaints were accompanied with so
much moderation, that he obliged heaven to bless him and the earth to admire
him.

CHAP. II.
CHAP. II. The Argument.
GOd commends the patience of Job, and permitts the Devil to afflict him with
sickness, and to render him the scorn of all the world; which he executes
with so much rigor, that his wife advises him to kill himself, and his
friends astonished at his misfortune dare not undertake to comfort him.

THese disasters were not yet published, Again, there was a day when the sons
of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among
them to present himself before the Lord,
when the Angels assembled themselves before God to give him account of their
commissions, or to receive new ones: The Devil puffed up with so great
success, and proud of so many crimes, failed not to be there, And the Lord
said unto Satan; From whence come thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and
said, from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
whether it were his pride that brought him thither, or the order of his
sovereign had obliged him to be present, when every one had taken his place,
and the ranks were distributed according to merit. God willing to extort truth
from the mouth of Satan, asked him from whence he came, what sins he had
committed, and by what artifices he had seduced men? the Devil who in his
misery reteins his vanity, answered, that being lord of the world he came from
visiting his estate, And the Lord said unto Satan have thou considered my
servant Job, and that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an
upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil? and still he holds
fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him to destroy him without
a cause
and that nothing rendered him more glorious than the great number of subjects
which depended upon his will.

God who pleases, himself in humbling the pride of Devils, and to make them
feel their weaknesses in their enterprises, enquired of him, if he had not seen
his faithful servant Job, if his constancy had not astonished him, if he had
not proved that all his attempts were unprofitable, and that in vain he had
obtained power to persecute him, since after he had lost his children with his
goods he had yet conserved his innocence.

The Devil to whom these praises were as so many reproaches and punishments,
And Satan answered the Lord, and said, skin for skin, yea, all that a man has
will he give for his life.
replied; did the patience of Job seem so admirable to him? that there needed
but a common virtue to support the loss of children; that that man was rich
enough who was well, and that there was none who to preserve his body would not
willingly abandon his goods.

But if he would receive his counsel, and know, But put forth thine hand now,
and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face
what that servant whose fidelity he praised so much, carried in his soul, he
must smite his body with some violent disease, take away his health, which he
preferred before all his goods, and that he assured himself that then loosing
all respect, and adding insolence to his impiety, he would blaspheme his name
before all the world.

God who knew well that Misery served but to elevate the virtue of Job, And the
Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his life.
and confound the malice of the Devil, abandoned his body to him, and death
excepted, gave him permission to try him by all miserable diseases which may
exercise the patience of men.

This cruel executioner of Gods justice, So went Satan forth from the presence
of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boyls from the sole of his foot, unto his
crown.
had no sooner received power to torment Job in his person, but he descended
upon earth, and although he doubted that his enterprise would succeed to his
shame, and that the pain of Job would be his own punishment, he covered his
body with an odious Ulcer, whose sharp and pricking humor penetrated the very
bone, and left no part of him without grief.

This innocent Prince, And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal;
and he fate down among the ashes.
who heretofore spoke not to his subjects but in his Throne, was then seated
upon a dunghill, and his hands accustomed to bear the Scepter were employed to
wipe the matter which distilled from his sores.

His wise whom the Devil spared not but to employ in his design, Then said
his wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God and die.
seeing him in this pitiful condition, mocked at his simplicity, and without
considering that there is nothing more glorious then to suffer, advised him to
blaspheme heaven, and to finish his miseries by a generous death.

But this great man, But he said onto her, thou speak as one of the foolish
women speaks; What shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? In allthis did not Job sin with his lips.
who understood well the respect that a Subject owes to his Sovereign, even
then when he is provoked, condemned the indiscretion of his wife; and by
reasons, which he could not learn but from Angels, represented to her, that
all that comes from the hand of God ought to be equally esteemed, that it is
not more amiable when it imparts favors then when it lanceth forth thunder. In
fine the rigor of his torments, the attempts of a devil, nor the reproaches of
a wife, could never draw from him a guilty word.

When the noise of his misfortunes was spread over the neighboring provinces,
Now when Jobs 3 friends heard of all this evil that was come up on him, they
came every one from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildod the
Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for they had appointed together to come to
mouth with him, and to comfort him.
and the Princes his Allies knew the history of his miseries, three of them
departed from their estates to comfort him, and arrived the same day as they
had appointed it, to the end that the grief of his mind might let it self be
overcome by all their reasons joined together.

Althoug they were come with this intention, and that prepared against this
misfortune they ought to have resented it the less, And when they lift up
their eyes a far off, and knew him not, they lift up their voice, and wept, and
they rent every ^one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward
heaven.
yet when they perceived him a far off, and saw his disgrace had so changed
him that he was not to be known, the tears fell from their eyes, and their
mouths not being able to form words pushed forth confused voices the assured
marks of a true grief: then tearing their garments they covered their heads
with ashes, and seized with horror lifted their eyes to heaven, from whence
this misfortune came. So they sat down with him upon the ground, seven days,
and seven nights, and none spoke a word unto him; for they saw that his grief
was very great.


Seven days and seven nights passed away whilst they sat with him upon the
ground, All this while not one durst undertake to comfort him, for they saw
that his grief was too violent to be sweetened, and that so great an evil was
not capable of remedy, and that there needed time to prepare his soul to
receive their consolations.

CHAP. III.
CHAP. III. The Argument.
Job being forsaken of God, makes imprecations against the day of his birth,
wishes death, and entertaines himself with the sweets that accompany it, and
the repose which is to be found in the grave.

After this opened Job his mouth and cursed his day.
After these rude Conflicts where Job made his piety appear as well as courage,
And Job spoke, and said.
he broke silence to assuage his grief, and made complaint to his friends to
oblige them to give him comfort; he cursed the day of his birth; and grief
which rendered him eloquent, furnished him with words to complain.

May the day wherein I was born perish; Let the day perish wherein I was borne,
and the night in which it was said, There is a manchild conceived.
may it be defaced out of the world, may men loose the remembrance of it, or if
they retain it, may it be but to be afraid of it; may the night wherein I was
conceived be buried in oblivion as well as darkness, and may it be as unhappy
amongst nights, as I am miserable amongst men.

This unfortunate day should be obscured with darkness, Let that day be
darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon
it.
and though the Sun cannot stay his course, he should at least hide his light:
God himself who makes the days and nights, Let darkness and the shadow of
death stain it let a cloud dshell upon it, let the blackenesse of the day
terrify it.
and by their agreeable variety makes rest to succeed travail, ought to have
annihilated it, and joined two nights to gether for to suppress a day which
was to be the cause of all my evils; did not the darknesses of the night and
the shadows of death meet together to make this day as horrid, as it has been
fatal to me? and has it not been accompanied with all the accidents which may
make a day happy?

Though wishes cannot change the condition of things past, As for that night,
let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let
it not come into the number of the months.
I would that shameful night had been great with storms, and that silence
which makes the night so agreeable had been chased away by tempests, and that
separated from the day which preceded it, and that which followed it, it
neither made a part of our months nor our years.

Would to heaven it were always solitary, Lo let that night be solitary, let
no joyful voice come therein.
that men during its course might never make assemblies nor accords, and that
being fatal to all sorts of persons it might receive no praise, but be blamed
by all the world.

May those themselves who prefer the nights before the days curse it, Let them
curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their mourning.
and those who to serve the designs of the Devil seek them and love them,
because they are favorable to their unjust desires, be afraid of this which
was the beginning of my life, and my misfortune.

May the stars which make all the beauty of the night be obscured by the
thickness of its darkness; Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark, let
it look for light, but have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day.
may those lights, which wake when we sleep suspend their influences, and their
light till it have finished its course, and if it may be may it languish
eternally after the day and never see the morning rise which brings it to us.

It was too blame that it did not make the womb which brought me forth,
barren; and that letting me enter into the world it seemed to conspire with
heaven to render me unhappy. Because it shut not up the doors of my mothers
womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.


Why did not death precede my birth? why was not the womb of my mother m^
Tomb? or if it were decre^ I should be borne, should no^ the same day which
saw m^ borne, have seen me die? a^ though my life had been composed but of some
hours, ha^ it not been too long for (...) wretch? Why dyed I not from the
womb? why did not I give up the ghost when I came out of the belly.


If the midwives had no^ been of intelligence with my had fortune, had they not
l^ me fall when I came out o^ the womb of my mother (...) if heaven had not
treated m^ as an enemy, had not my nurses refused me the dugg; and had not
hunger which had killed me done me a favor? For now should I have lien still,
and been quiet, I should have slept, then had I been at rest.


I should then enjoy a profound rest; and as I should be insensible of all the
evils which afflict me, I should keep silence with the dead, and grief should
force no complaints from my mouth: With kings and counselsers of the earth,
which built desolate places for themselves:
I should sleep with Kings, who knowing well that they must dye, have made
themselves proud Sepulchers; but not considering that their bodies can take up
but seven foot of earth, have built themselves rather Solitudes then Tombs. Or
with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver.
The riches wherewith they have filled them, deserved no difference betwixt
their condition and mine, because death makes all things equal; and as it
takes from the poor man the sense of his miseries, it takes from the rich the
use of his riches.

Or more happy than those Princes, Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not
bin; as infants which never saw light
should I have been as an Abortive, who being an imperfect work of nature, has
no sense of our miseries, or resembled those who are conceived and not borne,
and who have found death where they received life.

How happy is this condition, There the wicked cease from troubling: and there
the weary be at rest.
and how different from that wherein we now live; for those turbulent spirits
which filled all with tumult, and troubled the peace of the world with their
pernicious Artifices, have changed their humor, and breathe nothing but
repose. And those valliant Warriers, who promised themselves the conquest of
the Universe, have forgotten their glorious designs; and as if they were
wearied with their past travailes, abandon themselves to the shadow of death.

There the people which groaned under Oppression, There the prisoners rest
together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor.
are happily delivered from Tyranny; and these poor men, which trembled as often
as they heard the name of Subsidies, are cured of all their fears.

The same earth covers the great and small; The small and great are there, and
the servant is free from his master.
and that common mother, which shuts up her children in her bosom, teaches
them, that they are of the same condition; and those deceitful qualities which
put a difference betwixt men, endure no longer than life; There by a strange
wonder the slave no more fears his Master, and death which has taken from him
his life, has given him his liberty.

O God, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the
bitter in soul?
since death is so sweet to the miserable, why do you condemn them to live?
what pleasure do you take to combat their desires, and to prolong their
miseries? Which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more than for
hid treasures?


For you know that they sigh incessantly after death, and that a covetous man
who discovers a treasure has no^ so much contentment, Which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave?
as a miserable man who finds a Grave.

Why do you force th^^ to live, especially when th^^ want light to lead them,
Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in?
and that it seems you enviro^^ them with darkness for fear they should
amend, and (...) turn to the good way whi^^ they have left?

Wonder not if I take the part of the miserable, For my sighing comes before
I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the water.
since am one of their number; (...) repasts are intetrupted wi^^ my sighs,
and I drink no water but what is mingled (...) my tears: the Torrents which
ravage the fields, For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and
that which I was afraid of, is come unto me.
and the ^^vers which overflow make not a noise like my cries: and certainly,
I ought to be pardoned these excesses, for the evil I apprehended is come upon
me, and fear has not left me but to abandon me to grief. I was not in
safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet: yet trouble came.


That which vexes me the most is, that my conscience cannot reproach me with
any crime, and that I am ignorant for what sin heaven punishes me; for I have
dissembled the injuries which I have received, and which is difficult enough
for miserable men, I have been silent in my sufferings, and amidst the tumult
of my enemies, I have conserved the tranquillity of my soul. Notwithstanding
God, from whom I expected my reward, persecutes me, and he who ought to protect
me, is on my enemies side.

CHAP. IV.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELiphas, a neighbor Prince and friend of Job's, resting upon exterior
appearances, would persuade him that he is guilty because he is afflicted, and
relating to him a vision which he had had, endeavors to prove that no creature
is innocent before God.

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,
AFter Job had expressed his griefs with so much resentment, If we assay to
commune with thee, will thou be grieved? but who can with hold himself from
speaking?
Eliphaz the most ancient of his friends judging that his complaints offended
the Divine Justice, spoke in its defense, and began his discourse in this
manner I know not if in the grief which afflicts you, you are capable of
hearing us; and whether our reasons will not exasperate your evils, instead of
sweetning them. But who can hinder a discourse from coming forth, which is
already conceived? who would conceal from his friend those sentiments which
are profitable to his soul, and which coming from a good intention, ought in
reason to produce a good effect?

Behold, thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weakhands.
And for to propose to you no other examples than your own, remember that when
heaven blessed your labors, and favored your designs, you gave instructions to
all the world, and there was not a man who had more address than you, in
comforting the afflicted, and raising up the courage of them in whom grief had
beaten it down.

Your discourses animated the feeble, Thy words have upholden him that was
falling, and thou have strengthened the seeble knees.
if the assault of temptations did shake them, you assured them by your
reasons; and if the apprehension of evils to come astonished them, you prepared
them for them so well, that they were never less touched with them than when
they saw them arrived.

But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest, it touches thee, and thou
art troubled
Notwithstanding when the tempest fell upon your self, and that the evils of
which you had cured others, assaulted you, your prudence left you in your need,
and the affliction which has put your soul in disorder, has made you lose
your courage.

Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, the uprightnes of thy ways, and ^hy
hope?
Where is that fear and that constancy which tendered you admirable, and whose
just temperature made you that you were neither cowardly in fight, nor insolent
in victory? where is that patience gone which seemed to be proof against all
evils, and which could find none but what were easy to conquer? what is
become of that integrity which accompanied all your actions; and which in a
corrupt age made you have the name of Just?

Remember, I pray thee, who ever petished being innocent? or where were the
righteous cut off?
But because you take a vanity in the virtues which you have lost, I pray you
remember that God never abandoned the innocent; that he has always taken the
part of the just, and never suffered them to perish.

Indeed we have seen that those men, Even as I have seen, they that plow
iniquiry, and sow wickedness, reap the same.
who make them selves illustrious but by their crimes, who do evil with
pleasure, to whom others miseries are more sweet than a plentiful harvest is
agreeable to the Husbandman, By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath
of his nostrils are they consumed.
have not been able to avoid his justice; and that as those great Trees which
are planted upon the Mountains, they have been made the sport of the winds
and tempests.

Has not experience taught you, The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the
fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions are broken.
that men who reigned like Lions, that their children who equalled them in
cruelty, that their wives who surpassed them in insolence, have ended their
lives tragically, and that heaven has made seen in their persons, that it
never leaves sinners without chastisement?

Know you not that those great ones, The old lion perishes for lack of prey,
and the stont lions whelps are scattered abroad.
who under the face of men carry the hearts of Tigers, and those who not being
of the same birth, are notwithstanding of the same humor, receive the
punishments which their sins deserve; and that as there are no innocent ones
abandoned, there are no culpable ones unpunished?

But because you doubt of these truths, Now a thing was secretly brought to me,
and mine ear received a little thereof.
and your afflictions themselves cannot persuade you that you are guilty, I
shall tell you a secret which was revealed to me, and trust you with some
words, which though they dropped softly into my ear, are imprinted strongly in
my heart.

Imagine then that during the horrors of the night, In thoughts from the
visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men.
when sleep sliding into the eyes of men, makes it self master of all their
senses, and leaves no freedom to the mind but to treat with God, and receive
his inspirations.

A strange fear, Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bence to
shake.
the cause of which was hidden from me, seized upon my soul, and as strong
agitations of the mind make powerful impressions upon the body, there was not
a part of me but was moved at it; the bones themselves which steme to be the
foundations of this living Edifice, felt astonishment.

A furious wind which arose in my Chamber, Then a spirit passed before my
face, the hair of my flesh stood up.
redoubled my fear, and my hair being sensible of this accident stood an end
and taught me, that of all fears those which surprise us do most astonish us.

This tempest calmed by the presence of a man, It stood still, but I could not
discern the form thereof: an image was before mine eyes, there was silence,
and I heard a voice, saying,
whose face was unknown to me, and whose features notwithstanding remain so
livelily imprinted in my imagination, that me thinks I have his portraiture
yet before my eyes. He opened his mouch, and spoke to me in a voice, whose
sweetness equalled that of the western wendes.

May men be found who pretend to justify themselves before God, Shall mortal
man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure then his Maker?
and must not that creature have lost his judgment, who will contest with his
Creator, and dispute with him his innocence?

Those noble spirits dis-ingaged from the body, Behold he puts no trust in
his servants, and his angels he tharged with folly:
those quick intelligences, which have no commerce with flesh and blood, and
for increase of their happiness, have the glory to be his Domestiques, could
not subsist in nature, nor persevere in grace, if they were not aided by his
bounty: So all they who have despised him, are become guilty, and the purity of
their being has not hindered God from finding in their person disorders to
reform, and crimes to punish.

If it be true that these noble creatures cannot justify themselves before
him, How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust, which are crushed before the moth?
how much less ought men to hope it, who are condemned to carry bodies, which
may well be called houses of earth, since the habitation is so contagious, and
the Vestments of their souls, fince they shall be consumed with worms.

Indeed with whatsoever vain hope the proud flatter themselves, They are
destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding
it.
and whatsoever Artifice they use to cloak their miserable conditions, they
know that their life is so short, that the same day may see the beginning and
the end of it; but because they think not upon these truths, and to give
themselves liberty to sin, they persuade themselves that they are immortal,
God will punish them eternally.

And if their children which survive them be not exe^pt from their crimes, Does
not their excellency which is in them go away? they dye, even without wisdom.
they shall not be exempt from their punishments; and death which will come and
surprise them, shall be a just chastilement of their foolish rashness.

CHAP. V.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELiphaz pursues his discourse, and describing the chastisements of the
wicked, and the recompense of the just makes Job hope, that his miseries shall
end if he repent him of his sins, and that he shall be re-established in his
former fortune.

IF truth be suspected by you, Call now, if there be any that will answer thee,
and to which of the Saints will thou turn?
for being pronounced by the mouth of a mortal man; and if revelations find
no credit in your mind, For wrath kills thefoolish man, and envy slays
the silly one.
confer with God himself, and see if by the assiduity of your prayers you
can oblige him to answer you; or if you have not credit enough to hope this
grace from his bounty, address your self to the Angels or to the Saints, and
demand by their favor what you cannot obtain by your own merit: Or if you
will believe me, give me leave to tell you that your complaints are unjust, and
that the motions of your anger which transport you, are misbecoming a wise man:
There are none but fools who suffer themselves to be conquered by this
passion, as there are none but weak men, and cowards, which suffer themselves
to be gnawed by envy, and who make themselves misfortunes of the felicity of
others.

The prosperity of the wicked ought not to trouble you in your affliction, I
have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his habitation.
for it is not of continuance; and for my part, I have seen none whose fortune
howsoever it seemed established, has been able to subsist long; whatever
glittering it has had, I have always mocked at it, and presaged its end,
whilst others admired its greatness. His children are far from safety, and
they are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them;


His children survive him not often, they accompany him in his punishment, as
they have followed him in his sin; God permits justice to take cognizance of
their actions, Whose harvest the hungry eats up, and takes it even out of
the thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance
and to find Advocates to accuse them, and there are none found for to defend
them; And as if all their goods were abandoned to pillage, the hungry take away
their coin, the Soldiers carry away their movables, and the covetous seize
upon their riches which they had unjustly acquired. Although affliction comes
out forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground:


But besides this consideration, that which ought to comfort, you, is, that
nothing befalls man, but by the permission of God: For it is an abuse to believe
that the afflictions which oppress us, draw their being from the earth; God
ordains them in heaven, and men, which we believe the Authors of them, are but
the instruments of his Justice.

If this reason, Yet man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
for being too elevated, should not satisfy your mind, nature ought to
comfort you, who teaches you that flying is not more natural to the birds,
than travail is to man; who has no more mortal enemy than repose; wherefore
whatsoever disaster befalls me, I should always bless God, and judging
favorably of his intentions, believe that he afflicted me to try me; and that
punishments being but the seeds of glory, I might lawfully hope for a rich
harvest.

Or considering well his greatness, I would seek unto God, and unto God would
I commit my cause:
I should submit my self humbly to his Ordinances, for it is he who does all
that is great in the Universe; It is he who produces all those effects, Which
does great things and unsearchable; marves^ous things without number.
of which we cannot discover the causes; It is he who works all those wonders
which ravish us; and as his power is not bounded, the number of his miracles
also is not limited.

It Is he who raises up the vapors, Who gives rain upon the earth and
sends waters upon the fields:
who thickeneth them into clouds, and makes them distill in raines for to
render the earth fertile; It Is he himself who waters it, as well by those
waters which fall from heaven, as by those which he has hidden in its
entrails; And whose secret raines produce in a thousand places sources and
rivers.

But that which ought principally to invite you to bless him, is, To set up on
high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety.
that he takes pleasure to elevate the humble, and to raise slaves upon the
throne of their Masters; He disappointeth the devises of the crafty, so that
their hands cannot perform their enterprise
that he changes thorns into flowers; that he comfort the afflicted, and
banisheth sadness from their hearts, to make joy grow there? Also it is he who
makes the designs of the wicked fustrate, who hinders the effects of their
pernicious counsels, and who to confound their foolish wisdom suffers not
their hands to execute what their minds had projected. He takes the wise in
their own craftiness and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.


But we must confess, that his providence never appears more than when he
surprizeth the wise of the age in their craft, and giving their designs a
contrary success to what they promised themselves, they receive confusion
where they hoped for glory, and acknowledge by experience that there is no
Maxim of State so certain, which may not be overturned by his divine wisdom.

Is it not pleasant to observe their blindness in the most clear affairs,
They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the noone day as in the
night.
to see them trip at midday, and to make halts which are not pardonable but in
those that walks by night?

Also it often comes to pass that when they have a design to ruin a
miserable man, But he saved the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
the hand of the mighty.
God protects him by his power; and as if it were not enough to have preserved
his body from their violence, he defends his reputation from their calumny, and
by the same miracle delivers him from their hands and their tongues. So the
poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.


After so many visible marks of his bounty, the afflicted have cause to be
satisfied, their misery it self ought to entertain their hope, and the wicked
seeing that their calumny is serviceable to the innocent, are forced to shut
their mouths and to keep silence. Behold, happy is the man whom God
corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty:


Since God then takes the miserable into his protection, are not you bound to
believe that they are happy, and that without being unreasonable, they cannot
complain of an evil, which ought to be as glorious to them, as it is
profitable?

He afflicts them but he comforts them; For he makes sore, and binds up: he
wounds, and his hands make whole.
he causes their evils, but he finds them remedies; he hurts them, but he
heales them; and his hands are so delicate in touching their wounds, that there
is no one but would willingly be hurt to have the pleasure of being so gently
cured.

Be assured then if you suffer patiently the evils which oppress you, He shall
deliver thee in fix troubles: yea, in seven toere shall no evil touch thee.
God who abandoneth not his, will deliver you one day, and after this season
there will come another, where evils, as if they were struck with respect,
shall not dare to approach you.

When famine shall render the earth barren, In famine he shall redeem thee
from death: and in war, from the power of the sword
and the obstinate labor of the husbandman cannot overcome its ingratitude,
God shall defend you from death, and when in day of battle the enemies
Soldiers shall assault you on all sides, he shall preserve you from their fury.

Detractors shall spare your reputation; Thou shall be hid from the scourge of
the tongue: neither shall thon be afraid of destruction when it comes.
in the unbridled license which they take to blot the innocent, you shall be
covered from their calumnyes, and in the public calamity when all the world is
in alarm, you shall be without hurt, and without fear.

Whether your enemies besiege your places, At destrnction and famine thou shall
laugh: neither shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the enrth.
or make incursions upon your Frontiers, you shall mock at their successelesse
attempts, and your Troops shall chase them away without danger. The respect to
your person shall extend even to the Beasts, and when famine shall force them
from their dens, the encountering them, which is so dangerous, shall not be
fatal to you.

Certainly they may well reverence you, For thou shall be in league with the
stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
since the stones which are insensible shall remove themselves with respect out
of your way, or by another miracle they shall soften under your feet: But so
good an Office shall not remain without recompense; for those which mark your
inheritance, and serve it for bounds, shall be respected of all the world, and
as if they were sacred, your neighbors shall not dare to touch them.

You shall not be of the number of those who are not unhappy; And thou shall
know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shall visit thy
habitation, and shall not sin
but because they are ignorant of their happiness, yours shall be known to
you, you shall enjoy a profound peace in your house; Thou shall know also that
thy feed shall be great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
and as riches shall not puff up your heart with vanity, you shall taste the
pleasure of them without offense.

Experience which shall verify my predictions, shall teach you that it is God
who gives heirs to Fathers, Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like
as a shock of corn comes in in his season.
for yours shall be as remarkable for their number as their merit, and your
house shall be as fruitful in children, as the meadows in flowers, and the
fields in sheaves. Poverty, which old age so much fears, shall not afflict the
last years of your life; you shall dye with abundance, as you have lived with
it; and as they carry corn into the Barn when it is ripe, they shall carry
you to the grave, when you are weary of living.

Moreover doubt not of the Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and
know thou it for thy good.
event of these things, they shall come to pass as I have foretold them; and if
you think of them sometimes, they will sweeten your displeasures, and of a
happiness which is to come, you shall make a present felicity.

CHAP. VI.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOB replies, and makes it appear that his punishments surpass his crimes;
That their extreme rigor has made his friends disperse; That his courage
would not permit him to implore their assistance; And that heaven will punish
their ingratitude.

JOB observing by his friends discourse, But Job answered and said.
that his Reasons had made no impression in his mind; and that he neither knew
the design of God in his afflictions, nor his own in his complaints, replied
to him in these terms:

I would the sins which I have committed, Oh that my grief were thoroughly
weighed, and my calamity laid in the balance together!
and which have provoked the anger of God against me, were put in balance with
the pains which I suffer.

I am assured that these would weigh more than all the sand of the sea, For now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea, therefore my words are swallowed
up.
and that there is no constancy but would be overwhelmed under so weighty a
burden: wherefore, having nothing but displeasures in my heart, it is no wonder
if I have nothing but complaints in my mouth.

It seems God will discharge upon my body all the arrows of his fury, For the
arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
he draws not a shot but hurts me; and as if he would join skill with his
force, his invenomed shafts sprinkle in my veins a mortal poison, which
drinks my blood, and dryes up all my strength: and as if this kind of
punishment were not cruel enough he adds fear to my grief, and serves
himself both with present and future evils to render me unhappy.

It is not hard for you in the happiness which you enjoy to make a truce with
complaints, but this patience, Does the wild ass bray when he has grass? or
loweth the ox over his fodder?
from which you think to draw a reputation, is common with the beasts as well
wild as tame, for whilst either of them finds grass, they never importune
Heaven with their cries.

But he may complain with reason, Can that which is unsavory be eaten without
salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
who to appease the hunger, which devoures his entrails is constrained to eat
ashes and to swallow poison.

For my part though I am not yet reduced to this misery, Heaven is my witness,
The things that my soul refusth to touch, are as my sorrowful meat.
Heaven is my witness, that those meats which heretofore made me afraid, are
now my delight, and that without having liberty of choosing; Necessity inforces
me to eat indifferently of all that I can find.

Shall my vows never be heard? O that I might have my request! and that God
would grant me the thing that I long for!
shall I find no favor with God for to obtain of his bounty what my heart
desires, and what my mouth demands of him?

My prayers are neither injust for insolent, Even that it would please God to
destroy me, that he would let loose his hand^ n^ cut me off.
for I conjure him only to finish what he has so well begun, to end by a
shameful death the miserable life which I lead, and to withdraw his hand which
supports me but to make me languish, to the end that I may return into nothing.

He would much oblige me if he did not spare me, Then should I yet have
comfort, yea I would harden my self in sorrow; let him not spare, for I have
not concealed the words of the holy one.
and I should comfort my self, if by a surcharge of sorrow he would suddenly
take from me my life. That care which he takes to preserve it for me, is the
most cruel effect of his anger: that which you call favor ought to be called
rigor, and death is so much the object of my desires, that you need not fear
my appealing from it; when he who is most excellently holy shall condemn me to
it: neither have I vigor enough to sustain the assault of his power. The match
is unequal, What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end,
that I should sprolong my ^ife?
where man enters into the lists with God, and for to have so much patience as
you desire from me, it were necessary to be assured that my death approached
and that heaven advanced forwards that happy Term, when all my miseries should
end.

Nature has done no miracles in my person. Is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass?
My body has its weaknesses as well as others, and being neither composed of
Marble nor of Brass, you must not wonder if it yield to the assault of sorrow.

In this deplorable condition I see nothing which may charm my displeasures,
Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?
my languishing spirit has no more that vigor, which made it triumph over all
disasters, and my faithless friends have no more that tenderness which made
them sensible of all my miseries;

Yet they had best take heed, To him that is afflicted pity should be showed
from his friend; but he forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
it is no less their own interest than mine, for he, who assists not his
friend, fears not his God, and who wants pity for the one, will want
reverence for the other.

Lastly they which boasted that they loved me as their brother, My brethren
have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away:
have basely left me as soon as they understood of my misfortunes, and if at any
time they meet me they pass away more swiftly than the torrents in the
valleys, Which areblackish by reason of the ye, and wherein the snow is hid:
I know they think that my evil is contagious and that the fear of catching
it makes them retire from me, but I know also, that humane prudence is blind,
and that it ingages it self upon great hazards to avoid little dangers, like
those, who to keep themselves from the dew, unwisely expose themselves to the
snow.

They shall undergo the Punishment of so base a treachery, What time they wax
warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed our of their place.
and though it seem that to ruin them whole years be not long enough they
shall perish in a moment; and soft wax shall longer resist the fire, than these
treacherous men shall resist the anger of God.

Their proceeding deserves well this chastisement, The path, of their way are
tu^ned aside; they go to nothing, and perish,
for they have no fincerity in their actions, whatsoever they promise you,
their words never answer their thoughts: they shift like beasts, who make
faults for the Huntsmen, but if they abuse men by their turnings, they more
dangerously deceive themselves, because these devious ways will lead them to
death.

And least you should think I accuse them without cause, The troops of Tema
looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.
or complain without reason, observe the neighboring provinces, where I
thought I had as many friends as there are noble persons, and have patience to
consider what they have done to comfort me.

Indeed they came to see me and I believe that affection brought them rather
than curiosity: They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither,
and were ashamed.
but when they saw the deplorable condition of my fortune they could not
comprehend how amongst so many misfortunes there should remain any hope, and
at the same time their heart was seized with pity, and their countenance
covered with shame.

You have taken the pains too to come hither, For now ye are nothing; ye see
my casting down, and are afraid.
and the reputation which my disaster gives me, has begotten a defire in you
of speaking with me; but when your eyes had made you see that, which your ears
had informed you, your compassion turned into horror, and you had more fear
of catching my evil, than desire of curing it.

And it must needs be this consideration, Did I say, Bring unto me? or give a
reward for me of your substance.
that has separated you from me, and not my importunity; for you know that my
tongue never betrayed my courage, and that necessity cannot compel me to ask
any of your estate, though I am not ignorant that amongst true friends all
things are common.

Ordeliver me from the enemies hand? or redeem me from the hand of the mighty.
Did I ever entreat you to join your forces with mine to deliver me from the
fury of my enemies? and when the great ones of the age, better known by their
injustice, than their birth, had cruelly assaulted me, do not you remember,
that without imploring your succors I resolved to conquer them by my patience?

But least you should believe that my misery makes me insolent, Teachme, and I
will hold my tongue: and cause me tosunderstand wherein I have erred.
teach me, I am ready to hear: and if you judge that in my discourses I am
mistaken either through pride, or ignorance, I will have you for my masters,
and become your scholar.

Observe only that nothing ought to be further from the Spirit of a master
than lies, How forrible are right words! but what does your arguing reprove?
and yet nothing has more offended you in my discourses than their truth, and
to accuse my innocence you have fought against reason.

Suffer me likewise to tell you that you prepare studied dicourses, Do ye
imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are
as wind?
for to blot the most holy actions, and that you use not your eloquence but to
acquire esteem.

If a child loosing his Father has lost all his support with him, Yea, ye
overwhelm the fatherless, and you dig^ a pit for your friend.
he has no more cruel enemies than you: and as your interests are the motives
of all your actions, you spare not your very friends, you employ all your
artifices to ruin them, and their loss is welcome to you, provided it be
profitable.

Although you have all these bad qualities, Now therefore be content, look upon
me, for it is evident unto you if I lie.
yet I refuse not the combat, end the dispute, which you have begun, examine my
disocourses and condemn them, if you find them lies

I ask but one favor of you, Return I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea,
return again: my righteousness is in it.
when you would answer me, use not pricking terms, injuries make not reasons
valid, and when you would pronounce my sentence, consult your conscience, and
take heed least your mouth utter any thing which is belyed by your heart.

And on my part I promise you that impiety shall be banished from my discourse,
Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perversse things?
that the words which compose it shall be as pure as mythoughts, and that
indiscretion shall make me utter nothing which may hurt your ears.

CHAP. VII.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOb not knowing how to finish a discourse which pleased him, relates the
miseries of life, and wishes that a ready death were the remedy of them: but
considering on the other side, that one cannot get out of the grave when one is
once in, he changes this desire into prayer, and conjures God to pardon him
his offenses.

T That which has crossed you most in my complaints is the passion which I
have for death: Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his
days also like the days of an hiteling?
but certainly you would find it reasonable if you would remember, that the
life of man is a war, which has neither truce nor peace, and that his
condition is no better than those poor mercenaries whose travells have no
repose.

Also as slaves covered with sweat and dust wish nothing more passionately than
the shade for to refresh them, As a servant earnestly defireth the shadow, and
as an hireling looks for the reward of his works:
and rest to repair them, and as workmen desire nothing so ardently, as the
end of their work and the recompense of their travail:

So I have wished nothing more than the end of this unhappy life, So am I made
to posses months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.
whose days are and so fruitful in displeasures, and I number the tedious
nights which have not so many moments in them as they give me troubles.

If I lie down, When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be
gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dauning of the day.
I wish that the day star were up that I might rise with it, and when it has
appeared upon our Horizon, its light, which dissipates the vexations of others
augments mine, and as if night were to be the remedy of them, I expect it with
impatience; and when it is come I find that it is unprofitable to my pain.

If my desires seem extravagant, My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of
dust, my skin is broken, and become loathsome.
you must accuse the cruelty of the evils which I suffer, for my body is
covered with a thousand Ulcers; and my skin glued, shrivil'd upon my bones, and
blacked with the Sun, and the dust makes those who see me take me rather for an
apparition, than a man.

Why then should I love my life, My days are swifter than a weavers shuttle,
and are spent without hope.
since besides the evils. which make it odious, it is fragility makes it
contemptible? for a thread is not so easily broken as the web of our days and
when it is once broken no hand is skillful enough to piece it.

Remember Lord, O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see
good.
when you arm so many creatures to punish me, that my life is like the wind
which passes away and never returns, for when I once enter into ihe grave
you shall never bring me again to make me taste the delights of life.

The world shall see me no more, The eye of him that has seen me shall see
me no more: thine eyes are upon me and I am
and death, which shall separate me from the company of men, shall deface me
out of their memory, and when your eyes which see all things shall reckon the
number of your creatures, they shall find me here no more neither to reompence
me, nor punish me.

As a cloud appears noe more when the sun which formed it has dissipated it,
As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the
grave shall come up no more.
so are men seen no more when death has destroyed them, and they appear no
more upon the earth, when they are once gone into the grave.

They come no more into their families to govern them, He shall return no
more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more.
nor into their states to command them: and the condition of the living is so
different from that of the dead, that if they should return hither, their
domestiques would not know them, and they themselves, that made much of them,
would not be able to endure them.

Since the condition of the dead has its misfortunes as well as that of the
living, Therefore I will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in the anguish of
my spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
I will permit my mouth to speak, and my heart to sigh, I will vent my miseries
in my complaints and giving liberty to my grief, I am resolved to speak to
God, whatever it shall suggest.

Am I a sea, or a whale that thou set a watch over me?
Does my pride equal the seas that you should keep me in prison, as you do
it in captivity? and am I as furious as those monsters which you shut up in the
Abyss, that you treat me with the like Rigor?

This restraint gives me a thousand pains a day, When I say, My bed shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint.
and if I say, when the night is come, my Bed shall be my comfort; I shall
find ease in relating it my displeasures, and sleep shall give some
intermission to my Torments;

All these hopes are false, Then thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions.
for you make Apparitions pass before my eyes which frighten me, and you
command dreams to put on hiddeous forms to trouble me during my repose.

Wherefore my soul yielding to the assault of sorrow, So that my soul choseth
strangling, and death rather than my life.
wishes nothing but a gibbit, and death which is the Terror of the guilty is
the desire and hope of the most unhappy and most innocent of all men.

And certainly I may well be pardoned if I have the sentiments I loath it, I
would not live always: let me alone, for my days are vanity:
of one that is desperate, for in the force of my evils, and in the weakness
of my body, it is necessary that I die: if notwithstanding my conjectures are
not true, and after so many sorrows I must yet live, treat me more gnetly
Lord, and search no other motive of your mercy than the shortness of my days,
and the misery of my life.

What is man that you should undertake his ruin with so much indignation, What
is man, that thou should magnify him? and that thou should set thine
heart upon him?
you make him insolent in declaring your self his enemy, whatsoever misfortune
befalls him in this combat he will have the advantage and esteem himself too
glorious in having been the object of your anger.

As if it were very difficult to conquer him, And that thou should visit
him every morning, and try him every moment?
you employ at once sweetness and severity, for one while you flatter him as a
child, and presently after you threaten him as a slave.

How long will ye deferr the pardon which an innocent man asks of you? How
long will thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallowed down my
spittle.
and when will the hour come that, my tongue being no longer fastened to my
palate, I may form words at liberty?

O divine protector of men I will betray my innocence, I have sinned, what
shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why have thou set me as a mark
against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?
and confess that I have sinned; but what shall I do to appease you, since all
my cares have been hitherto unprofitable, and notwithstanding all I can do, I
can neither please you, nor endure my self, nor be well with my self being ill
with you.

Rather of a guilty man make an innocent, And why do thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust,
and thou shall seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.
deface my fin by your grace, and defer no longer to accord me this favor:
for considering the evils that I feel, the grave will presently be my
dwelling: and if you retard your favors till the morning, I shall be no longer
capiable to receive them.

CHAP. VIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
BIldad, one of- the Princes who had left his state to come comfort Job,
speaks: and after he had reproached him with his injustice dilates himself
upon the miseries of the wicked; and makes him hope that if he change his life
he shall change his fortune.

WHen Job had finished this discourse, Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and
said.
which he had not begun but to defend his innocence, Bildad who held the second
rank amongst his friends spoke, and following the example of Eliphaz, said to
him with some heat.

How long will you talk indiscreetly? How long wilt thouspeak these things?
and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?
how long will ye wander in these extravagant discourses? and accuse Heaven of
injustice and your friends of infidelity?

Do you think that God who is the supreme justice pronounces unjust decrees;
Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?
and that when he uses his power to punish men, he proportions not the
punishments to their sins?

Though your children have offended him, If thy children have sinned against
him, and he have cast them away for their transgression:
and that the sudden and unthought of death which they have suffered be the
just punishment of their crimes,

You may profit by their misfortune, If thou would seek unto God betimes,
and make thy supplication to the Almighty:
and be made wise at their expense. In a word, if in your misery you implore
the succors of heaven, and if in the morning when the season is calm, and your
mind clear, you present it your prayers: If thou were pure and up right,
surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous.


If you are sincere in your intentions and modest in your words,

God who at present seems to be asleep, will awake for to think upon you, and
after he has restored peace to your soul he will restore its former luster to
your house, Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase.
he will recompense your losses with interest, and the felicity which he
prepares for you shall be greater than that, whose loss you regrett.

But since, For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thy self
to the search of their fathers.
this being no good security, my promises may be suspected of you, consult the
times of our fathers read the histories of our Granfathers, and consider what
they have written in favor of the truth which I declare,

For we our selves are too For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing,
because our days upon earth are a shadow.
young to be believed, our life being not very long, our experience cannot be
great, and we may be ignorant of many things, since we know not that our days
disperse themselves like a shadow, which vanishes at the light of the Sun.

Those sage old men who have had the Angels for their masters shall resolve
you in your doubts, Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words
out of their heart?
and their discourses more eloquent than mine shall persuade you that the
happiness of the wicked cannot long endure, and that the misery of the just
must presently end.

But if nature herself be the mistress of men and if we may draw instructions
from all the cre^tures, Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water?
do not you see that these fair flowers which the rushes of the Marshes bear
cannot live without humidity, Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cur
down, it withers before any other h^th.
and that to remove them from the water is to condemn them to death, that when
they do but blosome; before the hand of men has defiled their beauty, if only
humidity be wanting, there is no herb which dies so soon, and the same day
which saw them borne sees them dye.

It is just so with the prosperity of the wicked; So are the paths of all that
forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish.
for though all things succeed according to their desices, if the grace of God
be wanting, it is necessary that they perish; Whose hope shall be cut off, and
whose trust shall be a spider^ web.
and when to deceive m^^ they shall seem pious in appearance, God who sees
the bottom of the heart, shall nor sail to punish them.

The design which they have to cover their sins under the cloak of piety,
shall not succeed; and the vain hopes wherewith they flatter themselves,
shall resemble the spiders webs, which have never so much artifice, but they
have as much weakness.

They shall rely upon the greatness of their house, He shall lean upon his
house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure.
but it shall fall like them; They shall endeavor to support it by their
Alliances, but whatsoever cunning they use, they shall have the displeasure of
seeing it overthrown, but shall not have the power to raise it up.

Finally, to keep to the terms of our first comparison, we must confess
that the fortune of the wicked is like to the beauty of the reeds, for to see
them in the morning, in those moist places where they have their birth, you
would judge that the spring which sees all the flowers borne and dye, would
never see them have an end.

Notwithstanding when the sun is in his Meridian, He is green before the sun,
and his branch shoots forth in his garden.
and beats perpendicularly upon their heads, he does not only deface all their
beauty, but dryes up their roots, His roots are wrapped about the heap, and
sees the place of stones
and depriving them of that moisture which nourished them, he makes them more
arrid than the rocks. Finally, he so consumes them by his heat, that there
remains no rest of them, and if the earth which bore them could speak, it
would say that it had lost the remembrance of them.

It Is one of the recreations of this beautiful star to ruin his works for
to produce new ones, If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him,
saying I have not seen thee.
and to keep up the beauty of the world by the variety of his effects: Behold,
this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.
And it is one of the employments of divine Justice to chastise the wicked, and
to ruin their fortune, and to stifle their glory in the birth.

Divine bounty, Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers:
its dear companion, treats not the simple so, for it takes care of preserving
them, it imbraceth their interests, and refusing its assistance to the wicked,
it tacitly consents to their ruin.

This general rule shall have no exception for you, Till he fill thy mouth
with laughing, and thy lips with rejoyceing.
and if you are faithful to God, your bad fortune shall change into a better;
joy shall appear again upon your countenance, and laughter recovering its
place upon your lips, shall banish sadness and grief.

And as the punishment of the wicked is a part of the happiness of the just,
They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the dwelling place of the
wicked shall come to naught.
they who have made war against you, shall be rigorously punished, and you
shall have the contentment of seeing shame upon their faces, and misery in
their houses.

CHAP. IX.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOB avowes that there is none just before God; and after he had established
this maxim by an ample description of the sovereignty of God, he again
defends his innocence, and shows that in the terms of Justice he ought
rather to be rewarded than punished.

JOB, Then Job answered, and said,
who saw well that his intentions were sinisterly interpreted, and that they
suspected him to accuse heaven of injustice; to purge himself of this crime,
and reclayme his enemy from this error, said to him:

I agree with you that there is none innocent before God, I know it is so of a
truth: but how should man be just with God?
that our perfections compared with his, are real faults, as our Being
compared with his is nothing.

I know that a man being so rash as to dispute with him, If he will contend
with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.
can carry nothing away in the conflict but shame and loss, and that of a
thousand things whereof God may accuse him he shall hardly purge himself of one.

If they make war against him with open force, He is wise in heart, and
mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered.
he is Almighty; and if they think to surpriae him by Artifice, he is Wisdom
it self; he laughs at our attempts and our subtilties, and whosoever opposes
his Will, it is necessary he resolve upon an eternal war.

He looseneth the Mountains from their roots, Which 50veth the mountains, and
^^ey know not which overturneth them in his anger.
he fills the Valleys with their breaches, and he causes this destruction so
suddenly, that those who should resent it can neither foresee nor avoid it.

He makes the earth tremble when he pleases, Which shakes the earth our of
her place, and the pillars thereof tremble:
and though it be the center of the world, he makes it change its place when he
will, and those columns which serve it for a foundation, cease to be
unmovable when he speaks.

It was he who without being aided of men or Angels, Which commands the sun,
and it rises not: and seals up the stars:
stretched forth the heavens, and rouled them in a circle; and whilst he might
have been wholly taken up in so great a design, Which alone spreads out the
heavens, and treads upon the waves of the sea:
he walked upon the sea, and taught that perfidious and proud element obedience
and fidelity.

And it is not to be wonderred at, Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades,
and the chambers of the south.
since those constellations so known to the Mariners, and which either
presage tempests, or excite them, be the works of his hands: and that they have
no influence nor virtue, but what they have borrowed from his power.

Finally, Which does great things past finding our, yea and wonders without
number.
to paint him in his most lively colors, and design him by those qualities
which belong to none but him; he does things so great, as for not being to be
comprised, they ought to be admired; and the greatness of them does not
diminish the number, because they are infinite.

As he is powerful in his deeds, Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: he
passes on also, but I perceive him not.
he is so secret in his designs, that he can come upon me and I not see him,
and by the same reason he can retire himself, and I not perceive him.

His power is so absolute, Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will
say unto him, what do thou?
that when he examines the guilty, he is not bound to observe all the
formalities of our Judges; his interrogations are so prompt, that it is
impossible to answer to them; and his discussions are so rigorous, that they
cannot defend themselves from them; and though he deal in this manner, there
is no one dares ask the reason of it.

When our crimes have provoked him, If God will not withdraw his anger, the
proud helpers do stoop under him.
and to punish them he has taken thunder in his hand, one must be without
judgment for to think to resist him; The Angels themselves, who move the
heavens, and the Kings which govern the earth, find no better means to
appease his anger, than to humble themselves before him.

Being then but a man by my birth, How much less shall I answer him, and choose
out my words to reason with him.
and a miserable man by my condition, how should I be able to reply to him in
his fury? and with what andacity must I be animated to accost him my self, and
to speak to him without Interpreter, and without Advocate?

But though my birth were more illustrious, Whom, though I were righteous, yet
would not answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge.
and my condition more happy, I should not dare to defend my self against him;
and knowing that he is my Judge and my Sovereign; I should use rather prayers
than Reasons.

And though I did know that he would hear them, If I had called, and he had
answered me, yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.
his greatness and my misery would persuade me that he would not listen to
them; and I should believe that he had done his Majesty wrong, if he had
daigned to entertain himself with one that is miserable.

His proceeding agrees with my beliese, For he breaks me with a tempest, and
multiplyeth: my wounds without cause.
for he is always angry, and never appears but in clouds, great with thunder
and lightning; when I pray him to cure my wounds, he makes me new ones; and to
increase the grief of them, he does not discover me the cause,

He does not permit my mind to take a little rest. He will not suffer me to
take my breath, but fills me with bitterness.
The end of one evil is the birth of another; and oftentimes to overwhelme me,
he ordains them to assault me in company, and to fall upon me all together.

Wonder not if he treat me thus, If I speak of strength; lo, he is strong: and
if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead?
Power and Justice are on his side, and as innocent as I am, when he accuses
me, or condemns me, there is not a witness who will depose in my favor, nor
advocate who dare defend my cause.

If I undertook to justify my self, If I justify my self, mine own mouth
shall condemn me: If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
my mouth and my heart taking his part, would condemn me; and if I had proved
by my reasons that I am innocent, he would make me confess by his, that I am
guilty. Though I were perfect yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my
life
Finally, were I the most just of men, and did the earth give me a public
testimony of it, he could make me lose the credit of it, and hide from me the
purity of my soul, for to make my life wearisome.

Wherefore I persist in my first opinion, This is one thing, therefore I said
it, He destroys the perfect and the wicked.
and maintain that God, using the power which his Sovereignty gives him, he
involves the innocent with the guilty, and dispensing with our Laws, he
proportions not always the punishment to the sin, nor recompenses to virtues.

If he hold this Maxim, If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the
trial of the innocent.
and will not spare the just when he punishes the guilty, let him content
himself to kill them once, and not mock at their torments to make them
despair. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked he covers the faces
of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?


You would say that he governes the earth like a Tyrant, and that he takes
pleasure to blind the Princes that govern it under him, and to make their
depraved wills pass for very reasonable laws, for they cannot deny that he
authorizes those disorders since he distributes crowns, and gives them to
Tyrants as well as to legitimate Princes.

During these disorders, Now my days are swifter than a post: they flee away,
they see no good.
my days are past away more swiftly than a Post who brings good news; and
during their flight, my eyes have seen nothing which may give content to my
soul.

They have fled away as those Vessels which carrying fruits, They are passed
away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hastes to the prey.
of which the Mariners apprehend the corruption, go with displayed Sails; or
as those Eagles who search their prey, and whose natural lightness is also
assisted by the famine which devoures them.

When I resolve to hold my peace, If I say I will forget my complaint, I will
leave off my heaviness, and comfort my self:
and that I forbid my eyes tears, and my mouth sighs, my face betrays me, and
they observe there all that passes in my soul.

Wherefore without any longer keeping of silence, I am afraid of all my
sorrows, I know that thou will not hold me innocent.
which prejudiceth me, I will complain to you, oh my God, and tell you that I
have always lived in your fear; That I have been scrupulous rather than a
Libertine; and knowing well that you spared not those who offended you, I have
always walked in innocence.

But if after all my cares, If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain?
you make me pass for guilty, and if you pay my services as offenses, have not
I lost my time? and are not my labors, being so ill acknowledged, unprofitable?

Though I were washed in the waters, If I wash my self with snow-water, and
make my hands never so clean.
and my whiteness equalled that of the snow; though my hands were clean, and
the purity of my heart surpassed that of my body,

You would observe faults in my person, Yet shall thou plurge me in the ditch,
and mine own clothes shall abhor me
your holiness would discover impurities in my soul, your justice would find
disorders in my body, and my clothes for to accommodate themselves to your
inclination, and serve your Justice, would be afraid, and would not be able to
endure me.

For when I contest with you, For he is not a man as I am, that I should answer
him, and we should come together in judgment.
I see that my adversary is not a man, and that there is no Tribunal on earth
where I may hope, that your right and mine may be equally discussed.

There is no person which can determine our differences, Neither is there any
daies-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.
since you are a party, I have no more Judge; and in this contestation where I
oppose my innocence to your Justice, I find no Arbiter who can bring us to
accord.

If notwithstanding you sweeten a little the pains which I suffer, Let him
take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me.
if you disarm those hands which carry thunder, and if you temper that Majesty
which begets my fear

I would speak with liberty, Then would I speak, and not fear him, but it is
not so with me.
my innocence should furnish me with reasons to defend my self: but in the
astonishment that I am, I have neither words nor thoughts, and my silence,
which is but an effect of my fear, passes for an effect of my sin.

CHAP. X.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOB oppressed with the extreme griefs which he suffers, gives himself up to
complaints; represents to God that he is his workmanship, to oblige him to do
him favor; and passing from reasons to prayers, conjures him to end his
miseries before he enter into the grave.

I Am weary of living, My soul is weary of my life, I will leave my complaint
upon my self, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
and to see the end of my miseries; I wish for the end of my days; in the
grief which presses me, I cannot keep silence; and because I knew not to whom
to betake me, I will say unto God, Do not condemn me, show me wherefore thou
cotendest with me.
I must speak against my self, and give way to my complaints, to give ease to
my pains: Whatever then come of it, I will say to God, Condemn me not without
hearing me, or if you are resolved upon it, grant to me if you please one
favor, which they refuse not to the most culpable, and declare to me for what
sins you punish me.

What advantage can you draw from my losses, Is it good unto thee that thou
should oppress, that thou should despise the work of thine hands, and
shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
and what profit will come to you if calumny triumph over my innocence, if my
enemies ruin the work of your hands, and if to facilitate the execution of
their pernicious designs, you assist them with your power?

Are you ignorant of the estate of my life? Have thou eyes of flesh? or feast
thou as man sees?
Are your eyes like ours, which see but the appearance of things, and cannot
penetrate the bottom of them? Is your knowledge propt upon feeble conjectures,
like ours, and can ignorance serve you for an excuse (as it does us) in your
judgments?

Are your days numbered like ours? Are thy days as the days of man? are thy
years as man's days?
and are your years composed of those moments which follow one another, and
which are the cause that we possess but the least part of our life?

If your knowledge be infallible, That thou inquire after mine iniquity, and
searchest after my sin?
and your durance eternal, what need you search into my sins with so much
earnestness, and corture me to make my mouth speak a thing which you may read
in my heart?

What necessity is there of so carefully clearing to you my innocence, Thou
know that I am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver out of thine
hand.
since wheresoever I am, I am always in your power, and there is no one in the
world which can take me out of your hands?

Change the your design, Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me together
round about; yet thou do destroy me.
remember that I am your work, and that there is no part of my body which is
not an effect of your power: Notwithstanding as if you were but equal, if
seems that you have resolved to ruin me, and that you seek for glory in my
overthrow.

Remember that dirt is the matter of which you have composed me, Remember, I
beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into
dust again?
and as of so weak beginnings, you cannot hope for great progresses, it is
necessary that I perish presently, and that having been earth before my birth,
I become dust after my death.

Consider if you please that you have given me my being, Have thou not poured
me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?
and as shepherds prepare milk and make it curdle into cheese, so have you
disposed of the blood of my mother, and thickning it by the natural heat you
have formed my body of it. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have
fenced me with bones and sinews.


Of the same matter (Divine workman) you have made a hundred different parts,
for the bone which sustaines us, the Nerves which give us motion, and the skin
which serves us for covering and Ornament, are in their first original but the
same blood which you have thus diversified.

As your divine wisdom leaves nothing imperfect in nature, Thou have granted
me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit.
you animated this work with the breath of your mouth, and as your providence
abandons not your creatures, you conserved that by your care, which you have
produced by your mercy.

Although it seem you agree not with me in all this discourse, And these
things have thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with thee.
and that to conceal your sentiments from me you treat me rather as your enemy
then as your creature, I know that you retain the memory of the favors which
you have done me, and that you cannot resolve to ruin a man, whom you have so
much obliged,

But if these conjectures are true, If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity.
why then do you punish me? the sins of my youth cannot be the cause, for I
have repented of them, and you have pardoned them, why then am I not exempt
from the punishment, if I am absolved from the offense?

Whatsoever it be, If I be wicked, wounto me, and if I be righteous, yet will I
not lift up my head: I am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine affliction:
you ought not to punish me with so much rigor, for if I am guilty, I shall
be unhappy enough, my sin shall serve me for punishment; and if I am just,
my innocence shall not cause in me any vanity, for, alas, whence should he have
it, whom you make drunk with tears, and whom you surfeit with miseries.

Notwithstanding as if I were the proudest of men, For it increases: thou
huntest me as a fierce Lion: and again, thou show thy self mavelous upon
me.
you treat me like a savage beast: The huntsmen exercise not more cruelties
upon a furious Lioness, then you exercise upon me; and when I believe that my
miseries are about to end, you return more animated then ever, and make me
suffer new ones, which beget astonishment and horror in the minds of those who
behold them. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine
indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.


All your creatures serve for your anger; your Angels and your Devils are
witnesses which depose against me; and the diseases which assault me, are the
soldiers which defend your quarrel.

Since you did reserve me for so many miseries, Wherefore then have thou brought
me forth out of the womb: Oh that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had
seen me.
why did you take me out of the womb of my mother? and since you have concluded
that I should be the Fable of the world, and that my misery should be as
shameful as it is unjust, why did you not oblige death to take away my life, I
should have been, as though I had not been; I should have been carried from the
womb to the grave.
for to conserve my honor?

I should be now as if I had not been, and without passing through those
different degrees of a long and miserable life, I should have been carried from
the Cradle to the Grave, and from the womb of my proper Mother into the bosom
of my common one. Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I
may take comfort a little.


Shall my desires never be heard? shall the years which seem so short to
contented men, and so long to the unhappy, never end with me? and will you
(Lord) never give me any truce to sigh forth my griefs with freedom? Before I
go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and the shadow of
death.


Grant me this favor before I leave the world, and that to obey the decree
which you have pronounced against all men, A land of darknesse^, as darkness
it self, and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is
as darkness.
I return to the bosom of the earth, where the light never dissipates the
darkness, where happiness never succeeds misery, where Death never suffers
life, where order reigns no more, and where Confusion has established her
empire.

CHAP. XI.
The Argument.
ZOphar Job's third friend upbraides him with the insolence of his words, and
to take down the pride of which he accuses him, he represents to him diverse
perfections of God; and to raise his courage also which he conceived depressed
with grief, he promises him a happy change in his fortune, if in this
disaster he has recourse to prayer.

CHAP. XI WHen grief had shut up the mouth of Job, Then answered Zophar the
Naamathite, and said,
Zophar his third friend, who took all his words for blasphemies, said to him
with more passion then charity, Sold not the multitude of words be answered?
and should a man full of talk be justified?


You must needs be barren in reasons, since you are so fruitful in injuries:
and we may well infer that prudence has little part in your actions, since
after having spoken so long, you yet make difficulty of hearing us. Should thy
lies make men hold their peaces, and when tho ^mockdst, should no man make thee
ashamed?


You have too much vanity if you believe that men be obliged to approve your
discourses, and to suffer you to be insolent, because you are miserable; your
scurrilities would well deserve censures, and it is to treat you with too much
sweetness, to confute them by our reasons, and to give you good advice for
injuries. For thou have said, my doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.


You have said with a high insolence, that your words and actions were pure,
and that God himself in his tribunal where he examines all things with rigor,
could condemn nothing in your person.

You would change your language if he had conversed with you: But oh that God
would speak and open his lips against thee!
and if doing you an honor whereof you are unworthy, he had opened his mouth
to declare to you his secrets.

You would see that one must be very just to observe all his laws, And that he
would show thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is!
know therefore, that God exacteth of thee less then thine iniquity deserves.
and whatsoever good opinion you have of your innocence, you would acknowledge
that the pains which you suffer, are much less then your sins, and that God
never had so much rigor but that he has more bounty.

Your pride is the cause of your destruction, Can thou by searching find out
God? can thou find out the Allmighty unto perfection?
and without considering that you cannot conceive the least works of God, you
would comprehend his perfections, and know why his providence permitts the just
to be unhappy.

How rash are your thoughts and how presumptuous is your ignorance! It is as
high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper then hell, what can thou know?
God is more elevated then the heavens, and you think to know him; he is more
profound then the Abysses, and you think to sound him.

And if it be permitted to use terms wherewith we describe Bodies, The
measure thereof is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea.
for to describe the greatest of spirits, he is longer than the earth, and
broader then the sea; and you think to comprehend him? The earth is very
great, and the vaste fields which it contains are sensible proofs of its
greatness. The sea is very large, and those plains of which our eyes cannot
see the extremities, give us good testimonies of it: Both of them though have
their bounds, and the being of God being infinite can have no limits.

His power which is no less then his immensity, If he cut off, and shut up or
gather together, then who can hinder him?
finds nothing which resists it, and if he would ruin his works, or reduce
them to that first confusion which he so wisely untangled at the birth of the
world, For he knows va^^^ men; he sees wickedness also; will he not
consider it?
there is none who can oppose himself to his designs. But that which ought
most to astonish us, is, that as he knows the weakness of men, he is not
ignorant of their malice, and if he be good enough to execute the one, he is
just enough to punish the other.

It is injuriously then that vain Man boasts himself; For vain man would be
wise, though man be horn like a wild asses colt.
and like a young Colt which has never been backed, he esteems himself born
free, and that without doing him violence they cannot prescribe him Laws. If
thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him.


You please your self in these sentiments, since you accuse the justice which
punishes you, and your obstinate heart provokes the wrath of God, when your
hands lifted up to heaven implore his mercy.

But if reforming your actions and your words you banish Sin out of your Soul,
If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in
thy tabernacles.
and if swearing an eternal divorce with impiety, you never receive it in your
house:

Then you may lift up your eyes without confusion; For then shast thou lift up
thy face without spot, yea, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear.
and as there shall be no disorder in your soul, there shall be no shame seen
upon your face; your happiness shall be so perfect, that you shall have no more
evils to fear, nor good things to desire.

You shall be so content, Because thou shall forget thy misery, and remember it
as waters that pass away.
that the pleasure which you shall taste, shall deface the remembrance of your
past miseries, and it shall be as hard to call them again as the waters of a
river which are glided away.

Your glory which seems now to be darkened, And thine age shall be clearer then
the noonday; thou shall shine forth, thou shall be as the morning.
shall clear up like the Sun in its Meridian; and when you think your self to
be in your setting, you shall rise with as much luster, as the star which
brings us back the day. And thou shall be secure, because there is hope, yea,
thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in safety.


And if it happen that any misfortune threaten you, hope shall never abandon
you in danger, you shall sltepe with as much security as if you were in a town
of war, shut up with ditches, Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make
thee afraid, yea many shall make suit unto thee.
and defended with Bulwarks.

You shall enjoy a profound repose which your enemies shall not be able to
trouble; those who despise your bad fortune, shall implore your favor, and
changing their reproaches into prayers, they shall, beg your succor in their
need.

But the wicked shall lift their eyes to heaven in vain, But the eyes of the
wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, and their hope shall be as the
giving up of the ghost.
and shall not get assistance thence: the earth shall be no longer favorable
to them; for in their dangers they shall not find a sanctuary to retire to,
and in their necessities, they shall be constrained to wish what others are
afraid of.

CHAP. XII.
The Argument.
Job complaining of the ill dealing which he had received from his friends,
provs in a few words, that in afflictions God has no regard to merit, and
making a magnificent description of the absolute power of God in the world he
constraines those who hear him, to avow that he is a good Divine, as well as a
great Prince.

AS our unfortunate Prince had perceived that his sweetness wronged his
innocence, And Job answered, and said;
he replies with a just indignation to his friends, and s^yes to them, No doubt
but ye are the people, and wisdom shalls die with you.


Your Vanity then has persuaded you that there are no men in the world but
you, that reason has left us to give it self wholly to you, and that wisdom is
so tied to your persons, that her conservation and her ruin depends upon yours.

I pray you believe, But I have understanding as well as you, I am. not
inferior to you: yea, who knows not such things as these?
that she is familiar with us, as well as you; that when they shall examine the
qualities of our minds, they shall find that mine is not less then yours; and
that all which you have said of Divine providence, is so common, that not to
know it, one must be absolutely ignorant. I am as one mocked of his neighbor,
who calls upon God, and he answers him: the just upright man is laughed to
scorn.


I know well enough that my fortune makes my person despised, and since my
misery they have judged evilly of it: but I am not ignorant also, that God
favors those who call upon him, that he assists the just who are forsaken by
their friends, and that nothing obliges him so much to succor them, as the
little esteem that is made of their innocence.

They are like torches whose brightness, He that is ready to flip with his
feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.
rich men dazzled with the luster of worldly things, consider not; but as every
thing has its revolution, their contempt shall change into esteem, and they
shall seek one day to be illuminated with their light.

Notwithstanding Abundance conspires with peace to enrich the houses of the
wicked, The Tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are
secure into whose hand God brings abundantly.
and though they hold all their goods from the liberality of God, their
ingratitude makes them forget it, and their insolence transports them to
provoke his anger. But ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee; and the
fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee.


It is certain then that the favors which heaven heaps upon men are not
always a good proof of their innocence, nor the afflictions which he sends
them an assured testimony of their wickedness: he is Master of his creatures,
he disposes of them as he pleases: and his truth is so well known, that if
you ask the birds of the air, or the beasts of the earth, they will both make
you know by their answers, that they are not ignorant of it.

Speak to the earth it self, Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee;
and the fishes of the sea shall declare umto thee.
its fruitfulness which is never weary of bringing forth, will teach you the
same thing? and the fishes of the sea as dumb as they are, will give give you
new assurances of it.

Also one must be very stupid to be ignorant that all the creatures are the
works of Gods hands, Who knows not all these that the hand of the Lord bath
wrought this?
and as their different qualities are effects of his power, and their different
motions are marks of his providence.

Who knows not at last that their being depends upon his will, In whose hand
is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind
that as he has produced them he can annihilate them, and that the nobility in
which man glories does not exempt him from this necessity?

The mind of man may as easily conceive of these Does not the ear try words,
and the mouth taste his meat?
truths, as the ear judges certainly of the variety of sounds, and the tongue
of the diversity of tastes.

But though nature should have denied us this knowledge, With the ancient is
wisdom, and in length of days understanding
it were easy to gather it from those venerable old men, to whom time being a
master has discovered secrets which young ones are ignorant of.

But if it be permitted me to make trial of my abilities, With him is wisdom
and strength, he^^ has counsel and understanding.
and strive for victory over the weak praises which you have given to God, I
shall tell you that wisdom and force which are divided betwixt the old and the
young are united in him; and as by his supreme intelligence he knows general
things, by his incomparable providence he governes particular ones, and
conducts them happily to their end.

This power of which you speak, is so absolute, Behold, he breaks down, and
it cannot be built again: he shuts up a man, and there can be no opening.
that if he ruin towns, it is in vain to undertake to raise them again; and
if he confine a malefactor to prison, they strive to no purpose to deliver him.

If he shut up the heavens and hinder the clouds from dissolving into rain,
Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sends them out,
and they overturne the earth.
the earth shall be barren, or if it produces some ^ruits, the drought shall
not permit them to come to perfect maturity; if he open the sluices to the
waters of heaven, they will overflow all the earth, and making a second deluge
they will again overthrow its buildings.

It is true then that he has Power, With him is strength and wisdom: the
deceived and the deceiver are his.
and if you doubt that he has wisdom, know that he understands the artifices
of those who deceive others, and the simplicity of those who let themselves be
deceived.

He mockes at Statesmen, He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the
Judges fools.
and causes that their wisest counsels are followed but with bad events; He
loses the bond of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.
he blinds those who make laws, and makes Judges stupid, who are appointed
over the people to govern them; but his power never shines forth more, then
when he assaulteth Monarchs, when he takes the Crown from their heads, and
treating them like slaves, he despoyles them of their belts, leads them with
chains, and makes their backs bend under the weight of their Irons.

Or when he changes the glory of priests into contempt, He leads Princes
away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty.
and to confound their pride, he permits his temples to be violated, and his
altars profaned; or when he ruins those men, whom berth, or favor of Princes
has elevated to the highest degree of honors. He removes away the speech of
the trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged.


And do not think that the qualities of the mind are less subject to his
power, then those of the body or of fortune; he can take credit from those who
speak the truth; he takes away the power of persuading from the most eloquent,
and makes old men lose that knowledge, which time and travail has acquired
them.

When he will chastise Princes, He powers contempt upon Princes, and weakneth
the strength of the mighty.
he takes from them that esteem, which maintains their reign, he casts
confusion upon their faces, or renders them despicable to their subjects, and
producing at the same time a contrary effect, he takes the the miserable out of
oppression, and makes them mount upon the throne of Kings.

He discovers the most hidden crimes, He discovers the deep things out of
darkness, and brings to light the shadow of death.
he makes public those pernicious designs which are conceived in the dark,
and which have no other witnesses then the night; he does wonders upon all
occasions, he brigns day into the Abysses of our heart and makes evident their
most secret thoughts.

Be does he not appear very absolute, He increases the nations, and destroys
them: he inlargeth the nations, and straightneth them again.
when to increase the number of people, he makes women fruitful, and for to
diminish it he makes lands barren; or when touched with their tears, or
conquered with their prayers, he delivers them from their miseries, and
reestablishes them in their former greatness?

Is not this an admirable point of wisdom and justice when he changes the
heart of Princes, He takes away the heart of the chief of the people of the
earth, and causes them to wander in a wilderness, where there is no way.
which he holds in his hands, when for to deceive them, he maks them leave
their good resolutions, which they had taken in their counsel, and ingageth
them in designs, where they cannot get off but with dishonor.

To see then their imprudent They grope in the dark without light, and he
makes them to stagger like a drunken man.
conduct, you would take them for men who walk in the dark, and to consider
their actions, you would think that they are drunk, and that wine has made
them lose their judgment.

CHAP. XIII.
The Argument.
Pain constrains Job to reproach his friends, and his charity obliges him to
give them good council which he terminates by a violent desire, which he
shows, to enter into dispute with God for the defense of his cause, in which
he promises himself the better, if certain conditions be accorded him.

CHAP. XIII YOu may judge by my discourses that I have well comprehended yours,
Lo, mine eye has seen all this, mine ear has heard and understood it.
and that you have spoken nothing which my ear has not well heard, and my mind
better conceived.

You see that our knowledge is equal; What ye know, the same do I know also, I
am not inferior unto you.
That I am not ignorant of what you know, and that it was without vanity that
my science gave not place to yours.

Wherefore I will henceforth address my words to the Almighty, Surely I would
speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.
and without losing more time in conferring unprofitably with you, I will
dispute boldly with him.

But I desire first to make you see, But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all
Physicians of no value.
that you take pleasure in inventing lies, and that one of your most ordinary
exercises is to teach pernicious maxims, and to defend them by worse reasons.

Would to God you had learned to hold your peace, O that you would altogether
hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom.
and that instead of making bad discourses, you had been able to keep silence,
at least you would have had the apperance of wise men, although you had not had
the sentiments, and those which did not know you by your face would judge well
of your mind. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.


But since you have not followed so good counsels, hearken at least, to my
reprehensions, and profiting by the good advice, which my mouth shall give you,
suffer your selves to be persuaded by my reasons.

Do you think that God has need of lies for the defense of the truth, Will you
speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?
and that to win his cause, and get the better of me, your artifices be
necessary to him? Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God?


Do you think that his right is so bad, that he has need of your favor, and
do you think to oblige his Majesty when you pronouce a decree which shall wound
his justice.

Do you remember that no wicked thing can please him, It is good that you
should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him?
who knows all things, and that with whatsoever fair pretext you cover your
bad designs, he will easily discover them, and not suffer himself to be
deceived by your artifices, like men who not able to penetrate your sentiments,
are obliged to rest upon your words.

He will blame you publicly for having taken his part against mine, He will
surely reprove you, if you do secretly accept persons.
and for having desired to gain his favor at the expense of my innocence.

As Soon as he shall appear to punish you, Shall not his excellency make you
afraid? and his dread fall upon you?
the first motion of his anger shall put you in disorder, and the brightness of
his offended Majesty, shall strike your spirits with astonishment.

After your punishment, Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to
bodies of clay.
which memory of your name shall disperse it self like ashes, which they cast
into the River: and that glory which makes you so insolent, shall become more
despicable then dirt.

Hold your peace then, and without interesting your self further in my
misfortunes, Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on
me what will.
my heart shall suggest to it.

Why must I be reduced to tear my body with my teeth, Wherefore do I take my
flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine hand?
and my miserable life be exposed to more dangers, then if I carried it in my
hands, and that it were given up to the fury of my enemies?

These without doubt are effects of Gods anger, Though he slay me, yet will, I
trust in him: but I will maintain mine own ways before him.
and if he were not provoked he would not punish me so cruelly; but though his
justice condemn me to death, I will ever hope that his goodness will repeal
the Decree, and that acquiescing in the reasons which I shall produce, it will
absolve me from all the crimes that they impose upon me.

So then the God which you judge to be the author of my ruin, He also shall be
my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come before him.
shall be the author of my salvation, and the boldness wherewith I shall go to
him shall not be a small testimony of my innocence, since they knew that
hypocrytes dare not approach him nor appear before his throne.

Hearken then to my discourses, Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration
with your ears.
and to learn of me that one may be innocent and miserable; understand the
explication of a Riddle, which Heaven has proposed to you in my person, and
which you have not yet been able to explain. Behold now. I have ordered my
cause know that I shall be justified.


If I be judged according to the ordnary forms, and if God renouncing the
rights of Sovereignty, keep himself to the terms of justice, my innocence shall
be acknowledged, and all the world shall see that though I am afflicted, I am
not guilty.

I hold this truth so constantly, Who is he that will plead with me? for now if
I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost.
that there is no one but I hope to persuade to it, and whosoever it be that
contests with me, I make account to convince him, and make him avow, that to
hold my peace in so just an occasion of speaking, were to increase my sorrow,
and betray my innocence.

But O God who art my principal adversary and with whom my misfortune will have
me to have difference, Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide my
self from thee.
if you accord me only two conditions, I will not fly the combat, I will
defend my cause in your presence and make it appear that thou art just, and
that I am courageous.

Make my pains cease; Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread
make me afraid.
for a man that suffers has not liberty to speak, and give me the assurance
which your Majesty has taken from me; for fear puts a man in disorder, and
permits him not well to duce h^s reasons.

Upon these conditions I am assured of the gaining of my cause, Then call thou,
and I will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me.
that without troubling my self, whither the first that discourses has the
advantage, I put it to your choice to oppose me, or defend your self, to speak
or to hear, to begin or to end the dispute.

And since your silence inviteth me to speak, How mano are mine iniquities and
sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin.
tell me what are my sins, and if you will have me have sorrow for them as I
have pain, declare to me their qualities and number.

Why do you hide your face from me, Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold
me for thine enemy?
test^fying by this action, that you can neither answer me, nor endure me, and
as often as you see me, you think you see one of your most mortal enemies.

What honor will you carry away by employing your power against a leaf, Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the dry stubble?
which serves as pastime for the winds? and what glory can you get by
persecuting a miserable man who like dry straw has no force nor vigor to
resist you?

You know that I complain with Reason, For thou writest bitter things against
me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.
since after your mouth had pronounced the sentence of my death, you write it
with your hand, and go to ground it upon the follyes of my youth, for to give
it some color.

Finally as if I were some signal malefactor, Thou put my feet also in the
stocks and look narrowly unto all my paths; thou sectest a print upon the
heels of my feet.
you put irons upon my feet, you overlook all my actions, and to find proofs
against an innocent you observe all my words and my thoughts.

When you come with all this diligence to ruin me, And he as a rotten thing
consumes, as a garment that is moth-eaten.
you have without doubt forgotten that I am but rottenness, and that my body
being of no better condition then my clothes, it must one day be the
nourishment of worms.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Argument.
Job makes an ample description of the misery of man, which he begins by his
birth, and finisheth with his death: then by a dexterity, which grief more
ingenious than eloquence had taught him, he draws reasons from his misfortunes
to oblidge the Divine mercy to treat him more gently.

MAn is borne of woman, Man that is borne of a woman, is of few days, and full
of trouble.
and as he has received being from her, he has derived weakness; he lives
here few years, He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flees also
as a shadow, and continues not
but in so short a term he suffers many miseryes.

He is borne like a flower, and passes away like it; he is like the shadow of
our Quadrants in a perpetual motion, and change is so far passed into his
nature, that notwithstanding all his endeavors he cannot remain one sole
moment in the same condition.

Notwithstanding, And do thou open ^hine eyes up^on such a one and bring
me into judgment with thee?
Lord, you esteem him worthy of your anger, you have your eyes open upon him
to examine all his actions, and you cite him before your Tribunal, that he may
give you an account of them. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
nor one.


His birth might serve him for an excuse in his sin; for who can make an
innocent of a man conceived in crimes? and who can make, but you only to whom
miracles are easy, the progress of his life to be pure, the entering of it
being so shameful and guilty?

And though the sin of his father should not diminish his own, Seeing his days
are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed
his bounds that he cannot pass.
at least you ought to pardon the shortness of his days, and consider that you
keep an account of his years, and that you have given him bounds beyond which
his life cannot extend.

Withdraw your self then from him, Turn from him that he may rest, til he shall
accomplish, as an hireling, his his day.
and let him expect in patience till the day of his death: content your self
with the evils that he suffers without procuring him new ones, and permit him
to comfort himself like a poor mercenary in hope of the happy day, which must
end his travail, and begin his rest.

So will you be sufficiently revenged by his death, For there is hope of a
tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender
branch thereof will not cease.
which puts him in a worse condition then trees; for after they are cut they
leave some hope to their Masters, and the sap which animates them makes them
recover their verdure, and thrust forth new Branches. Though the root thereof
wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof dye in the ground;


When time has made their roots old, and age taken from them their vigor, and
their Trunk being planted in a bad soil, draws up no more nourishment. Yet
through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.


At the very smell of the waters they recover their former force, and moisture
giving them life, they cover their heads with a new peruke, and as at the day
of their birth they crown it with boughs.

But when man is dead all hope dies with him, But man dies, and wastes away:
yea, man gives up the ghost, and where is he?
for after the soul is despoyled of the body, and the body is reduced into
dust, neither the endeavors of nature, nor the addresses of art can restore
him to life. As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decays and
dries up:


As it would be impossible to gather together the waters of the sea if they
were dispersed, or to keep together those of a river if the source were dry.

So cannot they bring a man back from the grave when he is once gone down
thither; So man lies down, and rises not, till the heavens be no more, they
shall not awake nor be raised, out of their fleepe.
and the sleep of death is so profound that he shall not awake till heaven
worn away with age and wearied with its long travailes shall stop its motions,
and suspend its influences.

This fatal condition which frightens all the world, O that thou would hide
me in the grave, and that thou would keep me secret, until thy wrath be
past, that tiou would appoint mea a fet time, and remember me.
rejoy ceth me when I think on it, and I should esteem my self very happy,
if during the misfortunes which make war upon me, the grave might serve me for
a sanctuary, and if heaven woold oblige it self to bring me thence when my
miseries shall be finished, and its anger passed over.

But as these wishes are unprofitable, If a man die, shall he live again? all
the days of mine appointed time will I wait, till my change come.
and as man cannot live again to dye any more, since I am at war with forrow,
I sigh after that blessed day where my soul united to its body, shall give it
part of its glory.

You shall call me by the voice of that horrid trumpet which must raise again
all the dead; Thou shall call, and I will answer thee: thou will have a desire
to the work of thine hands.
to obey your orders I will answer you from the grave, and to draw me out of
that obscure prison, you shall give me your hand, whereof I have the honor to
be the workmanship.

I do not lose this hope, For now thou numberest my stepps: do thou not watch
over my sins?
although I know that you count all my steps, consider the least actions of my
life, for I persuade my self that your mercy will triumph over your Justice,
and that my prayers will oblige you to pardon me my sins. My transgression is
sealed up in a bag, and thou ^owest up mine iniquity.


I know you weigh their quality, as you count their number; but I believe also
that my pains have defaced them, and that there is no sickness so troublesome
but may be cured by so violent a remedy. And surely the mountain falling
comes to naught: and the rock is removed out of his place.


There was no need though to treat a man with so much rigor; for if the
assaults of the winds, and the flashes of the lightning beat down the pride of
the mountains, and if the rocks by the violence of the rivers are unfastened
from their places:

If the waters which have no consistence, The waters wear the stones: thou
washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth, and zhou
destroyest the hope of man.
and which fall drop by drop hollow the stones which are so hard, and if the
sea unsensibly undermine its banks, it will not be hard for your Omnipotence to
ruin man, which has neither the steadiness of mountains, nor the hardness
of rocks.

Yet one would judge that he has not received his strength from your hand,
Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passes: thou changest his
countenance, and sendest him away.
but to support all the changes which happen in his person during the course of
his life; for after sadness and years have altered his countenance you give
him his discharge and send him into another world nevr to return again.

He is ignorant in that of all which passes in this, His sons come to honor,
and he knows it not, and they are brought low, but he perceives it not of
them.
and having no more commerce with men, he has no part in the glory nor in the
contempt of his children.

But as long as he is living his body is afflicted with a thousand evils, But
his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn.
and though his soul by the condition of her creation be exempt from them, yet
she bears a part in them, and becomes miserable with it.

The Fifteenth CHAP.
The Argument.
REasons failing Eliphaz he has recourse to injuries, and anger making him
loose his memory as well as judgment he reproacheth Job with crimes, which he
pence had never committed, and represents him under the person of a Tyrant
which he describes with much eloquence, and very little charity.

ELiphaz, Then answered Eliphaz the Themanite, and said,
who could not suffer the just reproaches Job of replies in choler.

If you were as wise as you think you are, Should a wise man utter vain
knowledge, and fill his belly with the East Wind?
you would not speak with so much vanity, but you would command anger which
transports you, and you would not cast so many unprofitable words into the air
for to exaggerate your griefs.

But with a high insolence you assault your Sovereign, Should he reason with
unprofirable talk? or with speeches wherein he can do no
and with a notable indiscretion you fly on discourses, which cannot be
followed but with punishment and repentance.

You have done all your endeavors, Yea, tho^costest off sear, and restrainest
prayer before God.
to banish out of the world the fear of God and after these impudent words,
which offend h^aven and earth, you will not have recourse to prayer, which
though is the sole means that remains to appease God, and the only remedy
which you have to sweeten your miseries.

For whereas your misery ought to have put regrets and fighs in your mouth; For
thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou chooest the tongue of the crafty.
your iniquity has put injuries there and in hearing you speak one may see
that you use the language of blasphemers, and that you have a design to
imitate them.

But without putting my self to the trouble to reply to you, Thine own mouth
condemns thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against thee.
your own mouth shall condemn you, and disavowing all the maxims which you
have in^iscreetly uttered, and you shall prevent our answers, and change your
opinion.

Do you think your self the first of men either in birth or merit? Art thou
the first man that was born? os wast thou made before the hills?
And would your folly have persuaded you that at your age, you were formed
before the mountains, and that being as ancient as the world there has nothing
past in all ages, whereof you have not had a perfect knowledge?

Have you entered into the Counsel of God for to give him advice? Have thou
hea^d the secret of God? and do thou restrain wisdom to thy self?
have you contested concerning any business with him? have you found that his
wisdom was inferior to yours, and that he had need of your instructions, for
the conduct of the universe?

But without flattering your vanity with such high comparisons, What koowest
thou that we know not? What understandest thou, which is not in us.
what do you know that we are ignorant of? and what truth do you understand
which are hidden from us?

If you think to prevail with the conferences which you have had with the
ancients of your state, With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men,
much elder then thy father.
you must know that we treat every day with men who are more ancien tand more
wise then your masters.

You complain of your losses, Are the consolations of God small with thee? Is
there any secret thing with thee?
and as if your evil were without remedy, you speak to God without respect:
Certainly if you had ever so little of your senses left you, you would judge
that nothing were more easy with him, then to reestablish you in your former
fortune; and it may be he would already have done it, is the insolence of your
words had not hindered him.

Why does your pride raise you above your condition? Why does thine heart carry
thee away? and what does thine eyes wink at.
why do they read in your eyes that you have thoughts of vanity in your heart,
and that you conceive designs that surpass your power?

Why does your mind revolt against God? That thou tu^nest thy spirit against
God, and let such words go out of thy mouth?
why does your rash tongue accuse his Providence? and why do you utter words
which offend his Justice?

I know you often allege your innocence; What is man, that he should be
clean? and he that is borne of a woman that he should be righteous?
but can one be formed of earth, and not sullyed with sin? and can one call
himself the son of a woman, and boast of being just?

Amongst those great men who by their piety have acquired the name of Saints,
Behold, he puts no trust in his Saints, yea, the heavens are not clear in
his sight.
there have been found some unfaithful: and amongst the angels, which are the
principal Ornaments of Heaven, there have been found apostates.

How much more light and less faithful will man be, How much more abominable
and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water?
whom his birth makes abominable, whom his weakness makes unprofitable, whom
his inclination carries to evils, and by a strange blindness persuades
himself that to drink water, and to commit sin, are two actions equally
indifferent?

If you will hear me I will impart to you some of my light, I will show thee,
hear me: and that which I have seen I will declare.
and to draw you from the error wherein you live, I will relate to you what I
have seen.

I will tell you nothing which wise men believe not as well as I, Which wise
men have told me from their fatheas, and have not hid it.
and since truths themselves are suspected, when we know not the authors of
them, I will name you those from whom I learnt them, as well to honor their
merit, as to satisfy your mind.

And for fear you should take them for persons of mean condition, Unto whom
alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them.
I would have you know that their birth and their wisdom had advanced them to
the administration of state, and that during their governments, our enemies
never overran our land, nor won any advantage over us. The wicked man
travellech with pain all his days, and the number of years is hidden to the
oppressor.


Behold the Oracles which they have declared to man, and which I entreat you to
hear with respect; The wicked Prince has no more cruel executioner then his
own ambition, or more sensible displeasure then to know that he is mortal, and
to be ignorant when his tyranny must end.

He thinks every hour that he hears the noise of Trumpets; A dreadful sound
is in his ears; in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon
when he injoyes peace he apprehends warte, and fears surprises from his
enemies, or treasons from his friends.

When night obliges him to lie down, He believes not that he shall return
out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword.
he never hopes to see the day, and his guilt r^presenting to him on all sides
nothing but naked swords, He believes, that they will assassine him in his bed.
He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knows that the day of
darkness is ready at hand.


When he firs at the Table to take his repast, he imagines that his meats are
poison, and that he shall find death, where he seeks for the conservation of
his life.

He is always in the same inquietude as a King who is going to give battle,
Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail against him, as
a King ready to battle.
and his state in the hands of fortune and of his Soldiers.

Although these punishments be rigorous, he deserved more cruel ones, For he
stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
Almighty.
for he made war against God, and by an insupportable insolence, he had
gathered forces for to fight with him.

He marched against him without fear, He runs upon him even on his neck,
upon the the thick bosses of his bucklers.
and as if God might have easily been overcome, he bel^eved that the pride of
his Troops, and the pomp of his Arms were sufficient to defeat him.

Having conceived this contempt of God, Because he covers his face with his
fatness, and makes collops of fat on his flank s.
he had given himself to debaushes, where the fat had so swollen up his cheeks
and his belly, that he had neither the stature, nor the visage of a man.

For punishment of so many crimes, And he dwells in desolate cities, and in
houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.
he shall see his estate ruined, and 10 secure his life he shall be constrained
to retire himself into forsaken Cities, and to hide himself in the ruins, more
proper to serve for a sepuichre for the dead, then a retreat for the living.

His extortions shall not enrich him, He shall not be rich, neither shall his
substance continue; neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the
earth.
for whatsoever care he takes to transport his treasures, he shall not preserve
them, and his fortune shall resemble those trees, which not having taken strong
root in the ground cannot resist the violence of the winds.

Fear and shame shall make him hide himself in darkness, He shall not depart
out of darkness, the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of his
mouth he shall go away.
where after he has seen his children dye, and the accomplices of his crimes,
he shall dye him self of displeasure, and by a just judgment of God, the same
fire which shall burn the trunk of the tree, shall consume all its branches.

When they shall foretell him these misfortunes, Let not him that is deceived,
trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recomp^nce.
the blindness wherein he lives, shall not suffer him to believe them, and he
shall not trouble himself to divert them by his prayers, nor redeem them by his
alms. It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be
green.


Finally he shall dye before his time; and he shall not attain that age, which
nature has made all honest men hope for, and his hands which exercised so many
crueltyes shall wither before his death, as the most guilty parts of his body.

His loss shall be without resource, He shall shake off his unripe grape as
the vine, and shall east off his flower as the Olive.
and one must expect nothing from his fortune, no more then from the
Olivetrees, or Vines which have been beaten down by the hayl, or stricken by the
frost, For the Congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall
consume the tabernacles of bribery.
when they thrust forth their first blossoms. Neither must one hope that his
riches will defend him from these disasters; for all the provisions which he
had made, shall be wholly unprofitable, and Divine Justice shall consume the
proud houses which he had built at the expense of the poor who could not
acquire his favors but by buying them with presents. They conceive mischief,
and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares deceit.


And surely he deserved all these punishments since the designs which he
conceived, tended to nothing but the ruin of his subjects, since he sought
nothing but occasions to execute them, and that he employed his mind but to
find artifices to deceive the innocent.

CHAP. XVI.
The Argument.
JOB teaches his Friends how to comfort the afflicted, and after he had mixed
his advice with some reproaches, he describes his miseries; And though he avow
God to be the principal cause of them, he promises himself that he will be
the principal witness of his innocence.

When the discourse of Eliphaz was ended Job replied in this manner. Then Job
answered, and said,


You entertain me with such common things, I have heard many such things:
miserable comfor^ors are ye all.
that you tire my patience, and oblige me to tell you, that if you have a will
to cure my evils, you have not the dexterity, and that your consolations are
remedies more hard to support, then my own griefs.

Will you never end such vain and picquant discourses, Shall vain words have
an end? or what ^mboldeneth thee that thou answerest?
and learning the sweetness of an afflicted man, which never used any injurious
words, will you not seek out some more civil ones to sweeten my displeasures?

If I had not rather follow my own inclination then your example, I also could
speak as you do: if your soul were in my souls stead, I could heap up words
against you, and shake mine head at you.
I might well use the same language; and if heaven had permitted that we might
change conditions, it would be very easy to me to make you see, that the
unhappy are more sensible of nothing then reproaches.

But as this proceeding is far from my sweetness, But I would strengthen you
with my mouth: and and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief.
I far from my sweetness, I would endeavor to find words which might
comfort you, and to do actions which might witness to the world how sensible I
should be of your Displeasures. I should employ all my Eloquence for to
fortifye you against sorrow; I should not open my mouth, but to assuage your
evils, and I should serve my self with all the Address I had for to cure you
without hurting you.

But since the order of things cannot be changed, Though I speak, my grief is
not assuaged: and though I forbear, I am not cased.
and that Heaven which will have you to be happy, will have me to be miserable,
what can I do to assuage my Grief? for whither I speak or hold my Peace, it
will be always equal, and my complaints nor my silence will not be able to
sweeten it.

Now as you hear me it oppresses me so sensibly, But now he has made me
weary, thou have made desolate all my company.
that me thinks all my forces fail me, and I am at the Vigil of returning
into nothing.

When I would conceal it, And thou have filled me with wrinkles, which is a
witness against me, and my leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my
face.
the wrinkles which appear upon my face discover it but too much: but their
reproaches trouble me not so much, as the calumnies of detractours who would
take away my Honor with my life.

They have displayed all their rage against me, He teareth me in his wrath, who
hates me; he gnasheth upon me with his teath; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes
upon me.
and passion so much masters their senses, that it appears in the terrible
Casts of their eyes, in the grinning of their teeth, and those other Gestures,
which men make, when their anger turns into fury.

They have opened their Mouth to caluminate my in nocence, They have gaped upon
me with their mouth, they have smitten me upon the cheek reprochfully, they
have gathered themselves together against me.
and passing from injuries to violences, they have given me Boxes on the Ear,
whose number cannot be counted, because they cease not till they were tired
with striking, and weary of making me so long suffer.

But nothing has more afflicted me then when God to try me Patience has made
me their Captive, God has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into
the hands of the wicked.
and to content their cruelty has delivered me into their hands.

I can scarce know my self at last, I was at ease, but he has broken me
asunder, he has also taken me by the neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me
up for his mark
when I compare the present with the past; for from an high and Eminent fortune
I am fallen into a profound misery: and God who will take from me the hope of
rising again, has broken me with Blows, and chosen me for the Mark of all
his thunders.

It seems that he is a Huntsman, His archers compass me round about, he
cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare; he pours out my gall upon the
ground.
and that I am a furious Beast; for where ever I go I find my self environed
with his Arms, he tears my sides and rends out my Bowels, and scatters them
upon the earth to serve as Meat for the Dogs.

I have not part of my Body, He breaks me with breach upon breach, he runs
upon me like a Giant.
but is covered with wounds; he stays not till the old ones are closed, to
make new ones, and both of them are so strange to look upon, that you would
judge it the hand of a Giant which has made them.

To appease his fury I have done all the actions of a Penitent; I have sowed
sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust.
I have clothed my Body with hair, I have changed the pomp of my habit into
the austerity of sackcloth, and instead of that Crown which served as an
Ornament for my Head, I have covered it with ashes. My face is foul with
weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death:


I have shed so many tears that my face is puffed up with it, that my eyes
infeebled have lost all their vigor, and can no more discern the Objects
which present themselves.

But I can say with assurance, Not for any injustice in my hands: also my
prayer is pure.
that I have suffered all these evils without deserving them, and that they
are come most commonly upon me, when to discharge my Duty I offered my prayers
to God, which might have been agreeable to him, since they were accompanied
with purity.

If I disguise the truth, O earth' cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have
no place.
may the Earth deny my body Sepulture, and may men more insensible then Rocks
never lend an ear to my compsaint. Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high.


But without having need of making Imprecations, I have a faithful witness in
the Heavens who knowing all my thoughts will not suffer my Innocence to be
oppressed.

Likewise I must confess to you, My friends scorn me: but mine eye pours
out tears unto God.
when the injurious words of my treacherous Friends renew my Griefs, I implore
his mercy, and employ my Tears to make him favorable to me.

As I am affored of his Justice, O that men might plead for a man with God, as
a man pleads for his neighbout!
and the goodness of my cause, there nothing remains to wish, but that it
were permitted me to treat with God as they treat with men, and to defend my
self before him as they defend themselves before a mortal Judge.

But I am afraid least Death prevent the Accomplishment of my Desires, When a
few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return.
and least my life end, before his justice absolve me; for I have passed the
best part of my years, and find my self engaged in a Carriere where one can
run but once,

CHAP. XVII.
The Argument.
Job complains of the Rigor of God, and the infidelity of his Friends, who
oblidge him with their continual invectives to wish for death, and to look
upon it as the end of all his miseries, and the beginning of all his happiness.

THe force of my mind grows weak, My breath is corrupt, my days are
extinct, the graves are ready for me.
The number of my days diminishes, and in the midst of so many misfortunes
which encompasse me, nothing is left me to hope for but the Grave.

My conscience assures me that I am more unhappy then guilty, Are there not
mockers with me? and does not mine eye continue in their provocation?
and notwithstanding my eyes are drowned with Tears, and it seems by the use I
make of them, that nature has not given me them but to weep.

Lord, Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will strike
hands with me?
put an end to so many miseries, or if it be your will that they yet endure,
take me into your protection, and by the favor of so good a sanctuary I permit
mine enemies to denounce war against me.

The ignorance wherein they live, For thou have hid their heart from
understanding: therefore shall thou not exal^^ them.
and the little care which they take to observe your Laws, makes me hope that
you will take my part, and that they shall have no advantage over me.

They regard me (though) as a prey which cannot escape them, He that speaks
flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail.
and they promise their Allies, that they shall enrich themselves at my
expense; But their Hopes shall be vain, and their eyes shall never see the
success of their unjust desires.

They make me the Fable of all Companies, He has made me also a byword of the
people and aforetime I was as a tabret.
and they never speak of the pubishment of the wicked but they allege me for
Example.

The just resentment which I have of their calumny, Mine eye also is dim by
reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow
darkens mine eyes that they cannot lead me, and all the parts of my body
being enfeebled cannot serve me.

Finally, Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall stir up
himself against the hypocrite.
the persecution which I suffer is so furious that good men cannot think on it
but their mind is struck with amazement, and their Heart seized with
indignation against th^se Traitors who were the canse of it.

But this is so far from hindering them to persevere in virtue, The right^o a
(...) on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and, stronger.
that on the contrary animated by my example they will add Courage to their
Piety, and do with pleasure what they did before with pain.

Change then your opinions, But as for you all, do you return, and come now;
for I cannot find one wife man among you.
you that think that I am punished for my crimes; or if you will persist in
that error, take it not ^ll that I condemn your thoughts, and that I publish
abroad that passion has made you loose your Judgment.

But I have entertained you long enough, My days are past, my purposes are
broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.
it is time to lend words to my sorrow, and to begin my complaints again; but
my life passes away, and my death approaches; my mind is disquieted, and if
it wander sometime in its Thoughts, it is not to divert but to afflict it self.

All things displease it equally; They change the night into day: the light is
short, because of darkness.
it would have night day, and when the day is come it yet wishes Night and
imagines that it will sweeten its displeasures. But as it sees that both of
them afflict it, it sighs after that night which has no end, If I wait, the
grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness;
and promises it self that it shall find rest in that bed, from which they
never rise again.

In these thoughts I make alliance with death, I have said to corruption, thou
art my father: to the worm, thou art my mother, and my sister.
and to testify to Rottenness and the worms, how I love them, I employ the
sweetest names which nature teaches us, and call them my Father, my Mother, and
my sisters.

And how would you have me place my hope elsewhere, And where is now my hope?
as for my hope, who shall see it?
since there is no one to be found who considers my miseries, and who gives my
Patience the Praises it deserves? They shall go down to the bars of the pit,
when our rest together is in the grave.


But if I could once dye, all my miseries should dye with me, and having no
more fear nor hope, I should enjoy the felicity which I search for, and which
with all my diligence I could never find.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Argument.
BIldad offended at the free replies of Job accuses him of impiety, and making
comparison betwixt his miseries, and those of sinners, he concludes that there
is much similitude in their opinions, there is so much resemblance in their
punishments.

BIldad then spoke for his Friends, and said to Job; Then answered Bildad the
Shuhite, and said.


Will you never give over speaking with so much peevishness, How long will it
be ere thou make an end of thy words? mark, and afterward we will speak.
and will you never hear our reasens to engage us to hear yours?

It is injustice to treat men like beasts, Wherefore are we counted as beasts,
and reputed vile in your sight?
and to despise discourses, which for wanting politenesse and ornament, do not
want reasons, nor truth.

But this fault ought to be pardoned you, He teareth himself in his anger:
shall the earth be forsaken for the^? and shall the rock be removed out of his
place?
since letting your self be carried away by the fury which possesses you, you
imagine that the earth shall be forsaken when you dye, and that the mountains
shall change their place, if you change your condition.

Do no you know that the prosperity of the wicked disperseth it self as soon
as it appears, Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark
of his fire shall not shine.
and that if fortune have l^st^^e, she has no continuance?

The glory ^f his house shall ^e darkened, The light shall be dark in his
tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out with him.
and if any conjectures abuse me not, his pomp shall become mournful, and the
lamps which glistered over his head during the pride of his feasts, shall give
no more light, or if they give any it shall be but to shine upon his tomb. The
steps of his strength shall be straightened, and his own council shall cast him
down.


He shall loose his courage in the midst of his enterprises, and his counsel
shall serve but to advance his overthrow, and precipitate him into misery.

His indiscretion, For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walks
upon a snate.
and Divine justice shall make him fall into snares which he had prepared for
the innocent, and when he shall labor to get out, he shall entangle himself
further in.

His feet shall be stopped in the net, The grin shall take him by the heel, and
the robber shall prevail against him.
and the pains which he shall take to disingage himself, shall cause an
unsupportable thirst, whose hear shall no less torment him, then the loss of
his liberty.

But nothing shall afflict him so much as to have been surprised in
encounters, The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the
way.
where he apprehended nothing, and that he could not tell how with his wisdom
to avoid the misfortune which was prepared for him. Terrors shall make him
afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his feet.


A thousand Panique fears shall astonish him, and having no more judgment, he
shall engage himself so forward in danger, that as if his feet were useless
to him, he shall not be able to retire.

Hunger that horrid Monster, His strength shall be hunger bitten, and
destruction shall be ready at his side.
which feeds upon our miseries, and which is never more vigorous then when we
are languishing, shall possess it self of his Heart, and devouring his
intrailes shall take from him that Vigor which made him subsist.

At the first Assault the freshness of his skin shall fade, It shall devour
the strength of his skin: even the first borne of death shall devour his
strength.
and after long languishing, he shall end his life by a strange Death which
shall be famed amongst the most violent.

His Family shall run the same fortune as his person; His confidence shall be
rooted our of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the King of terrors.
his children which were the best part of his hopes shall perish with him.
Death shall make it self a Trophy of their bodies, and like a Victorious King
take pleasure to trample them under his feet.

The Accomplices of his crimes shall be Companions of his punishment, It shall
dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his: brimstone shall be
scattered upon his habitation.
and he who is exempted, shall be drowned in a shower of Sulphur, and Flames.

Finally it shall be with his fortune, His roots shall be dried up beneath, and
above shail his branch be cut off.
as with those treees, whom the thunder has beaten down on all sides, and
whose roots it has burnt, whose branches it has broken, and whose Trunk it
has reduced to powder.

His memory shall be defaced from the earth, His remembrance shall perish from
the earth, and he shall have no name in the street.
and they shall never speak of his name in Assemblies nor public places.

God himself to contribute to his misery shall make him pass from brightness
to obscurity, He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of
the world.
from esteem to contempt, and his reputation as well as his person shall be
banished the earth. He shall neither have son or nephew among his people, nor
any remaining in his dwellings.


He shall leave no children to succeed him in his estate, and his posterity
perishing with him, there shall be no one to make him live after his Death.

In the day of his misfortune the astonishment shall be general, They that
come after him shall be astonished at his day, as they that went before were
affrighted.
and the great as well as the small finding wherewithal to be astonished,
shall be equally seized with Horror.

Since these misfortunes are the inheritance of the wicked, Surely such are the
dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knows not God.
and that those who forget God are punished in this manner, take heed least the
pains which you suffer be not proofs of your crimes, and that you be not
unhappy because you are guilty.

CHAP. XIX.
The Argument.
Job accuses the rigor of his friends, who for consolations give him nothing
but reproaches: he complains of the infidelity of his domestics and his
kindred which have left him, and comforts himself in the hope which he has
that God will raise him out of the Grave, for to make him eternally happy.

Job wearied with so many calumnies, Then Job answered and said.
wherewith his unfaithful friends would discolor his innocence, answered them,

Will you never give over afflicting my mind, How long will you vex my soul,
and break me in pieces with words?
and exercising my patience by words which are more insupportable to me, then
the torments which I endure.

They are so insolent, that they have made me blush a hundred times; These ten
times have ye reproached me: you are not ashamed that you make your selves
strange to me.
and the which angers me most is that they continue, and that the shame of
oppressing one the is innocent has not had the power to make you leave them of.

If I have failed out of ignorance, And be it indeed, that I have erred, mine
error remains with my self.
the cause of my s^^ shall be my excuse; if I have failed out of malice, I only
will undergo the punishment of my offense; and Divine justice which can well
discern the guilty from the innocent, shall not punish you with me.

Notwithstanding as if I were the cause of all your misfortunes, If indeed you
will magnify your selves against me, and plead against me my reproach:
I am the subject of all your calumnies: you oppose my misery to my virtue, and
you will persuade all the world that I am guilty, because I am miserable.

Learn now at least that God does not an action of a Judge when he afflicts me,
Know now, that God has overthrown me, and has compassed me with his net.
and that when he persecutes me, he has more desire to make his sovereignty
appear then his justice.

Who will not be of this opinion, Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not
heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.
if he consider that I suffer without a cause, that I complain with reason,
and that I cannot find a friend to comfort me, an Advocate to defend me, nor a
Judge to absolve me?

It seems God delights in engaging me in evils, He has en^ed up my way, that I
cannot pass^, and he has set darkness in my paths.
of which I can find no end, and that he has a design to overcast my mind
with darkness, to the end that I may suffer sorrow and that I may not find a
remedy.

He has despoyled me of that luster which environs Kings, He has stripped me of
myglory and taken the crown from my head.
he has taken the Crown from my head, and giving the guilty an innocent man
for example; of a puissant Prince, he has made a miserable Slave.

He has so ruined my fortune, He has destroyed me on every side and I am gone
and mine hope has he removed like a tree.
that there is none can reestablish it, and treating me like those trees which
the violence of the winds pulls up by the roots, he has not left me so much as
Hope which is the last comfort of the aflicted.

Anger, He has also kindled his wrath against me, and he counts me unto him;
as one of his enemies.
which animated him against me, has made him forget that I was the work of
his hands, and my misfortune has persuaded him that I was his enemy.

In these thoughts he has commanded his Soldiers to assault me, His troops
come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my
rabernacle.
and as his Orders are always followed, they have entered upon my Lands, where
after having done a thousand spoils, they have besieged my house, and made
themselves masters of it.

I thought that in this disaster my neighbors would comfort me; He has put my
brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me.
but whether the greatness of my evil has astonished them, or the justice of
God scattered them, they have kept far from me, as if they had been strangers.

Those with whom nature had tied me, My kinsfolk have veiled, and my familiar
friends have forgotten me.
have most basely abandoned me, and those with whom amity, more strong than
nature, had straightly united me, have most unjustly forgotten me.

My Domestiques themselves have lost the respect which they owed me, They that
dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a stranger: I am an aliant in
their sight.
and when since my misfortune they appeared before me, they seemed to speak as
if they had never known me.

When I called the slaves which owed me their liberty, I called my servant, and
he gave me no answer: I entreated him with my mouth
they would not daigne to answer me, and they themselves, who heretofore knew
not my intentions but by the mouth of another, have despised the prayers which
came out of mine own.

It is no wonder if that sort of people who love not but for interest have
forgotten me, My breath is strange to my wife, though I entreated for the
childrens sake of mine own body.
when mine own wife cannot endure me, but the stinking of my breath drives her
away; and when my prayers, mixed with tears and sighs, cannot stay the children
which my other wives have given me.

Finally, my misery is arrived to this point, Yea, young children despised me,
I arose, and they spoke against me.
that fools which make men sport mock at me; present and absent I am the
subject of their laughter, and they never are found more pleasant than when
they play the Buffoones at my expense.

I pardon their folly this insolence, All my inward friends abhorred me^ and
they whom I loved, are turned against me.
but I cannot endure that those wise men, of whom heretofore I took counsel,
and who received my advice as Oracles, should be afraid of my person; and that
he who amongst them was most obliged to me, is now the most ungrateful.

These evils, My bones cleaves to my skin, and to my flesh, and I am escaped
with the skin of my teeth.
as rigorous as they are, would seem supportable to me, if I felt no other in
my body, which are so much the more sensible to me, as they are more true: But
the Fever which devoures me has consumed my flesh; the skin which covered it,
is fastened to my bones, and the fury of that evil which disfigures all my
face, has left me nothing but the lips about the teeth to form words and
complaints.

At the sight of so many evils be touched with pity; Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
and you who make profession of loving me, have compassion of my griefs,
because their excess makes you see that it is an incensed God which is the
Author of them.

Why do you agree with him to persecute me, Why do you persecute me as God,
and are not satisfied with my flesh?
and why imitating the cruelty of Savage Beasts which live upon man's flesh, do
you feed your selves with my miseries?

Where is the man that will lend me his hand to write the Regrets of my mouth;
Oh that my words were now written, Oh that they were printed in a book!
and who will be the Engravor to carve them upon lead, or ingrave them in
marble to inform Posterity? That they were graven with an iron pen and lead,
in the rock for ever!


These wishes do no injury to my hopes, for with whatsoever terms I serve my
grief, For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth.
I know that he from whom I expect my salvation, is living, and that after he
has tried my patience, he will bring me out of that miserable condition to
which I am reduced.

And I may well believe it, And though after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God.
since faith persuades me that I must rise again after my death, that my bones
shall once again be clothed with flesh, that in my own body I shall see the
God which I adore, and hear from his mouth a sentence favorable to my
innocence,

With what reasons soever they combat my belief, Whom I shall see for my
self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, shough my reins be consumed
within me.
I hold assuredly that his goodness having obliged him to make himself man, my
eyes shall find their happiness in his body, that in spite of death, which
shall have destroyed me, I shall live again, that changed in condition only,
and not in nature, I shall see my God in his glory: And this hope which I
conserve in my soul, is the only consolation which I receive in my
displeasures.

If you are of the same opinion why do you prosecute me? But ye should say,
Why persecute ye him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me?
and if you believe that heaven will one day crown my patience, why do you
forge calumnies to oppress my innocence?

Change your design then, Be ye fraid of the sword: for wrath brings the
punishments of the sword, that ye may know that there is a judgment.
profit by the advice which I give you, fly that revenging sword, which leaves
not sins unpunished: and to entertain your self in this good resolution,
remember that God will be our Common Judge, and that our differences shall be
determined in his presence.

CHAP. XX.
THE ARGUMENT.
SOphar following the opiniont of those who had spoken before him, concludes,
that punishment is a proof of sin, and that with whatsoever Reasont Job
endeavors to defend his innocence, he is bound to confess that he is guilty,
because he is afflicted.

SOphar, Then answered Zophar the Naama^hite, and said,
who would take advantage of the last words of Job, said to him:

The conclusion of your discourse has given me a thousand thoughts, Therefore
do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste.
and my soul troubled with their number knows not which to choose.

The reproaches which you use to me, I have heard the check of my reproach, and
the spirit of my understanding causes me to answer.
will furnish me with an ample subject of discourse; but as in this conference
I seek nothing but to draw you from your error, I will not reply to the
injuries which my conscience and reason assure me are not true.

I will only tell you then that in your disgrace there is nothing
extraordinary: Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth
that every one knows that the glory of a wicked man is not of continuance,
That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but
for a moment?
and that moments are not shorter than the prosperity of a sinner.

Though his pride should mount up to heaven, Though his excellency mount up to
the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds.
though he should bear his head in the clouds, and that men, to content his
vanity, should accord him divine honors.

Yet all his glory shall turn into smoke, that deceit^u^^ luster, which
dazzled eyes, Yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung; they which have
seen him shall say, Where is he?
shall disperse like dust which the wind carries away: those who admired his
greatness, shall be amazed at his fall, and not able to believe it after they
have seen it, shall ask what is become of him.

It shall be with his happiness, He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not
be sound: yea he shall be chased away as a vision of the night
as with dreams, which when we awake, we cannot remember; and his prosperity
shall pass by like Ghosts, which go away with the night, and of which there
remains in the morning but a confused remembrance.

Those who looked upon him with envy, The eye also which saw him, shall see him
no more; neither shall his place any more behold him.
shall no more look upon him but with pity, and his Domestiques, the
eyewitnesses of his vanity, shall see him no more but with contempt.

And because a father is more sensible in the person of his children, His
children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall restore their
goods.
than in his own, they whom he has brought into the world shall be reduced to
extremity, and Divine Justice shall ruin them to revenge the Orphans which
their Fathers had oppressed.

But the most rigorous of his punishments is, His bones are full of the sin
of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust.
that he shall retain his bad inclinations till death, that he shall not lose
the desire of doing evil, when he shall have lost the power, and that he shall
carry away his bad habitudes with him into the grave.

For as those who eat any thing that is agreeable, Though wickedness be sweet
in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue
retain it a long time in their mouth, for to taste it with more pleasure.

So he shall keep his sin as long as he can, Though he spare it, and forsake
it not, but keep it still withing his mouth:
and if sometimes he let it go in appearance, he shall retain the desire of it
in his heart,

Notwithstanding he considers not, that that which has given him joy, shall
cause his sorrow, and that if sin flatter our senses, it poysoneth out souls,

But in as much as sinners fear not much what they do not believe, Yet his
meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within him.
and that hell enters not into their minds but as a fable, God will make him
feel the pains of it, for his goods shall be taken from him, and they shall
compel him to restore with sorrow, what he had taken with pleasure.

He shall find that the venom of aspes is not so mortal to those whom they
hurt, He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God
shall cast them out of his belly
as the goods of the poor to those who take them away; and that the tongue of
Vipers is not so dangerous a poison as riches ill gotten. He shall suck the
poison of asps: the vipers tongue shall slay him.


With what hope soever he flatters himself, he shall enjoy none of his goods;
for after that he shall have made great purchases, He shall not see the rivers,
the floods, the brooks of honey and butter.
that his flocks shall be increased, either by his husbandry, or by his usury,
that his Kine shall give him streams of milk, and his Bees shall give him
rivers of honey, he shall have but the trouble of it, and another shall receive
the profit: He shall bear the chastisement of all the evil which he has
committed, and though his griefs teach him that he is mortal, yet he shall
not be able to die: Heaven shall prolong his years, that he may suffer all the
miseries which his injurious malice has made the innocent endure.

Because he has ruined the poor, pillaged their houses, That which he
labored for, shall he restore, and shall not swallow it down: according to his
substance shall the restirution be, and he shall not rejoice therein.
and has not taken the pains to build them again after he has pulled them
down.

Because his unjust desires have had no bounds, and because his heart, after so
many pillages, has not been satisfied; God, who proportions punishments to our
crimes, Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor; because he has
violently taken away an house which he builded not.
will not permit him peaceably to possess what he has so unhappily acquired.

And fince in his good fortune he has not given to the poor what was
superfluous with him, he shall not have in his disgrace what is necessary.

But by a more strange kind of punishment he shall find poverty in abundance,
Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired.
for whether his avarice oblige him to form new desires; or to wish more
wealth, or that it permits him not to employ that which he has in his coffers,
he shall prove that of all kinds of poverty the most troublesome is that which
surpriseth us in the midst of riches.

And seeing that he cannot avoid being miserable in felicity it self, There
shall none of his meat be left, therefore shall no man look for his goods.
there shall be no sorrow wherewith his mind is not afflicted.

Since his good fortune must be so fatal to him, In the fullness of his
sufficiency he shall be in straits: every hand of the wicked shall come upon
him.
and that he shall be never nearer his ruin, than when he is mounted on the
top of his happiness, I would he were happy, that he might be presently
miserable, and that heaven might discharge upon him its anger, and stick him
with all its thunders.

I know well that he will do all his endeavors to avoid his misfortunes, When
he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him,
and shall rain it upon him while he is eating.
and that he will employ all his tricks to divert the disastre which hangs over
his head; But his endeavors and his tricks shall be equally unprofitable, and
they shall prepare him so many evils, that if he escape some, He shall flee
from the iron weapon; and the bow of steel shall strike him through.
he shall not warrant himself from others; for he shall see on one fide the
sword drawn out of the scabbard, and glittering like lightening, which shall
menace him with death; and on the other, he shall see the Devils (whom Divine
Justice imployes to revenge it self upon our injuries) who shall wait with
impatience for to conduct him to punishment.

In so pressing a misfortune he shall look for some retreat, It is drawn and
comes out of the body: yea, the glistring sword comes out of his gall:
terrors are upon him.
but shall find none, and those hidden places, which serve as Sanctuaries to
the unhappy, being shut against him, he shall be constrained to precipitate
himself into hell, All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not
blown shall consume him: it shall go ill with him that is left in his
tabernacle.
where that fire which has no need of wind to light it, nor of matter to
feed it, shall burn eternally; and for the accomplishment of his misery, the
children which he shall leave in his house shall undergo the punishment of his
sin.

Then all the Creatures which are subject to the vanity of men, The heaven shall
reveal his iniquity: and the earth shall rise up against him.
and which against their inclination served their iniquities, shall make War
upon him; heaven shall make his crimes public, and the earth which has seen
them shall depose against him.

When these faithful witnesses shall have made seen to all the world by what
ways this impious man had acquired his riches, The increase of his house shall
depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
God shall pronounce his sentence upon their depostions, and giving up his
house to pillage, shall permit his enemies to enrich themselves with his goods.

So all men shall learn from his fall, This is the portion of a wicked man
from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God.
that a bad life cannot have a good end; that hell is the portion of the
wicked; and that as virtue promises it self recompense, sin must expect
punishments.

CHAP. XXI.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOB uses diverse reasons to persuade his friend, that prosperity is not a
proof of our innocence, nor adversity a mark of our sin, since it often
happens, that a sinner is happy, and an innocent man miserable.

JOB perceived well that Sophaz had represented him under the person of a
sinner, But Job answered and said,
and that his friends approved his opinion, wherefore he replied to them in
these terms.

With whatsoever reasons you endeavor to support your discourse, Hear
diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.
I persuade my self that if you will but hearken to mine, you will change your
Opinion, and that at last you will be sorry that you have accused an Innocent.

I know that every thing displeases you in my person, Suffer me that I may
speak, and after that I have spoken, mock on.
and that heaven which would make me odious, has also made my discourse
insupportable; But make a trial upon your mind to hear me, and when I have
deduced my reasons, if they please you not, I give you leave to laugh at me.

Observe then, As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should
not my spirit be troubled?
that it is not with you so much as with God, that I dispute, and that I
complain more of his rigor than of yours; for if you have an ill opinion of
mine innocence, my afflictions serve as an excuse for your suspicions: But God
who reads my heart, cannot be ignorant of it; and when I think that he does
not take the pains to make you know it, methinks I have cause to complain of
it.

Since he will not give me this satisfaction, Mark me, and be astonished, and
lay your hand upon your mouth
and that he has resolved that my evils should be public and my innocence
hidden, look upon me at least, but without engaging your selves to comfort or
to bemoane me; put your finger upon your mouth, and testify your trouble and
your love, but by your astonishment and your silence.

For my part, Even when I remember, I am afraid, and trembling takes hold on
my flesh.
I cannot entertain my self with my misfortunes but I tremble, and though they
say that the memory of past evils is agreeable, mine are so violent, that I
cannot think of them without extreme sorrow: And all the while that my mind
entertaines it self with this fatal subject, all the parts of my body shake
with horror.

Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?
Yet so miserable a condition ought not prejudice my innocence, for if my
disgrace were a cause of my sin, the prosperity of the wicked would be a mark
of their virtue, and we should be obliged to believe that all those who are
happy are innocent; yet we see that sinners live long, and that honors are not
wanting to their ambition, nor riches to their avarice.

Their family is always numerous, Their seed is established in their sight
with them, and their offspring before their eyes.
and heaven which gives them children, takes the care of preserving them, that
they may enjoy them long, inasmuch as in few years they make many alliances,
and see issue from their daughters a long train of children.

Their houses enjoy a profound rest, Their houses are safe from fear, neither
is the rod of God upon them.
there is no accident that may trouble them, and with what sin soever they
offend the goodness of God, Their bull gendereth and fails not, their cow
calveth, and casts not her calf.
his justice never punishes them; the cares of his providence extend themselves
even over their flocks, for their Kine never miscarry when they are happily
delivered: there arrives no misfortunes to their young ones, and heaven gives
them milk in abundance to nourish them.

But without standing to describe so ordinary a thing. They send forth their
little ones like a flock, and their children dance
I will represent you the fruitfulness of their wives, which is so great, that
their children equal their flocks in number, and skip about their houses like
young lambs in the fields.

They can scarce go but they set them to dance, They take the timbrell and
harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.
their tongue is not yet untyed when they teach them to sing, and as if their
life were a perpetual Revels, Vials, and Lutes, are heard every day in their
houses.

They pass away their years so pleasantly, They spend their days in wealth and
in a moment go down to the grave.
and when the time of dying is come, and that sickness takes them out of the
world, they languish not long in a bed, but descend quietly and suddenly into
the grave.

Notwithstanding one cannot say it is their piety that brought these blessings
upon them, Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways.
for as long as they lived with us they boldly professed that they would have
no part with God, and that his Laws being indifferent to them, they were not
resolved to take the pains to keep them.

They made a show of being ignorant that there was a God, What is the Almighty,
that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him?
that they might not be obliged to serve him; and to dispense with themselves
from praying to him, they persuaded themselves that he did not watch over our
actions, and that he had abandoned to an imaginary Destiny the conduct of the
Universe.

Think not though that I am of their party if I describe their happiness, Lo,
their good is not in their hand, the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
for I know that that of the wicked though it be durable is not eternal, and
whatsoever assurance they show, they are not Masters of their fortunes;
wherefore their sentiments have been always contrary to mine, and our manner
of living has not been less different than our opinions.

I am of accord with you, How often is the candle of the wicked put out? and how
often comes their destruction upon them? God distributeth sorrows in his anger.
that their prosperity has no luster, which is not deceitful; that the
sorrows which succeed their pleasures shall make no less spoil in their
souls than the Torrents in the fields.

And that they shall not be forgotten in that fatal day, They are as stubble
before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carries away.
when the hand of God, which cannot commit injustice, shall distribute
punishment according to desert.

In the presence of that terrible Judge whom they can neither frighten nor
corrupt, God lays up his iniquity for his children: he rewards him, and he
shall know it.
it shall be with those wicked men, as with the straw which the wind plays
with, or as the dust which the whirle-winde carries not into the Air but to
disperse and scatter it.

Finally, His eyes shall fee his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath
of the Almighty.
their punishment shall not stop in them, but shall pass even to their
Children, who shall be unhappy for having had guilty fathers, and when they
shall see their sin punished in their successors, they shall prove to their
cost, that God takes notice of all that passes in the world, and if he
dissemble our offenses he is not ignorant of them.

Besides this punishment, For what pleasure has he in his house after him,
when the number of his months is cut off in the midst?
they shall suffer extreme torments in their persons, death shall be always
present before their eyes, and although they try its cruelties they shall not
feel its favors, and shall drink great draughts in this cup of bitterness
and fury which God prepares for his enemies.

One must confess that their punishment would be too gentle if they were
punished but in their successors; Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he
judges those that are high.
for when men are dead, the condition of their house gives them but little
trouble; and it is not their greatest pain to know that Divine Justice has
contracted the life of their children, and taken them out of the world in the
midst of their years.

Out of all this discourse it is easy for me to conclude, One dies in his
full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.
that there are no certain marks to discern the good from the bad, since it
happens sometimes, that two guilty men are treated differently, and that two
just men who are equal in merit, are not so in fortune.

Therefore we must adore that conduct, His breasts are full of milk, and his
bones are moistened with marrow.
and without murmuring submit our selves to the Ordinance of God, for men were
insolent if they would instruct him who teaches the Angels.

Let Us reverence then his providence, And another dies in the bitterness of
his soul, and never eats with pleasure.
when we see that a sinner has no disgrace whiles he is in the world, that his
happiness is constant, that riches and health accompany him to the grave, that
his body is of a strong constitution, and that that vigor which makes youth
acceptable, leaves him not in his very age.

But let us adore his Justice, They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the
worms shall cover them.
when we see another man who is not it may be so guilty, pass his years in
sorrows, count his days by his afflictions, and dye as poor as he was borne.

Finally, Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully
imagine against me.
let us not murmr, when we see that two lives different shall have the same
end, that the rich and the poor shall be both covered with earth, and that the
worms who have no regard to our conditions, shall spare a happy man no more
than a miserable.

I have not so little wit, For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and
where are the dwelling places of the wicked?
but I read in your face the thoughts which you revolve in your heart; I know
that you accuse me whilst I plead for God, and that you condemn mine
innocence whilst I defend his Justice.

For drawing a bad conclusion from a bad principle, Have ye not asked them that
go by the way? and do not ye know their tokens?
you say it is necessary that I should be guilty, because I am so unhappy, and
that God had never suffered my flocks to be taken away, my palaces to be
overthrown, and my children to be buried under their ruins, if by some
notable impiety I had not engaged his justice to punish me.

But you argue so ill in this occasion that there is no one but condemns you,
That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be brought
forth to the day of wrath.
and if without making choice of a Judge you will ask the first Passenger
which you find; I assure my self that his answers will make you see that upon
the subject of which we dispute, he has no other sentiments than mine.

And certainly they are very just, Who shall declare his way to his face? and
who shall repay him what he has done?
and it is with much reason that I maintain, that sinners are not always
punished for their crimes, for the earth has no punishments rigorous enough to
chastize them; and heaven does well to reserve them for the day of its fury,
and to defer their punishment to render it eternal.

The instruments which he uses here, Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and
shall remain in the tomb.
are too feeble for to tame them; for if he had a desire to chastize theie
sins, there could no man be found hardy enough to undertake it; and if he had
a design to ruin them, there could none be found puissant enough to execute
it.

Do not you see that they reverence them after their death, The clods of the
valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man shall draw after him, as there are
innumerable before him
that they oblige nature to wear mourning for them, that they condemn the
Elements to weep for them, that they carry them with pomp to the grave, that
they embalme their bodies to preserve them a long time, and that in spite of
death they defend them from corruption?

Those who flatter them during their life, continuing it after their death,
endeavor to persuade men that the earth respects their bodies, that the graves
are proud of possessing them, and that that fabulous hell of profane men is
happy to lodge their Ghosts, and that all those that go before or follow them
into those sad places, come not there but to have the honor to be with them.

Since it is certain then that the wicked are not always miserable, How then
comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remainetb falsehood.
and that experience contradicts the reasons wherewith you defend your opinion,
do not you take a wrong course to comfort me, when you would persuade me that I
am guilty because I am afflicted: And might not you rather conclude that all
the unfortunate are not wicked, because all the wicked are not unfortunate?

CHAP. XXII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELiphaz would persuade those who hear him, that when God punishes men, he is
not bound to declare his motives, and that those which obliged him to punish
Job are not secret, since his sins are so public.

AS they could not reply to such good reasons, Then Eliphaz the Temanite
answered and said,
Eliphaz, who disputed not so much for truth as for glory, had recourse to
invectives, and without any more palliating his design, undertook openly to
make Job confess that he was a famous Malefactor.

We know, says he, that a man were insolent, who would be equal with God, and
who serving himself with the light which he could not have borrowed but from
him, would reform his Providence, and oblige him by his reasons to use another
kind of conduct over men.

But certainly you are no less rash to persuade your self, Can a man be
profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be prositable unto himself?
that he is interested in your innocence, and that to make it public, he is
obliged to do a miracle; what profit can he hope from your virtue, who
possesses all in himself, and what honor can he expect thence, whose glory
is infinite?

Think not that he is like those Judges, Is it any pleasure to the Almighty,
that thou art righteous? (...) gain (...) that (...) make thy wayers perfect.
whom fear makes to change their resolution, and who da^e not condemn one
that i^guilty, for fear of incurring his dis-favour: Persuade not your sest
that he enters into judgment with you, and that to appease your complaints, he
declares to you the motives which oblige him to punish you. Sovereigns, which
are men, render no account of their actions to their Subjects, and when they
make an Edict, or pronounce a Decree, they often conceal the causes of it, and
allege no other reasons than their wills.

Believe then that God punishes you for your crimes, Will he reprove thee for
fear of thee? will he enter with thee into judgment?
and that all these afflictions which overwhelme you, are the just
chastisements which your impiety deserves.

Nor can you deny but that you have reigned like a Tyrant, Is not thy
wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite?
that against the fundamental Laws of State you have treated your Subjects
a^^ Slaves, that taking pawnes (...) those who were insolvable, you have made
as many poor as you had Debtors, and that by a violence which deserves not
pardon, you have taken from them their clothes, and have enriched your self
with their spoils.

I pass under silence, For thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for
naught, and stripped the naked of their clothing.
as not being your greatest crime, how that you have refused the necessitous
the use of the water, which you have turned aside for to water your gardens,
Thou have nor given water to the weary to drink, and thou have withholden
bread from the hungry.
and denying the bread which you owed to the miserable in their need, you have
taken from them that which you would not give them.

As long as heaven favored you, as your Subjects feared you, you invaded the
Lands of your neighbors, and without acknowledging any right but that of
Arms, you kept with injustice what you acquired with violence.

But as (...) the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honorable man dwelt in
it.
And to be no better your Subjects than to strangers, you ravished the estate
of the widows, and added the misfortune of poverty to that of their condition.
Orphans, who thought to find a second father in you, Thou have sent widows
away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have bin broken.
had no more cruel enemy, and their riches making their crimes, you did not
judge them innocent, but when you had made them miserable.

The miseries which now besiege you are the punishments of these sins,
Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubles thee.
and without searching any more whence these sanique terrors come which
affright you, and these invisible chayns which take away your liberty, you must
believe that your injustice is the true cause of it.

But that which astonisheth me the most, Or darkness that thou can not see,
and abundance of wares cover thee.
is, that amongst so many violences you lived without fear, for when you made
any reflection upon the condition of your fortune, you imagined that it had so
much luster, that disgraces could not obscure it, and that it had so much
steadfastness, that all misfortunes could not overthrow it.

When you entertain your self with these false hopes, Is not God in the
height of heaven? and behold, the height of the stars, how high they are.
you believe without doubt, that because God lodges in the heavens, because he
walks upon the stars, and his glory seperates him from his creatures, he
does not watch over their actions, or if he take any notice of them, it is with
so much confusion, that as one must not hope for recompense, one need not be
afraid of punishment.

Your superstition formed it self a God, And thou say, how does God know?
can he judge through the dark cloud?
who could neither know nor punish crimes, and to entertain your self in this
foolish belief, you were persuaded, that the thicknese of the clouds stole
from him the sight of them, Thick clouds are a coveriog to him that he sees
not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven:
and that being only busied about the motions of the heavens, he neglected the
conduct of the earth.

Oh! will you never leave following the errors of past ages, Have thou marked
the old way which wicked men have trodde^?
which in thus much ought to be suspected of you, as that they who invented
them have undergone the pumshment of them? Which were cut down out of time,
whose fonndation was overflown with a flood.
that their death was hastened to stop the course of their perverse Doctrine,
and that famous Deluge which drowed the Universe, was a chastisement which God
found to punish them.

They also said impudently, Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can
the Almighty do for them?
that they would not serve him, since he could not protect them, and that a God
who had not power, deserved no honor: Finally, they spoke with contempt of him
whom Angels adore, and made a vain Idol of him who gives the heavens motion
and the earth repose.

I know not how these impious men, Yet he filled their houses with good things:
but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
whose sentiments are so far from my belief, could vomit out these
blasphemies against God; for whilst they condemned his providence, it filled
their houses with riches, and whilst they despised his power, it made their
Lands fruitful.

Moreover these errors are so visible, The righteous see it, and are glad: and
the innocent laugh them to scorn.
that the just shall mock at them one day, and the simple, whose mind has
nothing elevated, shall laugh at these wise men of the world, who boasted
themselves to be the Authors of them.

Their vanity shall then be humbled, Whereas our substance is not cut down, but
the remnant of them the fire consumes.
for besides the displeasure of seeing their opinions despised, they shall have
the regrett of seeing their disciples serve as a prey to the flames, for having
been willing to maintain their pernicious Doctrine.

Do not you then bear any part in their opinions, Acquaint now thy self with
him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.
if you would not have any in their punishments; but follow better advice,
reconcile your self with God, make peace with that puissant enemy which makes
war with you, and that will produce you more happiness than this has caused
you misery.

Receive the Law of his mouth since he is victorious, Receive, I pray thee, the
law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.
submit your self to his Ordinances since he is your Sovereign, and for fear
his words should escape you, write them not in marble, but eng^ave them in your
heart.

This advice will not be unprofitable to you, If thou return to the Almighty,
thou shall be built up, thou shall put awa^ miquity far from thy tabernacles.
for if you appease God by your prayers, he will make your condition more
glorious than it is contemptible, and if to satisfy him, you banish sin from
your self, to recompense you he will banish misery from your house.

Then shall you acquit your self of all your losses, Then shall thou lay up
gold as dust, and the gold of Ophit as the stones of the brooks.
and you shall recover with usury what was taken from you, for for barren
Lands, which could bring forth nothing, you shall have such as in their
entrayles shall produce Porphyrie; and in stead of those unprofitable Rocks
which made a part of your Estate, you shall have fertile Mines, from whence
shall issue rivers of gold.

God who seems to be against you, Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and
thou shall have plenty of silver.
shall turn on your side, your enemies shall be his, and because they make
war with silver as well as iron, you shall have them both in abundance, the
one to pay your Soldiers, and the other to arm them.

In this happy condition God shall be all your delight; For then shall thou
have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up the face unto God.
and because he shall be the Author of it, you shall find it more solid than
those which you have heretofore tasted. Finally, you shall converse familiarly
with him, and in the same manner that your sin made you humble your eyes
toward the earth, your innocence shall make you lift them toward heaven.

You shall ask nothing o^ God which he does not gran^ you, Thou shall make thy
prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows.
his gifts shall be proo^^ to you of his love, and the vows which you shall
ma^^ him shall be testimonies o^ your fidelity.

You shall make no wishe^ in vain, Thou shall also decree a thing, and it
shall be established unto thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.
things shall happen as you have projected them their success shall never
deceive your hopes, and all your conjectures shall have so much certitude, that
it shall be very easy to judge that your light comes from heaven.

So by an agreeable exchange, When men are cast down, then thou shall say,
There is lifting up: and he shall save the humble person.
he who was in contempt shall be in esteem; That sinner which durst not look
up to Heaven, shall see the stars under his feet, and enjoying a true
happiness, he shall have no more fears which disquiet him, nor hopes which
deceive him.

But to arrive to this felicity, He shall deliver the Island of the innocent:
and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands.
it is necessary to be innocent, and to acquire this glorious Title, good words
must be accompanied with good works, and the sanctity of our souls be made
known by the purity of our actions.

CHAP. XXIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALL the words of Job declare the trouble of his mind, for he desires to one
far with God; complains of the difficulty which then is to find him; and on
the other side considering his greatness, he is afeard to a^ cost him.

WHen these discourses, Then Job answered and said,
which contained reproaches rather than consolations, were ended, Job neglected
to answer them, and knowing that God is the support of the miserable, he
entertained himself with him it these terms:

My friends persecute me, the remedies which they apply to my evil are so
violent, Even 10 day is my complaint bitter: my stroke is heaviour than my
groaning.
that in stead of sweetning them, they exasperate them; wherefore my mouth is
always open to complaints, notwithstanding whatsoever indeavou I use, it
cannot express the grief which I endure; as it is not so eloquent as the hand
which struck me is heavy, my evils are always greater than my complaints, and
those who see me, and hear me, are bound to acknowledge, that I am more
unhappy than I am eloquent.

But with whatsoever punishment he afflicts me, O that I knew where I might
find him! that I might come even to his seat;
I would treat with him as they do with the Kings of the earth, and find an
Angel who would be my guide to conduct me before the throne, where he absolves
the innocent, and condemns the guilty.

Though he be my enemy, I would take him for my Judge, and I would accompany my
discourses with so many fight and just complaints, that I would oblige him to
speak with me, and judging of his designs by his Answers, I would understand
what I am ignorant of, and know why I am unhappy being innocent.

I would not in truth in this contestation, I would order my cause before him,
and fill my mouth with arguments.
that he should use his absolute power, that he should dazzle me with the Rays
of his Majesty, or that he should overwhelme me under the weight of his
greatness.

But I would have him submit himself to the Laws of his ordinary Justice, I
would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say
unto me.
and that by a favor which they deny not to the guilty, my sentence might
bear my crime as well as my punishment: Upon these conditions I should promise
my self the better in my cause, and hope that my Judge would pronounce in my
favor.

But what diligence soever I use, Will he plead against me with his great
power? No, but he would put strength in me.
I cannot meet with him, though he animate all with his presence, and his
immensity leave no vacuity in the world, his retreat is unknown to me: There
the righteoos might dispute with him; so should I be deliver^d for ever from my
Judge.
whether I search him where the day star rises, or search him where it sets,
all my cares are equally unprofitable, and I can learn no news of him.

If I east my eyes toward those parts of the world where summer makes all the
seasons, Behold, I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but cannot
perceive him.
or toward those unhappy Countries whose winters are eternal, I cannot
discover him.

But for him, On the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: he
hides himself on the ^ight hand, that I cannot see him.
wheresoever I go, he knows how to find me, and his knowledge not being
bounded as mine, he sees as well my heart, as my face, and has no need of my
words to understand my thoughts: Notwithstanding as if so many lights were not
sufficient, he tries me like gold, and will have afflictions be to my soul,
what the flame is to the metal, and that to purify me they consume me.

If this trial give me much trouble, But he knows the way that I take: when
he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
it give, me also much glory, so he sees that nothing can take me off from his
service, and that in all conditions which he pleases to reduce me to, I obey
his will, and submit my self to his Ordinances.

Indeed I never wandered from his Laws, My foot has held his steps, his way
have ^ kept, and not decsined.
and not judging that marble was worthy to receive the words of his mouth, I
have ingraved them in my soul, and never lost the remembrance of them.

So must we confess that he well deserves this honor, Neither have I gone
back from the commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth,
more than my necessary food
for he is transcendently singular, and has no equals as the Kings of the
earth; his knowledge is not mixed with darkness, nor his power accompanied with
weaknesses; and as nothing can change what he foresaw, But he is in one mind,
and who can turn him? and what his soul desires, even that he does.
so nothing can hinder what he desires.

His power furnishes him wi^h so many means to execute his will, that those
which he has employed are always less in number than those which remain;
For he performs the thing that is appointed for me: and many such things are
with him.
The misery of my condition is an excellent proof of this high truth, for with
what punishment soever he has exercised my patience, if his goodness appease
not his justice, he may find yet a thousand more rigorous ones.

If I give way to these fatal opinions, Therefore am I troubled at his
presence: when I consider, I am asraid of him.
they ought not accuse me of being timorous, for it is not the greatness of a
man which astonishes me, but the Majesty of a God which affrights me: And I
have always imagined, that as it were weakness to fear a man, it were
madness not to be afraid of a God.

Also I protest to you, For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty
troubles me:
that nothing has so much humbled me as this consideration, and if God had not
been of the party, Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither has
he covered the darkness from my face.
I should have courage enough to overcome all the misfortunes which torment me,
and to drive away all the tempests which environ me.

CHAP. XXIV.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOB teaches us by this discourse, that all crimes shall not be punished on
earth, but for fear his friend, should accuse him of favoring the party of
the wicked, after he had described their impieties, he conjures Divine Justice
to punish them.

ANd because you accuse me to be of the number of those wicked men, Why, seeing
times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him, not see his
days.
who ^o give themselves more li^ence in their crimes, will not ^cknowledge
Divine Providence, I shall be glad to de^lare you my opinion, to pro^ect me
from your calumnies: Know then that I believe it so perfect in its light, that
it knows all the differences of sin, and that things future and past to us,
are always present to it, but know also that I hold it so secret in its
designs, that they themselves who adore it, know not the moment which it has
designed for the punishment of the wicked.

Some abusing their power, Some remove the land marks they violently take away
flocks, and feed thereof.
and violating the Laws of Justice, advance the bounds of their possessions,
to invade the Lands of their neighbors: By the same License they carry away
the flocks of strangers, and as if right consisted but in force, they drive
them into their meadows, and keep them there with as much insolence as
injustice.

If Orphans have but an Ass, They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they
take the widows ox for a pledge.
wherewith they serve themselves, their insatiable avarice does not spare him:
but because they are ingenious, and search pretenses to color their bad
designs, they feign that the widows are their debtors, and take the Kine
which feed them, for security of their debt.

Sometimes they give themselves more license, They turn the needy out of the
way: the poor of the earth hide themselves together.
and add force to injustice, for they wait for passengers upon the great
roades, and rob the poor people who have no Arms, and who place all their
safety in the Authority of the Prince. We know well that Divine Providence sees
all these crimes, but we know not when it will punish them.

Others, Behold, as wild asses in the desert go they forth to their work,
rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yields food for them and for their
children.
who would have necessity serve as an excuse for their sin, go out of the
Cities, and retire themselves into the Forests, where putting on the nature of
wild beasts, they feed on nothing but prey, thest is their exercise, and
pillage the trade wherewith they maintain their families.

When hunger presses them, They reap every one his corn in the field: and they
gather the vintage of the wicked.
and constraines them to come out of the woods, they make incursions into the
plains, and according to the occasion of the season, they either carry away
the corn which is not yet cut, or pillage the vines which are not yet vintaged.

As these crimes are but for a taste, They cause the naked to lodge without
clothing: that they have no covering in the cold
they afterward denounce war against men, they despoyle them of their habits
to cloth themselves with them, and taking counsel but of the fury which
animates them, they spare neither poor nor rich.

Thus it often happens, They are were with the showers of the mountains, and
embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
that those miserable men who have nothing left to cover them, are exposed to
the injuries of the weather, that the cold freezeth them, that the rain
molesteth them, and that to avoid these incommodities, They pluck the
fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor.
they are constrained to hide themselves in the rocks, and like wild beasts to
retire into Cavernes: Divine Providence which permits these impieties, cannot
be ignorant of them, but to know when it will revenge them, is a secret which
it has reserved to it self.

Others more dangerous than these, They cause him to go naked without clothing,
and they take away the sheaf from the hungty.
do as many outrages to their neighbors, as thieves do violence to passengers,
for they pillage the goods of the Orphans; misery, which should beget pity in
them, begets but audacity, and invites them to ruin the poor, and fill their
houses with their spoils.

When these miserable men are reduced to this pitiful condition, Which make
oylwithin their walls, and tread their wine presses, and suffer thirst.
and that having no more Lands of their own, they are forced to leaze in those
of others: These wicked men snatch the ears of corn out of their hands, and
condemn them to a death which is so much the more cruel as it is tedious and
languishing. Whilst they commit these excesses, and that they make as many
poor as they have neighbors, they sleep under the shadow of the sheaves, to
defend themselves from the heat of the sun, and being no better to their
Domestiques than their neighbors, they constrain them to work during the
time which nature has destined to repose, and by an extreme injustice make
those dye with hunger and thirst, who tread the grapes and reap the corn.

Finally, Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded cries
out: yet God lays not folly to them.
their violence is so great, that it makes whole Cities groan, and constrains
the most generous to complain, their sighs mount up to heaven, and God who
glories in being the Protector of the afflicted, mediates the ruin of those
who persecute them.

Certainly, They are of those that rebel against the light, they know not the
ways thereof, not abide in the paths thereof.
if this consideration should not be strong enough to induce him to it, he
would be obliged to it out of interest, for these are Subjects, Rebels to his
Decrees, who would beignorant of his Laws, that they might not be bound to
keep them, and to have a pretense to persevere in their crimes, persuade
themselves that repentance is a weakness of mind.

Others whose inclinations are more guilty, The murderer rising with the light,
kills (...) the poof and needy, and in the night is as a th^^^.
rise every morning before the Sun, and upon the great Rodes, or in public
places assassine those poor workmen who begin their labor with the day; when
night has covered the earth with darkness, they slip by its favor into
houses, and end with theft the day, which they begun with murder.

The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall
see me: and disguiseth his face.
If at any time an unlawful love possesses them, and its unchaste flames
consume their hearts, they take a time convenient for their designs, and choose
the most dark nights to satisfy their passions, and guilt which is never in
safety, obliges them to cover their faces, that they may not be known.

In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselves in
the day time: they know not the ^ight.
When they judge that me^ rest, and that charmed by sleep, they have lost the
use of their senses, they betake themselves to the assignations which were
given them in the day, they enter into houses by tricks or force, and glu^
their unclean desires by the favor of the darkness.

If at any time they awake a little late, For the morning is to them even as
the shadow of death: if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of
death.
and the morning surprise them, they imagine in the passion which blinds them,
that she that comes to bring day to men, did not rise but to bring death to
them, and remaining in opinions contrary to the worlds, they make day of night,
and of its most thick darknesses their most agreeable lights.

But whatsoever precaution they bring, He is swift as the waters, their portion
is cursed in the earth: he beholds not the way of the vineyards.
that they may not be discovered, Divine Providence shall know how to find
them for to punish them, and if it be permitted me to prevent their
chastisements by my desires, I wish that their prosperity were more inconstant
than the waters, that their Lands were more barren than the sands of the
deserts, and that their Meadows and their Vineyards may never increase the
number of their possessions.

Drought and heat consume the snow waters: so does the grave those which have
sinned.
May the heat agree with the cold to make them barren, may the winters be so
violent and so moist, as to rot all the Corn which they shall sow, and if
there remain any which shall thrust forth ears, may the burning heats of the
summer devour them, and may this misfortune without ever being interrupted,
accompany them to the grave.

May mercy, The womb shall forget him, the worm shall feed sweetly on him, he
shall be no more remembered, and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.
which has no greater cares than to succor the miserable, never think of
assisting them, may death be their only hope, may it tear them from the
earth, like those unprofitable trees which bring forth no fruit, may it set
upon their reputation as well as their life, and may it deface them out of the
memory of men.

He evil enrreateth the barren that bears not, and does not good to the
widow.
But we must acknowledge that this punishment is too gentle for their sin; for
they respected not that Sex whom weakness serves for a privilege, and
assasinating the children and the husband of the same woman, they took from
her her support and her hopes.

Then, He draws also the mighty with his power: he rises up, and no man is
sure of life.
having made practice upon those weak persons, and without defense, they
assaulted the more mighty, and as if the ruin of great ones had been the
establishing of their own fortune, they employed all their force to overthrow
them, and notwithstanding after all these violent precautions, they were not
secure of their life.

Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he rests; yet his eyes are
upon (...) their ways.
Heaven has deferred their punishment to give them time of repentance, but its
goodness which should have overcome their malice, has served but to make them
more obstinate in their designs, and more insolent in their happiness. It is
true, that his Providence which watches always over men carefully, considered
their actions, and waited but for the moment which it had decreed to punish
them.

In a word, They are exalted for a little while, but ere gone and brought low,
they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of the ears
of corn.
their happiness has not been of long continuance, the same Sun which
advanced them has dissipated them, their end has not bin more glorious than
that of the least things of the earth; and in the same manner as there needs
but a little wind to beat down the fairest ears of corn, there has needed
but a little disgrace for to overthrow all their fortune.

And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing
worth?
But if in all these discourses my opinions have not been conformable to
truth, I would have them accuse me before the Throne of God, and examine all my
words there; but if it be true, that the just are sometimes oppressed, and that
the wicked are not always punished, I would have you make a better
construction of my Innocence, and allege my miseries no more as assured
proofs of my sin.

CHAP. XXV.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether Baldad would divert Job from the design which he had to contest with
God, or whether he had no reasons which he could oppose to his, he leaves off
his Invectives, and makes a Panegyric of the Majesty of God.

Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said:
BAldad distrusted his forces, and judged rightly, that a bad cause could not
eafily be defended; but as he would not yield to the good reasons of Job, he
undertook with a bad design an excellent Panegyric of the power of God,
which he begun in these terms.

Dominion and fear are with him, he makes peace in his high places.
It is to have too good an opinion of your self, and not to make esteem
enough of God, when you wish that he were your Judge; he has glorious
qualities, which ought to beget in you modest sentiments, and more humble
desires; His Majesty is accompanied with so much Power, that he strikes
astonishment and fear in the minds of all the Greatures; He appeaseth the
differences of the elements, and obliges them to force their 'owne
inclinations, to preserve the quiet of the world; He shakes all the Heavens
with so much evennesse, that in the contrariety of their Motions they never
disorder themselves. Finally, maintains peace amongst the Angels, and
tempering his Justice with his Goodness, he makes himself equally loved and
feared of those blessed Spirits.

Though in this absolute power God has no need of any one to execute his
designs, Is there any number of his armies and upon whom does not his light
arise?
notwithstanding he has Armies whose Soldiers cannot be counted. The Angels
adore him in heaven, men serve him upon earth, the Devils are afeard of him in
hell. This prodigious number of Subjects makes no confusion in his mind, and
their different qualities do not hinder him, but he knows their worth, and
knows their names.

After so much pomp and glory, How then can men be justified with God? or how
can he be clean that is born of a woman?
which makes the Majesty of God so adorable, should not that man be insolent
who would justify himself before him, and must he not have forgotten the
condition of his mother, and the shame of his birth, if he pretended any thing
to the quality of an Innocent.

That beautiful Star, Behold even to the moon, and it shines not: yea, the
stars are not pure in his sight.
which in the obscurity of the night makes us see again the brightness of the
day, has no luster in his presence, and the Stars who are the honor of the
Firmament, and give it advantage above the other Heavens, compared with him,
are not without impurities, and without stains.

What then can man promise himself, How much less man, that is a worm: and
the son of man which is a worm?
whose birth is so shameful, whose death is so miserable, and who being but
corruption during his life, can be nothing but rottenness after his death?

CHAP. XXVI.
THE ARGUMENT.
JOB descants upon the praises which Baldad had given God, and with nohler
terms and higher thoughts exalts the greatness of his Power, and makes seen
that his will serves as Law to all his creatures.

WHen Baldad had ended this Enlogivus, But Job answered, and said,
which he had rather made for the patience of Job than to praise the greatness
of God, he received from him this Answer:

What design can you have in your discourse, How have thou helped him that is
without power? how savest thou the ann that has no strength?
which is not injurious to God? do you believe that his Power has need of your
succor? and when you defend his cause with so much heat, do you persuade your
self that he is one of those oppressed persons, whose weakness obliges the
great ones to undertake his protection?

When you give him advice and instructions to ruin me, How have thou
counseled him that has no wisdom? and how have thou plentifully decleared the
thing, as it is?
do you think he has need of your counsel? and when you make these great
discourses, do you imagine that his Divine Wisdom has need of your prudence?

Do not you know that he whom you undertake to instruct, To whom have thou
uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?
is the source of all our knowledge, and that our mind being but the breath of
his mouth, we have no light but what we have derived from his?

His Power is so known, Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the
inhabitants thereof.
that one must have lost his Judgment, to imagine that yours is necessary to
him; and to give you some proofs of it which may oblige you to treat him with
more respect, I will represent to you but the effects which he produces in
nature. Know then that it is he who makes the Monsters groan under the waters,
who keeps captives in the sea those heavy Whales, whose greatness justly
deserves the name of Giants.

His knowledge is not less than his Power, Hell is naked before him, and
destruction has no covering.
he sees the dead in their graves, and the earth which steals them from our
eyes, cannot steal them from his, since the Abysses are open to him, and hell
it self has not darkness enough to hide the Devils from him.

He has stretched over out heads those parts of Heaven whence the North winds
rise, He stretches out the north over the empty place, and hangs the earth
upon nothing.
and has given them no foundation but vacuity; He has formed the earth like a
bowl, and though so weighty a mass required strong Pillars, he has left it
no support but nothing.

It is he who has found the secret of keeping the waters in the air, He
hindeth up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them.
and of thickning them into vapors, that they may distill drop by drop, and
water the fields, which might apprehend a second deluge, if they discharged
themselves all at once.

But is it not wonderful, He holds back the face of his throne, and
spreads his cloud upon it.
that he hides from us with the clouds that beautiful Star which serves him
for a Throne, and that doing us a little hurt to procure us much good, He has
compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an end.
he deprives us of its beauty to enrich our Lands with the rain?

The elements bear him so much respect, The pillars of heaven tremble, and are
astonished at his reproof.
that they have no other motion than his will, the sea never passes the bounds
which he has prescribed to its fury, He divided the sea with his power, and by
his understanding he smites through the proud.
and when it seems that its floatings are about to ingulfe all the earth, they
have no sooner touched the bank, but their fiercenelk slackens, and their rage
converts it self into foame: this obedience shall not be less faith full than
it is prompt, for as long as the days and nights do mutually succeed one
another, the Billows shall break themselves upon the Land, and the Sea shall
not pass its limits.

Those high mountains which seem to be the pillars of heaven are touched with
the same sentiment, By his Spirit he has garnished the heavens; his hand has
formed the crooked serpent.
and though nothing be more proper to them than repose, they tremble when he
speaks, and to obey his will, they either shake their heads, or unfaste^ their
feet from the earth.

But is it not a prodigious Lo, these
Effect of his power, when he appeaseth the Tempests, that he calmes the fury
of the Sea, and triumphs over that pride which is no less natural to it then
inconstancy?

Finally, By his spirit he has garnished the heavens; his hand has formed the
crooked serpent.
it is his puissant hand which has adorned the heavens with all these
different beauties which make it so agreeable, [tis it which fills the air with
meteors, which forms the cloud, and which to deliver them of those thunders of
which they are great, opens their bosom and makes them happily bring forth the
lightnings, which as furious Dragons fly in the air, and fill it with flames.
Lo, these are parts of this ways; but how little a portion is heard of him?
but the thunder of his power who can understand?


Although these things be admirable, yet they are but the ordinary effects of
his Power, and if it be true that we have so much trouble to relate them, how
can we describe those great miracles whose brightness dazzeleth the eye, and
whose noise astonisheth the ear?

CHAP. XXVII.
The Argument.
Job asswageth his grief in blaming the infidelity of his friends, and
defending his innocence; then to prevent their calumnies, and testify to all
the world that he approves not of the designs of the wicked, he makes an ample
description of the punishments, which God provides for them.

AS Job saw that his enemies had no reply, Moreover Job continued his parable,
and said,
he continued his discourse, which he fortifyed with new reasons, and appeared
more eloquent then ever.

I swear by the living God, As God lives who has taken away my judgment,
and the Almighty, who has vexed my soul;
who that he might not be obliged to absolve me, would not pronounce my
sentence: I swear by the Omnipotent, who makes me suffer so many miseries, who
deprives me of all consolations which may sweeten them, and who condemns me to
pass my life in perpetual languishment.

I swear I say, All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in
my nostrills.
that as long as my heart shall beat in my breast, and my lungs shall breath the
Air, and my spirit animate my sad body, my mouth which I have consecrated to
truth, shall never serve for lies, and that my tongue which is the faithful
interpreter of my heart, shall never speak a word which is contrary to my
thoughts. My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.


Wherefore you ought not hope that I take your part, or that I approve of the
unjust just opinions which you have of my person: for were I to dye, I would
persist in my opinion, and with whatsoever reasons you endeavor to oppose it,
I will never betray my innocence.

I know very well that it is dangerous to be Judge in ones own cause, God
forbid that I should justify you; zill I die, I will not remove my integrity
from me.
and that one is easily deceived where his interest is concerned; but for my
part I fear not mistaking my self, and I think that in defending my side, I
defend truth's: for conscience which is worth a thousand witnesses does not
accuse me of committing any sin, which deserves so rigorous a punishment.

Sinners have never had commerce with me, My rightcousnesse I hold fast, and
will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
and as the honor of God regulated all my interests, his enemies have always
been mine, and all those who stood ill with him, never stood fair with me.

Also I doubted that the hope of the wicked was ill founded, Let mine enemy be
as the wicked, and he that rises up against me as the unrighteous.
that they could not find in riches the contentment which they promised
themselves, that the most great if heaven did not bless them, were ofttimes
the most unprofitable, and if they did deliver them from poverty, they did not
warrant them from death.

Do you think that God will assist them, For what is the hope of the
hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul?
when they shall implore his goodness in their misfortunes, and that he hears
prayers which having no other motive but interest, deserve rather punishment
then recompenses, and are rather sins then good works?

Finally do you think that in the engagements, Will God hear his cry when
trouble comes upon him?
which thep have to the goods of the earth, Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God?
they can find their rest in God, and that in the happy successes which make
them insolent, they invoke the name of God with as much fervor as in their
disgraces? I will teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the
Almighty, will I not conceal.


Do not accuse me then of imitating them, since the difference of our actions
justifies me, and if you accord me this favor I will discover to you the
admirable secrets of divine Providence, and make you see the chastisements
which it provides for the impious, whose crimes it seems to have forgotten.

But why do I call them secrets, Behold, all ye your selves have seen it, why
are ye then thus altogether vain?
since so many memorable examples which have made them public will not suffer
you to be ignorant o^ them? But if you know them why do you oppose my innocence
with so many vain reasons, and confounding the crime with the punishment would
you make an unhappy Man pass for a guilty?

Now that you may not accuse me of taking the part of sinners, This is the
portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors.
I will speak to you of the punishments which God reserves for them, and make
you see the inheritance which this just Father provides for his rebellious
children.

Be assured then that if they have many Heirs, If his children be multiplied,
it is for the sword: and his offspring sha^ not be satisfied with bread.
their number shall serve but to make them miserable; for they shall see them
fall before them, as sad victimes, upon whom the incensed people shall discharg
their just fury; and those who shall escape, shall be so cruelly persecuted by
hunger, that they shall envy the fortune of their brethren, and esteem
themselves unhappy to have escaped from the hands of a popular mutiny.

If there remain any of them who survive so many Those that remain of him
shall be buried in death; and his widows shall not weep.
misfortunes, and whom war and famine had not put to Death, they shall be
stricken with that contagious sickness which deserves as well the name of death
as that of the Plague, since it keeps intelligence with it to ruin Cities, and
dispeople States. In so fatal a mortality their wives shall not lament them,
and whither their affection be too weak, or their sorrow too violent, they
shall shed no tears upon their graves. Though he heap up silvet and dust, and
repair raiment as the clay;


If the unfortunate father of these unhappy children had gathered together
Mountains of Gold; if silver had been as common with him as Earth, if his
houses had been adorned with proud movables, of which the world had admired
the beauty, if the number of them had not diminished the Price: He may prepare
it, but the just shall shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the
silver.


He shall have but the trouble of gathering them, and another shall have the
pleasure of using them: for he who can absolutely dispose of our Goods, shall
make them fall into the hands of the just, who being a better Oeconomist then
the covetous, shall distribute them liberally to the poor, and make more men
happy with them then, the other has made miserable. He builds his house as a
moth, and as a booth that the keeper makes.


So experience shall make known to all the world, that he has done like
worms, which gnaw the wood to which they cleave, and ruin their houses when
they seem to build them: or that he has imitated the shepherds, who make
Cabins in the Summer to tend their flocks, The rich man shall lie down, and he
shall not be gathered ^he opens his eves, and he is not.
and who leave them to any one that will take them when winter comes.

But though he had longer possessed these Goods, yet he had still lost them at
his death: for when the rich man leaves the world he carries away nothing with
him, and when shutting the eyes of his body, he shall open those of his mind,
he shall not see so much as the shadow of his past felicity. Terrors take hold
on him as waters, a tempest steals him away in the night.


Then misery and poverty like overflowing Rivers shall besiege him on all
sides: unforeseen myseries shall surprise him, as it happens in the horror of
the night when unthought of tempest, surprise the sleeping Mariners. The
Eastwinde carries him away, and he departs: and a storm hurleth him out of
his place.


And that nothing may be wanting to his just punishment, aviolent death like a
surious wind shall carry him from the earth, where his disordered affection
held him so fast tied; and then he shall be no less tossed, then if he were
carried away by a whi^lwinde, or served as Pastime^ for tempests.

God himself who shall not spare him in this encounter shall power upon him all
sorts of miseries, For God shall cast upon him, and not spare; he would fain
fly out of his hand.
and when these faithful Ministers shall assault him on all sides, he shall
make vain attempts to get himself out of their hands, and unprofitable wishes
to meet with a sanctuary, where he may be in security.

All those who shall be witnesses of his misfortune shall clap their hands in
token of rejoicing, Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out
of his place.
and when the Just shall see the place which his siane shall give him in hell,
they shall hiss at him with pleasure, and his miseries shall be a part of
their happiness.

CHAP. XXVIII
The Argument
Job teaches his friends that the Treasures of Nature are not so hidden, but
men by their curiosity discover them, but that wisdom is so secret, that they
cannot find it without the assistance of God.

WHen this discourse was ended, and Job saw that his friends did not speak, he
began again warily to entertain them in conference, and engaged himself to
let them see by a long deduction of the wonders of Nature, that all things are
goverued by a supreme providence and since that they have their center and
their ends, man may reasonably hope that he shall have his, and that his sins
shall be punished, and his virtues recompensed.

That metal (says he) which maintains commerce amongst Men, Surely there is
a vein for the filver, and a place for gold where they fine it.
and which finds remedies for all their needs, has secret veyns where it is
hidden: and Gold the most noble of metalls, which has no price it self, and
yet gives it to all things, is shut up in mines where Natureworks whole ages to
form it.

Iron which they employ to so many diverse uses, Iron is taken out of the the
earth, and brass is molten out of the stone.
which serves in war and Peace, and without which the courage of soldiers,
and the industry of artizans would be unprofitable, is drawn from the entrals
of the earth; and brass, which serves as a recompense to the virtue of
Illustrius men, and which affords matter of which they make them statues, is
drawn from stones which melted by the heat of the fire turn into Metal.

Though nature has taken pleasure to hide all these Mettalls, He sets an
end to darkness, and searches out all perfection: the stones of darkness and
the shadow of death.
industry provides man with certain marks for to discover them, and
infallible conjectures to know the time when they must be drawn out of their
Darkness: and though the shadow of Death forbids the entry into these caves,
avarice and curiosity give him courage enough to go down thither; and enrich
himself with their spoils.

There are torrents found which divide certain people from all others, The
flood breaks out from the inhabitant; even the waters forgotten of the foot:
they are dried up, they are gone away from men.
and where waters are so profound and rapid, that shutting the passage from
travelers, they make the Provinces inaccessible which they water, and put them
in the Rank of those things which were never seen.

There are lands seen which brought forth corn, As for the earth, out of it
comes bread, and under it is turned up as it were fire.
and which by their fertility contributed to the Noutriture of men, which are
become barren, and which burnt by the Sun which shined upon them, and dried
with the sulphur which heated them, have lost their first fertility.

It Is true that this loss sometimes is advantageous to them; The stones of it
are the place of Saphires: and it has dust of Gold.
for it oftens happens that for corn they yield precious stones and their
Rocks turn into Saphyrs, and their turfes into wedges of Gold.

But as on the other side, There is a path which no foul knows, and which
the Vultures eye has not seen.
they are separated from the world, and lodged under climates too hot; the
Birds never fly thither, and Vultures whose penetrating sight can observe the
prey so far, could never yet discover them.

The Lions whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce Lion passed by it.
Those wild Beasts whose savage humor searches out the most Solitary places,
could never yet find them, and the Lionesses which run everywhere when they
have lost their little ones, have never approached them.

Yet man discovers them by his Industry, He puts forth his hand upon the
rock; he overturneth the mountains by the roots.
as by the Obstinacy of his labor he pierces Rocks, throws down Mountains,
and carries away the Treasure which they hide within their entralls.

His hands animated by his Curiosity, He cutteth out rivers among the rocks,
and his eye sees every precious thing.
divert the Course of Rivers, break the Rocks which serve them for banks,
and his Eyes enjoying the labor of his hands, discover all that is rare and
beautiful in the World.

Finally his mind which can not be overcome by difficulties, He binds the
floods from overflowing, and the thing that is hid, brings he forth to light.
and which to surmount them imployes both force and skill, sees the wonders
which the Rivers Cover with their waters, and contrary to the design of Nature
reveals her secrets, and discovers all that she hides.

What soever good success he has in these searches, But where shall wisdom
be sound? and where is the place of understanding?
he is not so happy, nor so dextrous in that of Divine wisdom; for he knows
not where she dwells, and what diligence soever he use to penetrate her
designs, he is obliged to consesse that she surpasses his understanding, and
that he ought rather to adore then search after them.

He knows not what she is worth, Man knows not the price thereof; neither is
it found in the land of the living.
and the esteem which he makes of things of the world, sufficiently testifies
that he is ignorant of the price of her; he abuses himself grossly when he
persuades himself that he shall find her in the Palce of them, who place all
their Happiness in Pleasures.

What diligence soever he use, The depth says, It is not in me: and the sea
says, It is not with me.
he shall have much ado to hear any news of her; for the Abysses which shut up
so many Treasures, confess that they possess her not, and the Sea which
enticheth it self with our losses, and which makes us pay use for the
Commodities which it lends us, acknowledges that she grows not with the
Pearls, nor with the Coral:

Though all things obey Gold, It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall
silver be weighed for the price thereof.
and there is nothing which one may not buy with Silver: * notwithstaning as
Wisdom has no Price, she gives and does not sell her self, no treasure can buy
her, and Experience teaches us that the most rich are not the most wise.

Finally her merit surpasses all that India has of Rarity; It cannot be
valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire.
and it would injure her to compare her with those stuffes, whose matter being
so rich the tincture is more beautiful: or with those precious stones whose
luster is so glittering, and greatness so monstrous.

That excellent Gold whose Purity the fire cannot increase; The Gold and the
Crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of
fine gold:
the Crystal which seems to be the last attempt of Nature, and makes us find
Heaven on Earth; those great Vessels of Gold whose workmanship is yet more
precious then the matter, are not exquisite enough to be given in exchange of
wisdom.

Those stars with which the firmament adornes it self, No mention shall be
made of Coral, or of Pearls: for the Price of wisdom is above Rubies.
when night drives away the day; that Sun whose Beauty makes so mary Idolaters,
and all those other lights which oblige us to prefer Heaven before Earth,
cannot be compared with her; but if her beauty beget a desire in us of seaching
her, her dwelling more unknown then the Rocks, out of which they setch the
Diamonds, makes us loose the hope of finding her.

This Difficulty which enhanceth her price is the cause that the Topazes of
Ethiopis, The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued
with pure gold.
which seem to have the luster of Gold, and the Purity of Crystal, and those
agreeable mixtures of colors, which make the Purple of Kings, are not rich
enough to purchase her. Whence then comes wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding?


Yet must we learn her dwelling, and permit our curiosity to search the place
where she makes her residence.

I know she is hidden from the eyes of men, Seeing it is hid from the eyes of
all living, and kept close from the fowls of the air.
that her Purity cannot abide their looks, and that she has chosen a Dwelling
so elevated, that the Birds which make their nests upon the tallest Trees, and
which see the proudest Montaines below them, have not yet discovered her. Those
Angurs themselves who boast of knowing the most secret things by the flight and
language of Birds, are obliged to confess that their knowledge is pure
ignorance, and that to discover wisdom all their conjectures are false.

Those profound Abysses, Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame
thereof with our ears.
which are consecrated to Death, and those places separated from the noise of
the World, which seem to be dedicated to silence, know her by the high
reputation which her merit gives her: but they are ignorant of her dwelling,
and know not her face. God understands the way thereof, and he knows the
place thereof.


God alone who knows her Price knows her retreat; and it is from him only
that we may learn where she keeps her residence, and where leaving of that
veil which hides her from us, she discovers all her beauty.

Nor is he like men who see at once but one part of the Universe: For he
looks to the ends of the earth, and sees under the whole heaven.
he sees all the extremities of it together, and with one look he observes
distinctly that prodigious confufion of creatures which heaven encompasseth
within its Circle.

And his knowledge is not new: To make the weight for the winds, and he
weighs the waters by measure.
for when he weighed the winds, when he limited their courses, and prescribed
the seasons which they were to govern, when he measured the waters, when he
reduced them into their Beds, and forbad them to power themselves upon the
Earth.

When he gave laws to the rain, When he made a decree for the rain, and a
way for the lightning of the thunder:
when he marked it out Places to thicken into clouds, or designed it times to
dissolve into water, when he formed the tempests, and made them flash with
lightning and when he traced them out the way, which they were to keep for to
fall upon the head of the Guilty:

Then he saw wisdom in his works, Then did he see it, and declare it, he
prepared it, yea, and searched it out.
he related her Beauties to the Angels, to beget a desire of her in them, he
prepared the hearts of men to receive her, and sought means to make her
visible, for to make her loved of all the world.

And to fortify those feeble minds, And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.
from whom the difficulty of finding so fair a treasure had taken away the
desire of seeking it, he taught them that the fear of the Lord was true
wisdom, that the highest prudence was separating from sin, and that amongst
men they ought to pass for the most wise who were the most innnocent.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Argument.
JOb entertaines his friends with his past felicity, and his Grief helping
his memory represents to it the blessings wherewith Heaven filled his house,
and the honors where, with the great ones of the age honored his Virtue.

THe friends of Job continued their silence, Moreover, Job continued his
parable, and said:
to give him occasion of continuing his discourse, and to make comparison of
his past happinesses with his present miseries, which he did in these terms.

Since God has lest me nothing in my misfortune but desires, Oh, that I were
as in moneth^ past, as in the days when God preserved me.
shall I find noe on^ who will turn them into effects, and reestablishing me
in that happy condition, where God took so much care of me, that it seemed that
I was the only object of his providence.

Why does he not revive that former condition, When his candle shined upon my
head, and when by his light I walked through darkness.
where ^is grace shining upon me like a Sun filled me with new favors? I lived
without fear amongst dangers, and walked without stumbling amongst the
obscurities of the night.

Why does he not call back that agreeable season, As I was in the days of my
youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle.
of which I tasted the sweetness, and resented not the troubles, where in a
vigorous body I had noe violent Passions, and where God treated so familiarly
with me that it seemed, being no more my Sovereign, he was become my Equal?
When the Almighty was yet with me, when my children were about me:


Or Why does he not make that more advanced Age return, where I saw my self
environed with a multitude of children and Domestics, who having in the
difference of their conditions but the same design thought of nothing but to
serve me and to please me?

Why is not my happiness equal to that which I tasted, When I washed my steps
with butter, and the rock powered me out rivers of Oil:
when my flocks were so fruitful that I washed my feet in Milk, and my lands
so fertile that the Rocks themselves brought forth Olives, When I went out to
the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the street.
which gave me Rivers of Oil? when followed by my subjects I showed my self
in the Places designed to do justice, and when to execute the charge of a Judge
my self, I heard the complaints of the poor parties, or when they prepared me a
Throne in some public place, and without serving my self with an interpreter I
declared my pleasure to my People;

I did no sooner appear in this pompous equipage but the young men seized with
respect, The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and
stood up.
bowed their eyes as dazzled with the luster of my Countenance, and durst not
look upon me; The old men, whom Age makes so venerable, had no sooner perceived
me, but without making use of the privilege of their years, they rose up and
stood in my presence.

Princes whose birth gives them Liberty to speak, The Princes refrained
talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.
ceased their discourses when they saw me, and the desire which they had to
hear me, made them put their finger upon their Mouth and condemn it to silence.

The Generals of Armies, The Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved
to the roof of their mouth.
whose words are received as Oracles in the councels of war, left speaking
when I would tell my advice, and passing from respect to astonishment, their
tongues remained tied to their P^la^e, and their soul was wholly shut up in
their eyes and their ears, to look upon me and to hear me.

Those who heard me, When the care heard me, then it blessed me; and when the
eye saw me, it gave witness to me.
found not words enough to praise my eloquence, and those which saw the Grace,
which accompanied me in all my actions gave me such advantageous Testimonies,
that any other mind then mine would have been proud of. Because I delivered
the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.


When I had delivered the poor, who in his oppression implored my assistance,
and that I had protected the Orphane which had no support,

The unfortunate who owed me his goods and his life charged me with a thousand
benedictions, The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I
caused the widoows heart to sing for joy.
and the widow who owed to my care the conservation of her children, banished
sadness from her Heart, and made her mouth publish my praises.

Though Kings adorn themselves with purple, I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem.
and to make their Majesty more Princely, they employ all that Nature
produces of rarety, my principal Ornament was Justice, and this virtue, which
served me for all things, was my Diadem and my Crown. I was eyes to the blind,
and feet was I to the lame.


But because it is too severe if it be not tempered with Mercy, I mixed the
quality of a father with that of a Judge, and because I know well that what is
profitable to the people is always glorious to Princes, I lent my eyes to the
blind, and my feet to the lame, and my cares extended themselves even to the
least subject of my state.

Of all those qualities wherewith they flatter the ears of Princes, I was a
father to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I (...) searched out.
there was none more agreeable to me then that of father of the poor, and their
interests were so dear to me, that as often as they pleaded against them in my
presence, I pronounced not any sentence before I had studied their cause, and
every one observed, that I was oftener their Advocate then their judge.

I never used my power so freely as when it was necessary to tame the pride of
those who would oppress them, And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked
the spoil out of his teeth.
and as they were more cruel then Lions, I took pleasure to hunt them, and
when I had overtaken them, I broke their teeth, I tore the pray out of their
throat, and did at once two Actions of Justice, punishing a criminal, and
delivering a^ Innocent.

At the fight of so many virtuous Actions, Then I said, I shall die in my nest,
and I shall mulciply my days as the sand.
which m^ thoughts deserved some recompense, I promised my (...) to dye
peaceably in mine ow^ house, and to end my (...) sweetly as I had begun i^; I
h^ped that my birth and my de^^ would be distant an Age, and that as the Palm
amongst Trees lives again in its branches, and the Phoenix amongst Birds is
born again out of his Ashes, I should be young in my Age, and begin again to
live, when others begin to dye.

I thought it would be with me, My root was spread (...) by the waters, and the
dew lay all nighs upon my branch.
as with those Trees which being planted near the streams never wither, and
always push forth new branches: Or that like to those Fruits, which are never
so easily cut, as when they are watered with the dew, I should dye without
sorrow, and be gently carried into the Grave.

I let my self be persuaded by my vain hopes that the good opinions which they
had conceived of me, My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.
should triumph over Calumny, and that the strength wherewith Heaven had
provided me should never change, but to augment it self, and give me a plain
advantage over all mine enemies.

That which helped me to deceive my self was the esteem which my eloquence had
acquired me, Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my council.
for as often as I opened my mouth, they that heard me imagined that all my
words were Oracles, and when I gave any advice, it was so generally approved,
that it passed rather for a sentence, then the particular opinion of a man.

They were so religious that they durst neither add, After my words they speak
no again, and my speech dropped upon them.
nor take away any thing from my words and as waters which fall drop by drop
hollow insensibly the hardest Rocks, the sweetness of my words made impression
upon the most stubborn hearts, and my eloquence never found Rebels.

They expected my discourses with more impatience then Husbandmen expect rain
in a time of drought, And they waited for me, as for the rain, and they opened
their mouth wide, as for the later rain.
and pressed by their desires, they opened their mouth, as the angry Earth
opens her breasts to receive those tardy rains which she has a long time wished
for.

If at any time I lived privately with them, If I laughed on them, they
believed it not, and the light of my countenance they cast not down.
and made escapes into any innocent mirth, they held this favor so deer, that
in seeing it they could scarce beleevei; they made so much esteem of all that
came from me, that a glance obliged them; and believing that mine eyes were the
interpreters of my heart, they thought they had as much part in my affections,
as they had in my looks.

If I were in the assembly of Princes my Alyes, I chose out their way, and sare
chief, and dwelt as a King in the army; as one that comforeth the mo^^ners.
I was never troubled to keep my place, for they acknowledged me for their
superior, although I was but their equal, and gave me the first place; but when
they encompast me on all sides, and that I was seated amongst them as a Prince
in the midst of his Army, my, these extraordinary Honors did not so strongly
possess my mind, but I thought of the afflicted, and the desire of comforting
them was always the strongest of my passions.

CHAP. XXX.
The Argument.
AS the remembrance of past Goods, makes present evils more sensible, after
Job has entertained himself with his happiness, he complains of his misery,
which he aggravates with that eloquence, as is natural to grief.

BUt at present that the Order of things is inverted, But now they that are
younger than I, have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to
have set with the degs of my stock.
and that heaven is more rigorous to me, then it was favorable, the young me^
mock at me, and their children whom I did not deign to long with the dogs which
kept my flocks, are the first which despise me.

I made so little esteem of them heretofore, Yea, where to might the strength
of their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished.
that I would not give them the least employment in my house, their services
were unprofitable to me, and their persons were so inconsiderable, that they
who judged without passion esteemed them unworthy to live: For want and famine
they were soli^^ry: flying into (...) wilderness in former time desolate and
waste?
Hunger and poverty persecuted them every where, shame chased them into the
deserts, where burdened with a thousand incommodities, they eat all that was
set before them.

They chewed gras like beasts, Who cut (...) Mallows by the bushes, and Juniper
roots for their meat.
they tote off the bark from the trees to appease the cruel hunger which
devoured them, and the root of Juniper, which surpasses all other in bitterness
was their ordinary food.

When these unhappy men whom necessity constrained to live in the valleys, They
were driven (...) from among men (they ^^ed after (...) as after thief.)
saw from far these sad meats, they ran with great cries of joy, gathered them
with care, and eat them with pleasure.

Their dwelling was not more agreeable than their norishment, To dwell ^n the
clifts of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the rocks.
for they retired themselves into vaste deserts whose silence was troubled by
the noise of Torrents, and to avoid the heat of the sun which burned them,
they buried themselves in caves, or rolled themselves upon the sands of the
streams: Among the bushes they brayed, under the nettles they were gathered
together.
misfortune had so well accustomed them to this fatal kind of life, that they
esteemed themselves very happy to be thus lodged and fed, and making their
delights of these miseries, they thought to sleep upon Roses, when they lay
upon thorns.

The nobility of their houses could not comfort them in these distasters, They
were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were viler then the
earth.
for as if all things had contributed to render them contemptible, their
fathers were of the dreggs of the people, and they counted none amongst their
Ancestors, but persons whose minds were no more elevated then their births.

Notwithstanding my misery furnishes them with matter for their
entertainments, And now am I their song, yea I am their byword.
I am the subject of all their jeers, and as insolence is natural to them, they
make songs of my misfortunes and to make my disgraces pass into a Proverb,
they call all miserable men by my name.

They have conceived so furious an Avertion from me, They abhor me, they fly
far from me, and spare not to spit in my face.
that they can no longer endure me: the plague seems not more contagious to
them, then my person, and if at any time they approach it, it is to do me new
outrages, and oblige their mouth, which has blotted my reputation, to defile
my face. Because he has loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also let
loose the bridle upon me.


That which gives this liberty to these Insolents, is that they see that Heaven
is a party, that God who was my Creator is become my enemy, that he who had no
arrows but to defend me, has none now but to hurt me, and that to take from me
the liberty of complaining, which is so sweet to the Miserable, he has put a
bridle in my mouth and condemned me to be silent.

He had not so soon pronounced my sentence, Upon my right hand rise the youth,
they push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their
destruction.
but my enemies, as the Ministers of his vengeance, assaulted me on all sides:
they imitated the cruelty of Hangmen, who seize upon a Malefactor, they threw
me upon the ground, they trumpled me under foot, and they followed one another
like the waves of the sea without giving me any respit.

Since this Moment they surprise me in all places, They man my path, they set
forward my calamity, they have no helper.
and as if my ruin were profitable to them, they prepare ambushes for me upon
the way, and take their aim so well, that there being no one to succor me,
they have the better, and they always find themselves the stronger.

The Torrents run not with so much fury when they break their Banks and
overflow the fields, They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the
desolation they rolled themselves upon me.
as they powered upon me, when God took away the Bound, which kept them in, and
gave them permission to assault me.

At these rude assaults I saw my self reduced to nothing, Terrors are turned
upon me: they pursue my soulas the wind: and my welfare passes away as a cloud.
my hopes which I esteemed so much more just, as they were founded upon the
Integrity of my Actions and the Truth of the promises of God, lost themselves
like the wind, and the happiness which I tasted dispersed like a cloud, which
the Sun raises and dissipateth the same day.

With my hopes my strength abandoned me, And now my soul is poured our upon
me; the days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
for I feel no more that vigor which promised me a long life, my soul is
grown feeble with my body, and my best days being past, there remain none but
mournful ones, where pleasures never succeed afflictions.

The night it self destined for repose gvies me no truce, My bones are pierced
in me in the night season; and my sinews take no rest.
for when I think to shut my eyes, I am assaulted with those mortal pains
which the miserable feel when they are broken upon the wheel: and if at any
time sleep would sweeten them, there issues out of my soars a swarm of
wormet, which devour me, and as my flesh cannot satisfy them, all my Arts
cannot charm them.

Their number is so prodigious, By the great force of my disease, is my garment
changed: it binds me about as the collor of my coat.
that when they cannot find wherewithal to feed themselves in my entralls,
they gnaw my garments, and as it were to repair the damage which they have
made, they cover me all over, and serve me themselves for clothes.

In this deplorable Condition, He has cast me into the mire, and I am become
like dust and ashes.
which may beget pity in the hearts of my enemies, I am so changed, that it
seems that my miseries preventing the cruelty of death, have already reduced me
into dust and ashes.

As I well know so great an evil can find no remedy upon earth, I cry unto
thee, and thou do not hear me, I stand up, and thou regardest me not.
I lift my voice to heaven, and address my complaints to you the only support
of the afflicted: but either you do not hear them, or else you despise them: I
present my self before you, Protector of the miserable, but you regard me
not, or else you disdain me.

Of a faithful friend who bore a part in my interest, Thou art become cruel
to me, with thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against me.
you are changed into a cruel enemy, who laughs at my sorrows: and that hand
wherewith you afflict me is no more the hand of a good Father, which corrects
his children; but the hand of an incensed Prince, who revengeth himself of his
Subjects.

You have not raised me, Thou liftest me up to the wind: thou causest me to
ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance.
but that my fall might be heavier: In the birth of my greatness you meditated
the design of my ruin; and you have not made me walk upon the winds, but to
dash my head against the Rocks when you shall throw me down.

Finally, For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living.
I know that you will deliver me to Death, and that your anger will give me no
truce, till it has sent me into those lad places where Nature has taken up
quarters for all men.

Yet it is not your custom to persecute them to death; Howbeit, he will not
stretch out his hand to the grave, though they cry in his destruction.
you raise them up, when you have cast them down, and you appear more powerful
to save them than to ruin them: wherefore I promise my self that your
persecution will end sooner then my life, and that if I have lived in your
discountenance, I shall die in your favor.

The care which I have had of the miserable keeps me in this hope; Did not I
weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor?
for I mixed my weeping with their tears; their miseries made mine, and my soul
was so sensible of their sorrows, that to see us together, it would have been
hard to judge which had been more afflicted.

But alas! When I looked for good, than evil came unto me: and when I waited
for light, there came darkness.
Heaven has deceived my hopes; for when I expected nothing but good, there is
come nothing but evil; when I promised my self an happy fortune, there is
nothing come to me but disgrace: those fair days which I hoped for have
produced but obscure nights, and Divine Providence has made us know, that if
our expectations are false, our conjectures are not more true.

This unexpected misfortune has put all my Passions into so furions a
disorder, My bowels boiled and rested not: the days of affliction prevented me.
that the war which they make with me can have no truce; my mind cannot
calm their fury, because the affliction which surprised it, gave it no leisure
to defend it self; and it perceived it self engaged to fight, when it thought
on nothing but peace.

So do I all the actions of a man whom Passion masters; I went mourning
without the Sun; I stood up, and I cried in the Congregation.
for as I know well that my death is inevitable, I wear mourning for my self, I
never walk in public, but the tears of my eyes discover the displeasures of my
heart; my mouth is always open for sighs, and grief making me lose respect, I
cry out in company, as well as in the Deserts.

But all my complaints are unprofitable: I am a brother to dragons, and a
companion to owls.
for it seems my nearest neighbors have left their sweetness to put on the
nature of Dragons, and my friends have despoyled themselves of their senses, to
habit themselves with the disposition of Ostriches, which they say, have so
little love, that they have none for their young ones.

Notwithstanding, My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burnt with heat.
one need but look upon me to have compassion of my miseries, and without
alleging their Reasons, the sight of my countenance might touch them with
pity; for my skin is more tanned then the people which inhabit Ethiopia, and my
bones destitute of their vigor, are dryer, then if the fire had burnt them.

Finally, to comprehend in a few words all the History of my miseries: My harp
also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of them that weep.
It is sufficient to tell you, that my pleasures are changed into pains, that
my condition is more miserable then it was happy, that my Lute is no longer fit
but for melancholy Airs, and that all those instruments which served for to
divert me are condemned either to sigh or to be silent.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Argument.
Job not able to endure that his Innocence should remain in Oppression,
represents to his friends all the sins which he had avoided, and all the
virtues which he had practiced during his Prosperity.

AS there is nothing more sweet to the afflicted then complaints, there is
nothing more agreeable to oppressed Innocents, then the thought of their
Innocence: wherefore I will entertain you with mine, and make you an ample
relation of the virtues which I have practiced during my good fortune. I made a
covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?
I had made an agreement with my eyes that their Glances should no^ seduce my
soul, and not only that they should not consider those lost women, whose
allurements engage men in sin but that they should not stay upon those innocent
face whose beauty has neither paint, nor design of Malice.

For I considered that if I give my self up to impurity God who cannot endure
it would withdraw himself from me, For what portion of God is there from above?
and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high?
and that my bod^ being infected with this (...) my soul should never be
honored with his grace.

I was not ignorant also th^^ the Ruin of impure souls (...) inevitable, Is
not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity?
that Heaven declares war to those who persecute Chastity, and if it ha^
aversion from all other si^ ners, it has hatred and ho^ rour for the unchaste;
A^ although this sort of people search for darkness and that they can hardly
discover them, yet I pretend not to abuse the God whom I serve, for I know well
that he sees my thoughts, that he counts my steps, and that I do nothing which
he knows not better than my self.

So is it no trouble to me to discover to him the condition of my soul, If I
have walked with vanity, or if my foot has hasted to deceit.
nor to appear before his Tribunal to hear my Sentence: wherefore if my
words have been double, if my mouth have not been the faithful interpreter of
my heart, and if I have not dealt sacerely with men.

I am content that he examine me according to rigor, Let me be weighed in an
even balance, that God may know mine integrity
to the end that if he find me guilty he may make me serve for an example, and
if he find me just, he may publish my ^nnocence, and give it the crown which
it deserves.

If wandering from my duty I have neglected his commands, If my step has turned
out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot has
cleaved to my hands:
if my heart has followed mine eyes, if its motions have been regulated by
their glances, if I have desired the goods which I have seen, and in my
actions or in my thoughts they have observed injustice.

I will have the trouble of sowing, Then let me sow, and let another ear, yea
let my offspring be rooted out.
and let another have the pleasure of reaping, I will work and let another
gather the fruits of my labor; and I consent that all the trees which my hands
have planted be torn up by the hands of my enemies.

If my heart have let it self be caught with those attractions wherewith women
delude us, If mine heart have bin deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait
at my neighbors door.
if their beauty has got into my eyes, if their friendship has served as a
covering for my passion, and if I have entered into the house of my friend for
to defile his bed, and deceive his wife.

I will receive the same affront, Then let my wife grind unto another, and let
others bow down upon her.
and may mine as many times as she has sworn to me, let her self be
corrupted by those who shall solicit her; and may my sin which has served
her for example, serve her also for excuse.

There needs no less a punishment for so great a crime, For this is an heinous
crime, yea it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges.
and the disorders which it causes in families, joined with the scandal which
it gives to all husbands, deserves well to be punished with the loss of honor.

It Is a fire which burns hearts, For it is a fire that consumes to
destruction, and would root out all my increase.
and which consumes houses, Heaven which proportions the punishments to the
sin, imployes its thunders to chastize it, and suffers the children descended
from those unlawful loves to perish miserably.

If I have refused to hear the complaints of my slaves, If I did despise the
cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant, when they contended with me.
if I have not permitted them to allege me reasons to justify them in their
faults, If I have not treated them rather like a Father than a Master, I submit
my self to all the pains wherewith Heaven punishes Tyrants.

But in the sentiments which God has given me, What then shall I do when God
rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him.
I did not care for chastizing them with rigor, for I knew well enough that
for being a Master, I did not leave to be a Subject, and that I had a
Sovereign whom I should be much troubled to answer, when he should demand an
account of my actions, and enter into judgment with me.

I considered also that if our condition were different, Did not he that made
me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?
out birth was alike, and that the honor of being formed by the hand of God,
was common to me with the least of my slaves.

If I have neglected the necessities of the poor, If I have withheld the poor
from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to sail;
If I have sent them back with a shameful deny all, or if they have not
received from me all that they have desired; If I have made the poor widows
languish, and not given to the importunity of their prayers, what I owe to the
misery of their condition.

If out of avarice or pride, Or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the
fatherless has not eaten thereof.
I have eaten alone at my Table, and if I have not given part to the Orphans of
the meat which they served me up, may Heaven which feeds our Lands with its
influences, leave mine unfruitful.

But this cruelty is far from my humor, (For from my youth he was brought up
with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mothers womb.
for mercy is so natural to me, that me thinks we tumble in the same belly,
that we were born together, and that like two twins we sucked the same milk.

Finally, If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering.
I consent that God punish me, if judging of men by their habits, I have
despised the poor who were not well covered, or if I have made any difficulty
to assist with my favor those who were commendable but for their misery.

But every one knows that the wool of my flocks has defended them from the
rigor of winter, If his ^oins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed
with he fleece of my sheep.
and that for having charitably clothed their bodies, I have received a
thousand benedictions from their mouths.

If while I presided in the Assemblies where my words were Decrees, If I have
lift up my hand against the fathersesse when I faw my help in the gate.
and where the Sovereign Authority which I exercised permitted not that I had
Arbiters or Correctors; Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine
arm be broken from the bone.
If (I say) in this supreme power I have ill treated the Orphans, or lifted up
my hands to strike them, I would that guilty part may be torn from my body,
that the arm which has been an accomplice in its sin, may partake in its
punishments; and that to strike terror in all Judges that abuse their power,
it may be broken by the infamous hands of the hangman.

But though my inclination had not kept me far from this crime, For destruction
from God was a tertor to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure.
the fear which I have of God would easily have diverted me from it, for I
have always apprehended the weight of his arm, and Sea men fear not so much
the tempests of the Sea, as I stand in awe of his anger.

I will suffer that he abandon me, If I have made gold my hope, or have said to
the fine gold, Thou art my confidence
and refuse me his assistance in my misfortune, if I have put my confidence in
my silver, if I have persuaded my self that gold was the strength of my state,
If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten much.
and if I have thought that I was more puissant than my neighbors, because I
was more rich.

I oblige my self to the same punishment, If I beheld the Sun when it shined,
or the moon walking in brightness:
if the estate which my Predecessors have left me, or that which mine own cares
have acquired me, have given me any vanity, and if when Heaven has blessed my
lands, and augmented my flocks, they have seen me more joyful or more
insolent, if I have superftitiously looked upon the Sun when at his rising he
discovers all his beauty, and when the people of the earth prostrate themselves
to adore him, or if with Idolatrous eyes I have looked upon the Moon, when she
is in the full, and marches over our heads with so much pomp and light.

If the sight of those two slarres have given me sentiments either of respect
or joy, And my heart has bin secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand.
if their beauty have persuaded me that they were the Gods of the world, and if
lowing my head, or kissing my hand, I have reverenced their greatness, and
implored their assistance. This also were an iniquity to be punished by the
Judge: for I should have denied the God that is above.
If I have committed this crime which surpasses all others, and which
endeavors to drive God from his Throne, to deface his Name out of the minds of
men, and to render his creatures an honor which is due only to Him, I would
that Heaven might chastize this sin with an eternity of miseries.

If the ruin of mine enemies has rejoiced me, If I rejoiced at the
destruction of him that hated me, for l^^t up my self when evil found him.
and if by a notorious baseness, which cannot fall upon a great conrage, their
miseries have begotten my pleasures, and the ill success of their affairs,
has given me contentment, I will perish with them.

I make this imprecation so much the more boldly, (Neither have I snffered my
mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his soul.)
as I know that my tongue was never given to detraction, and that my heart has
never formed any wishes which were prejudicial to the safety of my enemies.

Notwithstanding I wanted neither power nor occasion to revenge my self, If the
men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be
satisfied.
for I had not any about my house but would have cut them in pieces if I had
desired it, and who to repair my honor, on content my passion, would no^ have
devoured them.

If I have kindly treated mine enemies, The flranger did not lodge in the
street: but I opened my doors to the traveller.
I have no less courteously received strangers, for I never suffered them to
pass the nights in the fields, and without inquiring of their condition or
their birth, it was sufficient that they were Travelers to oblige me to open
them the gates of my house.

If I have concealed any sin, If I have covered my transgression as Adam: by
hiding my iniquity in my bosom.
like that unhappy man, whose children we are, and if I have preferred a little
honor before the repose of my conscience, and if I have hidden my faults and
would pass for innocent, though I were guilty.

If I have been afraid of the people, Did I sear a great multitude, or did the
contempt of families terrify me: that I kept silence, and went not out of the
door?
and if their tumults have made me change my good designs, if the contempt
which they have had of mine Alies has given me resentment, or if rather
keeping filence and staying at home, I have not let their differences be
determined by disinterested Judges, I condemn my self to the punishment which
this injustice may deserve.

But I read in your countenances Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire
is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary had written a
book
that these true discourses find no belief in your mind, so that your
incredulity makes me wish, that God would give me more reasonable Auditors, or
that he himself who ought to judge me, would write down my complaints and make
a book of them, Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a
crown to me.
to the end that I might tie it upon my shoulders, and that it might serve me
for ornament, or that I might put it upon my head, and that it might serve me
for a crown, that it might publish mine innocence and protect me from your
calumnies. Wheresoever I go it shall be mine only comfort, and to give it the
more credit I will present it to some Prince which shall cause it to be read in
his Dominion, and make mine innocence as known, as it is hidden.

But because you accuse me of tyranny, If my sand cry against me, or that the
furrows likewise thereof complain:
and that your discourses are all full of reproaches, know, that if the Lands
are desert long of me, and if the abandoned furrows complain of my violence,
If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the owners
thereof to lose their life:
if I have deprived the husbandmen of their hopes, or if making the labors of
their hands unprofitable, I have afflicted their minds, and drawn tears from
their eyes, Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle in stead of barley.
The words of Job are ended.
I am content that heaven curse my lands, that their sterility may not be
conquered by those that cultivate them, that for wheat they may give me but
thistles, and that for the barley which I shall sow, they may bring but
thorns.

CHAP. XXXII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELihu, a young man by conditi^n, who had assisted in the dispute which Job had
with his friends, demands that they would hear him, and promises that his
mind will provide him reasons for to defend the cause of God, and to oppose
the obstinacy of Job.

THose three persons broke up the conference, So these three men ceased to
answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes.
and replied no more to Job, whether persuaded by his reasons they believed
that he was innocent, or whether, as it is more probable, they lost all hope of
making him confess that he was guilty.

A young man, Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the
Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he
justified himself rather than God.
the son of Barachel, of the Country of Buz, and of the family of R^^, who
had been present at all this dispute, grew angry at Job, and was principally
offended that he persisted in his first belief, which persuaded him that he
was just, and that God himself could not condemn him for his sin.

He was angry likewise at Jobs friends, Also against bis three friends was his
wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
that they were not able to find good reasons to oppose him, and that passing
the bounds of a conference where every one fairly defends his opinion, they
meddled with condemning him, and took no pains to convince him.

Yet he patiently heard the discourses of the one, Now Elihu had waited till
Job had spoken, because they were elder than he.
and the answer of the other, because being the youngest, he believed that he
owed this respect to their age, and was obliged to hear them whilst they
spoke.

When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, then
his wrath was kindled.
But when he saw that the eloquence of Job triumphed over their wisdom, and
that their filence accompanied with confusion was a tacit and knowledgement of
their defeat, he grew more angry than before, and transported with his passion,
he says to them very briskely:

As I am younger than you, And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered
and said, I am young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid; and durst
not show you mine opinion.
your age has made me reverence your discourses, and mine has made me contemn
my own thoughts, wherefore with my head bowed, and a soul filld with a
respective fear, I did not dare to tell you my opinion of the subject upon
which you dispute.

I said Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.
For I hoped that your wisdom would furnish you with reasons for to convince
this obstinacy, and that the number of years which give you so much advantage
over young men, would instruct you some way of happily determining your
conference, and would discover to you arts from which this unhappy man could
not defend himself.

But for ought I can learn, But there is a spirit in man: and ^he inspiration
of the Almighty gives them understanding.
it is the Spirit of God which furnishes us with good things, and that it is
its motion rather than our reason which gives us overtures to win the hearts of
men, which hear us.

Prudence is not always ti^d to age, Great men are not always wise: neither
do the aged understand judgment.
and though knowledge be the daughter of time, (...) does not always happen,
that the most aged are the most learned, and experience ^eacheth us, that as we
see old fools, we see likewise ^oung wise men.

Therefore I said, Hearken to me, I also will show mine opinion.
Wherefore leaving that ^ashfull respect which hinderd me from speaking in so
notable an occasion, I will invite you to hear me, and a^ I know God gives
nothing but to communicate it to ou^ friends, I desire you to take part of that
light which I have received from his bount^*

The long filence which (...) afforded you, Behold, I waited for your words; I
gave cat to your reasons, whilst you searched out what to say.
obliges you to hear me, for you know tha^ during your contestations, (...)
did not interrupt you, and my patience has endured a^ long as your
entertainments.

Yea, I attended unto you: and behold, there was none of you that convinced
Job, or that answered his words:
I gave you my attention a^ long as I believed that you had any reasons left to
defend the cause of God; but for ought I know there is not on^ of you can
answer the Discourses of Job, nor allege good proofs to persuade him that he
is guilty.

And do not say to excuse your silence, Lest ye should say, We have found out
wisdom: God thrusts him down, not man.
that you have sufficiently convinced him (...) since you have made him
consesse that his disaster is an effect of Gods Justice, which cannot be
mistaken, and not of the anger of men who may be abused.

Now he has not directed his words against me^neither will I answer him with
your speeches.
I know that he has not meddled with me in his discourses, and that all the
reproaches which he has used to you, do not touch my honor, nor is it my
interest but Gods which makes me speak; and because your reasons could gain
nothing upon his mind, I will allege you some others, and assault him with
new weapons.

For if he has been hitherto victorious, They were amazed, they answered no
more, they left off speaking.
it is rather through your cowardice than his own courage; his answers have
amazed you, When I had waited, (for they spoke not, but stood still and
answered no more.
because he has replied upon you more boldly than a Malefactor ought, and this
thought has shut your mouths, and made your discourses cease. Since then I
have vainly expected, and you have not spoke, since you have basely abandoned
Gods side^ and by your silence yielded the victory to his enemy.

I will speak for to supply your default, I said, I will answer also my part,
I also will show mine opinion.
and treat with Job in my turn, that by the force of my eloquence I may oblige
him to confess, that if he has had the better, i^ is because you knew not how
to assault him, nor defend you^ selves.

I have so many reasons to convince him, For I am full of matter, the spirit
within me constrains me.
that I do not so much apprehend the event of the fight, as the flight of my
enemy: The subject which I must treat on furnishes me with so many thoughts,
that my mind has no trouble but to marshall them, and my mouth has so many
words for to express them, that I must strive to keep them in.

In the violent desire which (...) have to speak, Behold, my belly is as wine
which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottels.
methinks my ^eart is like those new wines which have been tunned up, and which
having no vent ^o evaporate their steames, ^oyle with fury and burst the
^essels, which take away their ^berty.

I will then open my mouth ^o discharge my heart a little, I will speak that I
may be refreshed: I will open my lips, and answer.
(...) will give way to my words, that I may breathe more free^y, and I desire
you to take ^^rt of my thoughts to assist you in your needs, and to ease me in
my abundance.

I first protest to you, Let me not, I prey you, accept any man's person,
neither let me give flattering titles unto man.
that inspect and shame shall not ^inder me from speaking truth, and without
having regard to the condition of those who hear me, I will speak freely, and
not give to men in my discourse those glorious gualities which belong only to
God.

For I know not to give flattering titles, in so doing my Maker would soon
take me away.
Though reason did not oblige me to have these thoughts, the fear of the
future would cause them in me; for I know not how long I must live, the day of
my death is as hidden as it is certain, and without conferring with my
Creator, I cannot foresee when he will take me out of the world.

CHAP. XXXIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELiku addresseeh his discourse to Job, and after he had gently insinuated into
his mind, he sharply reproves him for the liberty of his words, which he
qualifies with the name of blasphemies, and represents to him diverse means
wherewith God serves himself to reduce sinners to their duty.

ELihu, Wherefore Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my
words.
who judged that his Auditors were disposed to hear him, and that there
remained not any thing more to prepare the mind of Job, said to him:

As you are most interested in the cause, you are most obiged to hear me; lend
your ear then to my discourses, and despise not reasons which as well regard
the good of your soul, as the honor of God.

Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth.
Behold then I open my mouth to speak to you with liberty, and I oblige my
tongue to furnish me with words, which ought to be so much the less suspected
as they are mine, and as I shall employ them for truth only, and not for the
passion of your enemies.

My words shall be of the uprightesse of my heart: and my lips shall utter
knowledge clearly.
You shall see by the sincerity of my discourse that my design is not to
confound you, but to instruct you: with this right intention, I shall deduce my
reasons so clearly, that it shall be no trouble to you to comprehend them.

The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me
life.
Those promises which I make you must not seem impossible to you, since it is
the Spirit of God which makes me speak, and my tongue being but the
interpreter of his thoughts, my eloquence is more divine than human.

If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.
But do not believe that in the lists where we enter I would have all the
advantage be on my side, I desire that our weapons may be equal, that you may
fight with all your forces, that you turn not away your face, and that it be
permitted you as well to assault me, as to defend your self.

Behold, I am according to thy wish in Gods stead: I also am formed out of the
clay.
And certainly the match is very equal, for if God be your. Father he is also
mine, if we are his Children we are Brothers, and if he has molded my body of
dirt, he has not formed yours of a more noble matter.

Behold, my tertour shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy
upon thee.
I beseech you only that the wonders which I shall tell you, may not astonish
you, that that heat which accompanies the discourses of young men may give you
no alarm, and that the eloquence wherewith heaven has favored me, may not
render suspected the truth which I shall declare.

But for fear you should believe that I would make monsters to destroy them,
Surely thou have spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy
words, saying,
and put false opinions upon you to oppose them, I shall faithfully relate them
in the same words, which you served your self with to make us comprehend them.

You have said with more insolence then truth, I am clean without
transgression, I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me.
that your heart was pure, that sin had never sullied it that all your
intentions had been good, and that you^ actions had not been less innocent;
that heaven ha^ sought cccasions to hurt you that without having found real
sins which it might justly punish, it had fained imaginary ones, and that
making your complaints pass for crimes, it had treated you as rigorously, as
if you had been its enemy.

That to secure it self of you as they do of Malefactors, Behold, he finds
occasions against me, he counts me for his enemy.
it was not content to put irons upon your legs, but it had put salve to spy
all your actions, He puts my feetin the stocks, he marketh all my paths.
and set Guards upon you to relate unto it all your words.

These discourses are blasphemies, Behold, in this thou art not just: I will
answer thee, that God is greater then man.
but least you should think that I will sense my self rather with authority
then reason, I shall tell you that the Majesty of God obliges us to reverence
all his designs, and that his greatness forbids us for to condemn his
judgments.

You pretend that he does wrong, Why do thoustrive against him? for he gives
not account of any of his matters.
and that his proceeding is unjust, because he despises your words, and
answers not to all the reproaches which you use in the resentment of your
griefs.

But besides that these injurious complaints oblige not him to reply to you,
For God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not.
know that his greatness dispenses with him for speaking so often, and that
when he has once made us to understand his will, nothing obliges him to
inform us of it anew, and when he has given us any advice, we ought to follow
it, and not to demand any other.

Sometimes he advertiseth men in the night, In a dream, in a vision of the
night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the bed:
and when Ghosts fly through the Air, and that all is filled with darkness
and dreams, and that rest charms the senses, and that men plunged in sleep,
are neither in the number of the living nor the dead.

He speaks secretly to the ears of their heart, Then he opens the ears of
men, and seals their destruction.
whilst those of their body are shut up, and in a condition where it seems
they are incapable of apprehending any thing he declares to them his will, and
by imaginations which he paints in their fancies he afflicts or comforts them.

As he labors for their salvation as well as for his own honor, That he may
withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.
he gives them this advice but to make them better, for whether it be to
withdraw them from their finne, or for to deliver them from the pride which
tyrannizes over them, and make them free in making them become humble.

Or whether it be to advertise them of the misfortune which threatens them, He
keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.
inform them of the bad design of their enemies, discover to them the
treasons which they plot against them, and preserve them from a violent and
sudden death.

He speaks to them also sometimes by griefs, He is chastened also with pain
upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain.
and serves himself with diseases to instruct them, he takes from them the
power of doing evil, so that he may take from them the desire of it, and
commands a languishing Fever to burn their entrails, and to consume that
moisture which nourishes the bones, and conserveth life.

You shall see them then in bed dejected and distasted, So that his life
abhorteth bread, and his soul dainty meart.
the best meats displease them, Bread which is the most innocent of Elements,
and which changes it self most easily into our substance ^auseth aversion in
them, and those delicate meats which they sought so passionately, are no less
horrid to them then poison.

When the Malady contitues, their color changes, His flesh is consumed away
that it cannot beseen, and his bones that were not seen, stick out.
their favor vanishes, they become so lean that the bones pierceing the
ski^me, they seem rather Skeletons than men: Physicians give them over, those
which see the loathsome symptoms which accompany their disease, judge it
mortal, and believe that without a Miracle they cannot escape.

But whilst every one despaires of their life, If there be a messenget with
him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightnes:
that Angel which has been chosen out of a thousand to be their Tutelar,
undertakes to convert them, and to defend them.

The Majesty of God which takes pleasure in being overcome by the prayers of
hi^ people will give him charge to cure them, Then he is gracious unto him, and
says, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.
and his Mercy which is ingenious in obligeing them will find something in
their persons wherewith to satisfy his Justice, His flesh shall befresher then
a childs: he shall return to the days of his youth.
it will ordain that their body which has been consumed by sickness be
established in its former vigor, and that by secrets which Physic and Nature
do not know, it be restored to that beauty which it possessed in its prime.

Then their Sicknesses, He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto
him, and he shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his
righteousness.
joining their prayers with those of their good Angels shall make heaven
propitious to them, and not to be ungrateful for so rare a favor, they shall
thank God in his Temple with a thousand testimonies of joy, which shall be
followed with a perfect cure of their body and of their soul.

As a true repentance is always accompanied with a humble confession, He
looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was
right, and it profited me not:
they shall publish aloud the goodness of God, and the excess of their
offense; they shall say every where we have sinned against heaven, and with
whatsoever punishment we have been chastised we protest that it has been less
then our crime.

So by an innocent cunning they deliver themselves from the misfortune which
threatened them, He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life
shall see the light.
preserve their body and their soul from a double death, and procure
themselves by their repentance a double life.

See the order which God observes for to convert sinners, Lo, all these things
works God oftentimes with man.
and the diverse means which he uses to reduce them to their duty, To bring
back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living.
but their malice must not entertain it self in a rash confidence, for when
he has touched them twice or thrice without effect, they must fear least his
bounty grow weary, and that the contempt which they make of his favors oblige
him not to refuse them.

Learn then these secrets afflicted Prince, Mark well, O Job, hearken unto
me, hold thy peace, and I will speak.
hearken peaceably to him, which discovers them to you, and since all this
discourse is so profitable to your Soul, rouse up your attention, and continue
your silence.

If notwithstanding you have any good reply to make me, If thou have any thing
20 say, answer me: speak, for I desire to ju^^fie thee.
I am ready to hear it, and obliging my self to the same Laws which I have
prescribed you, I will patienly hear all your Reasons, for passion possesses
not my soul, and you cannot do me a greater pleasure, then to persuade me
that you are innocent.

But if you cannot do it, If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall
teach thee wisdom.
and if you want colors to palliate so bad a cause as yours I am content to
speak in your favor, and to teach you true wisdom, provided that on your
part you also persever in the design of harkening to me.

CHAP. XXXIV.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELihu gives liberty to his eloquence, imputes new erimes to Job, and by
experience of the punishment wherewith Heaven punishes bad Princes, endeavors
to persuade him that he is of the number of them, and that his misfortune is
the chastizement of his tyranny.

ELihu continued his discourse, Furthermore Elihu answered and said,
and accompanied it with all the exterior graces which make an Orator
agreeable, and which charm the senses of the Auditors, to make his reasons
pass with more delight into their minds.

Wise men says he, Hear my words, O ye wise men, and give ear unto me, ye
that have knowledge.
who have intelligence of all divine and humane things, observe exactly my
thoughts, and you learned men, whose mind knowledge and travail polisheth,
hearken carefully what I have to tell you.

For as the taste discernes meats, approves the good, For the eat ^^eth words,
as the mouth tastes meat.
and condemns the bad, so the ear judges of words, rejects he false, and
receives the true.

Call then your mind to the succor of your senses, Let us choose to us
judgment: let us know among our selveswhat is good.
for to make a judgment which is not passionate, and despoyled of your in
terest choose that which shall seem to you the best, and the most just.

Remen ber that Job has bragged of being innocent, For Job has said, I am
righteous: and God has taken away my judgment.
and that by a blasphemy, which his vanity has drawn from his mouth, he has
said that God would not do him Justice, Should I lie against my right? my
wound is incurable without transgression.
and that he had searched pretenses, that he might not give him audience, that
being overcome by his importunities he had at last pronounced his Sentence, but
that it was conceived in terms which made apparent the injustice of it, and
that he suffered punishments which made known the rigor of it.

Remember also the quality of the Personage, What man is like Job, who drinks
up scorning like water?
which makes these unreasonable complaints, and see how he has not his equal
in impudence, and how having lost all sense of honor, he drinks affronts, and
blushes not at it.

How without shame he walks publicly with lost men, Which goes in company
with the workers of iniquity, and walks with wicked men.
and priding in his sin, he is very glad that it is known that he frequents
not their companies, but because he approves their opinions.

Lastly, For he has said, It profits a man nothing, that he should delight
himself with God.
remember that he has said, that the God whom you adore is too hard to be
served; that a man, whatever pains he takes, cannot oblige him, that he is
their enemy who obey him, and persecutes them as well as those who offend him.

Wherefore (wise and generous Personages) I conjure you by the interests of
God, Therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding: far be it from God,
that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity.
which are so dear to you, to weigh the reasons wherewith I pretend to clear
him from these calumnies, and to make you plainly see, that injustice and
impiety cannot lodge in his person.

He treats men according to their merits, For the work of a man shall he render
unto him: and cause every man to find according to his ways.
and whether he recompense, or punish them, he regulates himself by their
actions, and never pronounces sentence, but he consults his Justice.

As he is good, Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the
Almightypervert indgement.
he chastiseeth no man without cause, and resembles not those Sovereigns who
feign crimes that they may punish them: as he is powerful, he walks upright
in his Judgments, and imitates not those evil Judges, who let themselves be
overcome by threats, or corrupted by presents.

If then he has punished you, Who has given him a charge over the earth? or
who has disposed the whole world?
you ought to believe that you are guilty, and you cannot cast the cause of
your misfortune upon any other, fince the same, who made the world, governes
it, and reposeth none of his conduct neither in men, nor in Angels.

And we must confess that he governes it by his Justice tempered with his
sweetness, If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit
and his breath;
for if he used his Power only, or had a desire to overthrowmen, it would not
be hard for him to take away the life, which he has given them, nor in his
fury to ruin a work which he has made but for his pleasure.

In this case all nature would perish, All flesh shall perishtogether, and man
shall turn again unto dust
and the body of man destitute of that spirit which animates it, would return
into its first condition, and become either earth, or ashes.

If then you have any wit left you, If now thou haste understanding, hearken to
the veyce of my words.
comprehend what I tell you: for to profit by my thoughts, hearken diligently
to my words, and do it so, that my eloquence may be glorious to me, and
profitable to you.

How can you hope for your Cure since not loving Justice, Shall even he that
hareth right govern? and will thou condemn him that is most just?
you hate your remedy? How dare you pretend that God should be favorable to
you, since being Justice it self he Condemns you, and by an execrable attempt
you would ruin his Honor to establish your own innocence?

Notwithstanding you know that he is so just, Is it fit to say to a King, Thou
art wicked? and to a Prince, Ye are ungodly?
that he pardons not Monarchs themselves, that without respecting their
condition, he reproacheth them either with the unbridled license which they
give themselves in their states, or with the worship of Idols which they
entertain amongst their subjects.

You are not ignorant that he has no regard in his Judgments to the quality
of persons, How much less to him that accepts nor the persons of princes,
nor regards the rich more then the poor? for they are all the work of his
hands.
and when great ones have any thing to do with mean ones, he considers not
the eminence of their condition, but the goodness of their cause, for as he
knows well that they are the works of his hand, he treats them equally, and
does them no more favor than his Justice permits him.

Thus it often happens that Princes receive their death, In a moment shall they
dye, and the people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and the
mighty shall be taken away without hand.
when they least fear it, that people revolt against their Sovereigns, that
by the favor of the night they make meetings, that they enter into their
Palaces, surprise them without their Guards, and take away their lives to
recover their liberty.

For whatsoever impunity the wicked promise themselves, For his eyes are upon
the ways of man, and he sees all his goings.
God has always his eyes open upon their actions, and when he seems to be
most busy in the conduct of the Universe, There is no darkness, nor shadow of
death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
he fails not to mark all their steps, and to consider all their thoughts:
the night has not darkness thick enough, nor the Region of Death shadows
black enough to hide them, and steal from his eyes the impieties which they
commit.

For he will not lay upon man more then right; that he should enter into
judgment with God.
Besides his Decrees are so constant, that they cannot make them change, for as
he who pronounces them is Sovereign, they cannot appeal from him to another
Judge; and as he is always equal they cannot hope that he will revoke them.

He produces every day examples to establish this truth: He shall break in
pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their stead.
for he breaks the heads of Tyrants, he gives them strangers, or enemies for
their successors, and makes them see that he is absolute over all Monarchs,
since he disposes as he pleases, of their estates.

It is not though without knowledge of the cause, Therefore he knows their
works, and he over^ turns them in the night, so that they are destroyed.
that he makes all these changes, for he punishes not bad Princes, but after
he has weighed their Crimes, or if he overthrow their fortune, He strikes
them as wicked menin the open fight of others:
or cover their face with confustion, it is but to punish their impieties, and
satisfy his Justice, if he make an example of them to the world, and if he
chastise them in the fight of all their subjects, it is but to proportion their
punishment to their sin, and to expiate notorious crimes by public
chastisements.

In a word, Because they turned back from him and would not consider any of his
ways.
if he have punished any of them in our Age, it was well known that they had
lost all sense of Religion, that it was not out of weakness but malice, So
that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he hears the cry of
the afflicted.
that they had gone astray from him, that it was not out of ignorance, but
design that they had violated his Commandments, that they had not fained
themselves to be ignorant of them, but to have the more liberty to persecute
the poor, and to constrain the miserable to wash the earth with their tears,
and importune heaven with their complaints.

Out of all this discourse it is easy to conclude, When he gives quietness,
who then can make trouble? and when he hideeth his face, who then can behold
him? whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only:
that the life and death of Kings depends upon the will of God, that when he
permits them to reign peaceably, there are no enemies which dare assault them;
and on the contrary, when he abandons them, and hides his face from them, which
he shows but to his Favorites, there are no subjects which daigne to regard
them, nor which will defend them. At the sight of these truths all the world
must confess, that the cares of God extend over States, and Families, and that
he watches over men in particular, and over people in general.

He gives good proof of this, That the hypoerite reign not, lest the people be
ensnared.
when to punish the sins of a Kingdom, he makes an Hypocrite reign, who
seeks in appearance the profit of his subjects, but in deed seeks but their
ruin and damage.

Now after I have maintained the Cause of God, Surely it is meet to be said
unto God, I have borne chastisement, I willnot offend any more.
and deduced all the Reasons which my wit could furnish me with for the defense
of his interests, I leave you the liberty of speaking in your turn, and am not
just but in refusing you a favor which you have granted me.

If treating on so high a subject, I have been mistaken, That which I see not,
teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.
you will oblige me to advertice me of it, and if transgressing from the
respect which we owe that supreme Majesty, I have uttered any word which is
unworthy of his Greatness; I will endeavor to expiate it by my silence.

It is true that you ought to to pardon this fault, Should it be according to
thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose,
and not I: therefore speak what thou know.
since God himself whom you have offended does not exact satisfaction for all
yours; and besides, you know that I have not continued this discourse, but
because you have began it, and so as you have served me for an example, you
ought to serve me for an excuse, if notwithstanding you have any thing that is
good to say, for to repair both your faults and mine, speak and I will hear
you.

In confess to you though, Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise
man hearken unto me.
if it were in my choice, I should desire to treat with intelligent men, and I
would that those who hear me and those, who answer me were equally reasonable.

For to speak to you my thoughts with freedom, Job has spoken without
knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.
you have none of these qualities, you speak without discretion, and without
respect, and all your discourses witness nothing but ignorance, and obstinacy.

Wherefore I conjure you O common Father of all men, My desire is that Job may
be tried unto the end, because of his answers for wicked men.
to tame the pride of Job by afflictions, to treat him like a slave, and not
like a son, and to continue in your putishrments, since he perseve^es in is
blasphemies.

On our part we shall employ all the advantages which we have received from
your goodness to defend your Justice: For he adds rebellion unto his finne,
he clappeth his hands amongst us, and multiplieth his words against God.
but if this man be incorrigible, and resist our reasons, we will leave him as
a desperate sick-man, and we will suffer, not without much sorrow, that he
provoke you to fight, and declare war against your divine Providence.

CHAP. XXXV.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELihu uses many reasons to persuade Job, that the resentments of injuries
induces not God to punish men, since in the happiness which he possesses, our
offenses cannot hurt him, nor our services oblige him.

ELihu, Elihu spoke moreover, and said:
who knew well how to begin a discourse, but who knew not how to end it,
continued his in this manner:

Do you think that your Propositions are maintaineable, Think thou this to
be right, that thou said, My righteousness is more then Gods.
that you have reason, when you will establish your innocence at the expense of
Gods Justice, and by a pride which cannot enter but into the spirit of a
Devil, you insolently say, that you are more just than he?

For you cannot deny but your impudence has drawn these blasphemies from your
mouth: For thou said, What advantage will it be unto thee, and what profit
shall I have if I be cleansed from my sin?
good and evil are equally indifferent to God, and as he is not obliged by
respects, he is not offended by contempts.

As for me, I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.
who cannot endure that so pernicious a discourse remain without reply, I will
confute all the words of it, and condemn your friends, who approve it by their
silence.

Lift up your eyes, Look unto the heavens, and see and behold the clouds which
are high then thou.
look upon Heaven, and consider that it is so high, that they cannot assault
it, that the distance which seperates it from us, warrants it from all our
attempts, that the Arrows which they draw against it are not fatal, but to
those which draw them, and that it is as secure against our outrages, as it is
elevated above our heads.

If you offend him whose Throne it is, If thou sinnest, what do thou against
him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him?
if you multiply your crimes for to satisfy the desire which you have to
displease him, what injury will you do his Glory, which depends not upon your
opinion? what wrong will you do his State, the peace or confusion whereof
depends not but upon his own will?

Or if out of a better design you serve him faithfully, If thou be righteous,
what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand?
what advantage shall he draw from your duty? If you load his Altars with
Sacrifices, and if you enrich the Temples, which they have erected to his
honor, what profit shall he receive thence, who accepts not our presents, but
to return them us back with interest?

It is to man who is your equal that your injustice may be prejudicial, Thy
wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the
son of man.
and not to God who is your Sovereign: it is to man I say, who has nothing,
and not to God who possesses all things, that your bounty can be profitable.

There need no other proofs to confirm this truth, By reason of the multitude
of oppressions, they make the oppressed to cry they cry out by reason of the
arm of the mighty.
than the complaints of the miserable, whose reputation the calumny of
detractors takes away, and the tears of those poor slaves, from whom the
injustice and violence of Tyrants force their liberty.

If Heaven sometime permit this oppression they ought not blame it, But none
says, Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night?
since they who have suffered it have well deserved it, for they had forgotten
God, Who teaches us more then the beasts of the earth, and makeeth us wiser
then the fowls of heaven.
and thought no more on him who in their first afflictions had made them taste
of delicacies more agreeable than those of Poetry and Music, and who denying
them none of those favors wherewith he obliges men, had given them a thousand
advantages over all the visible Creatures, for though Nature has so well
instructed living Creatures to seek what is profitable for them, and taught
the Birds to build their Nests with so much Art and symmetry, we must confess,
that men excel them in address, and know a thousand secrets whereof Beasts
are ignorant.

If he heed not then all our vows, There they cry, (but none gives answer)
because of the pride of evil men.
we must not infer that it is in vain that he hears them, but we must
rather conclude, that being just, Surely God will nor hear vanity, neither
will the Almighty regard it.
he examines the merit of those who make them, and refuses their sins what
he would grant to their prayers, so that if it seems that he neglect the
pains of the afflicted, Although thou say thou shast not see him, yet
judgment is before him, therefore trust thou in him.
or dissemble the offenses of the wicked, you ought not murmr, but submit
your self to his judgment, and expect with patience till he deliver the one,
and punish the other.

For at present as he reigns more like a Father than a Judge, But now because
it is not so, he has visited in his anger, yet h^ knows it not in great
extremity.
he discharges not his anger upon all those who provoke him, he equals not the
punishment to the sins, and chastises not a crime so soon as it is committed;
Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain: he multiplieth words without
knowledge.
which makes me conclude, that Job complains without reason, that he does ill
to accuse divine Providence, and that he is unjust to use so many insolent
words to blame a conduct, which all the world reverenceth.

CHAP. XXXVI.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELihu makes it appear that God has no regard to the conditions of persons,
but to their merits, that the great and the small are equally dear to him if
they are equally just, and concludes all this discourse with some advice which
he gives Job, for to conduct himself in his state when he shall be
re-established.

ELihu, Elihu also proceeded, and said:
who saw well that his tediousnes might make him troublesome, and that the most
part of his Auditors languished, awakened them by an artificial excuse, and
become more eloquent then he had been yet, returns to his discourse in this
manner:

If the interests of God are dear to you, Suffer me a little, and I will show
thee, that I have yet to speak on Gods behalf.
and if you are as jealous of his Glory, as he is careful of your salvation, I
conjure you to continue me yet a little that favorable silence, wherewith you
have hitherto obliged me, for there are some reasons behind, which I cannot
omit without doing injury to the cause of him, of whom I have the honor to be
the Advocate.

Permit me then to handle this subject as it deserves, I will fetch my
knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
and to deduce you the principles, whereof you have yet seen but the
conclusions, I hope that your patience will not be unprofitable to you, and
that your mind convinced by my reasons will acknowledge, that the God which we
adore is not unjust.

I will search for no Artifices in my discourses, For truly, my words shall not
be false: he that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.
they shall have no other ornament then those of truth, they shall be simple
and solid: with all these conditions I persuade my self that they will be
agreeable to you, and that you will approve what you have hitherto condemned.

You imagine that God loves not the great, Behold, God is mighty, and despises
not any: he is mighty in strength and wisdom.
because they are oftentimes unhappy, and that the highest fortunes are odious
to him, because they are most frequently set upon; but if it be true that every
one loves his like, you ought to believe that he hates not the great, since he
is their Sovereign, and that he has no aversion from Kings, since they have
the honor to be his Images.

It is true, He preserves not the life of the wicked: but gives right to the
poor.
as he preferres Piety before greatness, and makes more esteem of virtue than
of birth, he abandons Princes when they despise his Laws, and takes the part
of the poor when in their oppression they implore his assistance.

Yet of what condition soever the just are, He withdraws not his eyes from
the righteous: but with kings are they on the throne, yea, he does establish
them for ever, and they are exalted.
he has always his eyes open to look upon them: if Kings add innocence to
their Power he establishes their Thrones, supports their Crowns, and procures
them as much glory, as they render him obedience and submission.

If at any time they fall from their fortune, And if they be bound in fetters,
and be holden in cords of affliction:
if by the insurrection of their Subjects, or by the usurpation of their
Neighbors they are despoyled of their Estates, and loaded with chains as
heavy, as shameful.

Their injustice is the cause of their disaster, Then he shows them their
work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded.
their crimes pal thunder from heaven upon their heads, and they are not
punished but for the extortions which they have used in their Kingdoms, or for
the violence which they have exercirsed over their enemies.

And God is so far from taking pleasure to make them miserable, He opens
also their ear to discipline, and commands that they remine from iniquity.
that he employes all his favors to reduce them to their duty; for he speaks
secretly to the ear of their hearts to convert them, and serves himself with
good motions and inspirations to divert them from their sins.

If they profit by his advice, If they obey and serve him, they shall spend
their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.
if they prudently use his counsels, they shall come out of Prison happily,
they shall mount again upon their Throne, they shall reign there with
pleasure, and pass the rest of their years in that glorious Pomp, which
accompanies Kings in their Triumphs.

But if they neglect or reject them, But if they obey not, they shall perish by
the sword, and they shall dye withoutknowledge
they shall take them out of Prison but to carry them to the Scaffold: and all
the world shall confess, that their death is the just punishment of their
imprudence, and that they have lost their honor with their life for having
contemned God in their misfortune.

Dissembling Princes shall receive the same usage, But the hypocrites in heart
heap up wrath: they cry not when he binds them.
those who cover their pernicious designs under fair appearances, and who
never fail of pretenses to oppress their Subjects, shall likewise feel the
just punishments which they deserve; for when they shall be laid in irons and
of Kings as they were become slaves, their hardened hearts shall conceive no
sorrow for their sins, and their guilty mouth shall ask no pardon for them.

God wearied with their Crimes shall raise a Tempest which shall cause their
death, They dye in youth, and their life is among the unclean.
or if he defend them from it, it shall be but to condemn them to a life more
shameful than death it self; for being reduced to a condition where they
shall be no longer men, their Masters shall employ them for the Guard and
service of their Concubines.

If the poor likewise fall into any new misfortune, He delivers the poor in
his affliction, and opens their ears in oppression.
he will not despise them by reason of their condition, but by the same favor
which he has done the great ones, he will deliver them out of their misery,
and beget a desire in them of praying to him, to the end that he may be obliged
to help them.

Wherefore you must believe, Even so would he have removed thee out of the
strait into a broad place where there is no straitness, and that which should
be set on thy table, should be full of fatness.
unfortunate Prince, that if you imitate their Piety, you shall share in their
happiness, that God will take you out of this extreme calamity, which like a
vast sea has neither banks nor bottom: then all your miseries shall end, you
shall see your Table full of exquisite meats, and that nothing may be wanting
to your felicity, you shall eat them in quiet, and with pleasure.

That which has prejudiced you hitherto is, But thou have fulfilled the
judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee.
that you have favored the wicked, and that you have made their Cause your
own, wherefore you are treated as you deserve, and the Judgments which you
have received, have been formed by those which you have heretofore given.

To avoid then this misfortune, I am of opinion, Because there is wrath, beware
lest he take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver
thee.
that when Heaven has restored you to your Honors, and that when you shall be
again the Sovereign and Judge of your Subjects, that you should resist anger,
and that you should not suffer this violent passion to make you oppress the
innocent. Take heed also that Presents do not shake your constancy, and that
Money have not more power over your mind than reason.

Be not troubled to leave of that haughty Greatness, Will he esteem thy
riches? no not gold, nor all the forces of strength.
which is fitter to make one feared than loved; take no part with the Great
against the small, and when you walk in public be not accompanied with those
guards which commit a thousand insolences, and which hinder Subjects from
approaching their Sovereigns.

Else it will happen, Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their
place.
that your people being no longer able to endure their extreamities, and taking
advantage of your sleep, will go and fall upon them in your Palace, and make
them serve as an example to all servants who abuse the authority of their
Masters.

Take heed likewise above all things, Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this
thou have chosen rather then affliction.
that you decline not to injustice; for since your misfortune this sin is
become familiar with you, and it seems that Poverty has taught you to be
unjust.

Though your interest should not oblige you to take this resolution, Behold,
God exalts by his power: who teaches like him?
the Greatness and Majesty of God should invite you to it; for his Power
elevates him above all his Creatures: our Conquerors which master all by their
Arms, and our Sages who govern all by their Laws, are not worthy to enter
into comparison with him. Who has enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou
have wrought iniquity?


Who is he that would take the liberty to examine his Judgments? and who would
be so rash as to dare to reproach him with committing any injustice?

Remember I beseech you, Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.
that all the wonders which his hands work daily are hidden from you; and that
all which the Poets and Philosophers have spoken of them, can neither make you
know the greatness of his Power, nor the merit of his Works.

I know that as all the Creatures are but prints and shadows of his Being,
Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off.
men cannot be ignorant of him, and that there is no one so unhappy but has
some proofs or conjectures of his Divinity.

Yet we must confess, Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can
the number of his years be searched out.
that his Greatness surpasses our knowledge, and that the endeavors of our
minds are too feeble to reckon the number of his years, and to comprehend the
wonders of his Eternity.

It Is true, For he makes small the drops of water: they pour down rain
according to the vapor thereof.
that his Works give us instructions, and that the effects which he produceeth
manifest to us his Power, for who knows not it, and adores not him, when to
give us a fair day he disperseth the Clouds, Which the clouds do drop, and
distill upon man abundantly.
dryes up the drops of water, wherewith they were full; or when to make our
Lands fruitful he gathers together Vapors, and converts them into Torrents of
Rain?

Or when he thickens them so that the Air becomes obscure with them, Also can
any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle?
and that Nature finds her self buried in darkness, and when at full day he
makes a gloomy night, which the light of the Sun cannot dissipate.

But does he not appear admirable when he stretches out the Clouds like a
Pavillion, Behold, he spreads his light upon it, and covers the bottom of
the sea.
and when to give sensible tokens of his Presence he dazels our eyes with his
Lightning, and astonishes us with his Thunder, the flame and smoke of which
being confounded together cover the tops of those proud Mountains, which serve
as bounds to the fury of the Sea.

For as he serves himself with the same thing for contrary uses, For by them
judges he the people, he gives meat in abundance.
he employes Tempests and Rain sometimes to punish his enemies, sometimes to
favor his servants; and oftentimes the same storm which drownes the Lands of
the wicked, waters and fattens those of the just.

His Power extends not only over the Meteors, With clouds he covers the
light, and commands it not to shine, by the cloud that comes betwixt.
but also over the most beautiful of all the Stars which follows his orders
so exactly, that it seems its light is in his hands, that it has no other
motion but that of his Will, and that it rises not, and sets not but to render
him obedience.

When it mounts upon our Horizon, The noise thereof shows concerning it, the
cattle also concerning the vapor.
all Nature testifies its joy; and because its light is a common good which
makes none jealous, men advertise their friends of its return, and possess it
without envy.

CHAP. XXXVII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELihu has no other design then to prove to Job, that since the works of God
are unknown to him, his designs are more hidden from him, and that therefore
be ought humbly to reverence them, and not curiously to examine them.

IF these wonders ravish you, At this also my heart trembles, and is moved out
of his place.
those which are left me will ravish you much more, and I my self am so
surprised, that to judge by the extraordinary palpitation of my heart, it
seems as if it would go out of my breast, and testify its astonishment by
its death.

Hearken then with respect to this omnipotent God, Hear attentively the noise
of his voice, and the found that goes out of his mouth.
who explaines himself in the voice of Thunder, and who to reduce his
rebellious Subjects to their duty shootes forth lightning.

From the highest Heavens be sees all that passes upon earth, He directs it
under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth.
and when our crimes offend him, he commands the lightning to cleave the
Clouds, and to scatter its flames through the world.

After them comes the Thunder, After it a voice roareth: he thundreth with the
excellency, and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.
whose noise more horrid than the roaring of lions intimidates all men, and
although it advertises them of the disaster with which it threatens them, yet
it does not teach them to avoid it; for though they hear it, they do not know
in what part it will light, and its fall is as deceitful, as its voice is true.

He who thunders so horridly, God thundreth marvellously with his voice, great
things does he, which we cannot comprehend.
and who serves himself with storms and tempests, and makes himself feared
when he cannot make himself loved, is the same who does all those other
wonders in the Air, For he says to the snow, Be thou on the earth, likewise
to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.
which oblige us to reverence his Power, and adore his greatness. It Is he who
commands the Snow to whiten the earth, and (as cold as it is) to serve for a
cover for to preserve its heat: it is he himself who disposes of winter
Raines, which swell the rivers, and ravage the fields.

Lastly, He seals up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work.
it is he who during the rigor of this season ties up the hands of men,
hinders them from being at leisure for Husbandry, and obliges them to think
either on their domesticke affairs, or to admire the works of his power.

The Beasts themselves, Then the beasts go into dens: and remain in their
places.
who fear the injury of the season, make no more incursions into the Plains,
but shut up in the Forests they hide themselves in their Dens, and expect that
the Spring deliver them from this prison.

Then the Tempests come out of the places where they were imprisoned, Out of
the south comes the whirlewinde: and cold out of the north.
the Cold which the heat had banished into the Countries of the North, returns
more glorious then before, and established in its Empire, it makes its rigor
felt by all the people of the world.

The Winds which march always in its train cause a thousand ravages upon
Land, By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is
straightened.
and a thousand shipwrackes at Sea: when the Northwinde blows, and its
pierceing cold locks up all things, the Waters glaze themselves and change into
Crystal, but when the South-winds blow in their turn, the Ice melts, and its
crystal resolves into water.

God who provides for all our necessities does these wonders ordinarily, Also
by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scatters his bright cloud.
when the Corn has need of rain, for then he covers the Heaven with Clouds
great with Lightning and Thunder, which make the earth hope, that she shall
soon be watered.

These vapors which carry fertility in their bosoms, And it is turned round
about by his counsels: that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon
the face of the world in the earth.
have no other motion than that which God gives them, he is the Governor who
conducts them, and these inanimate subjects are always ready to do his
commands.

They are not tied to any one part of the World, He causes it to come, whether
for correction, or for his land, or for mercy.
they water as well strange Lands as those which brought them forth, and the
Will of God being all their inclinations, they stay upon the Fields, which he
will oblige, and fly from those which he will punish.

Consider these wonders a little, unhappy Prince, Hearken unto this, O Job:
stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
and since my reasons have no power over your mind, learn from the respect
which insensible Creatures bear to God, the obedience which you owe him, and
meddle no more in judging his designs, since his most common works are
unknown to you.

For to confound your pride once more without digressing from my subject, Do
thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine?
do you know the time when God commands the Clouds to mix their darkness with
the brightness of the Sun, and to make by that pretty confusion that
incomparable Meteor, which is compounded but of water and light, and which
shows us colors as beautiful as they are false, which naturally presageth
nothing but rain, and yet assures us that the earth shall never be drowned by
a universal deluge, and which lastly represents the form of a Bow, and yet
never shootes any man unless it be with astonishment and love?

But without standing any longer to describe so public a wonder, Do thou
know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect
in knowledge?
do you know the motion of the Clouds, the way which they observe in the
Heavens when they fly over our heads, the battles which they give when
carried by contrary winds they shock one another in the midst of the Air:
Lastly, do you know all the secrets which they hide from us, and which require
profound study, and perfect science to be plainly understood?

Have you never observed, How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth
by the south wind?
that the seasons change with the winds, and that when those of the South blow
upon the earth, your clothes grow hot, and your strength grows feeble?

But when you shall know the causes of these extraordinary effects, Have thou
with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking glass?
and by a long experience you shall have carefully observed all these changes,
will you dare to boast that you know how he has built these proud frames,
which roale continually over our heads, and which though they are more solid
than Brass, are more transparent than Crystal?

If you know all these woners, Teach us what we shall say unto him: for we
cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.
as you would persuade us you do, teach us some words to answer God with: for
I confess, that my light compared with his is darkness, and the more I
think of the greatness of his works, the less I can find words to describe
them.

Though the terms which I use now be very modest, Shall it be told him that I
speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up.
yet I would find some one who could relate them to him, for I am persuaded
that one cannot speak to him without danger, that the luster of his Majesty
dazleth men, and that they cannot purchase the honor of doing it but with the
loss of their lives.

His presence may well work this Miracle, And now men see not the bright light
which is in the clouds: but the wind passes and cleanses them.
since his Power produces every day the like: for it takes from us the light
when it pleases, it darkens the Air with Clouds, and makes a night in the
midst of day, then commanding the winds to scatter them, it restores us the
brightness which it had taken from us.

Then as if the Air were cleansed by the North winds, Fair weather comes out
of he north: with God is terrible majesty.
the Heaven appears as pure as gold, and this calm which succeeds the
Tempest, and teaches us that all things obey God, obliges us to adore him with
respect, and to mix sentiments of fear amongst all the praises which we give
him.

So that we must confess, Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he
is excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not
afflict.
that whatsoever endeavor we can use, we cannot attain to the least of his
perfections: for he is great in his Works as in his Judgments, and that man
does not know him yet, who thinks to find words to relate his wonders.

Wherefore the most advised men are content to adore him with humility, Men do
therefore fear him: he respects not any that are wise in heart.
without desiring to know him with pride, and the most judicious honor him in
his works without examining his defignes, for fear least so guilty a curiosity
should be followed with confusion and repentance.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
GOd speaks out of the midst of a cloud, and joins in appearance with the
friends of Job, to let him see, that since the wonders of Nature are unknown
to him, the secrets of his providence cannot be evident.

WHen this long discourse, Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwinde,
and said:
which wanted neither truth, nor cunning was ended, God who would himself try
the patience of Job, and exercise him once again before he crowned him,
appeared in a Cloud worthy of his Majesty, and spoke to him in this manner:

Who is that rash man, Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without
knowledge?
who after having expressed his thoughts in a confusion of words, comes
impudently to cross my designs, and reduce the laws of my Providence to the
feeble reach of his own mind?

If he have as much courage as insolence, Gird up now thy loins like a man: for
I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.
let him prepare himself for the Combat, let him take Arms to defend
himself, and since he has desired to try his force against mine, and to enter
into the list with me, let him answer to my demands, and learn by this
dispute, that the wisdom of men is but folly before me.

Where were you, Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth?
declare, if thou have understanding
when taking counsel of none but mine own Power and Goodness, I laid the
foundation of the earth, and made it unmovable in the midst of the Air, where
it has no other support but its own weight? declare to me this secret if you
know it, and make it appear in this occasion that you have more knowledge than
vanity.

Tell me who has taken the measure of this Universe, Who has laid the measure
thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it?
and compassed the Mountains and Valleys of the earth, and formed so perfect a
Globe of it, whereupon are the soundations thereof fastened? or who laid the
corner stone thereof?
that it serves the Universe for a Center, and is the unmovable Point where
all its Lines meet? Who has founded all this great work upon such firm
Columns? and who is that sage Architect who has laid the first stone of so
magnificent a Palace?

Where were you, When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy.
when at the birth of the World all the Stars praised me, and all the
Creatures which are my productions and my Children, by an harmonions consent,
which the course of time was never able to interrupt, published so loud my
Divine perfections?

Who shut up that proud Element, Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it
brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?
which acknowledges no other power than mine within the bounds, which it dares
not pass?

Who prescribed it Laws when it came out of that confused Mass, When I made
the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it.
which seemed to be the Womb of the Universe, and treating it like a Child
who is newborn, I covered it with Clouds as with Swadling-clouts, and laid
it in its Bed as in a Cradle, and commanded the Vapors which environ it to
serve it for clothes?

For you are not ignorant that it was I who gave it its being, And brake up for
it my decreed place, and set bats and doors,
who marked it out its bounds, and who to stay its violence opposed Banks
which it often touches, but never overthrowes.

You know it may be too, And said, Hitherto shall thon come, but no further:
and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.
that I used that imperious discourse to it, which taught it that it was my
slave, and that I said to it, Thou shall come hither, and pass no further,
there thou shall dash thy waves, and turn all their fury into foame.

But if you were not in the world when my hand did these Miracles, Have thou
commanded the morning since thy days? and caused the dayspring to know his
place,
since your birth have you assisted me with your power, or with your counsel?
have you commanded the Morning to rise before the Sun, and have you appointed
it the place where it must go out, when it appears upon the Horizon?

When lastly to punish the sins of men, That it might take hold of the ends
of the earth that the wicked might be shaken out of it?
I have at any time shaken the earth, did you take it by the ends to toss it
with me, and discharge it of those impious men who profained it with their
crimes?

Yet do not think that so violent a motion ruins my work, It is turned as
clay to the seal, and they stand as a garment.
I re-establish it with as much facility as by the impression ^f a Seal they
give soft wax the print which it had lost; and as when they beat the dust out
of a suit of clothes they do not wear it but make it clean, so by these
agitations I do not ruin the world, but purge it.

My Wisdom discerned the innocent from the guilty, And from the wicked their
light is withheld, and the high arm shall be broken.
and my Justice takes away but their lives whose pride would cross my
greatness.

But if it be true that you know all things, Have thou entered into the springs
of the sea? or have thou walked in the search of the depth?
as your vanity has made your mouth say it; did you ever go down under the
waters of the Sea? have you seen all the Monsters which it breeds in its
bosom? and did you ever descend into the depth of the Abysses for to
contemplate the wonders which I have hidden there?

Have those dark Cavernes which the earth shuts up in her entrails, Have the
gates of death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the doors of the shadow
of death?
and those gloomy Palaces where Death holds his Empire opened you their Gates
to let you in, and to let you out again?

But how should you know the depth of the earth, Have thou perceived the
breadth of the earth? Declare if thou know it all.
since the breadth of it is unknown to you, and your compass is too little to
take the measure of so great a Globe? yet tell us what you have learnt of it,
and satisfy my demands to content your own vanity.

Do you know where the Light makes its retreat, Where is the way where light
dwells? and as for darkness, where is the place thereof?
when Night comes to take its place? and where Darkness goes to hide it self,
when the Sun brings back the Day? and by what secret ways and imperceptable
to your eyes both of them retire into the house which I have designed them?

But to search no further proofs of your ignorance than your own Person, That
thou should take it to the bound thereof, and that thou should know the
paths to the house thereof.
did you know at that time that you should be borne in this? and understanding
then the things which you are ignorant of at present, Know thou it, because
thou wast then borne? or because the number of thy days is great?
did you know what would be the number of your days, and how many years you
were to pass in the world?

And to the end I may convince your ignorance by as many Creatures as there are
in the Universe, Have thou entered into the the treasures of the snow? or have
thou seen the treasures of the hail,
did you ever go into those Storehouses where I keep the Snow and the Hail to
serve my self withal in the day of Battle, Which I have reserve against the
time of trouble, against the day of battle and wa^?
and to teach all the world that nothing is impossible to my infinite Power,
since with such poor Arms I get such glorious Victories over my enemies.

Do you know by what ways I dispense light and heat to the world, By what way
is the light patted, which scatters the eastwinde upon the earth?
and how for to accommodate my self to the necessities of my Creatures, I
distribute Rain, and fair weather, and make the calm succeed the Tempest?

Are you ignorant in what manner I raise the Vapors into the Air, Who has
divided a water course for the overflowing of waters? or a way for the
lightning of thunder,
and draw out of their bosom Raines mixed with Thunders, which falling into the
Deserts, and covering them with greenenesse testify as well my liberality as
my Power, and make it appear that the profit of men is not the only morive of
my Actions, since I enrich places which are inaccessible to them, and feed in
the Woods savage Beasts which are unprofitable to them?

There is nothing more ordinary than those Waters which fall from Heaven to
water the thirsty fields, To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is:
on the wilderness, wherein there is no man?
and there is nothing more common or more pleasant than the Dew which
nourishes the Flowers: To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause
the bud of the tender herb to spring forth.
yet you know not who is the father of them, and though these effects are
evident to you, yet the cause of them is hidden.

You know as little out of whose bosom the Hail comes, Has the rain a
father? or who has begorten the drops of dew?
which would abate the value of the Pearls of the Sea, if it could longer
retain its whiteness, Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of
heaven, who has gendred it?
and its hardness; you know not neither the original of the Ice, which makes
the Rivers unmovable, and of their very water raises bridges of Crystal.

But if you believe that your power surpasses your knowledge, The waters are
hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.
can you gather together those glittering Stars which we call the Pleiades,
Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion?
and make one constellation of them? Can you divide in an equal distance those
other Stars about Vrsa Major, and which presage as well changes in States as
Tempests in the Air? Can thou bring forth Mazaroth in his season? or can
thou guide Arcturus with his sons?


Can you make rise over men's heads that beautiful Star to which you give
several names, according to its several uses, which precedeth the day, and
goes before the night; which rises first of the Stars, and which sets last?

Do you know the admirable order which I have established in the Heavens,
Know thou the ordinances of heaven? can thou set the dominion thereof in
the earth?
the regular motion of their Globes, the certain conjunction of their Planets,
the secret influences of their Stars, and that Empire which they have over
all the things of the world?

Is Nature engaged to follow your inclinations? Can thou lift up thy voiee to
the clouds, that abuudance of waters may cover thee?
Do your defires serve for Laws to the Elements? When you command the Clouds
to give water, do they obey your Commands? and when you have spoken, does the
Rain to obey your orders fall over your head?

Is the Lightnings subjected to your power, Can thou send lightnings, that
they may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?
which would have no bounds if it were as great as your pride? does it fly
through the Air to execute your designs? does it spare your friends? does
it hit your enemies? does it come to know your Will, and when it has
accomplished it does it return to give you an account of it?

If you cannot do these things, Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? or
who has given understanding to the heart?
can you so much as tell us who was that great Architect, who formed Man, and
put wisdom in his heart, and who having made him the weakest would also make
him the wisest of all the Creatures? or if you know not his perfections, do
you know those of Birds, and can you teach us who is that Divine Workman who
has given the Cock an inclination to salute the Sun, to awake men, and to
announce day?

But without questioning you any further, Who can number the clouds in wisdom?
or who can stay the bottles of heaven,
who is he amongst men who can tell me all the Wonders of the Heavens, the
sweetness and the force of their influences, the order and the number of their
Stars, the differences and the agreements of their Motions: and who can make
the harmony of those Globes cease which always roll, or lay them asleep by
any Artifice, and impose upon them silence?

Notwithstanding the Praises which they give me are as ancient as the World,
When the dust grows into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?
for ever since I mixed the sand with the water to give consistence to the
earth, and that my hands were employed to kneade the Mould of which it is
formed, the Heavens published my greatness, and the perfections of my Essence
were the only subject of their consort.

But since you confess by your filence that these Miracles surpass your
power, Will thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of the young
lions,
dare you brag of having directed the Lionesses in the Chase, and taught them
to search for Prey for the nourishing of their young ones, When they couch in
their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?
who not daring yet to declare an open war against the other Beasts of the
Forests, lay imbushes for them in their Dens, or wait for them upon a passage
to surprise and d^^our ^^em?

Do you take care of providing for the necessity of the Ravens? Who provideth
for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack
of meat.
do you take charge of feeding their little ones, when by their doleful cries
they accuse the cruelty of their Parents who have left them, and implore the
aid of God who is the common Parent of all his Creatures?

CHAP. XXXIX.
THE ARGUMENT.
GOd continues his discourse, in which he describes the properties of some
living Creatures: and Job touched with so many Wonders adores Divine
Providence, and condemns his own rashness.

SInce the height of the Heavens excuses you from knowing the Wonders of them,
Kuowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth, or can
thou mark when the hindes do calve?
and the little commerse which you have with the Birds does not permit you to
know their properties, you ought not to be ignorant of those of the Creatures
which converse with you: tell me then if you have observed the time when the
wild Goats retire into the Rocks to deliver themselves of their young, or if
you have considered the Hindes when they struggle with pain, and when to give
life to their Calves they are in danger of loosing it?

Have you so exactly counted the Months which are past since the moment that
they conceived, Can thou number the months that they fulfill? or know
thou the time when they bring forth?
that you can judge of that in which they are to bring forth?

They stoop to the earth by an i^stinct of Nature, They bow themselves, they
bring forth their young ones, they cast out their forrows.
whether it be the pain they suffer which compels them to it, or the fear of
hurting their Calves which obliges them to it: amongst the griefs which
torment them they cast forth cries, which are as terrible as the roaring of
Lionesses.

A little time after these young ones are borne they leave their Dammes to come
to them no more, Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn:
they go forth, and turn not unto them.
and by an inclination which Nature has given them they search in the fields
for the Herbs which are necessary for the entertainment of their life.

5 Who has caused the wild Ass to be borne in so great liberty? Who has
sent out the wild ass free? or who has loosed the bands of the wild ass?
who has excused him from the servitude to which domesticke Asses are subject?
who has broken his bonds, and delivered him from the reyne and the bridle,
which force the most generous Creatures to do the will of men?

Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.
I have accommodated my self to his disposition, which is an enemy to
constraint; I have given him solitude for his retreat, and assigned him his
dwelling in the Deserts, where without being disquieted by the noise of Cities,
He scorneth the multitude of the city, regards he the crying of the driver.
he hears not the importunate voice of those people who are destined for the
driving of Beasts to burden, and who to draw service out of them forbear
neither injuries nor blows.

With his liberty he has this further advantage, The range of the mountains
is his pasture, and he searches after every green thing.
that he chooses the places where is the best forage, and goes upon the
Mountains, where the goodness of Grass does not only appease his hunger,
but excite his appetite.

Can you oblige by your industry, Will the unicorne be willing to serve thee?
or abide by thy c^ib?
or by your force the Rhinoceros to serve you, and to triumph over the courage
of that fierce Beast, can you compel him to stand in your Stable, and to eat
of your Hay and Oats like your Horses?

Can you promise your self to make him bow his head under your yoke, Can
thou bind the unicorne with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the
valleys after thee?
to tie him to the Plough, and condemn him to the open earth with the
Plough-shares, though his force equal or surpass that of the Ox, Will thou
trust him because his strength is great? or will thou leave thy labor to him?
can you draw any service thence in your Husbandry? will you feed him with your
sheaves, and as he has borne a share in your labors, will you give him a
share in your Harvest?

Will you employ him during the Harvest-time to gather you Corn in the field,
Will thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed? and gather it into thy
bame?
and making him make a hundred journies a day will you condemn him to carry it
into your Barnes? Gave thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and
feathers unto the ostrich?
when the Estridge, whose feathers are like to those of Hawks and Hearnes, and
to whom I have given wings rather to adorn her than to carry her, when, I say,
Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust,
this brutish Bird leaves her Eggs in the sand, and without troubling her self
at the accidents which may befall them, she loses the care and the
remembrance of them, And forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the
wild beast may break them.
will you heat them to make them hatch? and will you temper the heat of the Sun
for to give life to her young ones? She is hardened against her young ones, as
though they were not hers: her labor is in vain without fear.


Do you serve them for a Father, in the absence of that Mother who is as
cruel to them as if they had no relation to her, and who would bring them
forth in vain without my assistance, Because God has deprived her of wisdom,
neither has he imparted to her understaning.
since she has no passion to preserve them, nor fear to lose them?

It is true, that she ought not to be accused of it, because her stupidity
makes my Providence appear, and because I took not from her the care of her
young ones, but to take care of them my self.

And it is not so, What time she lifts up her self on high, she scorneth the
horse and his rider.
when she is threatened with any danger, fear makes her advised, and when they
pursue her in the field, she serves her self with her feet and with her wings,
and at once laughs at the fleetnesse of the Horses, and the dexterity of the
Huntsmen

But last of all, Have thou given the horse strength? have thou clothed his
neck with thunder?
if your power equal your wisdom, can you give strength and agility to the
Horse, with whatsoever ornaments you trick him up to content his pride and your
own? Can thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is
terrible.
can you guide his head, turn his neck gently about, make his mane float upon
his shoulders, and swell his throat with that generous neighing which assures
the Cavalier who rides him of his courage? you can train him to the great
saddle, and teach him to obey your hand and your spur; but you can neither
give him dexterity, nor vigor: if he always be in action under the Rider, if
he bound in the Air, if he cannot stay in a place, it is an effect of my
Power, and not of your industry. When he is angry he champs his Bit, he grows
white with foame, he pricks up his ears, he darts a flame out of his eyes and
his nostrels, and snoaring with rage and despite strikes terror in all those
who behold him.

If he must go upon any occasion where his Master has need of his courage, He
paweth on the valley, and rejoices in his strength: he goes on to meet the
armed men.
he stamps upon the ground with his foot, he marches proudly, he lifts up his
head, he seeks out the enemy, and when he has discovered him he casts
himself amongst his Squadrons, and brings every where where he passes horror
and disorder.

When he is engaged in fight, He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted:
neither turns he back from the sword.
nothing can astonish him, the points of Pikes, and the glittering of Swords
cannot make him to requoyle; danger increases his courage, he knows not
fear, and is never more furious than when he sees himself covered with his
blood. The quiver ratleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.


The noise of Arms astonisheth him not, and whether the Cavalier who rides him
shoots his Arrows, or darts his Javelin, or wards with his Buckler the blows
which are made at him, he is always equally assured.

If in the fury which animater him his Master pulls back the Bridle, He
swalloweth the ground with fierceness audrage: neither believes he that it is
the sound of the trumpet.
and hinders him from advancing, he foams with rage, he gnawes his Bit, and to
see him bend his neck, and open his mouth, you would think that he would bite
the earth: he always has his ear open to listen to the sound of the Trumpet,
and in passion which he has to fight he imagines that it will never sound the
charge.

But when he hears it, He says among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smells
the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
and the Tantaras has filled his ears, he witnesses by his neighing the
pleasure which he receives in it, they judge by his action that he smells the
war, that he presages the Battle, and that become reasonable he is animated
by the speeches of the Captains, and excited by the acclamations of the
Soldiers.

Does the Hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south?
It is by your counsel or your address that the Hawke leaves off his old
feathers to take new ones, that by the favor of certain winds he despoyles
himself to cloth himself again, that he prevents the rigor of Winter, and
furnishes himself with a second plumage more thick than the former?

Is it by your order that the Eagle takes her flight on high, Does the Eagle
mount up at thy command? and make her nest on high?
that she raises her self up in the Air, and that she goes to make her Nest
upon the heads of the highest Mountains, or upon the top of the tallest Ceders?

Have you taught her to place her self upon the points of these inaccessible
Rocks, She dwells and abides on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the
strong place.
which are counter-skarsed and encompased with Proecipices, From thence she
seeks the prey, and her eyes behold asar off.
thence for to cast her eyes on all sides, and discover afar off the Prey
which she seeks for the nourishing of her young ones, who not as yet able to
tear it with their Talons, suck its blood with their Beak, and accustom
themselves to slaughter?

Lastly, Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is
she.
have you given her that subtle scent, which discovers to her that which her
eyes cannot see, and which makes her smell so far the fatal relics of any
bloody Battle?

God who read in the heart of Job that this discourse touched him, Moreover,
the Lord answered Job, and said,
and that the astonishment which seized him took away his speech, continued on
in this manner:

What now? Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that
reproves God, let him answer it.
does that man who would contest with God suffer himself so easily to be
overcome? has that man, who promised himself so much the better if they would
permit him to defend himself, already lost his courage? surely if the goodness
of his mind has not furnished him with reasons to maintain his innocence,
the goodness of his will might have furnished him at least with words to reply
to me,

As the fear of Job had made him hold his peace, Then Job answered the Lord,
and said.
the regret for his sin made him speak in these terms: Since my discourses
condemn me, Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand
upon my mouth.
my silence must justify me; since I have spoken with too much lightness, it
is necessary that I hold my peace with discretion: but what can he answer who
confesses his fault, and what should he do, who is guilty but for having
spoken too much, but put his finger upon his mouth, and oblige himself to
silence?

I confess to you, Once have I spoken, but I will not answer? yea, ^wice, but
I will proceed no further.
that griese has forced indiscreet words from my mouth, and that I have
escaped into discourses which to defend my innocence crossed your mercy; but I
protest to you, that I will be so rash no more, and though your Justice should
make my miseries endure whole Ages, I will cease my complaints to sing nothing
but your praises.

CHAP. LX.
THE ARGUMENT.
GOD once more provokes Job to the Combat, and to entertain him in an opinion
of his greatness, he makes him an ample description of the Elephant, with a
slight draught of the Whale.

GOd answers out of the midst of that cloud, Then answered the Lord unto Job
out of the whirlwinde, and said:
from whence he had already pronounced so many Oracles, and said to Job:

Resume new strength, Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee,
and declare thou unto me.
prepare your self to suffer a second Assault, and since you have gloried in
having such high knowledge, sinde out replies to all the demands which I desire
to make to you.

Do you think to oblige me by your discourses to change my Judgment? Will thou also disanull my judgment? will thou condemn me, that thou may be
^ighteous?
do you think your complaints make me revoke my Decrees? do you think to
ruin my Justice to establish your own innocence, and to persuade men, that in
condemning you I have rather followed passion than reason?

If your force equal mine, Have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder
with a voice like him?
if nothing be impossible to your power, and if to overthrow those who oppose
your will, you dispose of the thunder as I do, I will pardon your rashness of
these thoughts.

But for to give us proofs of your power, Deck thy self now with majesty and
excellency, and array thy self with glory and beauty.
set off your natural beauty by borrowed beauties, adorn your self as in the
day of triumph, cover your self with sumptuous clothes, and march with a
Majesty which may strike respect in all your subjects.

In this glorious Equipage, Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every
one that is proud, and abase him.
make your just indignation felt by all the rebels of the world, compose your
eyes in that manner that their looks may astonish the arrogant, and teach the
proud humility.

Beat down Kings under your feet, Look on every one that is proud, and bring
him low: and tread down the wicked in their place.
use not your power but to tame their insolence, and when they shall have
oppressed your Subjects, make the same place which was fouled by their Crime,
be washed with their blood, and their death give an example, where their life
has given scandal.

Bruise their Scepters, Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces
in secret.
hide the luster their Crowns, hide the luster of their glory under obscurity,
pursue them after their death, and teach them that the Grave is not a sanctuary
which can protect them from your anger.

When you have done these Miracles, Then will I also confess unto thee, that
thine own right hand can save thee.
I shall confess that in the miseries which encompasse you, my succor is
unprofitable to you, and that your forces being equal to mine, one cannot
assault you so well, but you can better defend your self.

But as all these effects surpass your power, Behold now Behemoth, which I
made with thee, he eats grass as an ox.
and you despise not mine but because it is not sufficiently known to you, I
will give you new proofs of it. Consider then the Elephant which I have
produced like you, and which I have fed as an Ox with the grass of the fields.

His force which has no equal resides particularly in his loins, Lo now, his
strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navell of his belly.
which are so strong that in the Battle he carries Towers filled with
Soldiers, and his vigor is enclosed in his Navell, which is as the center to
which all the members of his body answer.

He moves his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped rogether.
This advantage is the recompense of his purity, for he is so chaste that he is
never seen to do undecent actions, and Nature which accommodates her self to
his inclination, has hidden all those parts which seem for the conservation
of his species as the Bark covers the wood of Cedars and of Cypresses.

His bones, His bones are as strong pieces of bras: his bones are like bars of
iron.
and principally his teeth, which were given him for defense, are as hard as
plates of Brass, and his truncke which seems to be composed of gristles, is
equal in its strength to bars of Iron, and in its dexterity to the hand of
man.

Amongst the Creatures which conduct themselves by instinct he is the
Masterpiece of my power, He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made
him, can make his sword to approach unto him.
and if I had not given horns to the Rhinoceros, and poison to the Dragon, who
are his most mortal enemies, there were no beasts to be found which could have
the better of him.

Although he be so strong, Surely the mountains bring him forth food: where all
the beasts of the field play.
he is so gentle, that content with the Grass which the Mountains bring
forth, he seeks not for prey; and the other Beasts which know his humor feed
quietly in his company.

When he would repose himself he seeks out moist places, He lies under the
shady trees, in the covert of the reed and fens.
where he sleeps under the freshness of the shade which the Groves afford
him, or the Willowes, which so pleasantly bound the streams.

When he drinks, He drinks up a river, and hastes not: he trusts that he
can draw Jordan into his mouth.
it is such great draughts, that it seems to those who see him that he would
dry up Rivers, and when he enters into Jordan to appease his thirst, you would
say that he has a design to drayne it.

With all his strength he has so little cunning, He takeeth it with his eyes:
his nose pierces through snares.
that he sees the snares of the Huntsmen and does not avoid them; he is so
simple that he lets himself be taken like Fish with the Hook, and so gentle
that he lets his nostrils be pierced, and himself be led by the nose.

But that your weakness and my Power may appear as well upon the Water as the
Land, Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord
which thou let down?
make trial of your strength against the Whale, see if you can take him with a
Hook, or with a Line, Can thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw
through with a thorn?
and if after having tied his tongue with a Cord, and thrust a Buckle of Iron
through his nostrils, or his cheeks, you can draw him from his Fortress, and
lead him where you please.

Do you think to oblige him to say his prayers to you? Will he make many
supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee?
do you believe that astonished at your power, or surprised with your
Artifices, he will ask his liberty of you with words of sweetness and respect?

Do you think to reduce him to make an agreement with you, Will he make a
covenant with thee? will thou take him for a servant for ever?
and to protest to you publicly, that he honors you as his Master, and will
serve you as your slave, and that the term of his life shall be no longer
than that of his servitude?

Will you play with him as with those poor Birds, Will thou play with him as
with a bird? will thou bind him for thy maidens?
which serve as pastime for little Children? Shall your Daughters tie him with
a thread, which lengthening or shortning at their discretion, shall make his
prison either larger or straighter?

Do you think it easy for a band of armed men to catch him in Nets, Shall
the companions make banquet him? shall they part him among the merchants?
to cut him in pieces, to load vessels with his spoils, and to divide his Body
amongst the Merchants, who have contributed to his taking?

If it be not a thing impossible it is dangerous at the least; Can thou fill
his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fishspears?
for when you assault him, remember that you must prepare your self for so
furious a fight, that after you have tried him you will lose the desire of
meddling any more.

And though the design should not be dangerous, Lay thine hand upon him,
remember the battle: do no more.
it is always very difficult, for this monster will deceive your hopes, and
when you think to hold him fast he will vanish from your eyes, Behold, the
hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down, even at the sight of him?
and quit theshores of the sea to plunge himself into his Abysses.

CHAP. XLI.
THE ARGUMENT.
GOd goes on in the description of the Wbale, and by the greatness of that
terrible Monster raises the mind of of Job to comprehend his Power, and
reverence his Providence.

THough this terrible Prodigy, None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who
then is able to stand before me?
which seems to be the Tyrant of the Sea, be the work of my hands, yet men
ought not to accuse me of being cruel, for if my inclination carried me to
cruelty, there is no Creature which could resist my fury

But I am far from treating them so, Who has prevented me, that I should
repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven, is mine.
since my liberality prevents their services, and my bounty which created them,
takes care of preserving them.

As then the VVhale is rather a proof of my Power than of my Rigor, I will
not conceal his parts, not his power, nor his comely proportion.
I will continue in describing him, and representing in choice terms, and
proper to persuade, the disposition and the greatness of his body.

Neither is there any one who can relate his properties, Who can discover the
face of his garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle?
who dare lift up his terrible eyebrows, which hang over his eyes and make
him blind, or attempt to enter into his throat, Who can open the doors of his
face? his teeth are terrible round about.
and to count his monstrous teeth, where it seems that terror is lodged to
affright all those who behold them.

His body is armed with such strong scales, His scales are his pride, shut up
together as with a close seal.
that they seem to be so many bucklers of Brass wherewith Nature has covered
him to defend him: One is so near to another, that no air can come betwixt them.
they are so close that neither the wind which passes through all places, nor
Arms which penetrate all things can find the defect of them, They are joined
one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundred.
and they are so fast together that no Art nor violence can divide them.

When this dreadful Monster sneezeth, By his sneezing a light does shine, and
his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
there are seen twinckle a thousand sparks of fire, and when he opens his
eyes he darts forth looks, which have no less brightness than the first
rays of the morning.

If he open his throat, Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire
leap out.
there issue forth burning Torches, which disperse every where light and fear.

When he breathes, Out of his nostrils goes smoke, as out of a seething pot
or cauldron.
his Nostrils cast forth a thick smoke like to that of a boiling Caldron, his
breath is so violent that it would make the Coals red, His breath kindles
coals and a flame goes out of his mouth.
save the Forger his pains, and light the fire of his Furnace.

Though all the parts of his body be vigorous, In his neck remains strength,
and sorrow is turned into joy before him.
his force is particularly confined to his neck, he makes such spoil
wheresoever he passes, that it seems Famine goes before him, and Poverty
follows him.

He is of so strong a constitution that nothing can offend him, The flakes of
his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves, they cannot be
moved.
the parts of his body are so solid, and so well fastened, that the Lightning
which destroys the pride of the Mountains can neither break nor divide them.

The heart which animates his body is as hard as Marble, His heart is as firm
as a stone, yea, as hard as a piece of the neither millstone.
and surpasses in firmness the Forgers Anvill, which the redoubled blows of
the Hammer have hardened.

When he lifts his head above the Floods, When he raises up himself, the
mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.
or when he walks upon that element which is fallen to his division, the most
assured Pilots are seized with fear, and knowing how fatal his presence is to
their Vessels, they employ all their industry to get away, but if the tempest
render it useless they are constrained to make vows to heaven, and endeavor
to appease its anger by their prayers.

If they think to assault him, The sword of him that lays at him, cannot
hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.
or to defend themselves against him, all their weapons prove equally feeble,
for as there is no Sword nor Pike but his skin blunts, so there is no Armor
which he does not bow with his teeth: He esteems iron as straw, and brass as
rotten wood.
he breaks Iron like Straw, and Brass resists him less than wood worn with
age, and eaten with rottenness.

The Archers who do such great execution in a Battle cannot chase him away
with the showers of their Arrows; The arrows cannot make him flee: slingstones
are turned with him into stubble.
and those Stones which the Sling casts with so much force make as little
impression upon his body, as a feastraw would which the hand of a child should
push.

Those heavy clubbes, Darts are counted as stubble, he laugheth at the shaking
of the spear.
whose blows are so weighty cannot hurt him; and as he knows well enough that
his skin is proof against all weapons, he laughes at the javelins which they
dart at him, and at the thrusts which they make at him with their Pikes.

If this Monster has so much force, Sharp stones are under him, he spreads
sharp pointed things upon the mire
he has no less pride; for he despises all that is beautiful in Nature, he
disdaines the light, he makes litter of Gold, and tumbles himself with scorn
upon Pearls and Diamonds.

When he snorts under the Waters he raises Tempests, He makes the deep to
boil like a pot: he makes the Sea like a pot of ointment.
and the breath of his Longs as impetuous as that of the Winds, overtu^nes the
Sea, and makes it boil.

When he walks he leaves behind him a long tracke covered with foame: He
makes a path to shine after him, one would think the deep to be boary.
he changes the color of the Element, he whitens its Waves, covers its face
with wrinkles and furrows, and treats it like an old Man, from whom Age has
taken away his vigor.

Although the Earth brings forth many Monsters whom their enormous greatness
makes feared, Upon earth there is not his like: who is made without fear.
there is none of them to compare with this which seems not to have come into
the World but to fear nothing, and to despise all things.

Lastly, He beholds all high things; he is a king over all the children of
pride.
he is so great that when he lifts his head above the Waves he sees under him
the proudest Mountains; and his strength added to his Pride makes all the
Monsters of the Sea reverence him as their Tyrant.

CHAP. XLII.
The Argument.
THe Patience of Job triumphs over the Justice of God, who pardons his Friends
for his sake, reestablisheth him in all his Estate with advantage, bestows as
many Children upon him as Death had taken from him, and after a long Life gives
him a happy Death.

THe greatness of God had imposed silence upon Job, Then Job answered the
Lord, and said.
his goodness made him speak, and the regret which he had for having
complained, put these Excuses in his Mouth.

I know my God, I know that thou can do every thing; and that no thought can
be withheld from thee.
that as nothing is impossible to your Power, nothing is hidden from your
knowledge, you can do all that you will, weakness hinders not the Execution of
your Designs, and Darkness covers not the Sentiments of our hearts.

A Man must be very indiscreet, Who is he that hides counsel without
knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too
wonderful for me, which I knew not.
or very ignorant, if he think to conceal his thoughts from you; for my part,
I discover you mine, and confess to you, that I spoke rashly when I complained
of your Justice, and that by Discourses which surpassed the reach of my
understanding, I censured your Providence.

Now that my Reproaches are turned into Satisfactions, Hear, I beseech thee,
and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
and my Complaints changed into Prayers, give me leave to speak to you, and do
me the favor to hear me.

The admirable Discourses which you have made me, I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee.
have defaced all Doubts out of my Soul; those divine Lights wherewith you have
illuminated me, have dissipated all the Darkness of my Heart; I read your
Providence, I see your Designs, and I adore them; I understand the cause of my
Misfortunes, and I reverence it, I know for what reason the innocent are
afflicted, and I am comforted at it.

So that I blame all my past opinions, Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent
in dust and ashes.
I oblige my Heart to be sorry for them, I command mine Eyes to weep for them,
I ordain my hands to punish them, and condemn my whole Body to do penance for
them with Ashes and Sack cloth. And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken
these words unto Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temani^e, My wrath is
kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me
the thing that is right, as my Servant Job. has.


After God had testified that the satisfactions of Job were not unacceptable to
him, he discoursed thus with Eliphas; Your Crimes have irritated my Justice,
and she would take a memorable revenge upon you, if my Mercy did not detain
her; for in all your Invectives my honor has served you but for a pretense to
accuse Innocence; you have confounded the Crime with the Punishment; and the
inclination which you have to interpret sinisterly the Actions of your
Neighbor, has made you judge that my Servant was guilty because he was
miserable: but his Complaints are more acceptable to me than your Praises, and
I can more easily pardon the Regrets which sorrow has drawn from his Mouth,
than I do the Reproaches which Malice has drawn from yours. Therefore take
unto you now seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to my servant Job, and
offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my servant Job shall pray for
you, for him will I accept: least I deal with you after your folly, in that ye
have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my Servant Job.


Wherefore I command you to choose seven Bulls and as many Rams out of your
Flocks to make a Holocaust of them which may expiate your Crimes, and repair
my honor; but because the sacrifices of the wicked are not acceptable to me, I
will have you engage my Servant to join his Prayers with yours, and to demand
of my bounty the pardon of your offenses: he is charitable enough to do you
that good office, and I am merciful enough to pardon you for his sake.

These three Princes touched with sorrow, So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad
the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did according as the Lord
commanded them: the Lord also accepted Job.
and seized with fear, exactly followed the Orders of God, who let himself be
overcome by the humble Prayers of Job, accorded him the favor which he begged
for his Friends, and reestablished him in his greatness with so much
advantage, that all things were restored him double, that it seemed God had not
made him poor but to enrich him, nor taken away his goods but to given them him
again with interest.

As the adversity of Job had scattered his Friends, And the Lord turned the
captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the Lord gave Job twice
as much as he had before.
his prosperity brought them again together; for at the noise of the Wonders
which Heaven had wrought in his favor, they who were united to him by the
Bonds of Nature or of Amity, came to visit him, and after they had mingled
their Tears with his at the memory of his past Miseries, Then came there unto
him all his brethren and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his
acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned
him, and comforted him over all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him:
every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold.
they treated him magnificently, to testify to him the joy which the
establishment of his Fortune brought them, and when they returned every one of
them left him a Sheep as a Gage of his Affection, and an Ear Pendant of Gold in
assurance of his fidelity.

His loss was as profitable to him as it was glorious; for Heaven took care of
his Flocks, and multiplied them in that manner, that for seven thousand Sheep
which passed about his Plains, he counted fourteen thousand; for three
thousand Camels which carried Burdens he saw six thousand in his Stables, So
the Lord blessed the later end o^ Job more than his beginning; for he had
fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand Camels, and a thousand yoke of Oxen,
and a thousand sh^-Asses.
for five hundred yoke of Oxen which tilled the Ground, he had a thousand which
bore the yoke, and for five hundred she Asses which served for diverse uses, he
saw as many more in his fields.

His Wife becoming fruitful at an Age well advanced, brought him seven
Sons, whose perfections sweetened the sorrow which the loss of the other had
caused him; He had also seven sons and three daughters.
and that in so great a happiness he might have nothing to lament, he had
three Daughters which equalled or surpassed in virtue those whom Death had
taken from him.

The first whose beauty glistered like the Sun, And he called the name of the
first Jemima, and the name of the second Kezia, and the name of the third
Kerenhappuch.
derived her name from light; the second whose breath was sweeter than Roses,
borrowed hers from a most excellent Perfume; and the third whose cheeks Nature
had painted with a most pleasing Vermillion, took her name from the color of
her tincture.

Amongst so many Perfections which made them remarkable amongst the Women of
that Age; And in all the land were no Women found so fair as tha^ daughters of
Job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.
they had this further advantage, that they surpassed them all in beauty;
though they were married, they were not put to the trouble of leaving their
Brothers, with whom they lived always, and peaceably enjoyed the Inheritance
which their father had left them.

The felicity of Job was so long that an Age could not bound it; After this
lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons
sons, even four generations.
for after he had happily accomplished that, he lived yet forty years; during
so long a term he had the pleasure of seeing his childrens children even to
the fourth Generation. But as there is no life so long which has not its end,
his was terminated by so gentle a Death, So Job dyed being old, and full of
days.
that those who saw it wished one like it, and desired that they might be happy
to live and die like him.

FINIS.

