A LETTER FROM AN EJECTED MEMBER OF THE HOUSE of COMMONS, TO Sir JO: EVELYN:
SHOWING, The Constitution of that Council, and the Influence it has had on
the present Times, with a judgment of future Events.

Printed in the year, 1648.

A LETTER TO Sir JOHN EVELYN, from an ejected MEMBER of the Commons House.
Sir,
I Am sorry I am not in a capacity of returning one civility for another, being
bound up by the unfortunate aspect of my Nativity to receive benefits rather
then to give. Only I can say, I have committed your obligations to a faithful
memory and a grateful heart, who will at all times discharge their Offices I
am sure, in paying you all just and due respects. But for your last discourse,
wherein you endeavored to have me accept the proceedings of the House of
Commons for my Ejection, and acknowledge the right of my successors place; I
desire to be excused, till I am convinced by the Reason of Arguments, and not
fortune of the Times.

I must confess I do not envy him his cushion, nor the State, Dignity, and
Degree of Membership: which if I mistake not, begins to want something both of
the intrinsique and extrinsique value. And if my Arithmetic be good, the
Houses had no sooner disordered their whole Number, but they have ever since
been busied in Fractions.

But I need not read Lectures to the wise; you remember as well as I, and are a
witness to all the truth I know or can speak; How the things of this present
age, were begun with most exorbitant Opinion and Pride, carried on with
proportionable Injustice and Oppression, and are like to end with equal Shame
and Folly to the first Attempters.

With what an air of popularity was every man lifted up at the very first
meeting? Flattering himself in the honor of being a public Champion for the
almost captived liberty and interest of England: and of being a Member of that
Parliament, which the People (who measure all things, not by what is fit and
just, but by what themselves desire) already had in adoration. So that these
men that could not govern themselves by their particular virtue, no sooner came
to live in the hot air of vulgar acclamations, but they grew half mad.

An absolute Calenture had seized on the head of the Body politic, which made
them believe, they could do no business but by precipices.

The Speaker was so giddy with his vertiginous Office, that after a whole day
spent in hearing and doing public Affairs, he could seldom give account,
you know, of what was said or done. Which, I suppose, proceeded from the
various qualifications and tempers of the Members: whereof some were wise men,
but seemed not so, being superseded with acute prejudices and passions: Some
seemed so and were not, seeking Fame rather then deserving it: Others neither
were nor seemed so, and yet had public Faculty to use their incorrigible
confidence of troubling the House when they pleased.

And though no man came to the Parliament but whom the Writ supposed both wise
and valiant; yet that was to be understood favorably, for it appeared at last,
that passions and fears had taken away the reputation of both.

It Is certain that these humors quite overthrew the State, Rule, and Order of
a wise Council. Do you not remember how the Mornings were used to be passed
away in long-winded declamations, brought thither elaborately composed, and
read out of a hat perhaps, or behind a friend? And for the second Scene, How
about Noone (for so the match was made) came some Petition, from a County,
City, Corporation, Mystery, or Occupation, and made humble desires to have the
same things done, which the Speech-makers had all the morning been debating of.
Which also did not a little set forth the speculative prospect, and high
wisdom of the said Members in public Affairs. And it may be, after all
this, the same Members receive Letters (of their own procuring) from their
Country, City or Borough, to give the thanks of their Trustees to them, and
to acknowledge their unwearied pains for the public service. So that by this
time, the Gentlemen, swelling with opinion above the bounds of all shame or
fear, sent all their Orations to be Printed: whence came forth at any one time
eight Speeches of Sir John Wray; and soon after, nine Speeches more of Sir John
Wray: all penned without wit and understanding; (and they must needs be so, for
the Knight had none, and, where there is nothing to be had, the King loses his
right:) spoken without intelligible pronunciation and accent; and heard without
attention; and yet sent abroad to busy the people with popular theames, and
feed them with expectations of great effects. Whereas the wiser sort of men,
thought it a great dishonor to Parliaments, that these and other Speeches
should ever have been discovered to the world, to give Strangers and other
Nations occasion to think, what opinion they were to have of the great Assembly
of Wise men in England.

You must needs agree with me, that this liberty of Speech-making was Remora,
if not the overthrow of all Parliamentary results; and made us many times more
like persons conveened in a Cockpit, then a Council: which caused a high
resentment in some temperate old Members: Among whom, (quoth one, striking his
hand on his breast, in our sight and hearing) I have been of all Parliaments
since Duodecimo Jac. and never saw such doings.

Another cries out, that he had seen all the Parliaments of King Charles, and
that of Oxford, where they were called Hornets, after they had been adjourned
from Westminster where they were but waspes, all which were nothing to this.
For whether it were the intemperate desire of fame, or private opinion of
parties, which often deceives men, and never more then at this time, or
temporal interests, or irregular zeal, or engagement in Faction and Design,
certain it is, that all concurred to use a liberty could be denied to none of
them: and they that held themselves before almost undone for want of liberty,
were now about to be undone with too much. The truth is, much talking is
troublesome in all companies, and in Counsels dangerous; where all matters are
to be handled with gravity and weight. But you remember well enough, that our
long debates, which sometimes held from morning till night, and then almost
from night till morning again, looked little better then great brawles: and when
the people supposed their Gallant wise Members were very busy, and took great
pains, to sit up late anights, making them good Laws, they were then
altogether by the ears perhaps, and drawing Swords, about the Candles. It Is as
observable, how matters are not much mended, and that public Affairs move
still by the like wild and preposterous consultations: For, as when the rest of
the people lived in full peace, they were only then fighting and quarrelling in
the House of Commons; so now, when the Kingdom was put into open War, and
different parties were every where acting Tragedies, on each other; when like
wise patriots they should be quenching the flames of public discord, they are
spending their time like young novices in Religion, and getting by heart a
Catechism, which they have newly received from their reversed Tutor the Synod.

But popularity that bewitches all natures, not mightily supported with virtue
and wisdom, soon taught wise men, that there was no stop to be given to this
careere of Speech-making, unless the King should dissolve the Parliament:
which as the King had not done formerly without great temptation; so now to
prevent it, the temptation being greater then ever, you know the arts were
used; with all the desired success that could be. And notwithstanding His
Majesty's great alscrity in so important a matter, to consent to the perpetuity
of this Parliament, yet this security was so far from working off the clamor
of the Members, that it raised the key higher, and from general discourses
they descended every day more and more to particulars.

Happy was he that found out a Subject would tickle the attention of the
Houses, and could set it forth pathetically. Do you not remember how Cromwell
speaking for Layton out of the Gallery, dropped tears down with his words? and
did not Lilburne, Burton, Prin, and Bastwick, find the like passionate Orators?
and yet what effect did their glorious enlargements produce, but to let the
world see the turbulent spirit of these men was habitual and not imputed; and
justify the proceedings of the late governors against them? And that 'twas no
wonder they fell out with the King, His Privy Council, and the Bishops; when
now being all at liberty, they could not agree among themselves. For Prin was
become a State-Presbyter, and Bastwick an Ecclesiastical; Burton an
Independent, and Lylburne a Leveller; and all of them acording to the interest
of their several causes, did not only write and rail at one another, and at
several Members of the Houses and the Army, but at the whole Army and
Parliament it self.

It was strange to see the cheapnesse of your Jurisdiction, and what a facile
ear was given to all Accusations and Calumnies; as if the Parliament had been
called only to hear Informations, or receive Intelligences, I pass by the
Triumph was made over many great Personages in their loud Impeachments of High
Treason, and the great labor was had to prove them. Some of which were sold
afterward for money, and others to this day lie by the walls unregarded, and
forgotten. And those that did perish by their Accusations, suffered more, I
doubt, to satisfy the pride and greatness of the Accusers then the merit of
their Accusations. And when the wits and understandings of men failed, their
revenge and malice bore up the undertaking; for when the whole House was
gravelled, and knew not how to proceed in the Trial of the Earl of Strafford,
M. Pym, you know, was fain to call up that stupendous Oracle of all Learning,
SELDOM the Great, to help the infirmities of the Members, and declare (to the
form of proceeding what had been the practice of former Ages in the like
Impeachments. The matter rested in the hearts of the Accusers, and needed no
assistances. As appeared sufficiently upon the closing up the evidence at the
Bar by M. Glyn, who ranging all his matter to the best order and advantage he
could to charge the Prisoner; seconded with a reserve of his own aggravations,
made such a tedious, unsatisfactory, impertinent clamor, that of those Lords
who should have heard him, some fell asleep, others lay along tired, all found
out some diversion for their tormented thoughts, representing to them, the
fatality of that great Peer's life before them; which they could not save,
because they saw the Commons would not.

You must needs remember upon all occasions, how nice and tender they were ever
of their Orders and Privileges; holding them superior to all Laws and Rules
whatsoever. It was a State sacrilege to invade either of them. Whence it came
to pass, that their own, and their servants persons were free from all Legal
process in all causes and Courts. And one Benson a Yorkshire man, thought the
virtue of Member-ship so great, that he extended it to protect fourscore
persons, none of his servants, at one time, for which also he received 20s. a
piece: and I believe, the first example that ever was, of protecting a Rape by
Privilege of Parliament, was, in the person of that godly and faithful Member
to the Cause, whom they called Prince Griffith. I know there has been
something done of late to remit protections, and humble the power of
Parliaments; which signifies no more but this, that in a time, when peoples
minds were in a tumultuary discrasie, ready to break the reins of Government,
and some temper was fit to be administered; nothing was thought more popular nor
apt to court the People into their Obedience, then to offer them to lay down
this Spell of Privilege, which, while they were about them, no creditor could
do them hurt.

What opinion the House of Commons had of the Lords was seen every day, for it
appeared all along they were made servile to the designs of the Commons.

And in truth, it were too much trouble to put you in mind how often, and how
tamely they have suffered themselves to be baffled out of as much right and
reason, as would have served for noble advantages to have raised their lost
honors to their Ancient greatness and splendor. And in case (as of late it
has happened) that Petitions and Addresses were made to the Houses, which
exactly suited not with the sense and success of their present designs: Do
but observe what the different receptions of them were; with how much more
secret State and Dignity the answers were delivered from the Lower House; who,
when they dare, will be sure to reprehend; and when they dare not, their
answers shall be made up of such supercilious sentences, as shall signify
nothing; or some cold opinion of the action, and leave the Petitioners rather
to study out their own duty, then expect redress.

It Is an athletick labor to put you in mind of every thing: But you may
suppose, that when so many were got together, that could think themselves, any
thing: that there was no Power, nor Jurisdiction, nor Rule, but they were that:
it was no hard matter for them to make a transition from the power to the
execution, and fall to acting any thing.

Hence it came to pass, that Treason against the King, and Sacrilege against
the Church were become popular Topics. The first was upheld under the
pretenses of restoring the Crown to a stability of Greatness and Sovereignty;
and the other covered with the title of Reformation. But these appearing at
last with their disguises off, discovered only the power of some active and
subtle Members working out different designs through the borrowed resemblances
of Justice and virtue.

You need not be remembered with what notorious partiality and favor those
Causes were received, which belonged to persons of Parliamentary affections;
and how the others were either put off with terror, or so long tired with
delays, (for which there were a hundred known tricks among Committee Men, and
after a while grew no more to be any of the secrets of their Courts) that they
were undone with hoping to be relieved; and had nothing left them but the
memory of their innocence and right; which was now referred over to the day of
Judgment for a hearing: where no art of a Chairman, or power of a worthy
Member, can forestall the action, or pervert the just judgment.

It well beseemed indeed the wisdom of the House, wandering in a wilderness of
various matters without end or order, to take care that all Committees
concerning private matters should be nulled: and yet when fourscore Committees
were reduced at one time, M. Hollis had the favor to have that Committee
continued, which concerned a suit of his own in the Court of Wards, (as I
remember) because he was then a leading Member: which was noted at that time a
gross partiality. But this, you know, was the common use of all Parliamentary
references; for no Committee was so soon made, as it was immediately converted
to serve the revenge, envy, avarice, or other corrupt humors and passions of
the Authors: So that to commit a business signified no more, for the most
part, but to give the Members advantages of working their own, or their friends
business and designs with success.

But your partiality to friends was not more conspicuous, then to your reputed
enemies was your indistinct rigor and impartiality: for, as if you had
stoically held all men to be equal sinners, you did indeed make them all equal
in oppression; the King, with his meanest Subjects. For you have oppressed all
alike in their consciences, understandings, honors, dignities and fames: in
their wives, children, kindred, friends and servants: in their lives,
liberties, persons, goods, and properties. Notwithstanding that both of us have
often heard some of these things called Tyranny in the King and others: and
occasion thence taken to punish the Actors with the acts. Which kind of Justice
how you will avoid, your selves having been Judges in the case already, I
cannot see. 'Twill be no plea to say, you were fools or knaves, though all the
world think you are both. The best you can say for your selves is, that you
were mad; and that you may prove perhaps, by some of your late actions. For
what else was the voting of your Members, in and out so often? Your Voting men
into Prison for High Treason, and Voting them out again for you know not what.
Your Voting there shall be no more Addresses to the King, and then Voting that
there shall. A temper something like to that of Hen. 8. who advanced men in a
good humor he knew not why, and ruined them again presently in another he knew
not for what. But these resolutions of yours, are answered abroad with the like
discourses: Some saying that you are, and other that you are not a Free
Parliament: Some saying that many of you are, and others that you are not
Members duly elected. Which, how true it is I examine not, but I have heard,
that the virtue of the Army has been at several elections, to keep the peace,
as they call it: to say no more.

Many there are, who think you a mad company, in sensu composito, as well as
diviso: You have two Speakers, a white Speaker and a Black Speaker: But the
white Speaker like the white witch, soon unravelled all the spells of the black
Speaker, when he once appeared with his Familiar in both Houses. Which was
also, such a deep dissembled ceremony, that no man but saw through it; and did
believe with reason, that the Members brought his Excellency to the Parliament,
and not he them. I am sorry to hear, that you were one that ran upon this
Errand: though I know many Presbyterians did it, whom temporal respects
prevailed with, to be of the sure side. Yet, who would have thought that any
worldly profit or preferment, could have moved old Rous, a man in matters of
Religion and Conscience, always esteemed severe and resolute; now in his old
age when he can keep nothing long, to run away from his imbibed Principles
and persuasions, to be continued yet a little longer Provost of Eaton.

Oh, Sir, God will have an account of these things; and will let you see, that
all those calamities that attend great alterations in States, are better
prevented with wisdom, then punished with justice; and the day will come when
the memory of your own Votes shall torment you more then a thousand deaths.

For, if whatsoever comfort shall remain of our elapsed humane life, will
consist in the charity which we exercised living, and in that Piety, Justice,
and firm Faith, for which it pleased the infinite mercy of God in Christ to
accept of us and receive us; what shall we think of you, whose actions have
tended to banish all Charity quite out of Christian Churches and Societies; to
dissolve in all families and nearest relations, the Bonds of natural Piety; to
supersede in all Courts the execution of Common Justice; and to frustrate the
virtue and power of all Religion toward God and Man, under pretenses of higher
perfection?

A state as dangerous as that of the old Pharisees, whose strictness far
exceeded yours; and yet, because they justified themselves in their sins, and
busying themselves in small popular duties, omitted the weightier matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, what woes unchangeable and eternal does
our Savior Christ fulminate against their affected hypocricie?

Now, if you are not guilty it is well. But, how you have kept your Faith with
Heaven in your Protestations, Vows, and Covenants?

How you have kept your Faith the with King, in your Oaths of Allegiance, and
your many Declarations to make him glorious and great?

How you have kept your Faith with the Church in matters of Reformation? After
you had declared, die Sabbati, 9 Aprilis 1642. That you intend a due and
necessary Reformation of the Government, and Lyturgie of the Church, and to
take away nothing in the one or the other, but what shall be evil, and justly
offensive, or at least unnecessary and burdensome. -- And to establish Learned
and Preaching Ministers, with a good and sufficient maintenance throughout the
whole Kingdom, wherein many dark corners are miserably destitute of the means
of Salvation, and many poor Ministers want necessary provision. As if to take
away nothing in the one and the other, but what shall be evil, and justly
offensive, signified, to take quite away, both the one and the other: and to
establish learned Ministers with good maintenance in dark corners, signified,
to put out Learned Ministers, and put in young confiding dunces; divert the
Church profits to your own uses, and make ten dark corners for one that was
before.

How you have kept your Faith with the Scots in your Treaties, (made when you
were in adversity, and broke when you were out of it) and in the Solemn League
and Covenant?

How you have kept your Faith with the people, in securing to them, their known
Laws and Liberties? And

How you will keep your Faith with them in paying them all their moneys again?
God knows. And our own sad experience in humane Affairs has told us now
sufficiently, that, Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur.

For I look upon you now as Soldiers, and your mercenaries wear not more iron
then you do about your hearts; where no precepts of virtue or Religion can
make impression. Which made you so great enemies to peace and innocence, that
you have not been satisfied with breaking your own Faith and Obligations, but
have made others break theirs too. As in the North and West parts of England,
in the infancy of these troubles, when the Counties there, had agreed upon
Articles between them, and thereto engaged their Faith to remain Neutralls;
you held it an odious resolution, and caused those of your Faction to break it,
against the Laws of Justice and Honor. All which, with too many more of your
Actions, have made the times so tragical and disastrous, that the prudence of
those former Counselors of State seems fully vindicated, who (mistaken by the
vulgar sense to have done dis-service to the Common wealth) well judging of the
temper of late Parliaments; put a stop to their dangerous effects by dissolving
them. And however it sounds to the ear to wish for no Parliaments; yet it is
hard to wish, what we are all bound to do I think, that God would have removed
far off from us this day of affliction, and not also to wish we had had no
Parliament.

By this time, you will believe, I have not argued my self into a desire of
being amongst you again, or think my self, or any of my expulsed companions
covetous of the Honor of being of a Parliament, which is neither just, free,
nor compos mentis; (though it have sometimes lucida intervalla, which happens
when some moderate men are only left in the House:) And whatsoever scandal
you labored to raise upon us for deserting our Trust, as you called it, (when
we fled from the guilt of your designs, and left you going about by fine arts
and force to raise the Ball of dissension betwixt the KING and His People) we
know very well, that Game, if it began with Pym, Hampden, etc. and was handed
over to Hollis, Stapleton, etc. is caught up now at last by Cromwell, Ireton,
and their Accomplices: and whither it may be carried, God knows. But through all
these alternative designs and variable interests, it cannot be said, I hope,
that nothing has been done, but what the people at first entrusted you to do.
When it is notoriously known, that even at this time, the people every where
dislike what you are now a doing: and are ready to pull you off those Benches,
did not the Army you keep up restrain them. And though it be a long time since
you branded all those who concurred not with you in your actions and designs,
with the malevolent note of Malignants, yet now that all England is about to
turn Malignant, with what pretenses and arguments you will support your
undertakings we daily expect. If that of Salus Populi have any truth or reason
in it; as your controversal Writers for the cause have taken most exact pains
to prove by discourse, you must now prove it by your example, and yield your
selves a sacrifice to the common good; that the Kingdom may be restored to the
peace it groans after, and is only obstructed by your obstinacy and malice: for
as long as you sit together at Westminster, the people can neither be safe nor
quiet. And truly, I have always esteemed it, a notable effect of Gods divine
anger upon you, designing you to that just destruction God has prepared for
you, that, as the case stands, you did not all, before this time rise and run
away.

Whence the general hate and detestation of your very Names and Persons
proceeds, you need not much wonder, if you call to mind; First, that imprudent
and irrational demeanor of yours, toward all those whom you had the fortune
to reduce to your obedience. For among them who came in upon overtures of
favor and candor, held forth in your Declarations (as many did, upon that
Declaration of both Kingdoms of Jan. 30. 1643.) how were they received with
neglect? looked on with contempt and scorn enough? and the favor signified,
delusively denied or detained; till your distracted Proselites gnashed their
teeth at their supine error and folly of giving credit to your words and
promises. And were not all those that made Conditions upon Surrender of Towns
and Castles, like to have found little use and benefit of them, if the Honor
of the General had not interposed to make them good, against the implacable
and vindicative spirit of some amongst you, whom no Reason nor Religion could
rule against the swinge of their own violent wills? Contrary to the justice of
all Contracts, humanity of fellow subjects, and policy of all conquering
Parties, and your own Interests; whom it concerned always not to dis-oblige,
Countrymen, friends, neighbors, and allies: but rather by love and mercy to
work them over to receive with willingness your dominion. For it is a sure
maxim, that Patestas humana radicatur in voluntatibus hominum. Where is then
your power among a people that generally hate you? of whose affections while
you are never sure, so consequently never of your own peace and safety. It is
said of Caesar, Qua vicit, v^o^^os protegit ille man^^. And by that means the
infortunity of the Roman Conquests became sweetened with the prorection and
security the Provinces received from the Roman Laws. For without question, the
greatness of that Empire did owe as much to the heads of the Conscript
Fathers, as to the hearts of the Praetorian Soldiers. It being the manner
always of the Roman State after a new Conquest, to release unto their new
Subjects, half of that Tribute they had been wont to pay to their former Lords:
which wrought so much upon their affections, that 'twas no mervail that
Petellia a City of the Brutians in Italy chose rather to endure all extremities
of War, then forsake the Romans: and that too, after the Romans themselves had
confessed they were unable to relieve them, and wished them to provide for
their own safety, having been faithful to the uttermost. And as this liberty
of Rome, made her a most indulgent Mother to all her Citizens; so was it
exhibited to other Cities, to let them have a taste of her excellent Government;
and in time became extended to those far off, even to Tarsus in Cilicia, where
Saint Paul was born, whence it was, that he claimed the privilege of a Roman,
Acts 22. Which examples have been so ill followed by you, that in stead
thereof, you have injured all men; triumphing over your vanquished foes with
savage ferity, and over your Confederates, with falsehood, fraud, and treachery.
For you may call to mind, if you please, your signal ingratitude to the Scots;
to whom you owe first the very Being, and after that the Wel-being, nor only
of the Parliament, but of your selves, your Wifes, and Children: who in all
humane reason had inevitably fallen under the power of the King's justice, had
you not been rescued from it by the assistance of your Brethren of Scotland,
when you had with most pitiful moans and Messages called upon them for it.
Then, your ingratitude to the City of London, who was your Judas to carry the
purse for you; without carrying the Parallel any further, unless I should say,
that ye may perhaps in one thing be like our Savior Christ too; that as he was
crucified, so ye may be all hanged.

These acts of high persecution of your Enemies, and shameless ingratitude and
falsehood to your Friends, renders you equally hateful to both. And if that of
Claudian be true -- neque enim libertas tutior ulla est, Quam domino servire
bono: then are we become the greatest Slaves in the world, because we serve the
worst Masters; whose arts have not been very admirable neither, since it did
not require any great reach to carry on designs with that rule, of making
great Engagements and Promises, and of never keeping any.

But I Will be brief with you, and tell you; That there was a time when the name
of Parliament was used to intimidate Kings and Princes, and the Great men of
the earth; so now the time is coming, and is at the very door, when the Name
of a KING, (a Name in which there is power, says Solomon) shall, by the
revolution of Divine justice, intimidate all the lofty Titles of Members,
Chair-men, Committee Men, and whatsoever other Offices and Dignities are
thereunto belonging.

I know very well, the religious refuge you make to your famous Mother Shipton;
from whose Oracles you think your selves ordained to depose, not only the King,
but the Throne it self, in the succession of the Royal Line; because she has
said, there shall be no more Kings and Queens of England: which is a truth the
Devil has told you enigmatically, to make you more sure his own. For I am
ready to believe as well as you, that there will be no more Kings nor Queens of
England; and yet I do believe too, this Monarchy was never at that height it
is now about to arrive to; by the blessing of God, on the present undertakings
of men.

For the union of the 2 Crowns of England and Scotland, so prudently fore-laid
by Hen: 7. in the Marriage of His Daughter Margaret to James 4. King of
Scotland, had no sooner received the wisht-for success in the Person of our
late Sovereign King James; But both Kingdoms entered into a Treaty of rendering
the Peace and union between them inviolable. And the wisdom of the
Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland then employed to the Parliament of
England for establishing that union, considering that to advance the same, it
would be profitable to remove all memorials of the disunion and separation,
endeavored also that the common name of Great Britain might be reciprocally
taken up by both Nations. Which though it produced no other effect at that time
then a Proclamation from K. James (as I remember) yet that showed a true
understanding that wise Nation had, in improving the union to the utmost, both
in name and interest: And to this day the same has been prosecuted in the
transactions between the Parliaments of both Kingdoms: and was intimated by the
Lord Lowden in a Speech at a Conference of both Houses: and will no doubt have
its just and reasonable effect upon the settling of that Peace, both Kingdoms
are now fighting for, against a generation of Vipers would eat out the Bowels
of their Native Country, with a malicious and obstinate endless War; to
maintain the variable revolutions of their fancies, humors, and passions,
which they call their Conscience; and support the necessity of their fortunes,
which they call the Liberty and Property of all the Subjects of England. I say,
that you and I shall in a short time live to see this Riddle of your
Prophetess made good, against all the malice and power of your wicked sense
and actions: and these two Nations united into one common name of Great
Britain. And His Majesty's residence being drawn into the middle part of this
hopeful Empire, (which the world will then grow jealous of) may perhaps give a
further issue to your reverend Sibylls Prophecies, that York shall be. Where
His Majesty and His Posterity, no more using the style of Kings and Queens of
England, shall be saluted Kings and Queens of Great Britain, to the worlds
end: which God grant.

Is it not time then, Sir, for you to look about you? and in stead of wishing
me the Honor of being a Member, wish your self the happiness of being none.
Give me seriously in one breath, the just account of those vast sums you would
willingly give, to have lived these last fix years at my little private
Tusculanum, reaping the joys of innocent and peaceful hours: free from the
disorder and affranation of Tumults, prejudice of Factions, and injuries of
War. And tell me freely, or rather tell your own heart, what course of life
you would not rather undertake, were you to begin again, then the unprosperous
profession of a Soldier: For beside the envy and rage of men; the spo^les,
rapes, famines, slaughter of the innocent, wastings, and burnings, and other
miseries laid on the laboring man by you, have been so great, that were not
the merc^es of God infinite, it were in vain for any of you to hope for any
portion of them, seeing the cruelties by you perm tied and committed have also
been infinite. Your Votes for a Personal Treaty, can give us small assurance
of your affections to Peace, since you seem to be necessitated to them, by the
importunate desires of the people; whom it was necessary to suspend, by giving
them a crust, or something to bait upon; while your selves acted all the while
artificially and cunningly to render your own Counsels ineffectuall: for to
that purpose tended the neglect of your own Votes after they were made: your
clogging them with preparatory Bills: your receiving Petitions, praying you to
proceed in your own way: your discountenancing others desiring a Treaty; not to
say, taking occasion from thence perhaps, to murder and destroy the Petitioners
themselves: your limiting the place of Treaty to an Island, which is it self
but a larger Prison: your attending the business, with men of war; which
invades the freedom of it. So that what you were ashamed to deny in words, you
profess not to like in actions; and so long as Treaties and reconciliations
are made up of the same ingredients as the late War, Fears and Jealousies;
it is not like that any other fruit should be expected, no more then we can
expect grapes from thorns. And whatsoever the pretenses of some be, it is
notoriously known, that those who are esteemed stars of the first magnitude in
your Faction, by whose influence you act and move, have openly declared their
Antipathy to all Treaties, and tenacious resolutions to have the right of all
controverted interests ended by the Sword; because they very well know, the
dissolution their principles bring with them upon the present state of England,
and the novelty upon the whole world, will render them hopeless of an
establishment by deliberation and Counsel. And if the worst should come to
pass, the success of your designs I mean, which God forbid, I doubt whether
any acquisitions could give rest to the turbulent activity of some of your
minds; or whether there be any Kings under the Sun, whose means are answerable
to some of your desires.

But to me it would seem a great wonder; did not the consideration of the
frail state and continual fluctuation of all sublunary things, hinder; from
whence, I see the present state of the war quite altered from the principles of
the first undertakings, because the worser sort of men perhaps by the variable
succession of time and accidents, are grown worse then they intended to be;
That about five years since, the Committee appointed to manage the Treaty at
Oxford in March, 1642. should be tied up to Treat only with the KING, when He
was free, and had many Noblemen and Privy Counselors about Him, to have
employed in that business; And at this time, when He is a Prisoner and denied
the access of His Servants and Friends, it should be held so piamlous, and
perilous and undertaking to Treat with Him alone, when there is no body else to
do it for Him.

If the thing were unreasonable, or disadvantageous to you, yet many wonder,
you should run into a worse hazard, by choosing of two evils much the greater;
in displeasing one whole Kingdom; and probably the much greater part of
another; in which, you yet presume to sit and rule like Tyrants; thereby
preparing the hearts of others to use you, just as you were using them so long
as you had power to do it. For all men are now grown full of hope, that the
Horns of your strength and power are much shorter: and as you grow less able
to offend, so much the more will your majesticall offers of mercy and indemnity
be contemned and derided. That Indemnity you sent to the County of Essex showed
the weak and shallow state of your Authority: For after a few Gentlemen had
raised the County into Arms against you, you held forth your golden Scepter of
Indemnity; which the Gentlemen for themselves accepted of, but not being able
to lay down the Arms they had raised, went home to live in Peace, leaving the
Country to fight it out with the Parliament; which they have done to some
purpose: whereby you are gulled of your mercy and your honor both at once. To
the incomparable merit of that gallant old Peer the Earl of NORWICH, who went
out of SUSSEX into KENT to embarque himself amongst Strangers in the cause of
Loyalty; where he assumed the conduct of a business as full of hazards, as the
Sea is full of waves: and when the success of that undertaking failed, put
over into another County at the Isle of Dogs; where he was received by a
currish generation of men, making such effectual opposition, with the
advantages they had, that Sir William Compton was forced to article for the
Soldiers, that at such a place within a miles march, they should all surrender
their Arms: whither being come, and finding their condition desperate, they
resolutely refused to part with their Arms, and, in case they were denied,
would force a passage: which having effected, the marched to Bow Bridge; where
they placed a Guard; while their painful old General, sent to Chelmsford, and
next day rode thither himself alone, to understand the result of the Rendevouz
there: who by the example of their newly arrived neighbors and friends, past
so many hazards to come to them, and the encouragement of their gallant
Countryman Sr Charles Lucas, resolved to join Bodies; and so marched to
Colchester.

So that if Kent have not done the work alone, yet it has given fire to the
train, which is like to run through all England: and has begun a work, will
end in the greatest happiness this Kingdom could ever expect, viz. To
unsettle this Parliamentary Army which is, to settle Religion, Laws, and
Liberties.

And in spite of all your confidence in the arm of flesh, you will find, your
glory is setting; and the fortune of your Arms changing; the Lord Fairfax
being about to lose, together with his 50001. per annum, all the honor Sir
Thomas Fairfax won; and the Predictions of your own Saint Mr Saltmarsh to be
fulfilling upon you, who before he died declared his revelations of your
approaching ruin. And therefore, as Lot said to his Sons-in-Law, so say I to
you, Up and get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy this City,
Genesis 19.14.

Your condition seeming to me very desperate; for as you have ordered the
matter, what confederate States have you abroad to help you, and receive you?
as once you had of the Scots, in the like necessity. Or if you had, what Ships
have you to carry you thither? Are you not in a pound? and will not every Petty
Constable be helping to catch you when you run away? your very faces will
betray you, being complexionall Traitors, and Rebels by elementall
constitution: for who can look upon Corbet, Gourdon, Say, Scot, Armyne,
Cromwell, Rainsborough, Heyman, Ireton, Holland, Westrowe, Boys, Vane's, Father
and Son, Morley, Weaver, Martin (that rapsody of all villainy, and legislative
Priapus, who was sent for from fortifying of Reading, without impeachment of
High Treason; because though he be not for the Parliament in all things, yet if
he be against the King in all things, he is an instrument, par negotiis)
Wentworth, Hill, Bond, Ash, Rous, Hoyle, Pury, Strickland, Blakeston,
Walsingham, Allen, Harvy, Walton, Skippon, Ven, Livesey, Luke's, Father and
Son, Vassell, Love, Prideaux, and the rest of the Saturnine crew, and not
presently see strange apparitions in their very Phisnomy, of Churches
overthrown, Towns flaming, Houses plundring, Widows crying out for their
Husbands and Children, and Orphans for their Moneys. I must tell you, Sir, your
very face, though it be one of the best in the company, looks strangely when
you come abroad amongst honest men.

Some believe, God has suffered this defection amongst you, to produce some
great good to this Kingdom: For this state, being to suffer a total abolition
of the Government Ecclesiastical so long exercised in it; and to admit the
erection of another, with many alterations and qualifications in matters
Civil; upon which depended the good estate and happiness of great numbers of
men and families; besides, the questions in Divinity set on foot and maintained
plausibly by very learned and pious Doctors and Preachers, would probably have
had no rest, so long as all those persons whose dependances and relations were
also great, should remain unsatisfied either in interest or conscience. Which
work how to effect, it seemed impossible in the eyes of man: and therefore
Almighty God, by raising up a third sort of people, teaching principles and
doctrines destructive of all the politic forms maintained by the other two,
has begot an union betwixt the Royalist and Presbyterian: and engaged the
Scots upon such good and acceptable offices to the King and His loyal
Subjects, that whereas all the world, expected with hopes, a great contest
betwixt the two Nations about settling of their Church discipline in England: it
is now like to be received, aequo and grato animo, and all matters heartily
carried, to a lasting good understanding between both Nations: which God of his
good mercy grant.

That at last we may see an end of this devouring Faction, whereof you are the
Head, and is directed by your Councels, and maintained over us by your commands
and authority: whose ends, are without end; and vary according to the liberty
they take of thinking. A company of men that agree in one only resolution, of
undoing of King and Kingdom: and are made up of as many different opinions
among themselves, as must certainly ruin them, when they have ruined every
body else. Such as God has suffered to get together, that being now known, and
cast out of the Commonwealth, the Kingdom may hereafter be secure, and the
Government flourish. In order to which, we see every day strange beginnings,
which in a short time will evidence, I hope, to the settled world; That as Saul,
traveling long and far, with little success, seeking Asses found a Kingdom:
So you, to invert the Simile, having seven long years given chase to a King,
and lifted up your selves in the high confidence and assurance you had of
obtaining a Kingdom, found at last you were your selves but Asses. And so I
rest,

Sir, (Not of the House of Commons I thank God, and therefore the more likely
to be) Your faithful and humble Servant, G. S.
Aug. 16. 1648.
FINIS.

