SEVERAL PAPERS AND LETTERS Betwixt his Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX The Earl
of Norwich, Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas, about the surrender of Colchester.

His Excellencies last Summons and Articles offered upon the Surrender thereof
With the Answer in reply to the same

Also a Letter from his Excellency the Lord Fairfax To the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Inhabitants of the Town of Colchester in answer to their desires for a free
trade and commerce with the City of London during the Seige.

LONDON Printed for F. L. June 27 Anno Dom. 1648.

The Generals Letter and Propositions to the Earl of Norwich. Lord Capell, Sir
Charles Lucas for the Surrender of COLCHESTER:
MY LORDS,
THe Paper sent to me, enclosed in the Letter from your Lordships, and Sir
Charles Lucas of the 19. instant, seems in the first part of it so drawn, as
that I could not well understand it, what kind of Treaty, or for what Peace it
meant: But the latter part, underwritten by your Lordships, and Sir Charles
Lucas, seems to explain your own meaning, so, as if you meant a Treaty
betwixt the Armies for the general Peace of the Kingdom, and not otherwise
for your selves, or your Garrison: And to the contents of it in that sense, I
can only say, That such a Treaty, and for such a Peace, is not the proper work
of my self, or the Army, but theirs that have employed us: But if the English
be, to make way for conditions to your Garrison, I shall, without the trouble
of a Treaty, let you know what your selves, and those under you may expect from
me, (which for the restoring of quiet to this County, and the Kingdom, without
more blood shed) and for the saving of so eminent a Town from the chance of
War, I shall offer, viz. that if your selves, and the rest with you in
Colchester, shall within 24 hours after notice hereof, lay down Arms, the
common Soldiers, and men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their
several homes, and there quietly to remain, submitting unto the Authority of
Parliament: (and this I shall make good however, to so many of that sort
respectively, as shall accept thereof, and do accordingly,) Your selves, and
the Officers and Gentlemen engaged with you in the Town, shall have liberty,
and Passes to go beyond Sea, with equipage befitting their qualities, [engaging
themselves not to return into this Kingdom without leave from the Parliament]
And all of both sorts, with the Inhabitants of the Town, shall be free from
plunder or violence of the Soldiers, their Arms, Ammunition, and furniture of
War with in the Town, and also their horses employed in Military service,
[except such horses and swords, as shall be fit to be allowed to Captains or
superior Officers, and Gentlemen of quality, for their removal) being first
delivered up without imbezlement, in an orderly manner, as shall be further set
down, and the forces under my command, or such as I shall appoint, being
admitted a peaceable entrance into the Town. I desire the Gentlemen of the
Committee of Parliament now in your hands, [who by their Subscriptions to part
of the paper, and by your sending of it, as from them, or at their request, are
concerned to know what my Answer is] may be acquainted herewith, and indeed, if
it be concealed from any that are concerned in it: The blame thereof from God
and Man is like to fall on their heads, who shall be the authors of such
concealment.

Your Servant Tho. Fairfax.

To the Earl of Norwich, and Lord Capell.
The Answer to the Generals Letter.
My Lord,
WE have received yours of the 20. which takes notice of the Paper of the 19
subscribed by the Committee, and of our permission to have it delivered to you.
You have very justly apprehended our intentions to be the public peace of the
Kingdom, and we again own that sense, and no other, as befitting the duty of
English men: and we believe, if both Armies were accorded in such an endeavor,
it were the most pious, easy and honorable action, wherein they could be
engaged; but why you have taken occasion by that act of ours, to offer
ronditions in particular to us, we understand not, nor can it be supposed,
without straining, and offering violence to our manner of proceeding. Those
conditions you proffer to the Officers and Soldiers on our part, we do hereby
make offer of to the Officers and Soldiers on your part. We shall in this
occasion deal frankly and plainly, we do not without evident reason conceive
our selves to be in a condition, able to entertain all the force you can make,
and thereby to give courage and opportunity to all true hearted English men, to
recover their ancient and known Laws, or if you shall adventure to attaque
us, we doubt not but by the mercy and assistance of almighty God to give you
such a repulse as shall give testimony of our force and courage, and as how
high a rate we value the General peace of the Kingdom. You do with more then
usual earnestness desire that your Answer should be communicated tothe
Committee, and whom else it may concern, we apprehend you chiefly intend the
Inhabitants of Colchester; we were very unworthy persons if any should exceed
us in our care for this good Town, and we dobut not but God will recompense the
kindness we have received from them, and that he has a reward in store for
them suitable to the loyalty and fidelity they have hitherto in this occasion
manifested toward the King, and known Laws of the Kingdom, and because you
apprehended it so important and necessary to divulge the proceedings in this
affair, we will therefore put it into your power: And therefore we desire
your Lordship, to cause the Paper signed by the Committee of the 19. and our
answer sub signed, the answer of your Lordship to us of the twentieth and this
our reply of the 21 to be all printed, and as many of the prints as you shall
send to us, we will disperse in Colchester, and those parts of the County under
our power, and to each person of the Committee one,

Colchester 21 June. 1648. Norwich, Arthur, Capell, Charles Lucas.
My Lord we do also hereby return many thanks for your honorable civilities
in the business of Sir William Leyton.



My Lord,
WE have herewith sent you enclosed a petition delivered unto us from the Bay
and Say Makers of Colchester, and are so inclinable on our parts to satisfy
their desires as there shall want nothing thereto but your lordships equal
concurrence for our undertakings being to have the known laws and properties
of free-subjects enjoyed by every one in this Kingdom, we cannot but hold it
our duty as much as we may to encourage and assist all free Trades, which is the
Subjects right and the sinews of the Common wealth. And therefore if your
Lordship shall on your part be of the same mind and good inclination toward
the Petitioners upon signification thereof to us, we shall be ready to
concur with you in agreeing upon such a way to satisfy their desires as may
be an assurance to them for the free passage of their Goods through both our
Guards without any inconvenience or advantage to be thereby drawn upon the
Guards on either part. Expecting your answer herein we rest

Colchester, June 21 1648. Your Servants, Norwich, Arthur Capell, Charles Lucas.

For the Lord Fairfax. To the Right Honorable the Lords and others of the
Council of War fitting at Colchester.
The humble Petition of the Bay, and Say makers of Colchester, Shows,
THat your Petitioners having formerly impl^yed Thousands of poor people in
this Town, in Making of Bays and Says which they have weekly vended at
LONDON for this three weeks past the passage thither being embarred, they are
now no ways enabled for the continuing of the same. Except they may have
li^ense from your honors, and from the Lord General the Lord Fairfax, to
convey their said Manufactures to the said City of London.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That they may have a free pass from
your Honors to convey their Bays and Says, and Perpetuanies to London by
Wagons, And that your Honors would be pleased to recommend their humble
desires to the Lord Genesis Fairfax for the like free passage with convoy through
his Quarters.

And your Petitioners shall humbly pray etc.
Right Honorable
The Petition of the Bay and Say makers of this Town to the council of War
here accompanied with their Letters to your Honor, coming to our view and the
Petitioners humble desires to us to second the Petition and Letters, together
with our own knowledge and sense of the damage that will accrue not only to
this Town, but to the Kingdom in General by reason of an embarment and stand
of trade, has moved us to be humble suitors to your Excellency for your
concurrence with the Council of War here in granting the desires of the
Petitioners. For which we shall remain.

Colchester, June 21. 1648. Sir, Your humble Servants William Cook, Major,
John Lucy

Gentlemen,
IT had bin good that the unavoydable consequence of War, of that of
restraining trade to a town beseiged, is one had bin considered of by the
Inhabitants of your Town before Their admittance of those forces, which have
necessarily drawn it upon them, and which indeed first began the new
disturbances upon this county and the Kingdom, and that interruption to your
Trade which is complained off. You cannot but remember that even during the
first war raised against the Parliament, while you had none but the Parliaments
forces among you both your Town and this whole County, had as free trading
with London, and the parts adjacent, as if there had been no war. And after
that by the blessing of God the adverse forces were in all parts subdued, the
whole Kingdom enjoyed for some time universal quiet, there was again all
freedom of trade and commerce throughout all parts the forces of the
Parliament disbanded and lessened by degrees, and therewith taxes abated, all
plunder and abuse of the Soldiery restrained, and at last free quarter also
taken off, and there was no doubt but with the blessing of God, the kingdom
might have been speedily settled and eased of its burdens by degrees, as the
safety thereof would admit had it not bin for the new disturbances raised
cheefle by that party whom your town has afforded harbor and shelter unto
for the present, where had they not been admitted, and through the advantage of
the place gained some present breathing, there was little doubt but by Gods
blessing they might e're this time have bin broken or driven far enough off,
and your town had enjoyed without interruption, the same freedom of Trade and
all things else as formerly they had done, and as the present interuption
thereto is thus drawn upon your town not by my default but theirs and the
towns men's. So the first beginning thereof which the petition alleages to have
been for 3. weeks past, was singly by them there being at that time none of any
forces entered into this county, nor any that stopped your trade but the Lord
Goring and those in conjunction with him, who then lay at Bow and afterward at
other places upon the London road, which so soon as by their diverting another
way it was cleared there was no stop of trade by the forces under my command
either to other parts of this county or your Town, until by their admittance
thereinto, J was necessarily drawn down hither to beseige them, now to allow
freedom of Trade to a besieged town, imployes so much disadvantage or
prejudice to the beseegers, and such advantages to the beseeged, as the like
motion was never yet granted, nor I think made elsewhere, and therefore as to
your and the inhabitants desire thereof their hopefullest and surest ways to a
full freedom therein will be such as tend to the restitution of the Town and
County (as far as may be) into the same condition wherein they werebefore,
those forces which occasioned the interruption came in, and as in order
thereunto I lately offered fair conditions in a letter to the Lord Goring, Lord
Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas though perhaps concealed from you, though they be
rejected by them, yet I shall still be ready to make good the same to all that
shall timely embrace them except those 3. persons themselves, and for the mean
time here are many Gentlemen and others of known Estates in this County and
diverse inhabitants of your townsmen eminent in trade who declare themselves
willing to take of all the bays and Says made in the town at such prises as
they are usually sold for, and give good security for payment within a
fortnight after the town of Colchester, shall be taken, surrendered or quitted
which I hope would be readier payment by many months then those commodities
are usually vended for, or else to take them off upon such cerraine days of
payment as Merchants ordinarily do in that Trade. And though it be a favor
without an example to a besieged town yet in order hereunto I shall give way
for those commodityes to be freely brought to Stanaway-Heath. There to be
either sold upon the Terms aforesaid, or else to be returned into the town,
if they cannot bargain, and shall give passage to and from that place to the
persons and goods of those tradesmen at such times as I shall find most
convenient to be set apart for that purpose.

June 24. 1648. Your assured friend, THO. FAIRFAX.

For the Major, Aldermen, and Inhabitants of the Town of Colchester.
Sir, Saturday last a Trumpeter came from the Lord Capell to desire that
Abraham Harsdon, and John Rayner, Deputed by the Bay and Say makers of
Colchester might come and treat with his Excelency about a free Trade.

The Lord Capells trumpeter and Col: Panton's and diverse soldiers are this day
come from the Enemy, and many have come since the Generals. Letter into the
Town, promising liberty to soldiers and others of that rank to go and live
quietly at their homes.

Colonel Slingsby, col: Beale, Col, Tuke, Col. Champnes, and diverse other
Colonells are very active in the Town.

The Lord Goring, and the rest of the Officers keep up the Spirits of their
Soldiers with lies, when they ask't what our Trumpeters came so often about,
they told the soldiers, That it was about a Treaty and that the General offered
fifty thousand pounds if he would let him draw off quietly with his Army, but
that he would not grant it,

Your servant,
From the Leagure before Colchester, 26. June 1648.
FINIS.

