SEVERAL APPARITIONS Seen in the Air, at the HAGVE in Holland, upon the
21/3^ day of May last past 1646, about one of the clock in the Afternoon.

Viz. A Lion and a Dragon fighting. A King wi^h three Crowns on his head, etc.
A Navy or Fleet of Ships. A man on Horsbacke shooting himself through. Two
troops of Horse fighting, etc. A multitude of people appeared, some with heads
and some without heads.


Being verified by Letters sent to diverse Members of the Hon: House of Commons,
and translated out of the Dutch Copy.

Whereunto i^ annexed the several Apparitions seen in the Coun^ies of
Cambridge, Suffolk, and Norfolk, in and upon the same 21 day of May last past
(as aforesaid) in the Afternoon, 1646.

This is Licensed and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET, dwelling in Old Fish street, in Heydon-court.
1646.

Signs from Heaven, to warn and awaken the Eastern Association, with the
Southern parts of the Kingdom.
INcredulity has always been the forerunner of misery ever since the
Creation; the old World would not be warned by Noah's building the Arc until
the flood came, Pharaoh would not be warned by Gods Judgments till he was
swallowed up of the Red Sea; nay, as Abraham, said in the p^rable to Dives,
should one arise from the dead yet would they not believe; therefore because
these warnings would not serve; the Lord, who is slow to wrath and of much
mercy, gave signs from Heaven unto the Jews, to forewarn them of their
approaching destruction, but they regarded it not. The Blazing Star seen in our
Horizon so many years ago, which began toward Germany, fetched its compass to
Ireland, and whose blazing bush tail hung over England, was but a nine days
wonder, although these Countries has since found the effects thereof, the
Almighty divert his Judgments from u^ if it be his will, which we may justly
fear hangs over our heads, by reason of our continual crying sins,
notwithstanding the many tokens of his anger showed unto us by strange and
fearful Apparitions seen in the Air (the 21 of May last past) in many parts,
both in our own Kingdom of England, and at the Hague, in Holland, by many
hundreds of beholders, which thus appeared unto them.

Upon the one and twentieth day of May last in the afternoon, in this year
1646, there were very strange sights seen, and unwonted sounds heard in the
Air, in several places of this Kingdom, as also at the Hague in Holland upon
the same day as follows.

First; came a little round thing about the bigness of a Table or board, like
unto gray Paper: and without it was seen the likeness of a Lion and a Dragon,
which furiously fought together, which Dragon after a while did spit fire
furiously, but was overcome by the Lion: and yet the Lion continued in sight.

2. Appeared by the Lion a multitude of soldiers, with another Dragon
likewise, with a multitude of Soldiers both foot and horse: and before every
Troop a Trumpeter, which we saw perfectly set the Trumpets to their mouths, and
so began the Troops to fight one against another in great fury: so that we did
not know who had the better, but the people vanished away, and the Lion and the
Dragon continued still in fight.

3. There appeared also a King with three Crowns on his head, sitting upon a
Kingly throne with a great company of people about his Throne, and they
vanished away immediately: but the Lion and the Dragon abode still in fight.

4. There appeared also a number of peoples head, and one great head amongst
them: and a multitude of bodies without heads, which vanished away, yet the
Lion and the Dragon abode as before continuing in fight.

5. There appeared yet likewise one man sitting upon a horse, which shot
himself through (as with a pistol) and fell backward, and so vanished away.

Lastly there appeared a mighty fleet of Ships in the South-west, and drove to
the South-east, by the Lion and the Dragon, where the fight was, with a
multitude of men aboard the ships, with half their bodies to be seen above
board, which we saw perfectly hoyfing up their Sails, and driving too and fro,
and as it were continued all standing still, till the Lion and the Dragon
embraced one another and so fell backward, and disappeared: whereupon there
appeared a great cloud which was not there before, and so drove away with the
wind.

In the Counties of Cambridge, Suffolk and Norfolk, on the 21 day of May last
past in the afternoon were seen as follows.
ABout New Market in the County of Cambridg, there were seen by diverse honest,
sober, and civil persons, and men of good credit, three men in the Air
striving, struggling, and tugging together, one of them having a drawn Sword in
his hand.

Betwixt Newmarket and Thetford in the County of Norfolk, there was observed a
pillar or a Cloud to ascend from the earth, with the bright hilts of a sword
toward the bottom of it, which pillar did ascend in a pyramidall form, and
fashioned it self into the form of a spire broach Steeple, and there descended
also out of the sky, the form of a Pike or Lance, with a very sharp head or
point to encounter with it.

Also at a distance, there appeared another Spear or Lance, with a very accute
point out of the Sky, likewise, which was ready to interpose, but did not
engage it self.

The first Spear which came down from Heaven point blank, was after a while
clean elev^ted higher, and that spire or S^ear which went up from the earth,
ascended after it, to encounter with it a second time.

This continued about an hour and a half.

At Sopham in the County of Cambridge, a Ball of wildfire fell upon the earth,
which burnt and spoiled about an Aker of Grain, and when it had rolled and run
up and down to the terror of many people, it dissolved and left a most
sulpherous stinck behind it.

Also at Camberton in the County aforesaid, diverse of the Trained Bands being
met at a muster, did behold the form of a spire Steeple in the Sky, with
diverse Swords about it.

Also at Brandon in the County of Norfolk the inhabitants ran to behold a
strange spectacle of a spire Steeple ascending up from the earth, and a Pike or
Lance descending downward from heaven.

Also at Brandon there was seen at the same time, a Navy or Fleet of ships in
the air, swiftly passing under sail, with Flags and Streamers hanged out, as
if they were ready to give an encounter.

In Marshland in the County of Norfolk, within three miles of Kings Linne, a
Captain and a Lieutenant, with diverse other persons of credit, did hear in the
time of Thunder, a sound as of a whole Regiment of Drums beating a call with
perfect notes and stops, much admired at of all.

And the like Military sound was heard in Suffolk upon the same day, and in
other parts of the Eastern Association.

In all these places there was very great Thunder, with Rain and Haile-stones
of extraordinary bigness and round, and some hollow within like tings.

FINIS.

