John Carter Brown Library Brown University

GUARDED

blazon or coat of arms

A Modest Vindication of Mr. Setons Address and Petition, To his Majesty's High
Commissioner, from the Cavils and Misconstructions of Anonymus
I Am not at leisure to triffle with the (...) Author of the perplexed and
^edious Reflections on my short Sermon in behalf of Charity, and my most
earnest and humble Petition for a Brotherly Conference. I have studied our
Savior's Sermon on the Mount, and I hope I have profited something at His
School, who when He was Reviled, Reviled not again, my Intention is not to
amuse the World with Parades, unbecoming a Churchman, nor to do any thing that
may purchase me the Character of a Sounding Brass, or Tinkling Cymbal: I have
read the Causes of the decay of Christian Piety, and other good Books written
in good Language, but I was never at Billings-gate, nor am I versed in its rude
Dialect: I know how Haman pleaded against the Jews, and the Fauning Orator
Tertullus, against the great Doctor of the Gentiles, the Rapturous Encomiast on
Heavenly Charity; I know also how the Archangel managed the Contraversie
betwixt him and a very ill Competitor: But I never thought it worth my while,
to bestow spare hours on such trash and dirty pamphlets, as the Presbyterian
Eloquence, and the Wicked Answers to it.

I have long been one of these Mourners who bewail the sad State of
Christendom, and the miserable Divisions of this Kingdom in particular, and the
fierce Animosities among Us Churchmen, which make the Atheist flout Us* the
Theist and Socinian lift up his Head, and the Romish Missionary bless himself
with swelling Hopes and Triumph in Secret, and warm himself at the fire kindled
in Our Bowels.

I have been sometime in this Place, at the desire of Persons of different
Ranks and Characters, who are inclined to hope, that as upon more Occasions
than one, I have conform to my Slender Capacity, done some little Services to
my King, Country, and Holy Religion, so I might by GOD's Blessing prove
Instrumental at this Season, to beget a good Understanding betwixt contending
Parties.

I thank GOD for it, I have hitherto Labored with some good Success, I find
diverse Pious and Learned Men amongst my Presbyterian Brethren, I find fellow
Mourners for the Distresses of Our Zion, I find his Grace my Lord Commissioner,
deserves higher Characters than all the Eloquence I could command, has as yet
given him, I find he is not to be taught Manners by the Author of the
Reflections, and that he does not think it unworthy of his while, or Serious
Thoughts, amidst all the important Cares he is laden with, to listen to the
Friendly and private Conferences of Men of different Persuasions in little
Matters; The King himself finds Leisure and Inclination, amidst the rugged
Toils of War, to regrat Our unkindly and unseasonable Contentions, and he
wishes them at an end; And there are more of his chief Ministers than one, who
design to serve GOD Faithfully, and their Royal Master, and their afflicted
Country therein.

I want not overtures of Peace and Union, such as the Generality of this
Nation, or at least, those whose Hearts GOD has touched, shall in time be well
pleased with; I seek Peace and pursue it, and there are on both sides, who join
cordially their Helping Hands to me, I expect a fair Conference and a good
Issue through the Blessing of GOD on it, and I Labor without Wearieness to
have all things Right disposed to that Effect; And I will not be interrupted by
the nameless Scribler, but I can and will Pray heartily, That GOD may inspire
him with a more Christian and Charitable Temper.

If at a more Seasonable Juncture, It shall be found expedient to vindicat my
se^^ and my Brethren, as to our past conduct in some remarkable steps of
dubious co^struction, the little Pen that has been employed sometimes in harder
busieness, man by the aid of Divine Grace, be able to give the world
Satisfactory accounts in these and other Matters, not fit to be touched at this
occasion.

Thus sat I had Written upon sight, and with some tender Sense of unkind usage
but upon second thoughts, and finding I had one spare Hour more at my disposal
and being such a Penitent as I ought to be: For the fuller satisfaction of the
Autho^ and others, I think fit to add in the followi^^* Paragraphs, a
particular Confession o^ the Sins that I and those of my Persuasion are Tashed
with, or (if so you please t^ Construct it) to lay aside the Authors high
Sounding Envelop, and fast of Genera^ words, and the Stage and ^ce, and all
false Logic, and Erring Divinations, and to set His Church in a true Light,
and the Society thar prove Schismatic to it*

1mo. To dispose the most Opinionative Readers to hearken without prejudice t^
the Contents of my Adress and Petition when published, and to speak Truth of my
self and my Brethren, I Denominate us well Affected to the Peace of this Church
But I have cried aloud, and not spared, I have lifted up my Voice like a
Trumpet, and declaimed against the Sins of GOD's People, and his Select
Office-Bearers, and that is to have Jacob's Voice, and Esau's rough Hands.

2do. I Adorned my Paper with some Scriptur al Eloquence; But as Bishop
Stillingfleet in the Preface to his Iraenicum, so I unluckily named Procrustes,
whose Character every one is not acquainted with, and that smelled too rankly
of the Stage, and of unsanctified Heathen Learning; and after such Language of
Ashdod, no Wise or Good, Man could take me to be a Minister of the Gospel.

3tio. With some Emotion of Mind, and a Passionate Zeal, I have Commended the
Beauty of Charity, and Magnified her as a Divine Physician, and I thought I had
Saint Paul on my side, but that was only a fancy.

4to. Charity is a Stranger to the World, or she is not, if she be, I was a
Fool to speak Good of her; For I might be sure to be beaten for my pains, if
she be not there was neither Truth, Charity, no^ Wisdom in my complaint.

5to. To say, or so much as to insinuate that there is any Pride, or
Partiality, o^ Malice amongst these Churchmen, who have the Government now
Lodged in their Hands, or that there are any Errors in their Conduct,
prejudicial to Peace and Unity is a false assertion, and to tell them of it
openly, who can resent to purpose, is no Wisdom.

6to. Though I have often expostulated in private, with warm men on both sides
concerning the mischief that Springs from our Divisions, though some Man's
Memory more Charitable than the Authors, may be so kind as to remember that in
the Committee at Aberdeen, Anno 1694, I earnestly pressed a Friendly conference
with some of the Members, telling them in Express words, that the Devil and the
Jesuits had Triumphed too long in our Divisions, and that she was not the True
Mother, who cried to divide the living Child; And tho my serious Remonstrance
was but little heeded: Yet it was Uncharitable in me to insinuate shrewd things
of my Presbyterian Brethren, before I had admonished them privately.

7mo. All these Episcopal Ministers who have been turned out since the
Revolution, whither by the Violence of the Rabble, or by Church Judicatories,
who can never pass an unjust Sentence, have but got the reward due to their
Demerits.

8vo. There was much Atheism and Irreligion in the late Reigns, and the Bishops
and their Accomplices were the Chief occasions of it, but now the Golden Age is
returned, and Sin and Satan are Banished at least out of every Presbyterian
Congregation, and all this is owing to the present Church Government.

9no. That all the Episcopal Ministers of Scotland were not at once Spewed out
of their places for having complied with abominable Prelacy, the Mother and
Nurse of all Wickedness, is a mighty courtesy in the present Church Rulers,
tho some are apt to think that the greatest share of acknowledgements on this
head is due to the Wisdom and Justice of King and Parliament, and to the Love
of the people for their Ministry, and the great want to this hour of jure
Divino, Presbyterians Qualified for the Sacred Function.

10mo. Tho we be scarred by the Breath of angry Preachers in Face of
Parliament, and elsewhere, tho we be Characterized as Samaritans, (...) have no
Right to be Builders of the House of GOD, tho in places where we think ^he
Gospel was preached with much Fervor and Purity, some have the Good manner^
and Charity to Pray that GOD may open Men's Eyes to see the difference betwixt
(...) who feed the People with Husks, and such as now give them the true Bread
of Life, tho we deserve to be accursed from Christ if we ever did, or do Preach
another Gospel than himself and his Apostles have ta^^ht us; Yet it is much to
be wondered at, that all good and Peaceable Men amongst us, do not readily
join a Society, which Entertain so hard impressions of the whole gang, as the
Author terms it.

11mo. I must tell a piece of true History, Whatever Censure I may thereby
incurr, Anno 1691, when the Comittee should have sitten at Aberdeen, and was
hindered by a Rabble (to which we had no Accession directly or indirectly) the
Ministers of that and other Provinces, were hugely Allarum'd by the Citation of
no less then 30 Ministers at once, (Many whereof were eminent for Piety and
Learning) To answer to invidious Unsubscrived Lybels: There was but little hope
of Fair and Candid Proceeding from a Judicatorie so possessed with Prejudice,
and therefore by way of Self-Defence, some expostulating Queries, were drawn up
concerning the Comittees Intrinsic Right over us as Ministers, that being it
which they claimed to act by, and We being unsatisfied as to any Juridical
Power they could pretend to, save what was derived from the State, a
Protestation against the Intrinsic Power they laid claim to over Us their
Brethren in the Ministry, was therefore drawn up, and an Appeal to the Kings
Justice and Protection, imbodied therewith, tho not to be made use of till We
had employed Our outmost Endeavors for a fair Accommodation.

Anno 1692. The King it seems was well informed of the State of this Church,
and the Rights of its Standing Ministry, and like a true Father of his
Faithful Subjects, he was earnest to have Union amongst Us, and all our former
differences ended and forgotten; And to that effect (...) Formula of Union was
concerted, and by his Letters directed about one time to the Assembly and Us,
he recommended Concord to both Parties. In obedience to his Royal Otder, and
out of a sincere Love to Peace, We delegated Commissioners to wait upon the
Assembly, and We hoped for good Acceptance, and diverse Wise, and peaceable
Members of it were for granting our Requests, but the warmer and greater part
rejected both the Kings and Our Proposals, and to this day the Breach is kept
up (as We think) without any fault of Ours.

Anno 1694. While the Committee was coming to Aberdeen, We of that Diocese met
among our selves, and considered what was fit to be done, we remembered what we
had resolved upon. Anno 1691, And we thought our Circumstances still the same,
and We therefore agreed upon the same Measures as formerly.

Last Session of Parliament we were called to account upon that head, and upon
a very mistaken Supposition (proceeding from partial information) that We had
been acted by a principle of Enmity to the Civil Government, and influenced by
Great Men ill affected to it, two or three were censured, and the rest
overlookt by the Mildness of the King and Parliament.

Tho this very faithful Account of Matters of Fact may satisfy the Author and
others (if they would be so charitable as to believe it) that we have not
Almanac Consciences, yet he has said so, and therefore it must be taken as
granted.

12mo. To think that any private number of Churchmen, can explain the Acts of
their own Assembly, so as to satisfy the Scruples of such as demurr about
them, or that they who can by a power delegated from it, receive any particular
Minister, and instruct him sufficiently as to the Terms of Communion, can do
the same to two or three Ministers at once; is a vain and impossible
Supposition, and to demand a private Conference on the head in Presence of His
Majestis High Commissioner, that he may make faithful Report of it to the
King, who has loaded him with that kind of Care, amongst other weighty
matters, is an impertinent and indiscreet Proposal; And let the World Judge of
it.

13mo. Its acknowledged that there are but (...) small number of Constituents,
who give encouragement to Mr. Seton, to tak^ the Charge and trouble he is at,
for geting Church differences equally settl^^; yet if there were a general
Expectation of success in his peaceable designs, a^^ encouragement from
Authority for that effect, he durst undertake to get his commission signed as
yet with some hundreds of unexceptionable Ministers (...) to their Moral and
Intellectual Endowments, and already qualified or will^^^ to qualify according
to Law, and by many thousands of sincere Protest^^^ Laymen in this Kingdom.

14to. Tho none of my Constituents ly under the Censure of the Church, save
so^^ called Intruders, and these merely eo nomine and not for any Immoralities,
and tho some of them were lybelled by, and app^^^^d before the Committee, and
nothing proven against them by the Witnesses, who were examined particularly
enough, yet the Author says there appear^d little difficulty in the probation,
therefore I must acknowledge it, and all the world believe it to be true.

15to. Tho I seriously design a conference, and have very freely communicated
to some new aquaintances of my Presbyterian Brethren (who are dear to me
because of the true Gospel Spirit I see in them) a part of what, I have to say
when that is agreed to; Yet because the Author cannot or will not think on a
method how jure divino, and ambulatory men in point of Church Government, may
live peaceably together, and jointly carry on the common ends of the Gospel
without respect to difference of opinions or practices in matters supposed not
to be essential to Religion; And because I mean not to come closs to every
point, until I be persuaded that the Author speaks his Brethrens mind when he
talks of such a conference as I have Petitioned for, as unpracticable, I must
therefore be thought to design a parade only, and not be in good earnest.

16mo. Tho I have Written an Apology in defense of the Civil Government, and
that some of the highest Rank in the Kingdom know, and are pleased with what I
have done, and tho some Men of the Authors good Acquaintance, have with much
Bitterness more than once declaimed against my Constituents, and me for taking
the Oaths by Law imposed; And tho I have not Written to London since I came to
this place, nor mean to do so until I can give further accounts, yet the
infallible Mr. of Divinations must be believed*when he says I am ready enough
to spurn at the Government with my heels, and that I sent my Address to London
next Post after it was Printed.

To conclude, and to name no others whom I can prove to have been ill used by
Presbyterian Indicatories, if Dr. Sibbald at Aberdeen had been treated as
Civily by the Presbytrie, exercing a large Authority in that place, as by the
Committee appointed for Visitation of Colleges, I should be the more ready to
believe that the Author had a true kindness for true Ministers of the Gospel,
tho they should never come to be of the same Judgment with himself as to the
Government of the Church; And if the present Church Rulers had not spent more
of their Zeal and Spirits on other matters of less importance, than on
confronting Atheism, etc. And if he and some of his Brethren would condescend
to explain in presence of Honorable Witnesses, a few dubious Clauses in the
Acts settled by Authority in favor of the present Church Government, I should
be the more easily induced to have favorable thoughts of the Authors bold
appeal to GOD, Angels and Men, with which he takes confidence to end his
Re^^^ctions.


