Several LETTERS FROM Col. Genesis Poyntz. Lieu. Genesis Cromwell. and Col.
Hutchison. Col. Whitt.
OF The late great Victory near Sherborne in the North, with some other happy
successes in the West.

Printed according to the Original, together with an Order of both Houses for
Thanksgiving for the same.

Die Sabbathi 25. October. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That these Letters, with the
Order for the Thanksgiving, be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 27 October.
1645.

For his worthy friend Master Bedford Scout-Master-Generall to the Committee of
both Kingdoms.
Sir,
OUr news is very joyful, even the Defeat of a raging Enemy of near 2000 men
under the command of Digby, having taken 1000 Foot of mine near Ferry-brig, my
Horse under the command of Colonel Copley fell suddenly upon them, and not
only released the Foot, but God gave us an absolute Victory, as the List
enclosed will manifest. There is not above two or three hundred of them left
together, who are fled toward Skipton, eight hundred of mine pursuing of them:
so that I am retreating to block up the North side of Newarke, and sent two
Regiments to Colonel Rossiter to assist him in the blocking up the Southside
till I receive further Orders from the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms.
There is no considerable Enemy for me to follow. The King being at Newarke, and
the Garrison cleared of most of their Horse, it is conceived a very seasonable
time to block up the same. I want only their commands. You shall further hear
from me by the next that offers so much happiness to

Sir, Your friend to serve you, Sednham Poyntz.
Worsop 18. October. 1645.
For the Honorable Colonel Thornhigh at the Kings head in the Strand these,
with my humble service.
Sir,
SInce your departure hence Partees have been sent out every night, but the
Enemy have drawn into their Garrisons continually, that nothing could be
attempted; only on Friday morning last, Corporal Crofts, who is one of my
Corporals, with 20 horse of Captain Pendocks and mine did fall into Bridgeford
super mount, whether the Queens Regiment were newly come, and all mounted; they
charged through them, routed the whole Regiment, killed eight besides what were
wounded and brought off, 16 prisoners, 28 horse, without loss of one man. And
on Saturday following, my Lieutenant, with 42 men going to secure the market,
fell into Langar, where the Earl of Northamptons Regiments were drawing out to
a Rendezvous, being about 200 horse: Thirty of our men charged about 80. of
them, and routed them, and falling into the Town with them they killed betwixt
twenty and thirty, and a Captain: they took a Major, nine others, and 27
Horse, without loss of one man. I desire that God may have the praise of all,
for he is worthy. On Sunday Captain Pendock and my Lieutenant, with 150 Horse
went to Ekrin to gain intelligence, and the King quartered at Tuxford, Laxton,
and Lymonton with his whole Army, but they wanted men to fall upon any
Quarters. I am just now sending a small party to Ekrin.

Since I begun this Letter, I hear that the King quarters this night about
Welbeck and Worsop and (as report gives it) he is for the North. Sir, be
pleased to procure some Arms, if it be possible, and some Money, for the
Country is impoverished, and the Soldiers in great wants. Sir, I have no more,
but to assure you that I am

Not. Oct. 12. about 8 at night. Sir, Your humble servant Cha. Whitt.
Sir,
I beseech you present my service to Master Millington and excuse my not
writing to him.



For my Honored Friend, Gilbert Millington, Esquire.
I Know you will be glad to hear in what conditions we are in this place,
which makes me trouble your more weighty affairs with this Relation. The King
Quarters at this present about Welbecke and Worsop-Mannour, where he has not
above 1500. Horse, and those so tired and ill Armed that he is able to do
little service with them, during their time of quartering on the South Side
Trent near us (which has been for the space of eight days or thereabouts) we
from hence continually Alarmed them, and found them of so daunted and dejected
spirits that twenty of our men charged fifty of them, in a Town where the
Queens Regiment quartered, and killed and took thirty of them, and if the had
had more strength they might have brought awa^ ^any more; they took and
brought away with them thirty Horse with some good luggage; another time since
that 40. of ours charged 120. of them at Langar, routed them, killed near 20.
took 14. one whereof is a Major who is sore wounded. I cannot certainly
acquaint you what the King intends, the reports are some for the relief of
Skipton, others Chester, and some others say that Colonel Rossiter and we so
visited their quarters, that they make trial of the other for more security. I
have made some more discoveries of other Countrymen, who were engaged in the
betraying of the Trent Bridges; and they likewise testify that Sir Gervase
Clifton was engaged in the Plot against the Castle, Kirk the chief actor is
condemned by a Counsel of War to be hanged on Saturday next; I know, Sir,
tedious Letters are but a trouble to you, then which I shall rather choose to
break off abruptly, remaining Sir;

Your obliged friend and humble servant, John Hutchinson.
Not. 15. Octo. 1645.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire. Speaker of the Commons House of
Parliament, these.
SIR:
I Gave you an account the last night of my marching to Langford-house: whether
I came this day, and immediately sent them in a Summons; the Governor desired I
should send two Officers to treat wtth him, and I accordingly appointed
Lieutenant Colonel Hewson, and Major Kelsey thereunto: the Treaty produced the
agreement which I have here enclosed to you. The General I hear is advanced
as far west as Columpton, and has sent some Horse and Foot to Teverton, it
is earnestly desired that those Foot might march up to him, it being convenient
that we stay a day for our Foot that are behind and coming up. I wait your
Answer to my Letter last night from Wallop, I shall desire that your pleasure
may be speeded to me, and rest, Sir;

Your humble Servvnt Oliver Cromwell.
Salisbury Octo. 17. at 12. at night.
17. October 1645.
Articles of agreement made between Sir Bartholomew Pell Knight, and Major
Edmond Vvedale, Commanders in chief of Langford Garrison, and Liev. Col.
Hewson, and Major Tho. Kelsey on the behalf of Oliver Cromwell, Liev. General
to Sir Thomas Fairfax Army.

FIrst, That the said Commanders in chief of the said Garrison shall surrender
the said House and Garrison to the said Lieutenant General Cromwell to morrow
by twelve of the clock, being the eighteenth of October instant.

2 That all Arms and Ammunition in the said Garrison be then delivered to the
use of the Parliament without any imbesiling of it.

3 That the said Commanders in chief with 15 Gent. of the said Garrison shall
march away with Horse and Arms, and the private soldiers without Arms to
Oxford within ten days, and to have a Troop of Horse for their Guard the first
day, and a Trumpet, with a Pass the rest of the way.

4 That the rest of the Gentlemen, not exceeding fifteen more, shall march
with their Swords and Pistols, and Horses, if they can lawfully procure them.

5 That the said Commanders in chief shall have a Cart or Wagon allowed them
to carry their goods to Oxford.

6 That if any Gentleman of the said Garrison have a desire to go to any other
Garrison, or Army of the Kings, they shall have Passes to that purpose.

7 That the goods remaining in the said Garrison shall be delivered to the
several Owners thereof upon demand, within two days next following the date
hereof.

8 That Lieutenant Col. Bowls and Major Fry be left Hostage until these
Articles be performed.

John Hewson. Thomas Kelsey. Bartho. Pell. Edm. Uvedale.


Die Martis 21. October. 1645.
REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled; That on the next
Lords Day public thanks be given unto Almighty God in all the Churches and
Chapels within the Lines of Communication, and on the next Lords Day come
Fortnight in all other parts of the Kingdom, for the great blessings and
success it has pleased God to give the Parliaments Forces in the North, near
Sherborne in Yorkshire, and in other parts of the Kingdom: And that the
Ministers be required to stir up their hearts to a hearty thankfulness. And
that the Lord Mayor be desired to give timely notice hereof to the Ministers of
the several Churches and Chapels within the Lines of Communication.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

