Twenty and Two EPISTLES OF LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA, The Philosopher.

Translated out of the Original, into English Verse.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, MDCLIV.

To the Reader.
IT is the opinion of some Critics, that most of the Epistles of Seneca,
though entitled to Lucilius, were not usually sent, or so intended: but were
emergent conceptions in his Garden, House, or Bed, for such a Wit could no
where be idle. And therefore being no continued discourse, like his other
Works, but confined to the brevity of Letters, which (as our Author says)
ought not to fill the left hand of the Reader, and being withal interweav'd
with Philosophical Precepts, and Stoicall sentences, it is not to be supposed
they can or ought to be rendered in all parts with that fluency of Phrase,
which is requisite in his Consolations, and other Books of Design. An
exuberant Fancy pent in a short discourse, is like waves of the Sea driven
into a Creek, which role thick upon each other. Or like fire in a Furnace, the
flame whereof, being, as it were, crushed up together, cannot display it self
like that of a Pile. Yet how useful the Epistles are, hear what a learned
Writer says: One Book, one Epistle of Seneca is sufficient to order and
rectify life, if men be willing to be reformed. And truly such is the severity
of his admonitions, that what has been said of Epictetus is by some more
properly aver'd of Seneca. He that shall not be roused up with his acrimony,
will hardly be corrected but at the Bar of Hell.

EPISTLE I.
SO do Lucilius, mind thine own affairs,
And time that hitherto has unawares
Been stolen, or snatched, or else has slipped away,
Collect, and keep: believe it is as I say.
Some of our time is stolen, some snatched, and some
Slips from us. But our shameful'st loss does come
By negligence. Observe, and thou't find still
Much of our time is spent in doing ill,
The greatest part in doing nothing, all
In doing what is not ours. Whom can thou call
To mind that value's time? that life does prize
Or who condsiers that he daily dies?
We err in thinking Death makes little have:
Whereof a great part is already past:
Our whole remain of life is in deaths power.
Then do Lucilius as thou writ'st: each hour
Embrace: if thou't the present apprehend,
Thou will the less on the next day depend.
Life while it is deferred, is in its flight.
All other things are borrowed: we have right
Only to time: this slipprie alone
Nature has given us in possession:
Whereof most men deprive us as they list.
But we in so great folly do persist,
That we for small, and vile things, always such
As are reparable, think our selves much
Engaged: whereas not any one conceaves
That he is a whit in debt who time receaves;
When that is the only thing that never can
Be recompensed, by the most grateful man.
Thou't ask perhaps, what I do, who to thee
Prescribe these things? I will herein be free:
As one that's prodigal but diligent,
I keep a true account of what is spent.
I cannot say that I do nothing lose,
But what, and when, and how I can disclose,
And give the reasons of my poverty.
But I may well to my own self apply
What happen's unto many, who are brought
To indigence not by their own defaut,
All pity, none relieve's. What is then?
I do not conceave them to be poor men,
Whom whatsoere remains suffices. Yet
I Would rather thou should keep what thou do get,
And soon begin to husband what is thine own:
For as our Ancestors to us have shone
In The bottom it is too late of thrift to advise:
For both the least, and worst in the bottom lies.
EPIST. II.
BY what thou writ'st me, and by what I hear,
I have good hope of thee. Thou do forbear
To wander too and fro, and by the change
Of thy abodes, thee from thy rest estrange.
This toffing up and down notes a sick mind.
The surest argument that I can find
Of a sound judgment, is to have power to stay,
And with one's self abide. But by the way
Take heed the reading such variety
Of Authors, and of Books, do not implie
A kind of wandering lightness: thou had need
To dwell on some men's wit, and thereon feed:
If thou desire to draw from thence that good
Which should be fixed, and thoroughly understood.
He Is no where that is every where. And as
It fare's for the most part with them which pass
Their time in travel, making that their ends,
They meet with many hosts, but with few friends.
So must it needs befall them, who apply
Themselves to no man's wit familiarly,
But hastily run over all. The meat
Does' us no good, which we no sooner eat,
But presently cast up again; and store
Of remedies retard our health the more.
A wound dressed diversely comes not to' a scar:
Plants prosper not that often removed are:
And there is not so commodious a thing,
That cursorily used can profit bring.
Variety of Books distracts the mind.
And therefore since thou can not leisure find
To read all that thou have, it will suffice
To have what thou can read. But herein lies
Much pleasure, thou will say now to resort
To this book, then to that. It does purport
A feeble stomach to taste many meats,
The great diversity whereof begets
Corruption, and not good nourishment.
To approved Authors then be most intent:
And if perchance thou sometimes do desire
To look on others, to the first retire,
Against poverty, against death get every day
Some muniments, the like against the sway
Of other ills. And when thou have fully gone
Ore many things, be sure to cull out one
Which the same day thou may concoct. I tread
This path my self: of many things I read,
I fasten still on some. It Is this days gain
Which I from Epicurus did obtain:
For I to others tents use to pass over,
Not as a fugitive, but to discover.
Glad poverty's an honest thing, says he.
if it be glad it is not poverty.
For he that poverty with constant mind
Can bear, is rich. Nor can we justly find
Him to be poor that little has, he is poor
Who is not satisfied, but covets more.
What matter 'ist how much our chests contain,
What store of corn does in our barnes remain,
What herds of cattle in our pastures feed,
What money w' have at use, if we proceed
To seek what is other men's? If we desire
Not what we have, but what we may acquire?
But would thou know what mean in riches lies?
First what is needful, next what does suffice.
EPIST. III.
THou writ'st a Letter, as thou say, by' a friend,
And therein also do a caution send,
Not to leave all thy secrets to his trust,
For it is not used by thee. So that thou do
Him in the very same Epistle call
Thy friend, and yet denyest it withal.
Thou take that first word in the vulgar sense,
And cal'st him friend, as Candidates from thence
Are styled good men: and as when one we meet,
Whose name we cannot hit on, him we greet
With this term, Sir. Let that pass. But if thou
Think thou may any for thy friend avow,
And yet on him not as much trust confer
As on thy self, thou do extremely err,
And not to the full worth true friendship prize.
In all things therefore with thy Friend advise:
But first consult on him. We should not spare
To trust when friendship's made: we must beware
Before't be done. But they these duties mix
Confusedly, who their affections fix
Against Theophrastus rule, ere they have ground:
And love not after they have reason found.
Consider long, whether thou should admit
One to thy friendship; having found him fit,
Take him into thy breast, as freely' impart
To him, as to thy self, what is in thy heart.
Hows' ever live thou so, as not to fear
Thy foe should of thy actions witness bear.
But because some things oftentimes arise,
Which a familiar trust makes secrecies,
Let thy friend all thy cares, all thy thoughts know:
Thou't make him faithful if thou think him so.
For many fearing fraud do fraud invite:
And by mistrust give other men a right
To Offend. Why should I then a word suppress
Before my friend? or with him think I Am less
Alone, then with my self? some men unfold
To all they meet what only should be told
To friends: and what concerns them most, expose
To every ear. Some again doubt even those
They have in most esteem: and if they could,
Locking all secrets in their breast, they would
Conceal them from themselves. We must do neither.
For both are always to be cenfurd, either
To credit all, or none. But the one is sure
A fault more candid, the other more secure.
So may thou tax both them that never
Are quiet, and them that are quiet ever.
For it is not to be called industry
To take delight in turmoyles, but a high
Tumultuousnesse of mind: nor is it rest
Which every kind of motion does molest,
But languishment. Take then into thy thought
What I have from Pamponius been taught:
To darkness some themselves so much inure,
That all that's in the light they think obscure.
These should be intermixed, and by compact
In acting we should rest, in resting act.
Consult with Nature, she will guide thee right,
And tell thee she has made both day, and night.
EPIST. IV.
PRoceed as the have begun, and make what have
Thou can, that thou the longer may
Enjoy a well-reform'd, and composed mind:
And truly that inioyment thou will find
Even while thou do reform, even while thou do
Compose. But yet that other pleasur's most
To be esteemed, that from a mind proceeds,
Wherein no impure thought, or motion breeds.
Think but what joy thou had, when laying down
The robe of youth, thou did assume the gown,
And were allowd to plead. Expect far more,
When having all thy childish thoughts given ore,
The knowledge of Philosophy shall then
Bring thee into the fellow-ship of men:
For hitherto not only we possess
Childhood, but what is more grievous, childishnes.
And worse indeed than that, we gravely sit
Like old men, yet the errors do commit
Of children, nay of infants: these at light,
They at false things, but we at both take fright.
Then go thou on, and somthings will appear
Less to be feared, because they bring much fear.
No evil is the greatest that is last.
Death comes, and we thereat might be aghast
If it could stay with us, but this is sure,
It either will not come, or not endure.
But thou will say, it is a rigid thing,
That we our lives to slight, our minds should bring.
Do thou not see upon what slender ground
Life is dispis'd by many? one is found
Himself to have strangled at a wentches door
Merely for love: an other man, before
His Masters wrath he would longer undergo,
From the house top himself did headlong throw:
A third, that fled away, himself has slain,
Rather than he would be brought back again.
Think not but virtue may effect as much
As needless fear. Life's not secure to such
As use too great endeavor to prolong
The date thereof: accounting it among
Their great good-fortunes, that the have lived to see
So many Consulls. Our sole care should be
With full resolved minds our life to leave;
Which many hold as fast, and strictly cleave
Thereto, as men grasp Brires, and Thorns, when they
Are by a furious torrent born away.
Man for the most part miserably tosses
Himself, 'tween fear of death, and frequent crosses
Of life: and though he lives unwillingly,
Yet notwithstanding knows not how to die.
The way to make life pleasant then to us,
Is not to be thereof solicitous.
No good can the possessor please, unless
His mind to leave it be in readiness:
And we can part with nothing with less pain,
Than what once lost cannot be wished again.
Wherefore persuade thy self to be prepared,
To fare but as the greatest men have fared.
A Pupil and an Eunuch Pompey's head
Commanded: a fierce Parthian his rage fed
With Crassus blood: and Lepidus his neck
Submitted was at Caius Caesar's beck
To Decius the Tribune: and his own
Left to Cherea. Fortune has raised none
To so great height, to whom her menaces
Have been inferior to her promises.
Do not on this tranquillity rely,
The Sea does change in twinkling of an eye:
And oftentimes a ship, the very day
It Is flattered with a calm, is cast away.
Think that a Thief, or foe his sword may set
Against thy breast: and lest there should be yet
A greater power wanting, there is no slave,
But of thy life the full command may have.
For this is fure, whos'ever does resign
The care of his own life, is Lord of thine.
If to those Presidents thou't have recourse
Which by close wiles, or open fraud, or force
Have perished, thou will find the wrath of Slaves
To Have brought as many people to their graves,
As that of Kings. What is it then to thee
In what authority or power they be
Whom thou do fear? since there is none but may
Act what thou fear. What if thy foe shall lay
Hands on thee accidentally, that so
Will only send thee where thou were to go;
Do not deceive thy self, but think that thou
Did always suffer, what thou suffer'st now.
I tell thee from the hour thou first took'st breath,
Thou have been daily going toward death.
These, and the like we often must revolve,
If we on that last hour will well resolve:
The fear whereof makes carefulness attend
On all the rest. But that I may now end
My letter, take what has contentment bred
In me to day, and this I gathered
Out of an others Orchard. It Is great Treasure,
When poverty with natures Law keeps measure.
This Law of nature what it is, behold,
To keep our selves from hunger, thirst and cold.
If we mere thirst and hunger would prevent,
We need not great men's Palaces frequent,
Nor suffer a proud look, or an affront
That has a show of favor put upon it.
We need not run the hazard of the Seas,
Nor of the wars, that is to be had with ease
Which nature asks. We labor for excess,
It Is that wears out our gowns with servilenesse:
Makes us grow old under a tent: and throws
Us on strange coasts. Sufficient near hand grows.
EPIST. V.
THat thou do study with such constancy,
And all things else being by thee layd-by,
That thou do wholly aim at this one end,
How thou may daily learn thy self to mend,
I both approve, and also much rejoice:
And that thou would persever in thy choice
Not only I exhort thee, but entreat.
Yet notwithstanding I must not forget
To give thee warning to forbear what may
Or in thy habit, or thy life bewray
A humor in thee to be singular:
Like those, who to be gazed on take more care,
Than to be good. Forbear thou to affect
Rude garbes: a head un-shorn: or through neglect
A beard grown rough: an enmity professed
T'weene money and thee: a couch whereon to rest
Spread on the ground: or whatsoere beside
Is courted in a perverse way by pride.
The very name of a Philosopher,
Though nere so meek, will envy enough confer.
What if to live retired we shall begin?
We may dissent in all that lies within,
But greet the people with a cheerful face.
Let not our gown be splendid, nor yet base.
Let Us not desire to have plate with gold in-layd.
Yet let it not an argument be made
Of thrift, that we both gold, and silver want.
We to our selves may this compliance grant
With common people, that our lives should be
Better then theirs, but yet not contrary.
For otherwise we those shall from us scare
Whom we would allure: and since they do despair
TO imitate us in all things, they will refuse
To follow us in any. This accrews
As the first good reapt by Philosophy,
Public accord joynd with humanity:
The benefit whereof we needs must lose
If difference in manners interpose.
Let Us see if it be not vain, and odious,
Which we so much desire should draw on us
Men's admiration. Sure it is our intent
To live according unto nature's bent.
But this is contrary, to macerate
Our bodies, and cheap cleanliness to hate:
To affect rudnesse, and on meats to feed
Not only vile, but noisome, such as breed
A loathing. For, as it is luxury
To covet curious dishes. So to fly
The usual meats, and such as may be bought
At easy rates, is madness to be thought.
Philosophy requires frugalitie,
Not punishment: for neatness may comply
With thriftinesse. This mean gives me content,
When life's 'tween good, and public manners spent.
Let men admire our life, but know it too.
What then, must we do that which others do?
Must we from them in nothing differ? Yes,
In many things. Let him that careful is
TO observe, and look more nearely onus, kno
We differ from the people. They that go
Into our houses, should find cause enough
To view us, rather than our household stuff.
He Is noble, who can earthen vessels use
As they were silver: nor can we refuse
Him the like honor, who finds no more worth
In those of Silver; than in those of earth:
Not to be able riches to possess
In the right way, shows the minds feebleness.
I Will now impart what I have learned this day
From Heraton, to throw our lusts away
Will remedy our fears. Do thou forbear
To hope, (says he) and thou't desist from fear.
But thou will ask how these things can agree,
And stand together, that so different be?
It Is so, Lucilius, though there seem a maine.
Dissent, yet they are joynd. For as one chain
Couples the prisoner and his keeper, so
These which are different together go:
Fear follows hope: nor do I thereat wonder:
Both lean upon suspension, both lie under
The care of future things. But the best reason
Of both, is, we do nothing in fit season,
Mind not the present, but our thoughts defer.
And therefore we herein extremely err,
Turning to ill, man's chief good, Providence:
Beasts fly the danger obvious to their sense,
And scaping are secure: man looks upon
With troubled mind, not only what is gone,
But even with what is to come himself torments.
Our best gifs hurt us, memory presents,
And providence anticipates the pain,
Which we from our continual fear sustain.
No man is wretched only in the ill
That present is; doubt makes him wretched still.
EPIST. VI.
I Know it (my Lucilius) to be true
That I Am not only improved, but molded new:
Yet it is not to be promisd, or expected
That I have nothing left to be corrected.
Rather how can it possibly be thought
But that I yet have many things which ought
To be amended? some I must augment,
And some diminish? it is an argument
Our mind's reformed, when we the faults discrie
Which formerly in us conceald did lie.
There is some hope in many sicknesses
To know w' are sick. I therefore would express
To thee my sudden change, and reap this good
To have our friendship thoroughly understood.
A friendship which no hope, or fear can ever
Divide, nor thought of private profit sever.
That, both with which, and for which men do die;
Although there be too many that rely
More upon friends, than friendship: which fault springs
From want of equal will to honest things.
For all things should be common by the tie
Of friendship, but chiefly adversity.
Thou can not think what profit every day
I gather to my self. But thou will say,
Send me those things which so important be?
I willingly would power them into thee.
For I rejoice to learn that I may teach.
And there is naught can fall within the reach
Of my desires, that I would know alone:
If wisdom were on this condition
To be bestowed on me, that I should make it
Known to no other, truly I would not take it.
Without a partner there is no content
In any thing, though never so excellent.
Therefore the Books themselves to thee I Will send
And that thou may not too much labor spend
To reap that benefit thou do desire,
I Will note those things I fancy, and admire,
That thou may sooner find them. But yet know,
More good will from discourse, than reading grow.
Thou therefore must upon the place appear,
Both because men trust more the eye, than ear:
And that the way by precepts is about,
But by examples short, and of less doubt.
Cleanthes, had he only Zeno heard,
And not familiarly with him conferred,
Whereby he might his course of life observe,
And see he did not from his own rules swerve,
Had not so well resembl'ed him. Nor yet
Could Plato, Aristotle, and all the great
Authors of various Sects have so expressed
Grave Socrates from words, as from the test
Of his known manners. The society
Of Epicurus did more magnify
Poliaenus, Metrodorus, Hermacus,
Than did his School. It Is therefore fit for us
T'instruct as well as learn, that we may grow
Mutually helpful. Mean time, 'cause I owe
To thee a daily cent, accept a boon
That I received to day from Hecater.
Do thou inquire what I have gained? said he,
I Have learned a friend to my own self to be.
For he improves, and cannot be alone,
A friend to himself, is so to every one.
EPIST. VII.
Do thou inquire what thou should chiefly shun?
The multitude. Thou might a hazard run,
If thou should venture on it yet. For I
Must needs acknowledge this infirmity,
The manners which I carry with me thither
I bring back seldom. For I find that either
Some thing's disturbed which settled was before:
Or part of that returns I had giv'n-o're.
As some Diseases so our strength impair,
That though we mend, yet brought into the air,
We presently relapse: so happens it
To us, whose minds after a tedious fit
Are comforted: for public intercourse
Renews our malady, and makes it worse.
In a great multitude there is scarce one,
But by discourse, or conversation.
Or by a dangerous example will
When we least think on it, tempt us to some ill.
By how much greater the Assembly is,
So much the danger's greater. And know this,
That nothing does good manners more oppose,
Then to be present at our public shows,
For Vices there in to us eas'lier steal
By that delight. And that I may reveal
My meaning plainly: I return from thence
More covetous, more proud, and more propense
To Luxury. Nay further, I grow then
More inhumane, because I was with men.
Falling by chance upon a midday sight,
I looked for sport, and wit, and that which might
Afford some mild refreshment to men's eyes,
Which in the morning with strange cruelties
Inhumanly were fed. But lo I found
The contrary. For every former wound
Was mercy. Now all sport b'ing laid aside,
These are mere murders: no man does provide
Any defense: their bodies being quite
Uncovered, not one stroke in vain does light.
Yet many thither go, and like it far
'Bove common sword-fights, or those shows that are
Demanded by the people. Would you know
The cause? here are no arms to save a blow.
What needs a Helmet, or a Fencers skill?
Those delay death, and make men slowly kill.
Men in the morning are to beasts exposed:
And if they escape, they are at noon enclosed
With fierce beholders, who in sport ordain
Victors to be o're-come, and slayers slain.
The end is sword, fire, death: and this is don
But while there is an intermssiion
Of other Spectacles: and is excusd;
B'ing men condemned, they ought to be so usd.
This deserves death for stealing, that for killing:
But wretch what do thou merit to be willing
To behold this? to hear the people cry
Strike, burn, and kill: who, pleased with cruelty,
Are not ashamed to ask, why this so fears
To rush upon the sword; why that forbeares
To kill with daring confidence: and why
A third shows such unwillingnesse to die.
Strokes provoke wounds, and every mutual blow
Lights on their naked breasts; and though the show
Be intermitted, rather than sit still,
And nothing see, men must each other kill.
On then, and find ill presidents sharp rods
To them that make them: thank the immortal gods,
That you with so much industry have sought
To make him cruel, who cannot be taught.
A tender wit, and not accustomed much
To constant ways, must be withdrawn from such
Public assemblies. For what many do
It Will be soon and easily brought unto.
In frequent meetings where are various
And different minds, Cato, and Laelius,
And Socrates himself might have bin shaken.
And therefore none of us, though we have taken
Strong resolutions, can withstand the lewd
Temptations of a vicious multitude.
For one example either of avarice,
Or prodigality will much entice.
One curious guest will make us by degrees
Effeminate and wanton. He that sees
His neighbor rich, grows covetous: and none
Can entertain a lewd companion,
But he though honest will be quickly tainted.
What therefore will they be who are acquainted
With multitudes? or what secure defense
Can there be made against public violence?
Thou must perforce or imitate or shun.
But neither of them both ought to be don:
Lest thou grow like the bad, because they are many:
Or many oppose, because thou art not like any.
Into thy self, in what thou may, retire:
Keep company with those that do desire
To make thee better: and those men admit,
Whom thou may mend, and to thy manners fit.
These things are mutually performed, and men
Learn while they each. There is no reason then,
That thou, to show thy knowledge should dispute,
Or publickely repeat. That well might suit
If thou were like the people: but there is none
Will understand thee; if perchance some one
Or other there be found desires to learn,
Him thou must form thy meaning to discern.
But thou will say, for whom, or to what use
Learnd I those things? there needs not an excuse
Of labor lost, the fruit of all thy pains
In what the have learnd, to thine own use remains.
Yet lest that I should seem to have learnd to day
But to my self, I will before thee lay
Three worthy sentences, all which commeare
Our present purpose: one whereof shall clear
The debt this letter owes thee: the other two
Shall likewise pay a debt before it is due.
That of Democritus shall first be shown.
One is as all to me, and all as one.
He also whosoever he was, said well,
For who the Author was we cannot tell;
This question being asked him, to what end
Those Sciences, which few could apprehend,
He studi'd with such industry. To me
Few are enough, or one, or none, said he.
The third is noble. Epicurus writ
To one of the companions of his wit,
And used these words; I send these things to thee,
Not unto many: for to each other we
Are a full Theater. I thee advise
To hoord (Lucilius) these: thou't then despise
The pleasures that are most approved. What though
Many commend thee, thou art bound to owe
Thy praises to thy self? If thou be'st one
Whom many like, thy inward goods make known.
EPIST. VIII.
THou bid'st me fly the rout, say thou, and thence
Departing, rest with mine own conscience.
Where are those Precepts then which recommend
A life to us, that must in action end*
What? think thou I the mean while idle sit?
That I to others may bring benefit,
I both withdraw, and shut my doors: no day
From me in idleness does pass away.
I also spend a good part of the night
In study: and I seldom sleep invite,
But stay until it seize on me: and when
My weari'd eyes begin to close, I then
Continue them in action. My recess
Is not from men alone, but businesses,
And chiefly from mine own, for I prepare
The work of future ages, and declare
What will to them bring pr^fit. I present
In writing admonitions, which are meant
As safe, and wholesome medicines, which I
Have often found useful in extremity.
And though my wounds are not thereby quite cured:
Yet being now more easily endured,
The'are kept at least from festring. The right way,
From which with weariness I long did stray,
Having now found, I to others show: and cry
All that is pleasing to the vulgar, fly.
Shun all that fortune offers: look upon
All worldly goods with a suspicion.
Wild Beasts and Fishes are deceived with baits.
Counts thou those Fortunes gifts? they are deceits.
A happy life by none can be enjoyed,
Unless he strive those bird-lime gifts to avoid:
By which we also are made wretched, thus,
We think that we have them, but they have us.
They lead us to a precipice and all
That rise too high, are lifted up to fall.
Nor is it possible to disobey,
When riches drive us out of the right way.
Fly then, or stand upright: them who do so
Fortune may sift or shake, but not overthrow.
Remember also this safe course t'observe,
T'allow thy body what may only serve
To maintain health. And sometimes it must find
Harsh usage lest it disobey thy mind.
Let meat thy hunger swage, drink thy thirst slake,
Let clothes keep thee from cold, and do thou make
Thy house thy body's shelter. Take no thought
Whether't be built of Turfe, or Marble, brought
From other Countries: men may be as well
Covered with Thatch as Gold. Those things which swell
With too much cost and pride, thou must neglect,
And nothing in thee but thy mind respect;
To which b'ing great, no other thing seems great.
If this both to my self I do repeat,
And to posterity, wilt not appear,
That I more useful am, than if I were
A surety, or a witness to a will,
Or to a friend my promise did fulfill
In the assistance of my hand, or vote
To his preferment? this for truth I Will note,
Some seeming to do nothing, great things do:
Such as belong to earth, and heaven too.
But that I may conclude, and as a debtor,
Pay what I use to do in every letter,
Which shall not issue out of mine own purse,
But Epicurus shall the same disburse:
This sentence I in him did read to day,
If thou true freedom woulds enjoy, obey
Philosophy, subjection to her
Does liberty without delay conferr,
And quickly gives the Manumission.
turn: for that alone
Is freedom. But perhaps this question
Will in the mean time be propounded, why
I thus quote Epicurus, and pass by
Our Countrymen? But wherefore should not thou,
Such words, as public sentences allow?
Do not the Poets many things declare,
Which by the best Philosophers or are,
Or should be spoken? I Will not mention make
Of our Dramatick Poems, they partake
Of some austeritie, and are a mean
Between the Tragic and the Comic Scene.
Among the Mimikes what brave words are found?
And how do Publius his works abound,
With what does not the socke alone befit,
But what the tragic busk in might admit?
One of whose verses that Philosophy
Concerns, and sirs our present purpose, I
Will here remember, wherein he denies
That we have share in casualities:
What s'ever comes by wishing, is not ours.
I also call to mind a verse of yours,
Much better, and more near to our design:
That is not thine, which fortune has made thine.
Mark what is better yet, I Have heard thee say,
What may be given, may be taken away.
I do not reckon this a payment, none
Can think to pay a debt with what is thine one.
EPIST. IX.
TThou do desire to know, if Epicure
In one of his Epistls, upon sure
And just grounds censures them, who do maintain,
That a wiseman does with himself remain
Contented, and in that respect needs not a friend.
He about this with Stilpo does contend
And others, who the chief good have confind
Unto a mere impassivenesse of mind.
But it may be ambiguous, if we
Think to express the Greek word Apathie,
In this one word of ours, impatience.
For that may carry a far diffrent sense
From what is meant by us. We intend one
Who throws from him the apprehension
Of evils: whereas that word may implie
An absolute impassibilitie.
See if it be not better thus expressed,
A man that with no evil is oprest,
Than sensible of none. We disagree
In this, our wiseman, though the Victory
Over all evils he obtaines, yet still
He feels them too, but theirs even feels no ill.
We to each other have thus far consented,
That a wiseman is with himself contented.
Though he can satisfy himself alone,
He Will have a neighbor, friend, companion.
Mark how he this contentment does divide,
For he both with himself is satisfied,
And with apart thereof: as when a foe,
Or sickness by some humor, or some blow
Deprives him of a hand: or when an eye
Is put out by some casualitie,
He is content with what to him is left,
And is as cheerful when he is so bereft
As when he was entire. Though he would feign
Have kept them, yet he seeks them not again
Being once lost. So does a wiseman rest
Contented with himself; not that it is best
To live without a friend, but that he may:
And by that word I would more plainly say,
He a friends loss bears with a constant mind,
For him without a friend, we nere shall find.
It Is in his power that damage to supply:
If Phidias lose a statue, presently
He Will make another. This that can create
Friendships, when he is deprived of one, can straight
Restore that loss. But thou will ask me how?
I Will tell thee, on condition thou't allow
Of this agreement, that thereby the debt
Which this Epistle owes thee be out set.
Shall I, says Hecaton, on thee bestow
A philter, which it is virtue shall notow
To herbs and charms, but shall it self approve
If thou desir'st to be beloved, love.
For we are not more pleased in the full act
Of friendship, than while we the same contract.
And look what difference we may suppose
To be 'tween him that reaps, and him that sowes.
The same 's 'tweene him that has already knit
Friendship, and him that is preparing it.
It pleases more said Attalus that grave
Philosopher, to make friends than to have.
Paynters to paynt much more deligted are,
Than to have painted: for their studious care
In working gives them very great content:
But having finished, and their phansies spent,
The fruit indeed of the art is then injoyd,
But the art it self is, while the hands imployd.
Our childrens youth more useful is, but yet
Their infancy does more delight beget.
But to return to what we first propounded.
Although a wise man can be wholly bounded
Within himself, yet he desires a friend:
If for no other, yet for this sole end
That he may practice amity, and not
Let such a special virtue be forgot.
Not for the reasons Epicurus gave
In that Epistle, that he one may have
T'assist him when he is fallen into decay;
Or is restraind, or sick: but that he may
Have one whom he in sickness may relieve,
Or from a deadly enemy reprieve.
Who minds himself, and for that cause embraces
A mutual friendship, he the same disgraces.
As he began so will he end. He chose
A friend in whom his trust he might repose
In his restraint. No sooner shall the chain
Rattle, but he is gone. This is the vain
Frindship, which people temporie call.
So long he will be welcome as he shall
Be profitable. And therefore friends flock round
'Bout them who with prosperity abound:
But leave them who grow poor to sit alone:
Such friends when trial comes are quickly gone.
Of this we find examples every day:
Some their friends leave for fear, and some betray.
The end with the beginning must agree.
If any have begun a friend to be,
Because it is needful: or if he suppose
That if any fit reward of friendship grows
But in it self alone, 'twill not be hand
To make him against friendship take reward.
Why do I seek a friend? because that I
May then have one with whom I Would wish to die:
Or else accompany to banishment:
Or with mine own I may his death prevent.
What thou describ'st not friendship is, but trade.
He that minds profit, will himself persuade,
To look no further. Between amity
And Lovers passions there is some sympathy:
Which we may call mad friendship. Yet there is none
Will love for gain, or for ambition.
Love of it self, all other things neglecting,
Allures the mind of men to the affecting
Of such a seeming beauty, hoping withal
That this affection will be mutual.
What then? can lewd effects of lust agree
With a good cause? But here thou't answer me,
The question is not whether friendship ought
For it own self or something else be sought.
If for it self in ought to be desired,
He may enjoy it that can live retired
Contented with himself. But how may he
Enjoy it? as a thing of excellency:
And must approach it with a mind unshaken,
With change of Fortune, or with lucre taken.
He deprives friendship of her Majesty,
That seeks her only for prosperity.
A wise man's with himself content. But this
By some, Lucilius, perverted is.
They a wise man too much restrain, and think
That he into his skin should always shrink.
We must distinguish, and this sense allow:
A wise man's with himself content; but how?
To live in happiness, but not, to live.
For many things must him assistance give
In this, whereas to that is requisite
Only a mind that keeps it self upright,
And contemns fortune. The distinction
Crysippus makes, must here be looked upon.
A wise man needs not any thing, although
He stands in need of many. But we know
On the other side a fool does nothing want,
And yet wants all, by reason he has scant
The use of any thing. A wise man needs
Hands, eyes, and every other thing that feeds
The being of this life. A wise man's state
Needs nothing. For to need does intimate
Necessity: and this we must deny,
That any wise man's in necessity.
Though with himself he then be satisfied,
Yet he needs friends and many would provide.
Not that he may get happiness thereby,
For he without friends can live happily;
The chief good to no outward help pretends,
But rests at home, and on it self depends.
If of it self but any part be sought
Out of it self, it is ready to be brought
To obey Fortune. What condition then
Of life, will that be of a wise man, when
Committed to some prison, he is berest
Of friends: or else in some strange Country left?
Or held in a long Voyage: or given over
By all, is thrown upon some barbarous shore;
Like that of Jove at the Worlds dissolution,
When Heaven and Earth, and gods are in confusion:
Whole Nature ceasing for a time. He rests
Wholly within himself, and there invests
His cogitations: some such thing as this
A wise man does. He with him still is,
And therein wrapped. As long as he is permitted
To rule his own affairs, he is well acquitted
With only himself. When he thinks fit he marries,
Brings up his children, yet he lives, and tarries
Still with himself: though he will not live if he
Shall always be debard of company.
No profit of his own does him invite
To friendship, but a natural appetite.
And as of other things there is an innate
Sweetness, so of friendship: as we hate
A solitary life, so we delight
In company: as nature does incite
Man, to love man, so by a secret kind
Of longing, we to friendship are inclind.
And though he be most fervent in his love,
Ranks his friends with himself, oft-times above,
Yet in himself he seats his good, and says
As Stilpo against whom Epicure inveighs
In that fore-nam'd Epistle: for when he
His country, wife, and children, found to be
Distroy'd, and lost, he went forth all alone,
Yet happy still from that destruction.
And meeting with Demetrius, whose Surname
From the destruction of Cities came,
And was called Poliorcetes: who to bost
His cruelty, asked if he ought had lost?
All my things are with me, said he, Behold
A stout and valiant man, who thus controld
The victory of his foe. I have, said he,
Lost nothing. He compeld his enemy
To question his own conquest. I bear hence
All that is mine, as Justice, Temperance,
Prudence, and even the virtue which does make us
Count nothing good that ever can forsake us.
We wonder at some creatures which through fire
Do pass unhurt: we may that man admire
Much more, whose constant virtue him affords
A safe, and secure passage both through swords,
Ruin, and flames. Do thou not plainly see
How much it is easier to get victory
Ore a whole nation, than one man alone?
Such words no less than he the Stoiks own.
Their unhurt goods they carry with the same
Courage, through cities when the are in a flame.
They are contented with themselves, and bound
Their whole felicity within that ground.
But lest thou should conceave, that only we
Scatter abroad such glorious speeches. He,
Which so reproves this Stilpo, Epicure
Has sent out such, to which I would procure
Thy approbation: though already I
Have finished my present diarie:
Who thinks not his own goods most large, and stable,
Though he possess the world, is miserable.
Or if thou't rather have it thus declard,
(For we must now not words but sense regard)
Who judges not himself to be most blessed
Would wretched be, though he the world possessed.
And that from natures ground, such words appear
To be in use the Comicke Poet hear:
He is not blessed is who not understood
So by himself. What though thy state be good,
If thou conceav'st it ill? Or will thou say,
Though he that is basely covetous, perhaps may
Say he is happy, or he that's Lord of store
Of servants, but a servant unto more,
That his report shall therefore make him so?
Not what he says, but what he thinks, we know,
Is to be waigh'd: nor what he thinks to day,
But at all times. Then do not thou give way
To the least thought, that such a rare thing can
Be ere enjoyd by an unworthy man.
A wise man only with himself's content.
A fool to self dislike is always bent.
EPIST. X.
IT is so, and I do not change my mind,
Fly many, few, even one. I cannot find
With whom thou shoul'dst converse: my judgment must
Tell thee, that I thee with thy self dare trust.
Crates a man who did, they say, partake
Of Stilpo's documents, of whom I spoke
In my precedent Letter, when he saw
A young man secretly himself with draw,
Asked what he did alone? I speak, said he,
With mine own self. Crates replied, then be
Careful, that thou speak not with an ill man.
We use to be as watchful as we can
Of those, who are oppressed with grief and care,
Lest sollitude should bring them to despair.
Imprudent persons should not be alone:
For at that time their thoughts do work upon
Ill counsel given, and are plotting then
The ruin of themselves, or other men:
Their ill affections they to deeds dispose,
What fear, and shame kept secret, they disclose;
Their boldness then they whet, their lusts inflame:
Stir up their malice, and the very aim,
And usual benefit of solitude,
Not to trust any man, and to exclude
All fear of witness, is taken away,
And lost t'a fool, he does himself betray.
See therefore now what I may hope of thee,
What I may promise rather: for to me
Hope is a word of doubtful good: there is none
With whom I Would rather wish thee than alone.
I call to memory with what height of spirit
Thou spak'st those words so full of strength and merit:
Which I did then congratulate, and say,
Those speeches fell not hastily away
From the outward lips, but did with sense abound:
His like is not among the people found:
He minds the public weal. So speak, so live:
To base dejection no admittance give.
Though all thy former vows thou should remit
Unto the Gods, yet now it will be fit
Tourge a new request: that thou may find
Sound reason, health of body, and of mind.
Yet wherefore should I doubt but thou do use
Those prayers daily? do not thou refuse
To ask God boldly, for thou can not want
The thing, that is not in his power to grant.
But that I may, as I am wont to do,
With an Epistle, send a present too,
It Is true which in Anthenadore we read,
From all thy lusts thou't find thy self then freed,
When in thy prayrs to God, thou art thus far brought,
To seek, but what may publickely be sought.
For what a madness in most men appears?
To whisper shameful vows into Gods ears?
If any harken, then away they go,
They Will tell God what the are loath a man should know.
Mark whether this might not be made a Law:
That we so live with men as if God saw;
And that we speak to God, as without shame
We might believe that men did hear the same.
EPIST. XI.
I Have conferred with thy ingenious friend,
And by his first discourse did apprehend
His mind, his wit, and how already he
Improves: he gave a taste what he will be.
For being surprisd, his speech was unprepard,
And after recollection, found it hard
To shake off bashfulnesse (a sign of grace
In young men) blushes so possessed his face.
Whereof (as I suppose) he will partake
Ev'en then, when he all vices shall forsake,
And be confirmed in wisdom: which we find
Cures not the natural weaknesses of mind
Or body: for although wisdom may
Correct, it cannot take them quite away.
That which is fixed within, and is innate,
Art may amend, but not eradicate.
Many though very stout, in public sweat,
Like those whom labor puts into a heat.
In some, when the are to speak, most parts so alter,
Their knees will tremble, and their tongus will falter,
Their teeth will grate, and their lips cling together:
Nor can these things be quite removed, either
By use, or rule. Nature will execute
Her power: and men that are most resolute
Convince of fraylties: among which I name
Blushing, which seases with a kind of shame
Upon the gravest. Though it most appear
In younger men, who have more heat, and bear
A weaker forehead: yet it often lays hold
On men of years, yea such as are grown old.
Some men are never to be feared more,
Than when they blush: as opening then a door
To cast out modesty. For Sylla, when
Blood seas'd his face, was cruellest to men.
There could be nothing milder than the aspect
Of Pompey: for he could not but detect
His modesty, as often as he did make
Open adresses, and in public spoke.
When Fabianus was a witness brought
Into the Senate, modesty so wrought
Upon him, that, I can remember well,
He suddenly into a blushing fell,
Which wonderously became him. This does spring
More often from the newness of the thing,
Than shame. Nor yet does it so much astonish
Such as are unaccustomed, as admonish
Them, in whom that infirmity does grow.
For as some have their blood more temperate, so
Others more quick, moving from place to place,
And thereby apt to fly up to the face.
These (as I said) no wisdom can withstand:
For if it could all frailties countermand,
It certainly would be the Sovereign
Of nature's self. We cannot quite restrain
What the conditions of our birth involve,
And body's mixture, though we long resolve.
These things can be no more removed, than brought.
Comedians, who by their art are taught
To represent affections, and to express
Trouble, and fear, and the minds heaviness,
Do bashfulnesse in this sort imitate:
Their looks like men in a dejected state,
Are downward cast: their voice is low, their eyes
Fixed on the ground: but they cannot devise
How to command a blush, that neither can
Be hindrd, nor procurd, by any man.
Here wisdom will nor promise, nor assist,
It Is it is own law, comes and goes when it list.
But this discourse requires a sentence now:
Take it, it is wholesome, and I wish that thou
Would fix it in thy mind. We must some wise
And honest man propound, and for our eyes
So place him, that we live as if be saw us,
And do, as if his sight did always awe us.
This admonition Epicurus gave,
(Lucillius) appointing us to have
A keeper, and a tutor: and there is cause:
For if a witness present be, it draws
Offenders from their vices. Let Us apply
Our thoughts to one, by whose authority
Our very secrets may be made more holy.
O happy he! who can prevent our folly,
Not only when he is seen, but thought upon.
O happy he! who can so reverence one,
That by remembrance of him he amends.
He that an other can so fear, intends
To be soon feared himself. Therefore propose
Cato, or if he be too rigid, choose
One of a milder temper, Lelius.
Choose one whose speech, and life's ingenuous:
Whose countenance to thee declares his thought;
Let such a one into thy mind be brought
As an example, or a guardian.
For, as I say, it is needful to have a man,
After whose manners we our own may square,
Without a rule, faults uncorrected are.
EPIST. XII.
Where 'ere I go, signs of my age appear.
I com into my country house, and there
Complain of the expense which the decays
Are like to put me to: my Bayliefe says
The fault is not in him, he to uphold
The thing does what he can, but the house is old.
This house I built, what fate do I lie under
When walls of mine own age thus fall in sunder?
The next occasion I take to chide;
I frowning say, it cannot be denied,
These plane-trees are neglected, for they bear
No leaves, their dry bows shrivell every where.
How full of moss their bodies are? no doubt,
This could not be, had they been dig'd about,
And watered. Straight way, by my Gemins, he
Protests and swears, there wants no industry
To make them thrive. But to prevent my rage,
Tells me the cause of fading is their age.
These trees I planted, and first saw them grow,
What difference then tweene us? to the gate I go.
Ask whos' this so decreped, and decayed?
And at the door, as dead men are, is laid,
(For he the potter was) whence came he? why?
Do thou take care of strangers corpse? say I.
But he replies, sir, do not you me know?
I Am he, on whom you used to bestow
So many fairings: I Felicius am
Phylositus the Bayliefs son, the same
That made you sport. This dotard sure mistakes,
Say I, turns child, and childish pastime makes.
And it is very likely, his teeth too
Fall from his gums, as childrens use to do.
I owe this to my country house, that I
My old age whereso'ere I look descry.
Let Us then embrace and love it, for it is fraught
With pleasure, if we use it as we ought.
Apples are best when they are almost gone;
And childhood is most comely when it is don:
Wine-drinkers in the last carouse delight,
That drown their cares, inebriat's them outright.
All pleasure reserves that which is most sweet
Until the last: and we our age may greet
With no small joy, at least if that age be
Declining, not decrepid: though I see
Even such as stand upon the utmost brink
Of life, their pleasures have: or we may think
To need no pleasure, serves in stead of pleasure.
Do ubtlesse to banish lusts, has no small measure
Of sweetness. But thou't say, it irksome is
TO have death before our eyes. I answer, this
Ought ever to be looked upon, as well
By young men, as by old. Death does not tell
The years of men, nor summon by a role.
None is so old, but he without control,
May hope to live a day, and yet a day
Is a degree of life: our whole age may
Be found by observation to consist
Of parts, which many orbs together twist.
One whereof all begirts, which we may call
Our birth day reaching to our funeral.
Another the full space of youth unfolds
And one our childhood in it is circle holds.
There Is then a year in which all times enclosed
Whereof, b'ing multiplied, our lives composd.
A month has a less orb, a day the least,
Yet this begins, and ends from East, to West.
And therefore Heracletus, whose known mark,
Was from dark sayings to be called dark,
Was wont to say, one daye's the same withal.
This has by sundry men had several
Interpretations: he said it was
The same in hours, and that for truth must pass.
Because if from a day the time proceeds
Of four and twenty hours, all days must needs
Be equal in themselves, for the night has
That which the day has lost. Another says
One day is equal in similitude
To all. The longest time cannot include
More then one day, light, darkness, and
Th'alternate course, by which the world does stand
Longer or shorter makes no difference,
For there is still the same circumference.
We therefore all our days must so dispose,
As if we finished and completed life, like those
Who use in armies to bring up the rear.
Pacuvius, who by abiding there,
Made Syri'a his own country, when with wine,
And funeral Feasts he usd t'inshrine,
From supper to his chamber borne with rites,
And lewd applause of his stale catamites,
Causd this to be with aerie music sung,
He' has lived, he' has livd, and thus his whole house rung.
What he with an ill conscience did, we may
Do with a good, and blithe and jocond say,
As often as we our selves to sleep present,
IN have lived, and past the time that nature lent.
If God be pleased to ad another day,
We should receive it thank efully, and may
A count him very happy, and a man
Fixed in the enjoyment of himself, that can
Expect the morrow without anxious care.
Whosoere says I have lived, does prepare
To rise next day to profit? it is fit now
I finish my Epistle. But, say thou,
Shall it to me without advantage come?
Fear not, it shall bring some. Why said I some?
Much. For what words more excellentcan be,
Than these which I give him to send to thee?
To live in need is ill, but it is agreed
There Is no necessity to live in need.
Why should I not say none? since every where
The way to liberty is short and clear.
Thanks be to God no man is forced to live:
We to necessity it self may give
The law. But thou will say, this came
From Epicurus, why do thou lay claim
To what is another? what is true, is mine.
His sayings I Will inculcate with design
TO have such as so engage to men, that they
Value their persons, more then what they say,
In the assurance of this truth to rest,
Those things belong to all which are the best.
EPIST. XIII.
I Know thou have much courage; for I find,
That even before I seasoned thy mind
With precepts which are wholesome, and prevail
Against adversity, thou did not fail
To satisfy thy selfe' against fortune's power.
And much more then when she began to lower,
And made thee come to handy blows, whereby
Thou had occasion thy strength to try.
For as we never can be confident,
Till threatening dangers sundry fears present,
And sometimes set upon us. So the stout
And constant mind resolving to cast out
All base subjection to another will,
Is trie'd by danger, that is the touchstone still.
He is not like the combat to make good
That has no scars. He who has often lost blood
And in the fight grated his teeth, and though
Repulsd, has rushed again upon his foe.
He, who though often falling, letting not
His courage fall, as often up has got,
Will enter with more confidence the list,
Then let me in this similie persist.
Fortune has often lay'n heavy on thee, yet
Thou did not yield, but always from her get,
Returning with more courage: virtue thrive's
By provocation, and by wounds revives.
Yet if thou think it meet, from me accept
Some aid, by which thou't be in safety kept
There are, Lucillus, may things which scare
Rather then hurt: most of our dangers are
More in conceit then truth: to thee I speak
Not the strong words of Stoics, but more weak.
For we say, all those things which do wring forth
Howlings and groans, are slight and little worth.
Lets pass by these great words, though, good Gods, true!
I wish that thou would only this pursue,
Not to anticipate thy ill, or make
That iminent, which nere perhaps will take
Effect, at least is not already come.
Some things more trouble us than they ought and some
Before they ought: some other things perplex us
Extremely, which ought not at all to vex us.
We grief augment, or feign, or else forestall.
As for that other which 'tweene us does fall
In question, we'll defer it: what I deem
To be but light, thou heavy wilt esteem.
For some, I know, under the whip will smile,
And others at one buffet groans the while.
But whether these things from their own strength flow,
Or from our weakeness we will herafter show.
Mean time do thou but this: when any shall
Seek to persuade thee thou art wretched, call
Thy reason to thee, and consider well
What thou do feel, and not what others tell.
Say to thy self with patience, who know best
Thine own condition, why have these expressed
Such grief for me? why do they tremble so,
And fear to touch, or to come near? as though
Calamities infection did contain:
Does any hurt, in what they fear, remain?
Is not the thing reputed to be ill,
Rather then so indeed? be therefore still
Ready to interrogate thy self, and say
Whether do I without a cause give way
To trouble, and vexation? do I make
That ill, which is not? what course shall I take,
Say thou, to know if what disturbes my rest
Be true or false? to try that here is a test.
We troubled are either at present things,
Or future, or at both. Sense easily brings
A judgment of things present: if unbound
Thy body be and in thy power, and sound,
And if no injury procures thy woe;
What future is thou afterward shall know:
That is not this days work. But it is expected.
How art thou sure the ill will be effected?
For we with jealousies much troubled are;
And that which oftentimes procures a war
Report, will much more work on each of us.
It Is very true my dear Lucilius,
We quickly to opinions do adhere,
And question not the thing that causes fear:
Nor do we shake it off, but thereat tremble:
And turning so our backs we much resemble
Those, whom the dust made by a flock of sheep
Drives from their tents, or that are struck with deep
Astonishment, at some strange fable bred
Among the vulgar, without author spread.
False things, I know not how, do more molest,
Whereas the true within their measure rest.
Whatse'ver an uncertain rumor sends,
Is subject to conjectures, and depends
On the construction of a fearful mind.
And therefore Panick above other kind
Of fears, is carried on with violence,
Those without reason are, this without sense.
Then let us make further search. Some future ill
Is like t'ensue, we are not sure it will.
How many 'unexpected things fall out?
How many 'expected are nere brought about.
But say they should hereafter chance. Yet why
Should thou make have to meet thy misery?
When ill does come thou soon enough wilt grieve.
In the mean time do thou the best believe.
What shall I gain by thy credulity?
Time. Many things may intervene, whereby
The Approaching danger may be stopped, or past:
Or else upon an others head be cast.
A raging fire has opt away to flight.
And some have from a ruined house fallen light.
Some from the stroke of death have been repriv'd
And have the executioner furviv'd.
For even il-fortune has it is levity,
It may, or may not come. And therefore I
Advile thee while it is not, to think the best.
Oft-times when no true fignes do manifest
Ensuing ill, the mind vain things pretends:
And either doubtful words misapprehends,
Or when another is with us offended,
Conceives far more, than is perhaps intended:
Not waighing how much anger he does show,
But to what height an angry man may go,
If fear be what it may, there will be found
No cause of life, of misery no bound.
Let wisdom here assist: by strength of mind
Let Us now reject the fear, whereof we find
Apparent cause: at least let error chase
Error away, and let hope fear displace.
Of those things which are feared there is none so sure,
But it is surer, that what does procure
Both fear and hope, deceaves us. Let us then
Take care t'examine fear, and hope, and when
All things are found uncertain, let us do
For our own ease what we have most mind unto.
And though there be more arguments of fear,
yet let us this course follow, and forbear
To toil and vex our selves, and keep this still
Fixed in our minds, thus most men, though no ill
They feel, nor certain are they ever shall,
Do ner'thelesse into distempers fall.
For no man makes resistance when he finds
Fear once begin to trouble him, or minds
How to find out the truth. No man resorts
To reason, when his ears meet sad reports.
Or says the author's vain, and being vain
Does either vainly credit them or feign.
We yield up our belief to what we hear:
And doubtful things, as they were certain, fear.
We keep no moderation in our error,
A scruple soon converts into a terror.
I am ashamed such language to devise,
And cherish thee with such slight remedies.
Let others say perhaps this will not be:
But thou, what if it happen? we shall see
Whether it will or not. 'Twill come perchance
For my behoof, death will my life advance.
Poison made Socrates more great. If we
The sword, th'assertor of his liberty,
Wrest out of Cato's hand, we then detract
Much, from the glory of so brave an act.
But too much time is in advising spent,
T'incourage thee is more expedient.
I do not lead thee to those ways which thwart
Thy nature, thou for these things framed art.
Then let not thy endeavors be forborne,
Thy innate gifts to cherish and adorn.
But I shall end my Letter now, if I
Set to the seal, that is, if I apply
Some gallant phrase that to our use relates.
Folly among other ills, appropriates
This also, that it still begins to live.
If to the meaning of these words thou't give
( Lucillius the best of men) good heed,
Thou Wilt understand what sordid things proceed
From the vain thoughts of men, who daily mind
New ways of life, and when even death they find
Approaching, they vain hopes of life pursue.
Look round about, and thou shall often view
Old men that are prepared to venture on
Long journeys, business, and ambition.
Yet nothing can be found of greater scorn,
Than an old man beginning to be borne.
I should not add an author to this speech,
But that it is more hidden from the reach
Of vulgar ears, and is not found among
Those sayings that by Epicure are flung
Abroad, and into common use are grown,
Which I have both approved, and made mine own.
EPIST. XIV.
I Yield there is in us an inbred care
Of our own bodies: I confess they are
To be preserved. But though I not deny
Indulgence due to them, yet slaverie
I do deny. For who the body serves,
Who out of fear for that, from reason swerves
Too much, whose sole regard to that is ti'd,
He surely will serve many things beside.
We must dispose our actions, not as though
We for the body ought to live, but so
As we without the body cannot live:
The too much care whereof does often give
Tormenting fears, load's us with sorrows, flings
Contempt upon us, and reproaches brings.
Whos'ever his own body too much prizes,
All other things that honest are, dispises.
Let a strickt care thereof be had, yet so,
That when the duties we to reason owe,
To honor, and fidelity require,
Lets not refuse to cast it into fire.
Yet let us shun, as much as in us lies,
Not only harms but incommodities.
Let us our safety mind, and not forbear
A daily care to avoid the things we fear.
Whereof there are three kinds, as I suppose,
Want, sicknesses, and all the ill that grows
From an offended power, of which none beats
So fiercely on us, as what power threats.
That rayses tumults, and a noise does make;
As for those other which from nature take
Their ground, want, sickness filently appear,
And with no terror strike the eye or ear:
This comes with dreadful pomp, fire, sword, and chains,
And savage beasts sent in with horr'id pain's
To humane breasts: here may we also look
Upon a prison, gibber, rack, or hook:
Stakes through the mouth forced from the fundament,
And members by driven horses piece-meale rent:
The coat with combustible matter noynted,
And what else cruell-tyrants have appointed.
It Is then no wonder if the fear of this
Be greatest, whose varieties great is,
And preparation terrible. For as
A Torturer the sooner brings to pass
His purpose, when with sundry instruments
Of various torments he himself presents.
(For they who else with patience would hold out
By that dire pomp to yield are brought about)
So of such things as tame and quell the thought
They prevail most that with most show are brought.
Those plagues are no less grievous, hunger, thirst,
Impostumes bred, and in the intrailes burst:
Fevers that scald the bowels: but yet they
Are hid from view, have nothing to display.
These like great armies by their equipage,
And dreadful sight overcome ere they engage.
Then let us strive offenses to forbear.
Sometimes it is the people we must fear,
And sometimes, if a Senate rule the state,
With the chief men we must ingratiate:
Sometimes we must of all those stand in awe
Who of, and to the people give the law.
Thave all these friends, is hard: it may suffice
At least, to have them not our enemies.
A wiseman therefore will not undergo
The anger of great men, but shun it so
As mariners do storms, which thou might see
When thou did cross the Sea to Sicilie.
Rash pilots value not the South-wind's threats,
Which the Sicilian Sea with fury beats,
And forces in to whirle-pooles. They forbear
The left hand-shore, and to the other stere
Nearer Carib des where the waters roar:
But the more wary, they inquire before
Of men that know the place, of tide and wether,
And shun the place where whirl-winds meet together.
Here Is the condition of a wiseman, he
Avoyds the place that dangerous may be;
But with this caution, not to have it thought
He does avoid it. Safety much is wrought
By seeming not to seek it purposely,
For we accuse the power that we do fly;
Wherefore we must our thoughts to this inure,
How from the people we may be secure.
To do which, first lets shun whats'ever stirs
Great emulation among competitors.
Next, let us not be Lords of any thing
That to the spoyler may great profit bring.
How smal's the body's spoil? none will pursue
Man's blood for that mere cause, or very few.
Gain more then hatred moves. A thief lets go
An empty traveller. A poor man though
He be beset is safe. From three things then,
According to the rules of ancient men,
We must take special care our lives t'exempt;
From hatred, and from envy, and contempt.
How this may, be wisdom alone will show,
For there is a middle way, though hard to know,
Whereby into contempt we may not run,
While we the fear of envy seek to shun.
Nor while we would avoid suspicion,
To make our selves fit to be trod upon.
Some, 'cause they may be feared, to fear have cause;
We must be circumspect, for either draws
An equal danger. Let us therefore fly
For our own safeguard to Philosophy.
This not with good men only, but with such
As are not wholly bad, will grace us much.
For Oratorie, and what else invites
The peoples favor, have their opposites.
This which is peaceful, and its own work minds
Can nere be scornd: but from all science finds
A due regard, even from the worst that are,
For wickedness can never run so far,
Nor ever against virtue so conspire,
But that Philosophy will keep entire
It Is name and honor: always with this tie,
That it be handled calmly and modestly.
But what? did Cato then phlosophise
Calmely and modestly, when his advise
Opposed a civil war? when he between
Two potent princes armed with rage, and spleen,
Did intercede: and who, when some contended
With Caesar, some with Pompey, both offended.
It is a question whether it were fit
For a wiseman then at the helm to fit.
What meanst thou Marcus Cato? the contest
Is not for liberty, that was suppressed
Long since: the strife is whether now
We shall to Caesar or to Pompey bow.
What Is this to thee? thou have therein no share:
We must receive a Prince, what need'st thou care
Which shall be he? the better cannot gain
The conquest, he that shall at length be feign
To yield, may be the worse: he cannot be
The better, that obtaines the victory.
I here on Catoes latter years do touch.
But truly neither were his former such,
That a wise man might be admitted to
That rapine, which was like the state t'undoe.
What else did Cato then, but cry aloud,
Throwing forth empty words, when in the crowd
Of people, he was spit on, and abused?
And when he to be carried forth refused,
They dragged him from the Senate house at last,
And after all him into prison cast.
We'll show in time whether a wiseman may
Suffer his labor to be cast away.
In the mean while I bid thee look upon
Those, who from public businesses have gone
To order their own lives: and without a we
Of power, to bring mankind to reasons law.
A wise man public manners never flies,
Nor draws the people after novelties.
What then, will he who lives thus be secure?
This verily I can no more assure
Than health in temp'rat men, and yet we know
That health from temperance does chiefly grow.
A ship is sometimes in the Haven lost:
What think thou' of that which in the sea is tossed?
He that unsafe is in a quite life,
What hazard will he run by public strife?
The innocent do sometimes perish: true,
But oftener the nocent. He may rue
The art that he professes, who is hit,
And wounded through the ornaments of it.
A wiseman therefore will his thoughts apply
To reason, not events. Beginnings lie
In our own power: fortune directs the end,
Unto whose sentence I Will not condescend.
But it may bring some trouble, some distress!
A thief is not condemnd to death, unless
He kill. But now I know thy daily pay
Is looked for: I gold in thy hand will lay.
And since of gold I have made mention, take
What will the use thereof more grateful make.
He enjoys riches most, who needs them least.
Tell me say thou, the author. It Is professed,
(That thou may know what freedom we intend)
That what belongs to others we will commend.
The words to Epicurus appertain,
Or Metrodore, or other of that train.
What matter is it who spoke them, they were spoken
To all. To stand in need of riches is a token
We are in fear for them: and I suppose
No man enjoyes the thing he fears to lose:
Or that to which his care is how to add.
For where much thought of the increase is had
The enjoyment is forgot. His business is
To make up recknings: and he will seldom miss
The market: and as often as he can spare
Time from those things, he turns the Calendar,
And notes when use is to be called for;
So from a Lord he turns solicitor.
EPIST. XV.
IN elder times it has a custom bin,
And to my age continued, to begin
Epistles, If thou be in health it is well.
And let us likewise say, if thou can tell
How to Philosophise it is well, for this
Is health indeed, the mind that wants it is
But sick: the body too though it be strong,
Has only what to mad men does belong.
Seek therefore this health first, then that which will
Not cost thee much, if thou't be healthful still.
The exercise that does the arms extend,
Dilates the breast and sides, I not commend
To studious men (Lucilius): for although
Thou should so cram thy panch, that thou should grow
To Have brawny limbs, a fat ox yet at length
Will far exceed thee both in weight and strength.
Wherefore as much as in thee lies, restrain
Thy body: to thy mind let loose the rain:
For many inconveniences attend
Them, that much pains about the body spend.
As first all exercise that is violent
Hurts those, who are to contemplation bent.
And next, strong meats debilitate the wit,
And render it for study more unfit.
Besides, we must conceave of what strange parts
They be, who are the masters of these arts:
Men wholly conversant in wine and oil,
Who think the day well spent, if with much toil
They sweat enough, and what they sweat out then
Next morning fasting they restore again
With other liquor: but much drink and sweat
Will the cardiacall disease beget.
There are some exercises which are short
And easy, which the bodies health support,
And fix, in little time, whereof much care
Is to be had, of which kind chiefly are
Running, and swinging of the arms with weight,
Capring upright; and sometimes to leap straight
Forward along the ground, and not refuse
Sometimes to shake the feet as Fullers use.
Thou Wilt any of these by practice easy find:
But yet be sure to look back to the mind,
And to employ it day and night, for that
Is fed with labor which is moderate:
This kind of exercise nor heat, nor cold
Can hinder, no not though we be grown old.
Pursue that good which better grows by age;
Nor would I have thee still thy mind engage
In study, and in writing, but t'allow
Some respit, lest thou break what thou would bow.
The motion of a chair, or coach will jog,
And stir the body, yet the mind not clog.
Or thou may walk abroad, and not forbear
To read the while, to dictate, speak or hear.
Nor is it amiss sometimes thy voice to strain;
But from Musicians notes, and tunes refrain.
But if the garb of walking thoud'st be taught,
Get one of those who are by hunger brought
To these new arts, he will direct thy pace,
And teach thee how to eat with a good grace:
And will proceed as far in impudence,
As thou will suffer him with patience.
But what? shall then thy voice begin with
It is more natural to let it rise
By some degrees: as pleaders at the first
Softly begin, then into clamours burst:
For none will in the entrance of his speech
Implore a pardon, and the Judge beseech.
But howsoere thy fervor thee persuade,
Thou vices sometimes strongly must invade,
And sometimes mildly, and thereof make choice
According to thy strength of sides, and voice.
But when thy voice thou higher shall extend,
And then bring lower, let it not descend
At once, but by degrees: and be thou sure
To let it keep the masters temprature:
And that it be not sufferd to engage
Into an ignorant and clownish rage.
For it is not our intent by doing thus
To exercise our voice, but that to us
Our voice should be an exercise. But lo
I Have saved thee no small trouble: I Will bestow
A grateful gift beside that benefit,
Behold a precept that has worth in it;
A fooles' life is unpleasant, and does wast
In fear, be'ing wholly on the future cast.
Thou't ask perhaps, who spoke these words? the same
Which spoke before. But what is this we name
A fools life? Is it think thou that
Of Baba, and Ixion so laughed at?
No, it is ours: whose blind defires do fly
Headlong on things which never fatisfie,
But often hurt us: whom if any thing
Could have suffis'd, it had: who do not bring
Our thoughts to ponder what a sweetness lies
In seeking nothing: and how high we rise
When we b'ing full do not for more contend,
Nor yet on fortune any way depend.
Wherefore (Lucilius) often call to mind
How much thou have: how many are behind
More than before. And if thou't shun a strife
Ungrateful to the Gods, and thine own life,
Never forget how many thou have out-gon.
But what need'st thou mind others? look upon
Thy self, whom thou have outstript. Propound an end
Which thou may not be able to transcend,
Although thou would. These riches which deceive us,
Better when sought, tha^ had, will one day leave us.
If any solidnesse therein were found,
They Would fill at last the place where they abound:
But now the drinkers thirst they more excite,
And always with an outward pomp invite.
Why should I beg of fortune to bestow
Upon me that, which she sets out for show
To catch me with, rather than put this task
Upon my self, not to be brought to ask?
But wherefore should I so forget the frail
Estate of man; that fortune should prevail
To make me ask? I shall be sure to heap
Up store of wealth: what thereby shall I reap?
Labor for labor. Behold time makes have,
Or this is my last day, or near my last.
EPIST. XVI.
I Know (Lucilius) thou art well assurd
A blessed life can never be procurd,
No not in any reasonable sort,
Unless to wisdoms precepts we resort:
And also that such blessedness is stable
When wisdom is complete, and tolerable
When it is but begun. Yet thou must make
This thy assurance better root to take,
And gather strength by constant meditation.
It is a work of far more commendation,
And where in greater difficultie's found,
To perform honest things, than to propound.
We then should never cease, until we find
Our fleeting will, turned to a constant mind.
Wherefore there needs not many words to advance
My thoughts of thee, nor so much circumstance.
I find thou have much profited, and know
The things thou writ'st are not set out for show,
But real and unfaind. Yet i will declare
My mind: my hopes of thee already are
Enough confirmd, not my assurance yet.
And I in thee would the like thoughts beget.
Thou should not trust thy self too soon: but try,
And often search what crannies in thee lie.
But above all, try whether thou have learnd
Philosophy, or the life therein concernd.
Philosophie's no vulgar work, nor brings
Vain ostentation; but consists in things,
And not in words: nor is it to be imployd
Against idleness, or sports where with we are cloyd
It builds, and forms our minds, our lives disposes,
Governs our actions, and to us discloses
What Is to be don, what shund: it is our guide,
And sets us right when doubts our thoughts divide:
No man's secure without this. Every day
Innumerable accidents themselves display,
In which sound reason must direct our sen^^:
And that must evermore be fetched from hence.
But some will say what needs Philosophy,
If there be an ore-ruling destiny?
And how can that avail if God command?
Or how, if no man fortune can withstand?
Things certain are immutable, and I
Cannot provide against uncertainty.
If God dispose my counsels, and decree
What I shall do, what then is left to me?
Though some or all of these, Lucilius,
Be so indeed, yet it is fit for us
T'mbrace Philosophy: for whether fate
To fixed decrees do us necessitate;
Or whether God the universal guide
Do preordaine what ever shall betide:
Or whether chance do cross what we intend,
Yet still Philosophy must us defend.
This will persuade us willingly to obey
God: but resist with courage fortun's sway:
This teaches to depend on providence,
And to bear miseries with patience.
But here we'll not dispute, how it may be
That any of our actions can be free,
If providence ore-rule; or if a chain
Of causes bind to what the fates ordain:
Or else if new and sudden accidents
Have power to cross and frustrate our intents,
I now return t'advise there not to let
Thy mind grow cold, and what it learned, sorget;
But to confine it to a task, that so
A passion may into a habit grow.
But all this while, thou, if I know thee right,
Expect's some gift from what I now indite.
Search, and thou't find: nor think it strange at all,
That still of others goods i am liberal:
Why said I others? what is well, said I, take
For mine, as this that Epicurus spoke.
Thou't nere be poor if thou keep'st natures law,
Nor ere be rich if thee opinion awe.
For nature with a little is content,
Opinion to immensitie is bent.
Heap thou to thine own self as vast a treasure
As some possess: let fortune beyond measure
Raise thee to wealth: let gold enough be had
To load thee with: be thou with purple clad:
Let riches, and delights so much abound
That thou with marbles coverest the ground.
Let silver be not for thy use alone,
But at thy pleasure to be trod upon.
Add statues, pictures, for an ornament,
And whatsoere Luxurious arts invent;
All these will but incite thee to contend
For more. Our naturaii desires have end:
Such as from false opinion take their gro und
Can never cease, for falsehood knows no bound.
He at the length comes home that keeps his way:
But he that roves will into deserts stray.
Then leave all vanity: and if thou would find
Whether when thou seekst any thing, thy mind
Be led to seek it rather by a just,
And natural desire, than by blind lust;
Consider if it can somewhere abide.
Having gone far, if thou shall still provide
To go yet farther, know then thou do fall
Upon a thing that is not natural.
EPIST. XVII.
IF thou be'st wise all these things cast away,
Nay, that thou may be wise, with speed assay,
And with full force to get a perfect mind.
If any thing withold thee, thou may find
How to remove, or cut it from thee quite.
But thou will say domesticke cares of right
REquire my thoughts, which I Will not lay aside
Until sufficient means I shall provide
To live at ease: lest poverty become
To me a burden, or my self to some.
If thus thou say, thou do not apprehend
The force of that, to which thou do pretend:
But looking on the outside of that good
Wisdom procures, thou have not understood
The inner parts thereof, whereby to know
What prosit from Philosophy will grow:
How that to us the greatest things commends,
And, as we learn from Cicero descends
Even to the least. Believe me if thou't take
That for thy guide, it will not let thee make
Count-casting thy delight. But thou would fly
By these delays the fear of poverty.
Yet what if that should not be feared but sought,
For many men by riches have been brought
To neglect knowledge? poverty is found
To be secure and free: when trumpets sound
That knows it self not sought for: when the cry
Of fire is heard, that seeks but how to fly,
Not what to carry forth. If there be cause
To go to sea, that no disturbance draws
Within the haven, or about the shore;
Where one alone is followd which such store
Of servants, and attendants, that there is need
Of other countrie's plenty them to feed.
Where there are few, and they well governed,
If they but seek to have their bellies fed,
It Is don with ease: for hunger is appeasd
With little, gluttony is never pleased.
There is no more desird by poverty,
But only pressing want to satisfy.
Why should thou this companion then refuse,
Whose manners rich men that are temprate use?
If thou desir'st to be from trouble free,
Or poor, or like a poor man thou must be:
No useful study can be undertaken
Unless our diligence we often awaken
With frugalnesse, and frugalnesse we see
Is nothing else, but willing poverty.
Hence then with these excuses: I want yet
What is sufficient: if I once can get
The Sum that I propound, in the next place
I wholly will Philosophy embrace.
But that which is to thee a second thought,
And is deferred, should first of all be sought.
I will provide, say thou, wherewith to live;
Thou must learn also an account to give
Of thy provision. Although something may
Hinder thy living well, nothing can stay
Thy dying well. There is no reason why
We should be hindered from Philosophy
By poverty, or more then that, by need:
Nay yet, a little further to proceed,
We must for this to hunger us inure,
Which men in beseig'd Cities do endure.
And what reward, do they obtain for all
Their patience, but only not to fall
Within the victors power? how much more great
Is this, that makes our freedom so complete
And permanent, that we nor men need fear,
Nor gods? and truly we should not forbear
To come to this, although we hungry be.
Armies we know have sufferd penury,
And sed on roots of grass, and things that shame,
And modesty permit me not to name.
And all this for a kingdom, and to make
The wonder more, another right to take.
To suffer poverty can any doubt
That from his mind he may throw madness out?
We should not therefore first our means enlarge:
Philosophy receaves us without charge.
But so it is, when all things else are gaind,
Men are content that wisdom be obtaind.
This they will have to be the last provision
Of life, or to speak plain, addition.
But whether thou have any thing, do thou
Forthwith embrace Philosophy: for how
Appears it else, that the have not now too much;
Or whether thy condition be such
That thou have nothing, yet resolve to make
That the first thing whereof thou will partake.
But I shall want what necessary is?
What necessary is thou can not miss.
For nature with the least things will comply,
And a wise man on nature will rely.
But if extreme necessities insist,
He can the world relinquish when he list;
And by that means no longer need become
A burden to himself, or troublesome.
And if he have a little to sustain
Life, is content: and being not in pain
For things beyond necessity, bestows
On back, and belly what to them he owes.
And being sat, derides the rich man's ways,
And laughing at his course of getting, says,
Why do thou so defer? why do thou wait
For use of money put out at a rate?
Or expect profit from a growing trade?
Or why that blessed old man do thou persuade
To write thee down his heir, since thou may pitch
Upon a nearer way to make thee rich?
Wisdom exhibits wealth: which on all them
It does bestow, who riches do contemn.
But this belongs to others: thou have more
Than needful is: look on the age before,
And thou art in excess. All times present
To evry man what is sufficient.
I might here end my Letter, but that I
Have bred thee ill. The Parthian Kings deny
Admittance without presents, there is no shift
But at my farewell I must bring some gift.
And this to me shall Epicurus lend,
Many by getting wealth have found no end
Of miseries, but only an exchange.
Nor should this any way to thee seem strange:
Since in the mind alone the fault does lie,
Not in the thing: that which made poverty
A burden, riches also ircksome made.
For as a sickman whether he be laid
Upon a bed of wood, or gold, no ease
Does find, but carry's with him his disease.
So fares it with a mind that sick is, whether
It be in wealth or poverty, in either
It is unsatisfi'd, and its own ill
Where ere it be removed does carry still.
EPIST. XVIII.
DEcember is a month wherein all sorts
Of people in the City melt in sports.
Where luxury such privilege obtaines,
And not gets so publickely the raines,
As if some ods there should appear to all
'Tween days of work, and Saturne's festival.
Whereas there is so little difference made,
That we may verify what one has said;
In former times 'twas evident and clear
December was a month, but now a year.
Were thou with me, we would confer together,
What course therein were to be taken; whether
We should not change at all our former use,
Or not severely seeming to refuse
The peoples custom, merrily sit down
At supper with them, and throw off our gown.
But though at festivalls we have not refused
To change our cloths, a thing but only usd
In times of tumuit, and of public woe;
Yet thou at least if I thee rightly know,
Who take upon me to discern, do neither
Desire that we should become altogether
Like the cap-wearing multitude, nor yet
Unlike: unless perhaps we ought to get
Such power ore our minds, as not to follow
Pleasures, even then when all in pleasures wallow:
It is a certain sign of a fixed thought,
When that nor goes to ill, nor can be brought.
This shows we are more resolute and stout,
To come forth sober from a drunken rout.
But this more temprate, not to be exempted,
Nor yet with their ill manners to be tempted.
It is permitted to us that we may
Do the same things, although another way.
For we may keep a feast without excess.
I find in me so great a willingness
To prove the firmness of thy mind, that I
By the advice of wisemen will apply
To thee this counsel: Let some time be had
Wherein-thou faring coursely, and being clad
As meanly, may thus say: Behold the thing
That is so terrible, my mind I Will bring
While I am in prosperity to abide
Hardship, and will, while fortune smiles, provide
Against her frowns. Soldiers in time of peace
Do exercise their arms, and never cease
To keep their guards, and to make works, although
They apprehend no danger of a foe.
They in unnecessary pains proceed,
To be thereby prepared in times of need.
That which thou would not fear when it does come,
Practice before. This course is used by some,
Who every month do practice poverty,
And bring themselves even to necessity:
That they who daily are therein concernd,
May never fear what they have often learned.
I would not have thee think that I intend
By this my admonition, to commend
To thee a custom practiced now a days,
To sup alone, and in a cottage, ways
That luxury devises, to avoid
The superfluity wherewith i'ts cloyd.
But I would have thee lodge, be clad, and feed
As coursely, as thou truly were in need.
Three or four days together thus employed,
And sometimes more, the thing will be enjoyd
By thee at length as an experiment,
Which was before but a mere complement.
Then will thy joy (Lucilius) be great,
When fed but with two farthings-worth of meat,
Thou't find no need of fortun to suffice thee,
Things needful she though angry not denies thee.
Nor is there cause for thee to think therefore
That thou do much, for thou shall do no more,
Than many thousand slaves and poor men do,
Save only that thou art not forced thereto.
Nor will thou find more difficulty when
It Is always done, than when but now and then.
Let Us exercise though but against a stake:
And that hereafter Fortune may not take
Us unprovided, let our constant care
Be, to make poverty familiar:
We more securely riches shall possess,
When poverty we know brings no distress:
The great voluptuous master Epicure
Had certain times, when hunger he would cure
Dispitefully, to see if his full pleasure
Did yet want any thing, and in what measure.
And whether it were worthy to be sought
With carfulness, and with great labor bought.
For so he says in certain Letters sent
To Poliaenus, when the government
Was in Charines: where he does much boast
His dinner did not a full farthing cost:
But Metrodor's a whole one, who had not
So far in that proficiency yet got.
Then wherefore should this diet not suffice
Thy appetite? when pleasure therein lies:
Yea pleasure that will constantly abide,
And will not often need to be supplied
For although water and course batter fried,
Or crusts of barley-bread be things denied
To be delightful, yet it is the height
Of pleasure, that we can therein delight:
And bring our selves to that which fortune can
Though wicked, not deny to any man.
The food allowd to prisners is more large,
And men condemnd are not by them whose charge
It is to execute, so stricktly fed.
Then what great courage in that mind is bred,
Which of its one accord to that descends,
Which they feel not whom the utmost woe attends?
This is t'anticipate the strokes of fortune.
Wherefore (Lucilius) let me tree importune
Now to begin these men to imitate:
And to design some days thine own estate
So to neglect, that thou may suffer want:
With poverty learn to be conversant.
My friend, take courage riches to despise,
And worthily to God-like honor rise.
For no man can resemble God, but he
Who contemnes riches. I forbid not thee
To possess wealth: but I would have thee bear
It so, as to possess it without fear.
Which thou will do, if thou can be assurd
That happiness without wealth is procurd:
If thou on riches shall so cast thine eye,
As if they were to depart presently.
But I must now to a conclusion grow;
But first thou't bid me pay thee what I owe.
I Will thee assign to Epicurus, he
Shall reckon, and thy paymaster shall be.
From extreme anger, madness does ensue.
Thou needs must understand this to be true,
Since thou findst thy condition to be so,
That thou have both a servant and a foe.
This passion works on all men, and does move
Not only from malignity, but love:
Not only from things serious, but from small,
And things of sport. Nor is it material
From how great cause it comes, but in what mind
It falls. For as no difference we find
In what proportion fire is thrown, but where:
For we may cast the greatest without fear
On wet or sollid places, where as dry
And combustible matter suddenly
Will feed a spark into a ruin: So,
My dear Lucilius, anger that does go
On in a violence, will soon engage
It self, into a mad, and frantic rage.
We then as well for health's sake this must shun,
As not into intemperance to run.
EPIST. XIX.
AS often as I read thy letters, I
Rejoice: and am with good hope filled thereby.
For they in thy behalf not only make
A promise to me, but do undertake.
On then, I thee entreat, finish thy task.
For there is nothing I can better ask
Of any friend, then for him make request;
Steal if thou can from cares, if not. the have best
Snatch thy self off; we time enough have spent
In vanities: Let Us be in age content
To pack up our commodities. Then how
Are we to blame? we have livd at sea, let us now
Die in the port. Yet thou should not protense
To get a public name by thy recesse:
Which thou must neither glory in, nor hide.
For I Will not seek to draw thee so aside,
As our of hateful sulsinesse to keep
No company, but in some hole to creep.
Let thy retirement then appear to us,
But let it not become notorious.
Such as have yet no course of life begun,
May live obscure, and all acquaintance shun.
But thou can not: the vigor of thy wit,
And learned eloquence adorning it,
Thy noble correspondencies have shown
Thee to the open world: the art so well known,
That though thou should resolve to lie conceald,
Thy worth by former things will be reveald.
Thou can not live in darkness, wonted light
Will find thee out where ere thou takst thy flight.
Without distate of any, without blame
From thine own self, thou quietness may claim.
For what shall thou forsake that thou can say
Is with ill will forsaken? Clients? they
Do not seek thee, but something from thee. Friends?
Friendship was value'd once: it now contends
For prey. Will th'old-man whom thou do forsake
Alter his will? the Client him betake
TO an other gate? no great thing can be bought
At a cheap price. Take this into thy thought,
Whether thou find'st they have relinquished thee,
Or some of those things which thy evils be.
I could have wished thou had remaind within
The bounds of thine own birth, and had not bin
Raisd to that height! a quick prosperity
Far from a happy life has placed thee:
Commands, and governments, and what depends
Thereon: and yet more honor thee attends,
Place after place; what will thou have at last?
On what design will thy vast hopes be cast,
Ere thou first still? thy full desire thou't gain?
That cannot be, for as there is a chain
Of causes whereto fate, they say, is knit,
So is there of desire, and like to it:
One takes beginning from an others end.
To such a kind of life thou do descend,
As of it self can never come to check
Thy grievances. Wherefore withdraw thy neck
Worn with the yoke, which to cut off is less
Offensive than to let it still oppress.
If thou t'a private life shall have recourse
All things will be much less, yet will have force
To fill abundantly: whereas the most
Now fetched with charge from many a distant coast
Will not suffice. To which have thou most mind,
In want to abound, or be in plenty pind?
Felicity both greedy is, and must
Be still exposd to others greedy lust.
As long as thou shall unsuffys'd abide,
Others with thee will not be satisfied.
But how (say thou) shall I get off? lay hold
On any means. Think with thy self how bold,
And rash for money thou have often bin:
How diligent that thou might honor win.
Something must be attempted then for rest:
Or else thy daily pains to manifest
Thy care of this man's business, now and then
To perform civil offices to men,
Will force thee to grow old in toil, and dwell
In miseries, to which thou can not tell
Which way with modesty an end to give.
For what avails it that thy self would live
In peace? thy fortun will not: which even yet
If sufferd to grow greater, will beget
As much new fear as profit. I will now
Mecaenas quote, who did the truth avow
Even from the rack where favor him had laid:
For height it self is with great height dismayed.
If thou inquirst where this is to be read,
It Is in his book which is entitled
Prometheus. By which saying this is meant,
That greatness has the greatest discontent.
How then can any power be so much worth,
That thou such words of surfeit should bring forth?
He was a man of wit, and like from thence
To have produced to Roman eloquence
A great example, had not happiness
By weakening, nay by guelding made him less.
Lo this will be the end, if thou before
Shall not take in thy sails, and make to shore,
As he too late intended. I could let
This sentence of Mecaenas pass for debt:
But thou, if I mistake thee not, wilt hold
It fitter to be paid in coin that is old.
And therefore Epicurus here shall lend
The money, which for payment I intend.
We ought, says he, with seriousnes to think
Rather with whom, than what we eat and drink.
For they who at flesh meals a friend refuse,
Lead but the life that Wolves and Lions use.
This will not thy condition be, unless
Thou do retire: thou't else, I must confess,
Have guests, but those thy Nomenclator shall
In order from a heard of clients call.
Who hires a servant at the door, or makes
Friendship with any at a feast, mistakes.
A public person, one that is beset
With his own happiness, has never met
With greater ill, than when he thinks h'hath got
Those men his friends t'whom he himself is not:
Or else believes that his large courtesies
Bestowd on men will be sufficient ties:
Since some the more they are ti'd, the more they hate:
A small debt will a debtor alienate,
A great one bring him to turn fo. What then?
Are benefits no pledges among men?
Yes, if we choose receivers; if no wast
Be made, but that they be with judgment placed.
Then since to be thy self thou do begin,
Let this sage counsel on thy reason win,
To think it much concernible to know,
Not what, but upon whom thou do bestow.
EPIST. XX.
IF thou be'st well, and think that thou art grown
So worthy, as at length to be thine own,
I Am glad. For 'twill my glory be, if I
Free thee from storms thou had no hope to fly.
But this I crave, Lucilius, and entreat,
That thou would give Philosophy a seat
Within thy breast, and let some proof be shown
Of what thou have gaynd, not by bare words alone,
And writing, but by constancy of mind,
And by thy lusts abatement: Let words find
Credit by actions. They who do declame,
And seek by eloquence to get a name,
Have their designs; and they who catch the ears
Of idle youth with vain disputes, have theirs.
Philosophy instructs to do, and not to say:
And requires this of all, her rules t'obay:
That our whole life should with our words agree,
And not by different actions changed be.
Wisdoms chief work, and office hereto tend,
That words and deeds drive only at one end.
But who will this perform? Few, yet some will.
It Is difficult: a wise man must not still.
Go the same pace, but ever the same way.
Upon this observation therefore stay:
Does thy apparel and thy house dissent?
Art thou to thine own self munificent,
But sordid to thy servants? Do thou feed
With frugalness, in building yet exceed?
Lay hold upon one certain way to live,
And thereby to thy self directions give.
Some bear it low at home, abroad live high.
There is a fault in this diversity,
And shows the mind is weak, and cannot guide
It self, but suffers it to start aside.
And I will now declare to thee whence springs
This levity, this diffrence both of things,
And counsels. No man to himself propounds
What he would have, or goes upon firm grounds;
Or if he do, he will not persevere,
But suddenly another course will stere.
Nor does he only change, but back ward look,
Resuming what with hatred he forsook.
And therefore that I may the course decline,
Which th'Ancients used wisdom to define,
And briefly comprehend our life's whose frame;
Wisdom what is it? To will and nill the same.
Yea though we add not this distinction,
That it be always right we go upon.
For there is nothing that can always please
Unlesse't be right. Most men have this disease,
They know not but at the instant while their will
Is strongly bent, what will their mind fulfill.
Nay very few do fully know what they
Would, or would not. Men's judgments always stray,
And turn to the contrary. The greater sort
Do for the most part make their life a sport.
Therefore where thou begin'st press on: perchance
Thou either to the highest shall advance,
Or know alone there is not a highest yet.
But how thou wilt say, shall all my followers get
A livelihood? if thou shall not proceed
To feed that troop, it then it self will feed:
Or what thy bounty would not let thee know,
Thou shall be sure thy poverty will show.
This will discover true and faithful friends:
Whosoever shall depart had other ends
Than only thee to serve; for this alone
Should poverty be like'd, it makes it known
Of whom we are beloved. When shall thou see
That day, wherein thy honor will not be
Dissembled with? let then thy thoughts retire
All hither, thy whole care, and thy desire.
All other wishes to the Gods release,
That with thy self thou may remain in peace:
And with the fruits thence growing be content:
For what felicity can represent
God more? reduce thy self to things though small,
Yet such as thou from them can never fall.
And that this may be don with willingness,
The tax that on this Letter I assesse,
Shall further it, which I from Epicure
Will borrow, though thy envy I endure.
Thy words, believe it, will have more renown,
When utterd from a homely couch and gown.
For they will not be spoken then alone,
But be for truth by demonstration known.
And how indeed can I think otherwise
Of our Demetrius sayings, when he lies
Naked, and little better then in straw?
We then from him not only precepts draw
Of truth, but testimony. What? therefore
May not a man contemn wealth having store?
Why not? that man enjoyes a noble mind,
Who though he takes the wealth that he does find
Is heapt upon him, yet does often sit
To recollect himself, and laugh at it:
And rather hears he is rich than feels. It Is much
In riches company to have no touch
Of the infection. He Is more great that is poor
In midst of wealth, but he that wants is more
Secure. But thou will say, I cannot tell
How this would bear't, if into want he fell;
Nor do I know says Epicure how he
That Is poor would riches bear, if they should be
Upon him cast. Therefore we must in either
Respect the mind, and must consider whether
This can indulgent be to poverty,
Or that to wealth use no indulgencie.
For otherwise a homely bed and gown
Are but slight arguments, unless't be known
Whether he of his own accord does choose them,
Or through necessity be forced to use them.
But the minds greatness then is manifest,
When we make have to these things as the best,
And think them easy too: for sure they are
Easy: and if, Lucilius, thou wilt prepare
Them with premeditated thoughts to greet,
Believe it thou will also find them sweet:
For therein that especially does lie,
Without which nothing's sweet, security.
Wherefore I judge it necessary now,
And great men, as I say, have don't, t'allow
Some certain days, our plentiful estate
To lay as't were aside, and imitate
True, by imaginary poverty.
And this so much the rather we should try,
Because we drenched are in daily pleasure,
And all attempts as difficult do measure.
We must be rousd from sleep with a sharp touch,
And showed that nature stands us not in much:
For no man is borne rich, whosoere is sent
Into the world is bid to be content
With milk and clouts: from these beginnings we
With Kingdoms hardly can sufficed be.
The order is intermitted in the two following Epistles.
EPIST. XXVI.
I Told thee lately old age did appear
To be before me: now, I rather fear,
It Is left behind me. Therefore some new term
Must fit these years, this body so infirm.
Because indeed old age is chiefly meant
Of age that is weary, not of age that is spent.
Put me among decrepit men, and such
As ready are the brinke of life to touch.
Yet I rejoice with thee that I do find
Times injury in body, not in mind.
For vices only, and what served t'uphold
And minister to vices, are grown old.
My mind is lively and is joyful too
That with the body't has not much to do.
A great part of the burden that oppressed
The soul, is off. She ships, and does contest
With me 'bout age. She says it is her youth.
And we may well believe it to be truth:
She then improves. I joy to think what I
Owe in this time of rest and modesty
To wisdom, what to age: and stricktly search
What things I cannot, what I would not reach.
And whether I can any thing effect,
Which I would rather utterly reject.
For if I cannot do a thing that is bad,
Then that I cannot do it, I am glad.
What damage therefore can a man pretend,
When he finds that which ought to end, to end?
It is the greatest damage thou wiltsay,
To wast, to pine, or rather melt away.
For we are not with sudden violence
Laid prostrate, but are gently carried hence.
Each day draws something from our strength. What death
Can then be better than to puff out breath
When nature's spent? not that there is any ill
In wounds, or other accidents which kill.
But because this is a more easy way
To be withdrawn after a soft decay.
For my part, as if trial were at hand,
And that day, to whose sentence I must stand
For all my times expense, I Am thus prepared
To say: whats'ever I have yet declard
By deeds or words is nothing: those I find
To be deceitful pledges of my mind:
And were wrapped up in many an outward show;
I must trust death if I the truth would know.
I do not therefore fearfully expect
That day, wherein I plainly shall detect,
Whether when arts and fallaces depart,
I speak great things, or have them in my heart.
Whether I wore a vizard to disguise
When I with boldness fortun did despise.
Remove men's estimation which is still
Uncertain, and mistakes both good and ill.
Remove thy studies, thy whole life's chief care,
And death of thee true judgment will declare.
This I would say: disputes and learnd discourse,
And all that observation can enforce
From precepts of wise men, with readiness
Of language, cannot the minds strength express.
For many very timorous, and weak
In resolution, often boldly speak.
It plainly will appear what thou have don
When thy toule is departing. I Will not shun
The judgment: but will cheerfully assent
To the condition. This to me is meant.
Yet thou must also think that I impart
My mind to thee. It Is true thou younger art?
What Is that? Years are not numberd. It Is a doubt
In what place death will come to find thee out.
And therefore be thou ready to embrace
And meet him willingly in any place.
But I would end this Letter, and my hand
Is near the close. Yet rites, I understand,
Must be performd, and portage must be paid.
I need not tell on whom the charge is laid.
Thou know whose chest I use. Do thou but stay
A while, and I my self these debts will pay.
In the mean time disbursement I Will procure
Of this intended sum from Epicure,
Who thus has said. Think whether 't be more fit
That death should come to us, or we to it.
The meaning of these words does open lie.
It is a noble work to learn to die.
It Is needless, thou perhaps wilt say, to learn
What we can use but once? we may discern
The reason of the needfulnesse from thence.
For when we cannot have experience
That we have learned: we are obliged thereby
To practice such a thing continually.
Contemplate death, He bids us, who says so,
Contemplate freedom. Who to die does know,
Knows not to serve: he ore all power prevails,
At least is out of it. What then are Jailes
To him; or hideous dungeons which do more
Afflict? he always finds an open door.
There is one chain that binds us fast. The love
Of life: which though we should not quite remove,
Yet we should loosen so, that, when there is cause,
Nothing should hinder us, or make us pause
With courage, and alacrity to run
And do that quickly which must once be don.
EPIST. XLI.
THou seekst a safe and profitable thing,
If thou endeavour'st, as thou writ'st, to bring
Thy mind to become good. It is but vain
To wish, what from thy self thou may obtain.
We need not lift our hands to Heaven, nor crave
The Sexton's leave that we access may have
To the ears of the image, as if then we were
More easily heard. For God to us is near:
Is with us, nay within us. This I say,
There is a sacred spirit that does stay
And rest in us: and is our guardian too,
Observing all the good and ill we do:
And us, as we use it, it always uses.
No man is good till God the good infuses.
Who can without him above fortune rise?
In great designs with him we must advise.
In all good men (although we cannot tell,
What God) a God undoubtedly does dwell.
If thou to some thick wood should come by chance,
Whose ancient trees their lofty heads advance
'Bove common height: whose arms are spread between
Each other so, no sunshine can be seen.
The trees so tall: the place so still: the shade
So strange, that wonder does thy thoughts invade:
And this in midst of a large champion set,
Will instantly religious thoughts beget.
And if we find a cave in rocks much worn,
By which a hanging mountain is upborne:
Not made by hands, but by mere nature brought
To such a hollownesse: it strikes a thought
Of some Divinity to be implord.
The heads of mighty rivers are adored:
The deep eruptions of vast floods do claim
Their Altars, and we consecrate a name
To sourses of warm waters, and some lakes
A siradinesse, or deepnesse sacred makes.
When we behold a man not scared with danger,
Untoucht with lusts, to vain delights a stranger
Happy in adverse fortun, quiet, when
Tempestuous storms rage most: transcending men,
And equalling the gods: will not our sense
Tell us we ought this man to reverence?
Will we not say this doubtless is some Being
Greater and higher far, than is agreeing
To reason, to believe that it can be
Like to the little body which we see?
Some heavenly virtue thither sure descends.
A mind that is fixed, and for true worth contends:
That slights, as quite beneath it all things here,
And laughs at what we either wish or fear,
Must needs b'inspird: a thing that so ore-tops
The rest, subsists not but by heavenly props.
And therefore the chief part of such a mind
Descends not hither, but remains behind.
As the sunbeams do seem to touch the earth,
Bu^ remain there from whence they were sent forth,
Eve^ so a great and holy mind, although
(Tha^ we Divine things may more nearly know)
It does converse with us, yet never leaves
It Is place but to it is first beginning cleaves.
There it depends, and thither strives: and is
That part of us which is our only bliss.
But what is that? a mind that is understood
To lean on nothing but its proper good
For how can greater foolishness be shown,
Than to praise men for what is not their own?
Or with great admiration to be struck
At that, which from thee other men may pluck?
A golden bridle betters not a horse.
A Lion with a gilded maine, by force
And want of (...), that out of fear
With a submissive readiness will bear
Whats'ever is imposd, is looked upon
In a much different condition
From him that is un-awd, and is entire
In courage. This, (as nature does require)
Fierce in assaults, in dreadful fury, gay:
And terrible in countenance (which may
Be called his beauty) far transcends that cold
And stupid Lion, though adorned with gold.
We praise a vine if it with grapes abound:
If with the weight of fruit it touch the ground,
Who will prefer before this, as a vine,
That which with golden grapes, and leaves do shine?
A vines true worth by fruitfullnesse is known,
And man commended is for what is his own.
He has a gallant family: is possessed
Of a fair house: he lends at interest:
Plants and sowes much. All these things are not (...)
But are about him. That alone can win
And merit a just praise, which never can
Be given, or be taken from a man,
Which is his property. But would thou find
What is that property? it is the mind.
And in the mind right reason. For by nature
A man is found a rationable creature.
To finish then his good he ought to do
Completely that which he is borne unto.
But what is that right reason does direct
A man to do? what he has power to effect:
In all things his own nature to consult,
But common madness makes this difficult.
We thrust each other into vice. How then
Can any be reduced to goodness, when
No man to hinder wickedness will strive,
But into viciousness the people drive?
FINIS.
Reader, the Author being out of Town, has occasioned diverse faults to be
committed in the Printing of the foregoing Epistles; for which the Printer
entreats thee to make a favorable interpretation: some whereof are here set
down.
Page 16 line 1. read know. p. 21. l. 16. 1. It will. p. 22. l. 10. r. teach.
p. 33 l 25. r. he is not blessed who is. p. 35. l. 1. r. witnesses. p. 38. l. 14
r. before our eyes. p. 39. l. 21. r. Genius. p. 40. l. 16. r. drown's. p. 41. l.
last, r. he usd himself. p. 42. l. 3. r. aerie music. p. 46. l. 13. r. by
this. p. 47. l. 14. r. that most men. p. 50. l. 12. r. variety. p. 58 l. 10. r.
thou have got. p. 66. l. 3. r. this to me. ibid. l. 21. r. riot gets. p. 71. l.
22. after Snatch thy self off: insert, we time enough have spent in vanities.


