SEVERAL LETTERS To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable
House of Commons.

Concerning The Gallant Proceedings of Sir Tho. Fairfax Army in the WEST.

VIZ. The SURRENDERING up of EXETER On this present MONDAY: The taking of 80
prisoners, with the Works and Line about Pendennis Castle by Col. Hamond; the
taking of 60 Prisoners of the Mount, which is the greater part of that
Garrison; And the probability of the Delivery up of BARNSTABLE.

Also very good News from IRELAND.

APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House
of Commons, to be forthwith printed and published.



London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
April 13. 1646.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
I Suppose you did think before this to have received News of the Surrender of
Exeter, considering the time since the Treaty began: I cannot say two hours
has been lost since the first entrance upon the same. The Commissioners having
sat two nights together, besides the several days in debating the business
with the other Commissioners, hoping to have completed the Articles; but such
were the Devices of some of the Enemies part, in ordering of their Articles,
and putting many needless Quaeres, especially concerning the Church and
Cathedral, that it necessitated a consumption of time; and when any were in a
manner concluded, some further satisfaction was to be given, concerning some
things they stood upon, which I shall forbear to mention till the Articles
themselves come up unto you; I only observe this, That the giving so large
Conditions to Ashby de la Zouch, begot an expectation, nay, an assurance in
those in Exeter to obtain the same, which has been the principal cause in the
prolonging of this Treaty, that it came no sooner to maturity, which now is
perfected: The Conditions are Honorable, yet no other then becomes a Soldier
to grant, and which the place (considering the consequence in the timely
Surrender thereof) might expect or hope for; This being as it were the closing
of our business in the West, will set the Army wholly at liberty, to attend
the more public Affairs of the Kingdom in the other parts of it, which are yet
annoyed by the Enemy: For Barnstable, we have assurance it will not dispute it
with us; and if they should, the Town being already quitted, the Forces raised
in this County, are sufficient to reduce that Castle and Fort, and so not
engage the leaving of any part of this Army. I have staid this Messenger these
four days, being unwilling he should come till the Treaty was finished. Two
Forts are this day to be delivered into the Generals hands, and four persons of
quality for Hostages besides, for the Surrender of the Town on Monday next: The
Articles are many and long, and alterations have been made, so that I shall not
presume to mention any thing of them until they come up. The Fort of
Ilford-Come was gained by Storm the other day. Colonel Sheffield commanded a
party which were led on by Lieutenant Colonel Harris. The Governor and all his
men are Prisoners; some slain. I take my leave, and rest.

April 9. 1646. Cullomb John. Your humble Servant.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
I Writ to you this morning, that it was agreed unto by the Commissioners of
the Treaty, to deliver Exeter on Monday; and in assurance thereof, to give four
persons of quality as hostages, and to surrender two Forts. This Agreement was
completed this Afternoon, by delivering up the Fort and Hostages, and the
Exeter Commissioners came in person to see the General sign the Articles, as
ours did go to Sir John Berkley to see him sign them: There is very good
correspondency; they depend much on our Faith in performing Articles, which I
dare say will be punctually observed. The General had no sooner settled this,
but he removed late this Evening to Tiverton, to be early to morrow at
Barnstable, when the Summons goes in; and I hope, before Monday that he return
to Exeter, to have an assurande of Surrender of Barnstable, if not actually
done by then. Thus much I thought fit further to certify you by this express,
for your better satisfaction in our proceedings: Having no more to trouble you
withal, I take my leave and rest

Your most humble and faithful Servant, J. R.
April 9. 1646. past 12. at night, Tiverton. This Messenger was in Exeter with
our Commissioners, and can further inform you: He promises me to be at the
House on Saturday before you rise; his speed will deserve your favor. I doubt
not in my next, to assure you of Barnstable by what I perceive. On this day
seven night the whole Army is to march East: Orders are out accordingly.



AT Market-Jew near the Mount, we took of the Mount men 60 prisoners, being the
greater part of the Garrison; also a Captain in Pendennis came off with 80 men
more. We understand in Pendennis they have nothing but Salt-Beef tainted, and
cannot subsist long; and little quantity of Bread; and their Wine almost spent.
We hope well shortly of both those places. Colonel Hamond writes as much.

Tiverton, April 10. Two in the Morning. J. R.

To my Honored Friend Edmond Prideaux Esquire.
SIR,
SInce my last from Bodman, I have spent two days with Col. Hamond at the
Leaguer of Pendennis Castle; he has almost perfected the Line from point to
point, so that 'twill be a very difficult thing for any of them to stir abroad
without our consents: The last night there came Lieutenant Colonel Chapman,
Captain Rives, and about fifty two men from them; we had an intimation of their
coming before, which had we been certain of it, might have endangerd the
Castle. They are all discontented, and jealous one of another, so that I
believe the carrying of that Castle will be no long work. I had one to day with
me from Master Godolphin of Silly; he begins to look upon my self: I, sent the
Gentleman to Colonel Hamond, being unwilling to deal in any of these
businesses; it is probable somewhat may come of it: the like intimations there is
from the Mount. The disbanding of the Army here, and the late defeat given
Ashley, are most excellent convincing arguments.

Your faithful Servant, Anth. Nicol.
Truro this 4 of April. 1646.
To the Honorrble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
Honorable Sir,
I Have often imbolden to trouble you with some lines from me, as of Cardiff,
etc. But now here arriving one Captain Bruie from Ireland yesterday, I could
not be silent, but make known the News: We have from those parts, blessed be
our good God, it is good, Capt. Robert Moulton Admiral of the Irish Sea, with
ten sail more set sail March 1. from Kingsail with Eight hundred Soldiers, and
sailed Westward: And it is credibly reported, that he has fallen on Dingel
de-Couch, where at first had some opposition, but at last took it, and found it
very rich; but it not being Tenable, they Plundered it, set fire on it, and
sailed toward Limbrick, and has taken a Castle, Mount Raccie, and Lord
Tumount, who is now on board the Ships: And our Forces are Fortifying the said
Castle; and since their being on Land there, they have taken One hundred and
twenty Horse: Limbrick Merchant would very willingly have Surrendered the said
Town unto them, but was prevented. The Lord Broghill has sent Three hundred
Horse from Munsler to join with them; God in mercy prosper them, for the Enemy
has sent Castle Haven with some Forces that way.

Captain Plunckets Ship has taken a small Man of War, with six Guns of
Barnstble, and a small Frenchman laden with Wines, etc. bound for Galloway.

The contrary winds hinders me with the twenty sail of Merchant men, and
Colonel Jephsons Five hundred Horse going for Ireland; we are all ready to set
sail the first wind; and had we but another Fleet, and two or Three thousand
men to fall on Dublin or that parts, there is great probability of gaining that
City, and doing much on Ireland this Summer. The Lord prosper the work, says
he that is, and so shall remain,

Your Honors humble Servant, John Crouther.
Kingroad, 9 April, 1646.
THe Wachford Men of War have taken one Captain Johnson of Plymouth, and one
Capt. Paige of London, both Pirat men of War: We want Ships on Irish Coasts.

Idem. J. C.

FINIS.

