Seneca.

TROADES.

A Tragedy written in Latin by LANNAEus SENECA, translated into English by S
P. with Comments annexed Splendebat Ante omnes, tanquam m^^^^ Sol aureus
a^tris. 1660



TROADES ENGLISHED.

By S. P.



LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane,
and Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey near the Counter. 1660.

To the Reader.
Reader.
I Had rather be wanting in an Epithet, then at an adventure to impose one upon
thee, which may not be Consonant to Truth: A whole Regiment of them would not
be enough to Equalize the diverse humors of those into whose hands this small
piece may come. I am not igrant how dangerous a task I have undertaken in the
Edition of this translation, or rather Paraphrase, A man whilst he is recluse
is safe and unknown, but if once he steps abroad (in this nature) he must
expect to run the hazard of being soundly whipped with the venomous lash of the
tongue. That you may see I am very willing to bear the burden of my own
faults, I have neither got a forlorn Hope of precursorie verses, nor offered to
gain any to patronize them by a Dedication: I am more chary of my Friends than
of my self, for if I have Committed any errors in this version, it is fit that
I bear the censures my self without exposing them to that trouble, whose
charity might o'repasse what a strict and censorious eye will bitingly examine.
By this you may see that I already plead guilty to my faults, and am very
willing to submit to the judgment of the learned: At their bar I stand, and
have nothing to say for my self but that it is my first Essay, and confequently
my first fault, and may be the last I shall commit in this nature. If they then
absolve me; I shall not regard the tumid words of carping Zoilians, who make it
their whole work to detract others, and invalidate all but the issue of their
own brains. I assure you I am not Pigmalion to be in Love with the work of my
own hands; if I were, I should rather have kept this in my deske then thus
freely offer it to a Common prostitution. If thou ask'st why I have offered it
in public view, I will not answer thee with that trivial and palliating
Come-off, that the entreaties of Friends have forced me contrary to my will to
tumble into the press, where after so desperate a Squeeze, I appear so
misshapen, and besmeared with black blood: No truly, I freely jumped in, and
have endured the wrack only to pleasure the mere English Reader; and that I
might add the more luster to, and set off with my distorts the beauties of
Medea, and Hippolitus, so well translated by several Hands; I Confess I had
begun this e're I had a view of either, which when I had seen I finished it
with reluctance, as knowing how short I came of their eligancy and skill. For
to speak any thing in praise of that noble Philosopher my Author, were to hold
a Candle against the Sun, for indeed -- Splendebat -- Ante omnes tanquam Mediis
Sol aureus astris. Therefore I shall wave it as a thing needless, being so
esteemed by, and well known to all learned men. As for the work, it is with
Medea and Hippolitus (according to the Judgment of learned Lipsius and
Scaliger) to be preferred to all the rest of the Tragedies, as being both the
only Legitimates of the Philosopher, and excelling the rest in Style and
Elegancy. As all his works are full of wise, grave, and wholesome Counsels
(bating him where he is altogether Stoicall) so although he has put on the
Buskins, and played the Tragedaean, even in this Cothurn^ll style, he has many
profitable and moral sentences. This has induced me to what I have done, and
therefore I shall say no more but be Candid and

Farewell. Bradfieldiae Call. Novembris. S. P.

Dramatis Personae.
HEcuba. Queen of Troy. Agamemnon. General of the Greeks. Pyrrhus. The Son of
Achilles. Andromache. Hectors Wife. Helena. The Wife of Menelaus, stolen and
married by Paris, the cause of Troys destruction. Ulysses. A Subtle Grecian.
Astyanax. The Son of Hector. Calcas. A Grecian Southsayer. Talthybius. A
Grecian. Polyxena. Mute. Senex. Nuncius. And Chorus. Of Trojan Women.
The SCENE Troy.

The Argument.
TROY had now withstood ten years Seige, and with incomparable valor resisted
the Greeks, when at last her Champion Hector being taken, through the Treachery
of a Stratagem, she was sacked, fired, and brought to ruin and destruction.
The Greeks intending now to depart to their long left homes, were by a contrary
wind stayed, when the Ghost of Achilles appearing, commands them not to stir
thence, till they had immolated the Princess Polyxena (under the pretext of a
marriage) to his Ghost. Chalcas their Prophet being consulted, he gives
judgment, that not only the Princely Virgin must dye, but that also Astyanax
the Son of Hector, must be flung from the Top of a high Tower in Troy. Which
Tragedies being accordingly acted, the Greeks hoist Sails and depart laden
with Captives, Riches, and Glory.

TROADES. A TRAGEDY
Written in Latin BY Lucius Annaeus Seneca; TRANSLATED Into our Vernacular
Tongue.
The first Act.
Enter Hecuba alone. WHo trusts in Kingdoms, and who puissant bears
Rule over mighty Monarchies; nor fears
(1) The inconstant Gods: Who on Prosperity
Relies too much; Let him consider me,
And thee o Troy. For Fortune never bore
Of great men's slip'ry state such Proofs before.
The Head of Pollent Asia: The great work
OF the (2) Gods above does in its ruins Lurk:
To whose (3) assistance came both those that drink
At seven mouthed (4) Tanais frigid brink:
And those (5) that nere first see the springing day
In the warm East: Those too where, with the Sea
(6) Tigris does mix. And (7) she that neighboured
To the wandering Scythes, her band of Widows led
Unto the Pontick bank. Destroyed thus
In her own ashes lies Pergamus.
See the Walls pride, her lofty Turrets lie
Huddl'd in their burnt ruins; flames on high
Compass the Palace round. All Ilium
Smoaks; yet the Victors greedy hands the flame
Prohibits not. The prey from flames is took;
Nor may the Heaven be seen for waving Smoke.
The dark day wrapped in a thick'ned cloud
Does in Troys ashes as in mourning shroud
It self. The proud, and greedy victor stays
And wrath; bowed Ilium with his eyes surveys:
At length he holds excused his ten years wars,
And Troy's sad affliction abhors.
Although he sees she is overcome, yet he
His eyes scarce credits; knows not how't may be.
The robber though Dardanian spoils, away
Snatches: A (8) thousand ships w'ont hold the prey.
The power of the Gods adverse to me,
My Country's ashes, Phrygian King, O thee
Whom Troy hides, with the whole Kingdom; and
Thy Manes Hector, by whom Troy did stand
Whilst that thou stood'st: And ye great flocks of my
Own Children, and the lesser Umbrae, I
Call all to witness, what somever ill
Has happened to us; I believed still
What ever ills (9) Cassandra prophised
In her mad sits; though Godprohibited.
(10) With-child I this first saw, a Prophetess
I unbeleiv'd before Cassandra was.
Crafty Ulisses, nor (12) Diomedes
His night Companion; nor false (13) Sinon, these
Fires has sown: No, no, this fire is mine,
It Is by my (11) Firebrand that ye now do shine,
Ah sad old woman! why thus long do thou mourn
The Cities downfall? O unhappy! Turn
Thine eyes to fresher griefs: Troy's downfalls old,
That execrable fact I did behold
The (14) murder of the King: yet greater harm,
'Twas at Jove's Altar; and by Pyrrbus arm
I saw when that fierce man, with fatal hand
In Priamus's curled locks entwined
Forceing his head down, hid his horrid sword
In a mortal wound; who willingly was gored:
Which done, he from the old man's throat again
Drew forth the blood-wet blade. Whom he amain
Pressing the extremest point of age; at all
Could not appease but by his cruel fall.
The Gods are witness of this mischief; and
The Altar sometimes of this ruined land.
Priam parent of so many Kings e'rewhile
Wants now a Sepulcher; a sun'ral Pile
In flaming Troy. But this suffices not
The Gods. See I a Master now by lot
Must choose with the Daughters of King Priamus,
And his Sons Wives. Whom shall I follow thus
Poor prey? Pyrrhus may join with Andromach
Another with (15) Hellenus Wife may match.
Another does (16) Antenors Grave: And thou
Cassandra wants not one to wed thee too:
My lot is feared: It Is I alone the Greeks
Despise. Why fellow Prisoners cease your shreeks
(17) Strike, strike your breasts, send forth sad groans and sighs
Cause to be done Troys sun'ral obsequies.
Forthwith without delay make for to ring
The fatal house of (18) Ida's direful King.

Chorus. Thou bid'st to mourn, those who in tears
Are perfect: for these many years
This we have done; Since Paris went
(1) TO Amyclas, and the rough Sea rent
With Mother (2) Sybit's sacred Pine.
Since which Mount Ida's top has been
Twice five times periwigg'd with Snow:
And spoiled of Trees which there did grow,
To make our funeral Piles. The mower
In fear has twice five times told over
In the (3) Sigean fields the wheat
Cut down. Alas no day as yet
Our tears did want: New cause of woe
Renu'd our Grief. To tears we go.
O Queen (4) lift up thy hand, and we
Well taught to weep will follow thee.

Hecuba. Faithful Mates of our Misery
As it behooves, your (5) hair unty;
Your locks spread on your backs you must,
Defiled with Trojan bloody dust.
Show your bare stretcht-out arms, and put
Your slackned coats tied with a knot
About your wast: and even unto
Your belly, all your bare Limbs show.
For what Husbands should we I trough
Hiding our Breasts our pudor show?
Let upper coats your under tie,
So that your hands at Liberty
May be, with furious strokes your breasts
To wound, this habit likes me best.
Your company I do agnize;
Let now return your wanted cries,
Exceed your wanted manner too,
`Tis Hector now lament we do.

Chorus. Our rent and much decayed hair
We all have loosed; and now we wear
It hanging down untied: we spurt
In our own faces Troy's hot dirt.

Hecuba. Fill your hands full of it, we may
For all Troy's spoils this bear away,
Buttoned about your sides now wear
Your Gowns, and show your Shoulders bare.
Your naked breasts your hands invite
To strokes; let grief draw forth your might
Make all the (6) Rhaetian shores resound
With your laments. The (7) Echo found
In Mounts and Caves, let her repeat
Not as she used last words; Complete
Let her return the Trojan Cries.
Harken O ail you Seas, and Skies!
Now let your hands the Tyrants play,
And with vast strokes your breasts repay;
With wonted Cries I Am not content,
It Is Hector now we do lament.

Chorus. O Hector! thus for thee our bare
Arms, and our bloody shoulders tare
Our right hands do: our heads for thee
We beat; our breasts extended be
Torn with maternal hands. And now
Our former wounds for thee, do flow
With blood (8) fresh torn. Thou wast the stay,
And Wall of Troy the Fates delay,
(9) A Sconce for tired Trojans, and
Ten years stood Troy propp'd by thy hand,
With thee it fell. Hector's last day
The last was also unto Troy.

Hecuba. Enough for Hector; change your plaint;
And now King Priamus lament.

Chorus. Accept our tears twice (10) lost old man:
Thou living but (11) one ill sustain
Did Troy. 'Twice has the Dardan Towers
Sustained the force of Grecian powers:
And (12) twice abode the Herculean Shaft.
The Sons of Hecuba aloft
On Princely Piles, were reared all;
The last part of the funeral
Thou their father do conclude,
(13) At Great Joves Altar murdered:
(14) Thy trunk lies on the Trojan shore.

Hecuba. Iliades, O weep no more
For Priam's death; But rather thus
Cry all, O HAPPY PRIAMUS!
He free went to the Ghosts below;
Nor shall his neck to Greeks yoke bow:
(15) Neither Atrides shall he see,
Nor false Ulysses, nor shall be
A prey for Gretian Triumphs. Nor
Shall his neck be subjected for
Their Pomps. Nor's hands accustomed
To Scepters be behind him tied:
Nor bound in Golden Fetters trot
Behind Atrides Chariot;
Nor be a sight to (16) Mycene thus.

Chorus. We all cry, HAPPY PRYAMUS!
He dying with him bore away
His Kingdom, and now safe does stray
In the shade of the (17) Elysian wood;
Where happy he among the good
Souls, seeks for his Hector, thus
O happy happy PRIAMUS!
``Who dies in War he happy is,
``All things with him consumed he sees.

Exiunt. Act the II.
Scene the I.
Enter Talthybius, Greeks, Chorus. WHat long delays the Greeks in the Haven make
Both to (1) the War, and now they homeward take
Their way. Chor. we pray you show the causes that
Put thus long stop unto the Grecian Fleet,
And what God stops their voyage back.

Talth. My heart
Quakes, and a horrid fear shakes every part.
A greater wonder and true too, none yet
'Ere heard of: I, nay I my self did see it.
It was when Titan first 'gan to display
His early beams; Night new over come by Day;
When on a sudden The Earth shoke, a hollow sound
Flew from the bottom of the rending ground.
The losty Forest, and the (2) sacred Grove
Rung with the crash; the Woods their tops did move.
Idaean Rocks broke from their Cliffs fell down;
The Earth not only shoke; but Seas did own
Achilles presence: for their Surges rose.
Immense Denns then the chapt Earth did disclose.
And gaping by the broken sides did show
The pervious way unto the (3) Gods below.
A Tomb it did straightwayes discharge; from whence
Sprung the (5) great Ghost of the (4) Thessalian Prince,
Like as when he did Thracian arms annoy,
(6) The Proem to thy fatal fall O Troy!
Or as when he Neptunian (7) Cycnus fought,
Or raging in the battle all about
With a strong courage damned the Rivers up
With Carcasses, and did slow (8) Xanthus stop,
Making him wander by new Fords of blood:
Or when he victor in's high Chariot stood,
(9) Great Hector, and Troy drawing on the ground,
Wroth with these words he made the shore resound:
Away away you negligent! and pay
Due honors to my Ghost: Ingrate! away!
Launch out your Ships into our Seas! Greece shall
Appease our anger with no trivial.
A noble prize must do it. Polyxene
Unto our A shes must betrothed be.
Let her be slain by Pyrhus hand, and her
Hot breathing blood imbrew my Sepulcher.
This said, and night now vanquished, down again
He goes, and mersed in that Hellish den,
The riv'd Earth closed again: the Seas lie still,
VVindes lay their threats aside; soft murmurs fill
The Air; arising from the stilled profound;
A chore of (10) Tritons the (11) Hymenaeum sound.

Act the II. Scene the II.
Enter Pyrrhus, Agamemnon. NOw we should spread our merry Sails at Sea
Home-bound: Achilles is forgotten; he
Whose hand alone Troy with the Earth did lay;
Repensating what ever short delay
He made at (2) Scyros, or at (3) Lesbos where
They doubting neuters stood, till he came there.
Now though thou would obey what he might crave,
Thou giv'st too late: All other Captains have
Already their rewards. What prize is less
That may be given to so great worthiness?
Are his deserts but small who (might have fled
Wars, and in Peace his life continued
Unto an age surpassing (4) Nestors years)
Leaving his mothers guiles, (5) and guise, appears
A man at Arms? when that proud (6) Telephus
Denied a passage through his Realm to us,
His hand new practiced, in Kings blood he died:
(7) The same knew how to wound and heal beside.
Then (8) Thebes fell. (9) Eetian vanquished saw
His Kingdom taken, (10) Lyrnessus the same way
With a small force as from a Rock was cast.
(11) Eriseis too, both Land and she at last
Was taken; And (12) Chrysa cause of strife to us
Cast down: and the most famous (13) Tenedos,
In whose fat soil the (14) Thracian flocks were fed
And sacred (15) Cilla too, subdue he did.
But what? (16) Caycus streams can witness these;
Such mighty dread, and so great miseries
Of Nations: so many dismantled towns
As by a sudden whirl-winde, chiefest Crowns
And glory would have been to others, this
Unto Achilles, but his entrance is.
Thus comes my Father, and such Wars he bears,
Whilst he the way but unto War prepares.
Should I in silence other merits smother,
Had not one Hector been enough? my Father
Troy overcame: ye pulled it down. To tell
His great and noble acts it likes me well.
Hector lay slain before his Fathers eyes;
Fore's Unkle's (17) Memnon, whose sad Mother dies
The mournful day with a pale countenance:
The victor feared his own works precidence.
Achilles learned by this a Goddesses Son
Might dye. Your great fear ceased the (18) Amazon
Being slain. A maid unto Achilles thou
(If his deserts are justly weighed by you)
Do owe, although he should require that she
A Grecian should, or Mycene virgin be.
Art thou in doubt? Can not allow this straight?
Thou who thine own to (19) Hellen immolate
Did, can thou fear that Pelius Son should have
Priamus Daughter? Accustomed things I crave.

Agamemnon. A youthful vice, it is not to guide the rage
Of passion. This most in their youthful age
Possess. But thou thy Fathers also. I
Sometimes have meekly born the fierce and high
Threats of surly (26) Aeacides. Bear thou
Meekly more things, the more thou may it do.
Why would thou stain the great Dukes noble Ghost
With a dire slaughter? It behooves us most
To know what Victors ought to do, and what
The Conquered suffer can. A cruel state
None long can hold. Firm stands the moderate.
The more that power by Fortune's raised, the more
The fortunate ought for to bow; and sore
Afraid be of unconstant chance: and fear
The Gods when they so too much favoring are.
I by my Conquest learned have, that brought
Great things may in a moment be to naught.
Troy has too proud and cruel made us: we
Stand where it did; may fall as well as she.
I grant sometime exalted, and superb
My self I bore too high. This thing does curb
My lofty Spirit, when Fortune's favor might
Have rather been a cause for others height.
Thou make me high and tumid Priamus!
King shall I ought but a vain glorious
Title account? But a false band esteem,
To bind our brows about the Diadem?
A sudden chance may ravish this, without
A thousand Ships, or ten years time to do it.
Bad fortune comes not so slow to all.
I must confess (with your leave Greece) the fall
And ruin of Troy I would have helped, though I
Desired much to have the victory:
But rage, thirst of revenge, Nights conquest let
A Kings command. Revenge did this commit;
And whatsomever cruelty has pleased
The Victor, whose rage by the night increased.
The conquering Sword is mad once died with blood.
Let what of ruined Troy is left abide.
Enough, and more then enough we'ave punished; I
Cannot endure a Princely maid should dye,
A Sacrifice unto a Tomb, or wet
The Ashes with her blood, nor that sell act
Of Murder call a Marriage: Mine be the blame;
Who lets not Sin, and may, commands the same.

Pyrrhus. Shall then Achilles Ghost have no reward?


Agam. Yes, all his praise shall sing, strange lands regard
Shall his great Fame. If blood then must be shed
(21) To light his Grave; cut off an Oxes head:
Spill blood for which no mothers weep may. O!
What custom's this, when man's in shades below
That t'him rites must be paid? your sire refrain
T'hare, whom you would worshipped have with others pain.

Pyrrhus. How lofty lifted up with secund State
Thou art! How fearful when that dangers threat!
Tyrant! again inflamed is thy breast
With Sudden heat, now of a new come lust?
(22) Will It always rob us of our spoils; This hand
The victim shall unto Achilles send.
The which if thou deny'st, a greater shall,
And sitter too, then that of Pyrrhus fall.
My hands from regal blood suffer restraints
Too long: King Priam a companion wants.

Agam. I don't deny but it is thy chiefest fame
In The Wars, that Priam by thy Sword lies slain,
Once suppliant to thy Si^e.

Pyrrhus Suppliant to him,
But I as enemies regarded them,
Priam himself petitioned, which thou
Quaking or fear wer'in bold enough to do,
But trembling hidden lay, and to commend
(23) Thy suit did Ajax, and Ulysses send.

Agam. I do confess your fire then did not fear,
When, whilst our Fleet burnt, and Greeks slaughtered were.
Forgetting Arms and War he sloathfull lay,
And did upon his pleasant Viol play.

Pyr. Great Hector then thy Arms contemned: yet feared
Achilles Song, Thessalian Ships secured,
In all that dread lay quietly at rest.

Agam. Forsooth your Ships, nor Father, in the least
Had cause of fear, from Hector freed.

Pyrrhus. To grant
Life to a King, of a great King's a point.

Agam. Why then did thou a King of Life bereave?


Pyrrhus. The pitiful Death often for Life does give.


Agam. Your pity then the Virgin slayes I guess.


Pyrrhus. To slay a maid now think it wickedness?


Agam. It does become a King for to prefer
His Country to his Children.

Pyrrhus. No Law does spare
The Captive, nor their punishment impede.

Agam. But shame does, what the Law does not, forbid.


Pyrrhus. The Victor may do what he list by Law.


Agam. He least of all should do, who freely may.


Pyr. Why brag'st thou thus, when it was Pyrrhus broke
These conquered, the ten years heavy yoke?

Agam. (25) Scyros such valor breed?


Pyrrhus. The same which knows
(26) No brothers Villainy.

Agam. Which waves enclose?


Pyrrhus. Forsooth our Kin. I of the noble breed
Of Atreus, and Thyestus have heard.

Agam. And I of thee conceived in furtive play
(28) B'a maid; got by Achilles, yet a Boy.

Pyrrhus. The same Achilles whose Kin sparsed be Throughout the worlds. Whose
with the Gods. The Sea With Thetis, Hell with (29) Aeacus, and Heaven (30) With
Jove he holds.


Agam. The same Achilles given.
To Death, by Paris hand.

Pyrrhus. The same whom hand
To hand, none of the Gods durst yet withstand.

Agam. I can cease brawling truly, and repress
With punishment, this your audaciousnesse:
But my Sword knows how to spare Captives. Let
Calchas the Gods interpreter be fet.
If Fates require I Will yield. Enter Calchas.
Thou who did set
The Crecian (31) Fleet loose from their bonds, and let
To Wars, who do the Poles unlock. To whom
Beasts intrails, Comets, Thunder, what to come
Does show, whose Oracles has cost me wide
damage. O Calchas with thy Council guide
Us, and what God ordains do thou declare.

Calchas. With wonted price their way the Grecians are
To buy, so Fates do Grant. A maid must slain
Be on the Tomb of the Thessalian
Prince, dressed as the Thessalians when they wed,
Or like a 32) Ionian or a Mycene bride.
Pyrrhus must to his Father give the Maid,
So 'twill be rightly done: Not this has staid
Alone our Ships, blood's due to blood; it is higher
Than thine Polyxena the Fates require.
Astyanax thrown from a Tower shall be,
And lucky dye: Then spread your Sails at Sea Exeunt omnes.

Enter Chorus of Trojan Women. Is It true? Or fools do tales deceive,
That Souls (1) the Bodies buried live?
(2) When next of kin shall close the eyes,
Last day obstruct the light of Skies,
And Urns sad ashes last enclose;
It boots not Souls to give to those.
Or is it that wretches longer are?
Dye we not all? of us no share
Remains; when with last flying breath
The Soul past into Air is with
The mixed clouds: and the bare trunk,
Into the (3) funeral fire sunk?
Whatsoever the Sun from East to West
Beholds; the Sea with blew waves pressed
In's flux or reflux wets, age will
With a (4) Pegasian Motion spill.
With what pace the twelve Signs do fly,
With what course through the year does hie
The Stars Lord; with what haste in her
Oblique course (5) Hecate does stir,
To death we run: who once attains
The (6) Stygian Lake no more remains.
As the black fume which from the fire
Mounts, does in a short space expire,
As (7) Boreas does assunder blow,
The rain-big clouds we saw but now;
Just so flies hence, our guide, the breath.
After Death nothing: Nothing's Death,
Of a short life the last end. Let
The Greedy hope, the Sad fear set Aside.
Where thou shall be, do quaere aside.
When dead? where the unborn now are.
(8) Time us, and Chaos does devour;
Body and Soul yields to Death's power.
(9) The Realm of Dis, and (10) Taenarus
And the three-headed (11) Cerberus,
The black, and Cruel monster, that
Sits Porter at the unfacil gate
Are idle tails, vain words, and seem
Like fables in a pensive Dream.

Act the III.
Scene the I.
Enter Andromach, Senex, Astyanax. ANd why sad Trojans tare you thus your hairs?
Why knock your breasts? and wet your cheeks with tears?
Our ills are light if we can weep: But now
When long before to me, fell Troy to you?
(1) When Acchillis drew my Hector's limbs o'th ground,
Whose burden made the Chariot groan: I found
Troy then o'return'd, and fallen. By Ills I Am made
Dull, stiff, and without sense. Were I not stayed
By my Astyanax, after my husband, I
Would quickly follow. He forbids to die.
It Is he my Courage tames, and makes me move
As yet with some request the Gods above.
Time adds unto my misery. The Chief
Security to fear nothing.
Fruit of all ills h'as robbed me of: for grief
But not for better luck a way is left:
Most wretched it is to fear of Hope bereft.

Senex. What sudden fear is this afflicts thee thus?


Andro. From one mischief a greater spring there does,
The Fate of falling Troy yet has no end.

Senex. What harms can God find if he would to send?


Andro. The doors and dens of Styx are opened, and from
The bottom of his tomb our foe does Come.
Lest that we dread should want. Alone must the
Way backward previous to the Grecians be?
Sure Death is Equal. Common is the fright
Which fears and grieves the Trojans. What to night
Scared me in sleep belong to me it may.

Senex. What Sighs portend such fear declare, I pray.


Andro. Two parts of Cherishing Night were almost fled,
And the Sev'n Stars bright wain was turned to bed,
When rest not usual did sad me surprise,
And a short sleep crep't over my weari'd eyes;
(Or rather Scupor of a mind be-scar'd)
When straight ways Hector before mine eyes appeared:
Not as when he upon the Argives set,
And sought with flaming pines to burn their fleet.
Nor as when he the slaughtered Grecians fought,
And they true Spoils from (2) feigned Achillis brought.
His Countenance no glorious beamings had,
But like to ours dejected was, and sad,
His hair disordered hung; And yet I Joy'd
To see him: when shaking his head he said.
Awake, O faithful wife! and take thy Son,
Let him be hid: he is thy Hope alone.
Leave weeping. Mourn'st thou for the fall of Troy?
Would that might only fall! Make have, the Boy
The small stock of our house remove. I shook
With horror and cold shivering awoke,
Trembling my Eyes I cast now here, now there,
The Child forgot, I wretch for Hector quaere,
But the vain shade did through my hands retire.
O Child, true offspring of thy mighty Sire!
The Trojans only hope; and of our sad
House, and most ancient, and most noble blood
The only stock. How like thy Sire, just that
Visage my Hector had, and such a gate
And habit; so he did's strong hands advance,
His shoulders rear; Threat with his Countenance;
So his spread hair his shoulders did adorn:
Too late for Troy, too soon for me tho'art born.
Shall that day be, that happy day when that
Defender and Avenger of Troy's state
Thou Pergamus rebuild shall? and bring home
The Sparsed Citizens? render the name
To Troy and to the Trojeans? Of my Fate
I Am unmindful. -- I doubt such votes to great
Are. It Is enough that Captives live. Ah! where
May I a place find faithful to my fear?
Where shall I hide thee? The famed Citadel
Strengthened with forts, and walls of Gods, is fell
To Dust. All Is spoiled with flames: Of mighty Troy
Not so much left is where to hide my Boy.
What cunning place now shall I choose? Lo here
The Sacred Tomb is of my Husband dear,
By foes revered, raised by his Father thus
To this vast height with riches; Covetous
He was not in his sadness: -- Best I can
His Father trust. -- A cold sweat falls upon
My limbs. -- Ah wretch! I tremble lest that this
An omen of his future funeral is.

Senex. To be thought Dead the only way has been
Many to keep alive: Scarce any thing
Of Hope's above. His great birth bears him down.

Andromach. Can none betray?


Senex. Let not your fraud be known
To witnesses.

Andromach. What if the foe shall quaere.


Senex. He perished in the City, say.


Andromach. The near
What are we, if at last they find our Guile?

Senex. The victors fierceness lasts but for a while.


An. What, w'thout great fear he cannot be hidden then?


Senex. ``Secure do choose helps snatch distressed men.


Andr. What place? what Realm, remote and invious
Shall keep thee safe? who 'le succor trembling us
Who will Protect? O Hector! thou who have
Always defended thine, defend at last,
Conserve the close deed of thy pious wife.
Keep with thy dust a future victor's life.
Child, Come near the Tomb -- Why run'st back? Despise
Base Corners do? Thy valor I agnise.
He scorns to fear -- Thy Noble Sp'rit forget,
And ancient Courage. Take what thy Fates permit.
See what poor Troop remains, this Tomb, and thou
A Boy, I prisoner -- We to our Ills must bow.
Go to: venture into this (3) holy seat
Of thy Sepulted Sire, thou have if that
The Fates will unto wretches help infer
Thy Life; if life deny, thy Sepulcher.

Senex. He Is closely hid. But lest your fear betray
Him, hence receed, and go another way.

Andromach. Who fears at hand is wont to fear the less.
But let us from this place, and if you please.

Senex. Silence awhile, Cease your Complaints, I pray,
Ulysses moves his Cursed steps this way.

Androm. Cleave earth! O Husband from Stix deepest womb
The Earth rend, there keep my depositum.
Here Is Ulysses; By's musing pace it is guest
He Cunning mischief hatches in his breast.

Act the III. Scene the II.
Enter Ulysses and Soldiers. ILL news I bring, but this I first require,
Though my mouth Speaks't, believed not my desire,
It is the voice of all the Greek guides, whom
Hector's Issue keeps from their long-left home.
Him do the Fates require, the Grecians will
Their peace uncertain think, behind them still
Fear will enforce them for to look, nor can
They lay down arms, whilst Andromach! thy Son
Does Courage to the Conquered Trojans bring.

Andr. Does thus indeed your Prophet Calchas sing?


Vlys. If that our Augur Calchas silent were
Yet Hector tell us this, whose stock we fear.
The generous Seed the growing stock adorns.
So the small Hang-by calf, to a herd, whose horns
Yet has not cut the Skin, when by and by
His forehead ample grown, and's necks on high
He rules the beasts, and leads his father's flock.
So a small twig left to the lopped stock
In a small time like to its mother grows,
Shaddows the Earth, its boughs to Heaven shows.
So Sparks left carelessely their strength resume.
Grief is of things an unjust judge. Presume
Thou may, that after a ten winters war
As many summers the old Soldiers are
Afraid of other broils, nor well esteem
Themselves, Troy not destroyed: A great thing them
Disturbs, A Future Hector it is. Do thou
Remove this fear, that only stays us now.
This stops our ready ships. Cruel suppose
Me not, that I ask Hectors Son, for chose
By lot to do it, (1) Orestes I Would require.
Come (2) suffer what the Conqueror did bear.

Andro. O Child! would thou were in thy Mothers hand:
What Chance bereft me of thee, or what land
Now holds thee? Would I knew. Not Enemies darts
Stabbed in my breast; Nor cutting bonds, nor smarts
Of fire my sides surrounding e're should shake
My maternal Faith. O Child! what chance does take,
What place does hold, thee now? wander unknown
About the Fields do thou? Or overthrown
Amongst the rubbish of thy Country trod?
Or has fierce victors sported with thy blood?
Or were thou cast unto some cruel beast?
Or were thou to the Trojan souls a feast?

Ulysses. Leave feigning thus. Thou can not easily
Deceive Ulysses. (3) Mothers Treachery,
Yea wiles of Goddesses I have undone:
Leave these vain setches; tell me, where is thy Son?

Andro. Where Is Hector? Priamus? all the Trojans? where?
Thou ask'st for one, I for them all do Quaere.

Ulysses. You shall be forced to tell what you deny.


Andro. For he who ought, would, can, it is safe to die.


Ulysses. Approaching Death will scare great words away.


Andro. If Andromach, Ulysses! thou wilt betray
With fear; threat' life, to die is my desire.

Ulys. What now thou hid'st by torments, stripes, death, fire,
Thou shall be forced to tell, unwilling, pain
Thy closest Secrets from thy breast shall drain.
Necessitie's wont to do more then zeal.
It Is vain to hide, what straight thou must reveal.

An. Flames, wounds, and the dire tricks of torments threat.
Famine and cruel thurst, all Plagues complete,
Hot irons thrust into my bowels, the
Plague of close Prison, and what e're may be
Pleasing to the angry tumid Conqueror.
The valiant mother can admit no fear.

Ulysses. This Love in which thou do so stiffly 'bide
The Greeks warns for their Children to provide.
After a ten years war, and so far off
I less should fear, what Calehas prophiseth,
If For my self, but thou do wais prepare
For (4) Telemachas. Androm. I will ease from Care
Ulysses and the Greeks. O sorrow! Griefs!
Say unto those you trouble: Joy O Greeks!
Do thou as thou were wont Good news declare
To the (5) Pelasgians. Dead is Hector's heir.

Ulysses. How will thou prove that this is true?


Andromach. So let
The Greatest ill the Conqueror does threat
Happen to me, Let Fates me quickly sley,
May I be buried in my Country; may
The Native soil (6) lightly on Hector spread,
As he wants light, and lies amongst the dead,
And with due exequies laid in his Tomb.

Ulysses. The Fates are pleased if Hector's Son is gone.
A solid peace, and Joy to the Greeks I Will Give. Aside.
What do Ulysses? will the Greeks believe
Thee? who thou? The Mother. What wont she swear?
Is It not Death's dreadful Omen makes her fear?
Fear Omens! what should such fear more? now she
Has tied her Faith by oath, what thing may be
Worse to be feared, then that she perish? Now
Wiles, Craft, Fraud, and thy self Ulysses show.
``Truth will appear. Search out the Mother. Mourn,
Shed Tears, Lament she does, at every turn,
Now here, now there her anxious steps she bears,
My words receives at her Careful Ears.
She fears more than she Mourns. Here Is work for wit. To Andromach again.
That parents ease to parents give it is fit.
Thou may rejoice that thou do want thy Son,
Whom a most Cruel Death did wait upon,
For from the Tower, that which remains alone
Of Troy, he should have been cast headlong down.

Andromach. My feeble limbs do shake, my Spirit's lost;
My blood grows stiff bound with a frigid frost. Aside.

Ulysses. See how she trembles: This is the way to do it.
Fear has detected her: Now I Will renew't. Aside. To the Soldiers, they seek
about.
Go, Go make have, bring forth where e're he is hid,
The Greeks last plague, hid by his mothers fraud.
(7) So so he is Caught: Go to; Make have:
He'r lead. To Andromach.
Why look thou back and fear? Thy Son is dead.

Andro. Would I might fear! This is accustomed fear.
``What we learn long, we cannot soon forbear.

Ulysses. Since that the youth a purging Sacrum may
Not be, nor we our Prophet thus obey,
He being snatched by a more gentle Fate,
(8) Thus Calchas says. Our ships may remigrate,
If Seas to please we Hector's ashes spread
About, and's Tomb with the Earth be equal made.
Since he escaped has the appointed fate,
Our hand this Sacred Seat must violate.

aside. Andro. What shall I do? my mind a double fear
Distracts. My Son; the ashes of my dear
Husband. O Hector! I to witness, Call
The Cruel Gods; the True, thy (9) Ghosts an all,
Naught but thy self in my Son pleases me;
May he live then for to be like to thee!
Shall's ashes merged be? his Tomb pulled down?
Shall I let us bones into the Sea be thrown?
First let Astyanax.
him die. But Can thou see him sent
To death? hurled down from the high battlement?
I will. I Will suffer 't. I will indure't, that the
Dead, by the victor's hand may not dammag'd be.
He may be sensible of pain; at rest
The Fates have placed him. Why waverest?
Determine which thou wilt save -- Do doubt ingrate?
This is thy Hector -- Both are Hecters, yet
This is alive, revenge perhaps he may
His dead Father. Both cannot be saved. Delay
Why do? save him the Greeks do fear.

Ulysses. I will
Distroy this Tomb, and the Oracle fulfill*

Andromach. (10) That which ye sold?


Ulysses. I will the Sepulcher
Raze to the Ground.

Andromach. The help of Gods deter;
Achilles Faith I Call: O Pyrrhus! thy
Sire's gift desend.

Ulysses. This Tomb shall by and by
Over all the field be spread.

Andromach. Such villainies
The Greeks yet have not dared; (11) of Deities
Your friends, you violated have the Fain,
Your Rage yet spared the Tombs. --
I Will you restrain:
My naked hands yours armed shall set upon.
Wrath Strength will Give. As the fierce (12) Amazon
Beat down the Grecian Troops: As (13) Menas struck
By Bacchick sury, all the forests shook
With her Enthean rage, and furnished
With (14) Thyrsus, mad, never felt the wounds she made.
So in the midst I Will rush, a Mate become
To's Ashes in defending of his tomb.

Ulysses. Cease ye? what does a simple woman's do to the soldiers.
And fury move? Obey and quickly too.

Andr. O slay me first! foil hell! break Fates delay!
Hector remove the Earth; So that you may
Ulysses tame: Thy Ghost can do it. -- See see
He shakes the weapons: Hurleth fires; do ye
See Hector? or do only I?

Ulysses. Down down
With It to the Ground.

Andromach. What do? shall overthrown Aside.
Thy Son and Husband be together? pray
The Greeks, perhaps you pacify them may.
The massy ruins of the Tomb will strait
Crush the hidden wretch. O rather let his Fate
Be some where else, lest that the Father kill
The Son, the Son the Father's ashes spill.
I suppliant at thy feet do fall although To Ulysses.
My hands did never such humble postures know,
I lay them at thy Feet Ulysses, hear
My pious prayers gently, patient bear,
Pity a Mother; And the higher thou
By the Gods art raised, unto the fallen show
Less rigor: who the needy helps, does gain.
So may thou thy (15) chaste wife's bed see again!
So may thy sight extend thy Fathers years!
Thy Son receive thee! May thy voteful prayers
In thy Son's virtues, more then answered be!
His grand-sires age, thy ingenuitie
May he surpass! The Mother pity; save
My only Joy.

Ulysses. Bring forth thy Son and Crave.


Act the III. Scene the III.
Andromach, Ulysses, Astyanax. MIserable wretch Come from thy Den! Andromach
calls Astyanax from the Tomb, he comes out.
-- See here
The Child Ulysses who your Ships does fear.
Submit thy self fall prostrate on thy face,
At thy Lord's feet entreat: Nor think that base
Which fortune to the wretched has assigned.
Thy Kingly Grandfathers put from thy mind,
And famous Priamus's mighty Power,
Hector forget, and like a Captive bear
Thy Self with bended knees.
If though art not sensible as yet of Death
Yet imitate thy mothers Tears. -- Troy has
Once seen the (1) tears of her young Princely heir:
The fierce (3) Alcides threats removed were
By little Priamus; That fierce one who
(4) Did monsters by his mighty Strength subdue,
Who broke hell's gates, returned thence, yet he
Was by the tears of 's little Enemy
Overcome; Take here, said he, the reins, possess
Thy Father's seat, and Throne; more (2) faith express
In ruling now. His Captives, not repent
We should: By Hercules learn to relent.
Must only Hercules's (5) arrows please?
As good as Priamus here suppliant lies
Before thy feet: his life he begs; as for
The Realm he that to Fortune does refer.

Ulys. The Mourning of this 'frighted mother sore Aside.
Moves me, but yet the Grecian dames move more,
To whom this Child great Sorrow once may yield.

Andromach. Shall he this ruined City e're rebuild?
Shall these hands Troy erect? No hopes Troy has
If such as these: we ruined are, alas!
Not so that we to any fear may Cause.
Doth's Father Cause this rigor? -- (6) True the place!
Hector himself after Troys downfall would
Have left his Courage, by such great Ills Cooled.
If punishments you seek, worse can you lack
Than to the yoke to use his noble neck?
Sure he may serve, who 'le this a King deny?

Ulysses. It Is Calchas this denies to you, not I.


Andromach. Author of Frauds! worker of Cruelty!
None in the wars did by thy valor die:
By the Sly frauds of thy infected mind
(7) Greeks too have fallen. Why do thou pretend
The Prophet, and the Guiltless Gods? when this
Night Champion! of thy own devising is?
Tho'art valiant to slay a Child; It Is now
Alone by day thou any thing dare do.

Ulysses. Ulysses valor to the Greeks is known
Enough, too much to you: I may n't in vain
Words Spend the day. Our Anchors way'd will be.

Andr. Grant some short stay whilst that I render the
Last duties of a Parent to my Child,
And have my griefs by my last Clippings filled.

Ulysses. Would I might pity show! this only may
Be shown; we grant at thy request delay,
And time to weep. Tears griefs disburden does.

Andr. Sweet pledge! O glory of our fallen house!
Last end of Troy! O fear to Greeks! O vain
Hope of thy Mother! for whom thy Gran-sires reign
In his best State, thy Father's fortitude
I did request: The Gods our votes delude.
In Iliums royal Court Troys Scepter thou
Shall n't bear, nor laws give to thy people now:
Nor to thy yoke submit the Conquered rout,
Nor Grecians slay; Nor Pyrrhus drag about.
Nor shall thy tender hands Arms exercise,
Nor boldly in the lawnes wild beasts surprise.
Nor shall thou with the noble youths resort
To use the (at solemn (8) Lustres) (9) Trojan sport.
Nor with swift feer (10) dance in the Phrygian fanes
About the Altars, whilst the (11) warlike strains
Of Curved pipes excite. Dire death, alas!
Worser than death; Something more sad than was
Hector's Troy now shall see.

Ulysses. Break off thy Tears
Great dolor never of it Self forbears,

Andr. Small is the time for tears that we require,
Ulysses! grant before that he expire,
I wish my hand may close his little Eyes.
Thou dyest young but feared by Enemies.
Thy Troy expect thee; Go free Trojans see
From bondage freed.

Astyanax. O Mother succor me!


Andr. Why hugg'st thou me? Why hold'st thy mothers hands?
Thou take a vain defense. As trembling stands
By 'is mothers side the tender youngling, when
It hears the Lion roar: She gone, he then
With his vast jaws teareth the tender prey,
So thee thy foe snatch from my breast away
Will. Here receive my Kisses, Tears, and hair
(12) Rent off. To the Sire now full to me repair.
Tell him thy mothers plaints: If Ghosts retain
Their former Love, not perished in the flame.
O Cruel Hector! will thou suffer thy
Andromach serve the Greeks? and slothful lie?
Achillis back returned. Take here, take here,
Once more my rented hair, and tears, what e're
Is of my Hector lest: These Kisses give
Unto thy Sire. This Coat thy mother leave:
This touched has my dear's ashes, and his tomb;
I Will search his ashes and what is left (13) lick down.

Ulysses. Thou have no measure in thy tears: away,
It Is time to break the Grecians Ships delay. Exeunt omnes.

Chorus. Which is the place where we must dwell?
Thessalian Mounts, and (1) Tempe's vail?
Or (2) Phthie, bearing Mermidons?
Or asper (3) Thrachyn full of Stones,
Where the fair droves of beasts bred be?
Or (4) Jolchos Mistress of the Sea?
(5) Or Hundred City'd spacious Crete?
Small (6) Gortine? or barren (7) Trice?
Or knee holm bearing (8) Methony,
Which in the (9) Oetian woods do ly
Whence came those Cruel shafts, which more
Then once Troy's fatal ruin bore?
(10) Olenus where few houses be?
(11) Pleuron Diana's Enemy?
Or Seas-indented (12) Troezean?
Or Prothous Kingdom (13) Peleon,
(14) The third step to heaven? where then
In the Hollow Mount a spacious den
Was, where great (15) Chiron master to
(16) The Cruel youth did use to show
His skill, striking the sounding Strings
With His bow; and there whilst wars he Sings,
His mighty ire stir up he dos.
Or Marble-bearing (17) Carystos?
(18) Or Chalcis nere the Shore of the
Swift (19) Euripus the unquiet Sea?
(20) Echinae open to every wind?
(21) Or Genoessa where gales find
A Constant vent? or (22) En^spae
Which fear the North-East wind? or the
(23) Ptrithaedos joined to Attica?
(24) Elusis which do (24) hidd'n rites enjoy?
Or Ajax Country (25) Salamin?
(26) Or Calydonia which has been
Well noted for the Cruel bore?
(27) Bessa and Scarphe, which (the shore
Even reached) Titaressus laves
About with his dull sluggish waves?
(28) Ancient Pilos? (29) Pharis? Jove's
(30) Pisa? (31) Elis which great games loves?
Sad Storms which thus the wretched send
By every one to every land:
But whilst that we for Helena.
her do pay
Who has done thus to Greece, and Troy,
Far may Sparta, and (33) Argos be,
And mighty (34) Pelops Mycenae!
(35) Neritus less than (36) Zacynthus!
And guileful Stany (37) Ithacus.
What fate remains, O Hecuba!
For thee? what Lord shall lead away
Thee? and to what Land shall thou fly?
Or in what Country shall thou dye?

Act the IV.
Scene the I.
Helena, Andromach, Hecuba, Polyxena, Mute. Enter Helena alone, with Grecian
Tires and Ornaments in her hand. It Is fit a Bride-maid Helena should be
At every deadly Hymen, and where the
Marriage does cries, grief, slaughter, blood produce.
I Am forced the Conquered Trojans to abuse;
Pyrrhus's false nuptials I am charged to show,
And Grecian tires, and trimings carry to
Polyxena: So Paris sister shall
Deceived by my fraud, and Cunning fall.
Be She deceived; 'will easier be for her,
It Is a wished death to die without Death's fear.
Why do thou not as thou art bid? Crimes still
Forced, return on the authors of the ill. Enter Polyxena, Hecuba and Andromach.
O noble Maid of the (1) Dardanian House!
A better God now the afflicted does
Begin for to regard: A dowry he To Polyxena.
And happy marriage does prepare for thee,
And such a Husband Priamus he could
Not have given thee though Troy it self had stood.
For Pyrrhus.
Thessaly's great Prince desires to wed
With holy rites, thee to his lawful bed;
Whose Kingdom spreads over Spacious Thessaly:
Great (2) Tethis and the Lady's of the Sea,
And (3) Thetys the proud Seas fair Lady, shall
Call thee their's; (4) Peleus shall thee Cosen Call,
When thou art Pyrrhu's wife; and (5) Nereus too: Offers her the Grecian Tires.
Put off these mourning robes and these indue;
Forget Captivity: Let maids prepare
With art-ful hands to Curle and plait thy hair.
Thou by this fall perchance may higher rise;
``Many have gained by being made a prize.

Andr. For to be glad the only ill has been
Wanting to ruined Trojans: Troy's now seen
In Flames. O Time for weddings! Who dares though
Deny? or who will be in doubt to go
For to be Married when that Helena
Persuades? to Grecians and to Trojans ah!
(6) The ruin, Pest, and Plague. Se'st thou these Tombs
Of Captains? and these inhumated bones
Spread over the fields? Thy Hymen's fruits they be:
Asia's and Europ's blood was shed for thee,
Whilst thou with doubtful wishes and no care,
(7) Thy husbands fighting Saw; Go too, prepare
The wedding. What needs Torches? fire? or bright
(8) Nuptial Faxes? Troy'l this new wedding light.
O Trojans Pyrrhu's wedding Celebrate!
Let Tears and Groans sound it in seemly rate.

Helena. Although great grief, wants reason, and denies
To yield, and Your sad fellows to despise
Does cause, yet I my Cause defend do dare,
That my Griefs greater far than yours are,
Before a prejudiced Judge. Andromacha
Bewaileth Hector, Priamus, Hecuba:
For Paris only prively does mourn
Helen; You servitude hard to be born
And heavy think: Ten years this Captive yoke
I bore. Your family and Troy now struck
Are to the Earth; It Is sad indeed to bear
Your Country's loss; but worse for me to fear.
Your ills are by partakers casie made;
Me both the Greeks and Trojans ires invade.
You know not yet whose Prisoners you shall be,
Without a Lot my Lord will straight take me?
I Cause of these wars and Troy's overthrow.
But 'twas your fleet on Spartane Seas did row.
But if the Phrygians me a prey did make,
(9) Being Venus gift for her victory's sake,
Then pardon Paris. Angery Menalaus
Will shortly sharply Judge my Crime and Cause.
O Andromach stop thou thy tears, and gain
Polyxena to wedd, I cannot refrain
From weeping.

Andromach. O what mighty Evill's this!
That Helen weeps? why weeps she? Tell what is
Ulysses plot, what wickedness does he
Contrive; what, must the Maid cast headlong be
From the Idaean rocks? must she be sent
From the high Tower's highest Battlement?
Or from those rocks must she into the vast
Sea, which Segeon's clef^ side bounds be cast?
Tell tell what is hid in thy deceitful breast.
Alas! this evill's worse than all the rest.
That Hecuba's and Priam's Son in Law
Pyrrhus should be. What plagues preparest, say?
Show, and let us not in our Misfortunes be
Beguiled; To die we ready are you see.

Helena. Would Calchas also would Command me to
With Sword the Stays of hated life undo.
Or that I might by Pyrrhus's cursed hand
Be slain before Achilles tomb, and stand
O Polyxen! a part'ner in thy woo.
Achilles does Command that thou be to
Him given; that thou thy life 'fore's ashes yield,
That he thy Spouse may be in the Elysian field.

An. See with what joy her death pronounced she hears,
With Princely ornaments her self she tires,
Her hair she suffers to be Curled, It seems,
She Marriage Death, and Death a Marriage deems.
But see! my Mother swoons at this sad news,
She faints! Arise! take Courage Mother! use
Courage! take heart --. How small a thread does stay
Her parting Soul! A small thing Hecuba
Can happy make! -- She breaths: -- She lives: thus still
``Desired death fly from the wretched will.

Hecuba. Does yet Achilles Live to punish us?
Rebels he yet? O Paris (10) hand that thus
So lightly struck! His Tomb and ashes they
Thirst for our blood. About my side a gay*
(11) Troop once did stand. I wearied was to deal
My Kisses and my Love amongst them all.
This onely's left, Hecuba's only Child,
Companion, joy, she who my griefs beguild.
(12) I only her call Child. Unhappy still!
Fly hence Soul case me of this only ill.
See Tears bedew her Cheeks, a sudden shower
From her dejected Countenance does power.
Be glad O Child Cassandra would rejoice,
Or Andromach, to be espoused thus.

Andr. It Is we! it is we! O Hecuba it is we
Should be lamented, scattered on the Sea
And up and down dispersed: But Helen then
Shall her dear Earth and Country see again.
He* You Would grudge my State more did you know your own.

Andromach. Is any part of my Torment unknown?


Helena. The Fickle lot has given you masters shall.


Andramach. Whose Servant? who must I master Call?


Helena. The Pyrrhus.
Scyrian youth by Lot does Challenge thee.


Andromach. Happy Cassandra! (12) Phoebus sets thee free.


Helena. The General has her.


Hecuba. Is Hecuba by any claimed?


Helena. Thou art Ulisses's prey*


Hecuba. What Cruel and unjust Lot sorting Guide
Was this, Princes to Princes that denied?
What God the Captives lots thus badly drew?
What Cruel Judge, who for poor wretches knew
Not how to choose them Lords? And whose dire hand
Has gi'n us such unequal Fates? who send
Does Hectar's mother to (13) Achilles Arms?
I Am to Ulysses sent. And now all harms,
Captivity, and Death, does me behem:
Not of my Bondage but my Lord I am
Ashamed. He Hector's spoil does bear, who does
Achilles Arms bear? Land that Seas enclose
And barren shall that hold my grave? Away
Ulysses lead me; for I make no stay.
My Lord I follow: me my Fates. The Sea
May it no Calm retain! But let it be
With Winds disturbed. The Fates of Priamus
And of my self, wars, Fire follow us!
So shall my pain prove gain to me, so that
Such prize Ulysses by his Lot may get.
But Pyrrhus with a hasty pace does run,
And Cruel Look* why stay'st thou Pyrrhus? Come Priamus and She.
Pierce my breast too, and let * us now Conjoyne:
Old Priam's Murderer, fit this blood of mine
Is by thee to be shed. Polyxena
Take hence and with her Cruel death beray
The Gods above, and eke below. why should
I you beseech? To such rites Seas I would
Have answerable. On your mighty fleet,
And Ship that Carries me all Curses light.

Chorus. Companions Sweeten Grief; it is found
Less hard when Cries whole Swarms resound.
Sorrow and Tears more gently bite
When Troops with like tears are in sight.
Great grief desires still to see,
Many fellows in Misery:
And not alone the pain to bear.
None nills when all suffer a share.
No man wretched himself does hold
If all are so: Men rich in Gold
Remove: Remove all such that use
To Cut rich land with a hundred ploughs;
And then the poors Cast minds will rise.
None's poor but when he rich espies.
In great mishaps it is Sweet to see
In Sadness every face agree.
He does his fate moan and deplore,
Who naked gains the sought-for shore,
By swiming from Shipwreck alone.
He danger less and's Chance does moan,
Who a Thousand ships did see
Together swallowed by the Sea:
Whilst Shipwrack'd planks spread on the Shore
When that the (1) North-west wind does rore,
Holding back the Constrained waves.
(2) Phrixus for Helle's drowning raves,
When that the Golden-fleeced Ram
On's gilded back bore she and him,
And she sell thence into the Sea.
(3) Deucalion and Pyrrha they
When they nothing beheld but waves
Where all but they had made their graves,
Grieved less together. Alas! all we
Anon shall separated be;
And tossed Ships disjoyn our tears,
When that the Sails the Mariners
At Trumpet sound shall hoist; and when
With winds, and hasty oars they from
The flying Shores have to the Deep.
What State of mind shall wretches keep
When Seas increase, and Earth grows small?
When (4) Ida high, lie hidden shall,
Then Children to their Mothers, they
To the Children where Troy stood shall show,
And poynting with their fingers Cry,
That Is Troy where the Smoke on high,
Creeps to Heaven. The Trojans so
By black Smoke shall their Country know.

Act the V.
Scene the I.
Nuncius, Andromach, Hecuba. O Dire! Cruel! horrid! miserable fare
So sad and Cruel wickedness begat
This ten years wars had not. Andromacha's
Grief shall I first Condole, or Hecuba's?
Whose ills some e're thou moan'st, thou mine do Moan.
All others ills I bear; they but their own.
For me all is spoiled: all wretches mine remain.

Nun. The Child's flung from the Tower: the Maid is slain,
But both bore death with an Heroic mind.

Andr. That double ill show, how to death assigned:
Go to, tell all for my indurate heart,
Desires to hear, of the mischief every part.

Nun. (1) One Tower of famous Troy's yet left, and where
Priamus used to Sit wars Arbiter,
And by signs guide the Armies. In that place
His Nephew in his bosom Cherished was,
Where whilst his Sire with fire and sword persu'th
The flying Greeks; h' his acts showed to the youth,
This noted Tower, once the walls chief pride,
But now a Cruel Rock, on every side
Begirt was, with the Captains, and with the
Spread troops of Plebeans: Ships relinquished be
The vulgar thither run. The hill some board
Which does a Prospect to the place afford:
Some gain the high rock, from whose top a band
To see this doleful sight on tiptoes Stand.
Some bays; some beaches, others pines get up:
The whole wood Shakes with the hanging troop.
The broken mountain's highest part one gets,
Another the half burnt houses tops: This sets
Upon a hanging Stone of the falling wall;
Another he on Hector's tomb does Crawle
To see, O wicked! Through the Crowded place
Ulysses walks with a Stately pace,
And Priam's little Nephew in his hand;
Who with no slow pace to the Tower did wend:
From whose high top with an undaunted heart,
His earnest eyes he threw on every part.
As the Stout Lion's tender whelp, who yet
Not able for to tear his prey does threat,
His Courage swells, he tries to bite in vain:
So the fierce youth a hostile hand restrain
Did: whilst he moved into tears below
The Captains, vulgar, and Ulysses too,
He only tearless stood, whom all be waild.
But whilst their Prophets words Ulysses told,
And to those rites the Cruel Gods did call,
He of himself leaped down amongst them all.

An. (2) What Colchian e're; or barbarous (3) Scythe commit
Did such an act? what (4) Caspian borderer that
A lawless people are thus much dared do?
(5) Buseris on's Altar no Children Slew:
Nor did the (6) Horses of Diomedes
Banquet upon such tender limbs as these.
Who shall unto thy limbs give burial?

Nuncius. What limbs remains there after such a fall?
The fall has dashed, and Split his bones, his face,
His father's noble Marks, his bodies grace,
Confounded are by's fall. His neck is broke,
His head is rent, and by flints Cruel stroke
His brains dashed out are; thus his members do
Deformed lie.

Andromach. Thus he is like his father too.


Nun. When that Astyanax from the Tower was thrown,
Waild by the Greeks who this vile fact had done,
The same unto Achilles Tomb do hie
For to perform another Tragedy.
The Rhaetean Seas with gentle waves do beat,
The farther side; the field does Compass it
On the other; and the valley rises there
With a small rise; Like to a Theater,
The midst enclosing. Swarms do fill the shores;
Some hope her death will free their sluggish oars.
Some joy to see their foes Stock slain, To see
Most hate the Crime in which they actors be.
The Trojans too with fear do thither go
Where they behold Troy's utter overthrow.
Now marriage wise the Torches march before
And Helenae.
Tyndaris the bride-maid marches there,
In the head. The Trojans wish (7) Hermiona
Such marriage: and the Adultresse Helena
So given to her Spouse. Both sides amazed are;
The Maid cast down her bashful looks does bare.
But yet her Eyes did shine, and fairer show
Her beauty did that it was wont to do.
So sweeter shows Phaebus's setting light,
When rising Stars bring on the neighbor night.
The people Marvail; all do greatly praise,
The about to die; her Beauty Moyeth these,
These her soft age; Things flying changes those,
But with what Courage she does death oppose
Moves all. Before, Pyrrhus she went: All do
Tremble, and Marvail, and her pity too.
When they unto the sad hill's top were Come,
And Pyrrhus mounted on his Father's tomb,
The bold virago not a step withdrew,
But met the fierce Stroke with a valiant hew.
Such Courage moved the Minds of all, a new
Wonder Pyrrhus was slow to run her through.
But when his sword h' had hidden in her skin,
At a large wound blood flowed, where death crept in.
Nor dying did she Courage lose, she prone
And with an angery force fell, as if on
Achilles she the (8) Earth would heavy make.
Both Greeks and Trojans wept, these prively
With fear, the others wept more openly.
Such order had these rites, the ground no drop
But the blood-thirsty Tomb, her blood drunk up.

Hecuba. Go Greeks, you go home now in safety may,
And your Safe Ships with spread Sails plow the Sea.
The Maid and Child are slain: wars done; where may
I bear my Tears? where burst death's long delay?
For Daughter, Nephew, Husband shall I moan?
For Country? or for all? or me alone?
Death's my Sole vote. Infants and virgins be
Slain by thee, where some e're, thou ragest me
Alone thou fear, and shun'st; from me thy flight
Thou take, though among swords, darts, fires, sought all Night.
Foes, dangers, fire, has not my Members spilled,
Though I so near to Priam stood when Killed.

Nuncius. Have Captives now to Sea: The sayls are spread,
The Ships already are unharboured.

FINIS.
These Comments are not for the learned's sight,
The dark unlearned these Tapers only light.
COMMENTS UPON THE First ACT.
(1) THE Inconstant Gods] It may be meant the Inconstant Goddess Fortune, who
was the Servant of the Gods, to whom was attributed the disposal of all
sublunary things, she was painted with the horn of plenty in one hand, and a
wheel in the other, by which was meant, her disposal of all earthly riches and
the inconstancy of them:

Volat mobiles alis
Nec ulli prestat velox fortuna fidem.
Fortune flies with swift wings, nor does
With any, fickle she, keep faith. Sen. in Hippol.
She was painted, also blindfolded, as bestowing her favors either
impartially, or promiscuously as Senec. in Hippol.

Res humanas ordine nullo
Fortuna regit, spargitque manu
Munera Caeca.
Humane affairs w'thout order Fortune guides:
And with a blind hand all her gifts divides.
Or else,

-- Faciles dare summa deos, eademque tueri
Difficiles. --
The Gods are prone great things to send,
But backward the same to defend.
(2) The Great work of the Gods above.] Neptune and Apollo, who induing humane
shapes, were hired by Laomedon, to build the Walls of Troy, which being
finished, he denied them their promised reward: The Gods angry at his
perfidiousness and perjury afflicted the City, Neptune with inundations, Apollo
with a pestilence. Laomedon Consulting the Oracle, it was answered, that the
Gods could not be appeased, without they chose a Trojan Virgin by lot yearly,
and exposed her to be devoured by a monstrous Whale: After many had run this
fatal Chance, it fell at last on Hesione, Laomedons daughter, Hercules coming
thither by chance, and seeing the Virgin bound to a rock, bargains with
Laomedon to set her at liberty, and slay the Monster for his Horses begotten of
divine seed: Hercules performed his part, but Laomedon denying him his reward,
he returns afterward with an army and sacked Troy, taking Priamus then a Child
prisoner, but having flain Laomedon, he sets Priamus at liberty to enjoy his
fathers Realm. Thus Ovid. Met. 11.

-- Apollo,
Cumque Tridentigero tumidi genetore profundi
Mortalem induitur formam, Phrygiaeque Tyranne
Aedificat muros, pacto pro moenibus auro, etc.
By Sands Translated thus. -- Apollo,
Who with the father of the tumid main
Indues a mortal shape: and entertain
Themselves for unregarded Gold to build
The Phrygian Tyrants walls. That work fulfilled
The King their promised reward denies, etc.
(3) To whose assistance Came] Rhesus King of Thrace, whose horses had they
drunk of the River Xanthe by Troy, (as the Oracle delivered) Troy had been
invincible, but he was slain, and his horses taken before they came thither by
Ulysses and Dromedes.

(4) Tanais] put for Ister which falls (like Nile) into the Sea at 7 mouths.

(5) And those that near first see] Memnon with his Eastern Troops the Son of
Tithon and Aurora Priamus's Nephew: slain by Achilles, whose ashes were
converted to fowls. Ovid. Met. 13.

-- Cum Memnonis arduus alto
Corruit igne rogus: --
Atra favilla volat: glomerataque Corpus in unum
Densatur, saciemque Capit -- etc.
Sands Translat. -- When greedy flame, devoured the funeral pile,
The flying, dying Sparkles jointly grow
Into one body. Color, form, life, spring
To it from fire, which levity does wing,
First like a fowl, forthwith a Fowl indeed, etc.
(6) Those too where with the Sea Tigris] The Troops that came with Memnon,
about the Perfic Gulf, where the swift river Tigris disimbokes it self.

(7) And she that neighboured] Penthesilea, Queen of the Amazons, slain by
Achilles. See note third, upon the 5 Act.

(8) A Thousand Ships] the number of the Grecian Fleet, when they first set out
for Troy.

(9) Cassandra] Priamus's daughter, whom Phoebus loving, Sued for her
maidenhead, which she promised him on Condition that he would indue her with
the gift of Prophecy, or foretelling things to come; which having granted her,
She would no(...) to her promiss, which the deceived God seeing ad(...) his
former gift, that whatsoever she foretold, though never so true, should not be
Credited: Nor did the Trojans believe what she predicted till afterward they
found it true to their sorrow.

Virg. Aen. 2. Tunc etiam fatis aperit Cassandra suturis
Ora, dei jussu, non unquam Credita Teucris.
Cassandra then, these future fates foretold,
Whom Trojans never believed, so Phoebus would.
Ogleby interpret. (10) With Child I this]

(11) It Is by my fire brand]

Hecuba when she was with-Child of Paris, dreamed that she was delivered of a
firebrand, which proved true, in that he was the Cause of Troys destruction.

(12) Dromedes] King of Aetolia, the Constant Companion of Ulysses in all his
exploites: In stealing the horses of Rhesus and the Palladium of Troy, which
could not be Conquered whilst that remained there.

(13) False Sinon] He by whose Craft, the wooden horse was admitted into Troy,
out of whose belly came the hidden Greeks, who surpised the City by that
Stratagem.

(14) The murder of the King] Priamus slain by Pyrrhus at the Altar of Jupiter
Hercius, which was in the Court, between the Entrance and the Hall, where the
Kings use to be Crowned.

(15) Helenus's wife] Andromach, who after Pyrrhus had taken Hermione from
Orestes, was given to Helenus, who was Priamus's Son, and a great Prophet; So
that the time is here anticipated by the Author.

(16) Another does Antenors Crave] Theano. Antenor was a Trojan Prince, who
after Troys overthrow, fled to the Venetians: he built Padua.

(17) In Imitation of mourners, as the manner of the Preficae was, to knock
their breasts, tear their dishevelled tresses, and lam(...) groans and
ejulations.

(18) Ida's direful King] Paris, whose residence was on mount Ida, where whilst
he kept sheep, the three Goddesses Juno, Pallas, Venus, presented themselves to
him, making him the arbitrator of their strife for the Golden Ball, which he,
despising the proser'd wisdom of Pallas, the Riches of Juno, adjudged to Venus,
who had promised him the fairest Beauty in the world, which was Helena, whom
she gave him in reward for his arbitration.

Upon the Chorus.
(1) To Amyclas] A City in Laconia, where the Brothers of Helena, Castor and
Pollux were born.

(2) With mother Cybeles Sacred Pines] The Ship in which Paris went, being made
of the Pines that grew on Mount Ida, a Mountain Sacred to Cybele, and where she
was chiefly worshipped, from whence her Priests where Called Idaei dactyli.

(3) In the Sigean fields] The fields adjoining to Troy, denominated from the
promontorie Sigeum, by which was the Sepulcher of Achilles.

(4) O Queen lift up thy hand] after the manner of the Praeficae, which was the
sign to begin their lamentations.

(5) Your hair untye] Here is described the custom of those women hired to
lament at funerals, they wore their hair disshevel'd, their necks and breasts
bare, and striking their hands against them, made a fearful ejulation, and
howling.

Hae la crymis sparsere deos, hae pectora duro
Af flixere solo: lacerasq, in limine sacro
Attonitae fudere Comas: votisque vocari
Assuetas crebris feriunt ululatibus aures.
-- Una madentes
Scissa genas, planctu liventes atra lacertos,
Nunc ait o miserae contundite pectora matres,
Nunc laniate Comas, etc.
Lucan. lib. 2. May English.
One weeps before the Gods; one her torn locks
Throws in the Sacred porch: another knocks
Her breast against the ground: the God whose ears
Were used to prayers, now only howlings hears:
-- But one there
Her plaint-bruis`d arms, and moysten'd cheeks did tear
Now now quoth she, oh Mothers tear your hair
Now beat your breasts --
Such was the manner of the ancients mourning fully
described in his Chorus.
(6) Make all the Rhaetian Shores] A promontory of Troy, in which was the
Sepulcher of Ajax Telamonius.

(7) The Echo found, In Mounts and Caves] Is the repercussion of the air
against some rock or hill, or some obvious body which repears the dilated sound
by reflection. But the Poets have feign`d it the effect of Love, whose
Metamorphosis you may read in Ovid. lib. 3. She was a Nymph of the river
Cephissus, who falling in Love with Narcissus, and being by him rejected pined
her self with grief to a stone, her voice only remaining, etc.

-- In aere succus
Corporis omnis abit: vox tantum atque ossa supersunt,
Vox manet: ossa ferunt lapidis traxisse figuram.
Inde latet sylvis, nulloque in monte videtur:
Omnibus auditur, sonus est qui vivit in illa.
-- Her blood converts to air,
Nothing was left her but her voice and bones:
The voice remains: the other turned to stones.
Concealed in words, in mountains never found.
She Is heard of all: and all is but a sound.
Sands. Here it is said she is never found in Mountains, and that is because
there is no obstacle to strike back the air, but if you stand at a Convenient
distance from the mountain (especially if there be any Caverns.) you will
according to my author find this vocal Nymphs habitation to be at the foot of
the hill, or on the sides of the rock.

(8) Our wounds do flow with blood fresh Torn] They did believe that humane
blood was pleasing to the defunct, which made them not only use these
Praeficae to tear their breasts, but also the gladiators were brought into
use, who unmercifully shed one another blood.

(9) A Sconce for tired Trojans] Hector might be well called the safeguard of
Troy, for whilst he lived she was impregnable.

Virg. O lux Dardaniae, spes O fidissima Tencrum.
O Dardan light! O Troy's chief Confidence.
Hector -- Cum quo sua Troja sepulta est
Conduntur pariter qui periere simul.
Hector with whom Troy's sepulcher'd, they lie
Together now, who did together dye.
(10) Twice lost old man] He was twice Captivated when a youth, and being lead
into Greece, he was ransomed by his Sister Hesione.

(11) Thou living but one ill sustain] That is, by the Death of Hector the
Kings Son, now the King himself is slain.

(12) And twice abode th* Herculean shaft] Without the arrows of Hercules, Troy
could not have been conquered, they were fatal to Troy; Twice, that is this
last time, and once before, when Hercules subdued it: See the 2 note of the
first Act.

(13) At great Joves Altar] See note 14. Act the first.

Virg. Aedibus in mediis, nudoque sub aetheris axe.
Ingens ara suit.
Amid'st the Court under heavens Canopy.
An Altar stood, etc.
(14) Thy Trunk]

Vir. Aen. 2. Jacet ingens littore Truncus
Avulsumque humeris caput, etc.
His body lies on the shore without a head.
Here Virgil alludes to the fall of Pompey, whom our author follows.
(15) Neither Atrides] Agamemnon and Menelaus both Sons to Atreus.

(16) Mycene] A City of Peloponnesus, built by Perseus, in which Agamemnon the
Captain general of the Greeks reigned.

(17) In the shade of the Elysian wood] The habitation of the blessed after
death, some supposed it to be in the Sphere of the Moon, others placed it in
the Atlantic or Fortunate Islands, Homer in Spain, Plutarch in Britain. It is
supposed the Greeks borrowed their Elysium from the Egyptians, who came to the
Knowledge of it by the Hebrews, so that it was answerable to their Paradise,
where Pious Souls received all the joys and pleasures annexed to the other
life. But the Poets have described the pleasures of Elysium too sensually, it
may be as Mahomet did his Paradise, not but that they knew better, but knowing
that such sensual descriptions would soonest take with vulgar Capacities.

Virg. Aenei. 6. Devenere Locos laetos, and amaena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas.
Largior hic Campis ether, etc.
In joyful places they arrived at last,
And came to Groves where happy souls do rest,
In pleasant Greens the dwellings of the blessed.
Here larger Skies did cloth the purple rays
The field, etc. Ogilvius.
Upon the second Act, Scene the First.
(1) BOth to the war] when the Grecians lay at Aulis, a City of Baeotia ready
to embarque themselves for Troy, Agamemnon by chance killed Diana's Stag; for
which being wroth, she stayed their progress with contrary winds, till
Agamemnon was fain to appease her anger with the slaughter of his daughter
Iphigenia on her Altar. For which Sacrifice, Ulysses was employed with his
Craft to gain her from her mother, which he did, by beginning a Marriage betwixt
her and Achilles. But when she was ready to be Sacrificed,

Victa dea est, nubemque oculis objecit and inter
Ossicium, turbamque sacri, vocesque precantum,
Supposita fertur mutasse Mycenida Cerva.
-- Dian' does pity show
Who over their eyes a cloudy meteor threw;
And while they prosecute her rites and prayed
Produced a hind to represent the Maid.
Ovid. Met. 12. From thence by the Goddess she was conveyed to Taurica, etc.

(2) The Sacred Grove] on Ida Sacred to Cybele.

(3) The Gods below] were Pluto, Proserpina, Minos, Aeacus, Rathamantus. The
Furies; Parcae, Hecate and others.

(4) Thessalian Prince] Achilles.

(5) The Great Ghost] which is meant either, because that Ghosts (as they held)
appeared in a larger Size than their bodies, or it has respect to the Stature
of Achilles, which they say was nine Cubits high.

(6) The Proem to Troys fatal fall] which was when he encountered with, and
overcame Cisseus King of Thrace, father to Hecuba, and Telephus Prince of
Mysia, who were coming to the aid of Troy.

(7) Neptnnian Cycnus] He was Nephew to Neptune, and invulnerable, as Ovid.
met. 12.

-- Removebitur omne
Tegminis officium, tamen indistrictus abibo.
-- Should I display
My naked breast, thy force could find no way.
Sand. However Achilles after a long sight throtl'd him with his Knees, but his
body was not to be found, being Converted into a Swan.

(8) Slow Xanthus] A river by Troy called also Scamandrus.

(9) Great Hector and Troy drawing on the ground] when Achilles had slain
Hector, he tied him to his Chariot, and drew him round about the walls of Troy;
and the tomb of Patroclus, one whom Hector had slain in Achilles Armor. He was
kept inhumated 12 days, and was at length Ransomed by Priamus. Homer Il. lib.
23.

Troy drawing on the ground] for when Achilles had slain Hector, he Cried out,
I have overcome Troy; in that he was the only defense and safeguard of the
City.

(10) A Chore of Tritons] Sea Monsters, whose upper parts were like men, their
lower like fishes; They were the Trumpeters of Neptune, and at the Sound of
their Concha, the Seas see their raging, and become Calm.

Caeruleus Triton, cava buccina sumitur illi
Tum quoque, ut ora dei madida rorantia barba
Contigit, and cecinit jussos inflata recessus, Ovid. Met. 1.
Omnibus audita est telluris and aequoris undis, Ovid. Met. 1.
Et quibus est undis audita Coercuit omnes.
Blew Triton his wreathed Trumpet takes, and set
To his large mouth, he Sounded a retreat;
All Floods it heard that Earth or Ocean knew,
And all the Floods that heard the same withdrew.
(11) Hymenaean] The Marriage Song, from Hymen the God of marriage, which the
Grecians used to sing with the repetition of Hymenaee, as the Romans did
Thalassio.

Upon the second Scene, Act the second.
(1) Troy with the Earth did lay] See note 9 upon the second Act, Scene the
first.

(2) At Seyros]* An Island in the Aegean Sea one of the Cyclades, and the
Country of King Lycomedes: In this place Achilles was Concealed habited like a
virgin, and accompaning with Deidamia the Kings daughter, he got her with
Child, by whom he had Pyrrhus: he was brought hither by his mother Thetis
goddess of the Sea, because she had foreseen his fate before Troy, but he was
drawn hence by the subtle persuasions of Ulysses.

(3) Lesbos] An Island also in the Aegean, which Achilles overran before he
joined to the rest of the Greeks.

(4) Nestor's years] A man very eloquent, who was at the Trojan wars, although
he had lived.

Annos bis centum: tunc tertia vivitur aetas.

Two Ages, then he in the third did live.

(5) Guiles and Guise] When she hid him, as in the second note.

(6) Telephus (7) The same knew how to wound and heal] Telephus the K. of Mysia
denying Achilles passage through his Country, when he went to the wars of Troy,
they incountered together, in which battle Telephus was wounded by Achilles,
for which wound he could attain no remedy. Thereupon the Oracle being
Consulted, it was answered, that he must seek the help from that which wounded
him; being then reconciled to Achilles, he granted him some of the rust from
that Spear with which he was wounded, which immediately cured his wound.

(8) Thebos] A City in Cilicia the Country of

(9) Aelion] The father of Andromach.

(10) Lyrnessus] A City under the dition of Troy, and the Country of

(11) Briseis] Otherwise Hippodamia, who after the taking of the City, fell by
lot to Achilles.

(12) And Chrysa Cause of strife to us] A City of Cilicia under the government
of Mines, the husband of Briseis, who was slain by Achilles: When this City was
taken, Chrysis otherwise Astynome the daughter of Chryses, the Priest of Apollo
Smintheus, was taken away by Agamemnon, for whom her father with prayers and
entreaties implored Agamemnon, but not prevailing, he sought aid of the God he
Served, who forthwith annoyed the Grecians Camp with so great a pestilence,
that Agamemnon was enforced to redeliver him his daughter, being persuaded to
it by Achilles: But Agamemnon being enraged at the loss of his prize, forceably
took Brefeis from Achilles, which begat an implacable feud between those two
Princes, insomuch that Achilles by no entreaties could be persuaded to the
wars, till Patroclus whom he dearly loved was slain, in whose revenge he fought
against Troy.

(13) Famous Tenedos] An Island over against Troy, very famous before those
wars.

-- Tenedos notissima fama
Iusula, dives opum, Priami dum regna manebant.
-- Tenedos, the Isle well Known
By fame, and rich whilst Priam held the Crown.
Virg. Aenaeid. 1. (14) Thracian flocks] It may be that the Greeks put their
horses there to pasture, which they might take from Rhesus King of Thrace,
which lay opposite to Tenedos.

(15) Sacred Cilla] A Town in Cilicia, famous for the Fane of Apollo.

(16) Caycus] A river of Mysia, running through the fields of Pergamus.

(17) Memnon] See note 4, Act the first.

(18) The Amazon] Penthesilea the Queen of the Amazons.

(19) To Helen Immolate] that is for her sake rather than retard the fleet: See
note first, second Act, Scene first.

(20) Aeacides] Achilles.

[21] To light his Grave] The Ancients had a fond conceit that the Soul was
inhumated with the body, therefore for her better getting forth to go to the
Seat of the happy; they used to with that the Earth might lie light upon them,
for which there were many rites to the Diis Manibus performed, as the pouring
Milk, Honey, Wine, Oil, and Flowers upon the Grave, So Eueas at his Fathers
Tomb. Virg. -- duo rite mero libans Carchefia Baccho, Fundit tumi, duo lacte
novo, duo sanguine sacto, Purpureosque jacet flores -- powered two Bowls of
rich wine on the floor, Two of new milk, and two of Sacred gore, strewing the
place with purple flowers.
As also sacrificing of beasts: Nor was there a greater imprecation than that
earth might lie heavy upon the Deceased.

(22) Wilt always rob us of our Spoyls] As when he took Bryseis from her
Father. See Note 12. on this Scene.

(23) Thy Sute] When Achilles and he were fallen out to reconcile whom Ulysses
endeavored.

(24) A King of life bereave] Priamus whom he flew. See Note 14. Act 1.

25) Scyros] See Note 2. on this Scene.

(26) No Brothers villany] That was Atreus the Father of Agamemnon, and
Thyestes Atreus's Brother; Thyestes had forced the Wife of Atreus, for revenge.
This Atreus roasted his Children, and put them before him to eat: At the sight
of which horrid fact, the Sun was said to run back again toward the East.

(27) Our Kin] Thetis Mother to Achilles.

(28) By a Maid] See Note 2. on this Scene.

(29) Aeacus] The Grandfather of Achilles.

(30 With Jove] The Father of Aeacus, who was a Judge in Hell, and so Achilles
Great grandfather.

(31) Thou who did see the Grecian Fleet lose] When the Navy lay wind-bound
at Aulis, it was by his Oracles that Iphigenia was sacrificed, by whose death
they had a permission to proceed. See Note 1. Act 2. Scene 1.

(32) Ionia] A Region of the lesser Asia between Caria and Aeolis.

Upon the Chorus.
(1) Souls the Bodies buried live?] Seneca according to the opinion of the
Epicures, brings in the Chorus questioning the Immortality of the Soul, and
making as if the Soul perishes with the Body, an impious and unwarrantable
tenent.

(2) When the next of kin shall close the Eyes] It was the custom of the
Ancients, when any body was dying, for the next or nearest of kin to receive
the last breath of the dying party into his mouth, and also to close his eyes
being dead. Thus Anna did to the dying Dido her Sister.

Virg. Aeneid. 4. -- Extremus si quis super halitus errat
Ore legam --
And if that any breath be wandering found
My lips shall gather it.
(3) The Funeral Fire] The Ancients did not inter the bodies of the dead, but
burned them, because they were thereby made secure from the malice of their
Enemies, who had formerly used to dig the humated bodies out of their graves,
that they might revenge themselves upon the dead Corpse. This Pile was called
Pyra, built always in form of a Tabernacle.

(4) Pegasean motion] That is, Swift, from Pegasus the winged Horse of Perseus,
who arose out of the blood of Medusa by him slain; who when he took his flight
to Heaven from Helicon raised the Rock with his foot, from whence sprung the
Muses fountain Hippocrene.

(5) Hecate] The Moon: from (...), from shouting or darting down her rays. She
was called also Dea triformis, Three formed Goddess; because she was called in
Hell Hecate, on the Earth Diana, in Heaven Luna; signifying the several Aspects
of the Moon: Luna when she is full of light said to be in Heaven; Hecate when
she is in the Change, that she affords us no light at all, then said to be in
Hell; Diana when it is between the full and the new, then said to be on Earth.

(6) The Stygian Lake] Hell on the region of Pluto. From Styx (which signifies
Hateful) a river of Hell, had in great veneration by the gods themselves; and
to swear by Styx was an inviolable oath, for whosoever of the gods brake it,
was divested of Immortality, and kept from Nectar and Ambrosia a hundred years.

(7) Boreas] The North Wind, whose nature is to dissipite clouds.

(8) Time us and Chaos] They held that all things at the appointed time, the
world and all, should be changed and turned into that confused mass it was at
first, from whence it should spring again; and thus it should do vicissively
for ever. This was the Stoics Eternity.

(9) Realm of Dis] Hell the Habitation of Pluto.

10) Taenarus] A Promontory of Laconia, where the Poers feigned to be an
entrance into Hell.

(11) Cerberus] The three-headed Dog of Hell, who was the Porter at Pluto's
Palace: He was drawn hence by Hercules, who no sooner saw light but he spu'd,
from which vomit sprung the deadly Aconite, or Wolfe-bane.

Upon Act the third Scene the first.
(1) When Achilles drew my Hector's limbs] See Note the 9. upon Act 2. Scene
the 1.

(2) Feigned Achilles] Patroclus the Companion of Achilles, who having endued
his Armor, fought against Hector and was slain, Hector supposing he had slain
Achilles.

(3) This holy Seat] The Sepulchers or Domiciles of the Dead were always held
sacred by the Ancients, and held a most heinous crime to violate them, and were
therefore spared by the Enemies themselves. The Sepulcher was a kind of vault
arched and roof'd within, where the urn or little chest which held the bones
was placed, without, it was built with costly compartments and rare
workmanship, and sometimes to a stupendous greatness.

Upon Act the third Scene the second.
(1) Orestes the Son of Agamemnon.

(2) Suffer what the Conqueror did] See Note 1. Act 2. Scene 1.

(3) Mothers treacheries, yea wiles of goddesses, I have undone] Clytemnestra's
when he got from her Iphigenia. See Note 1. Act. 2. Scene 1. And Thetis's, when
he gained Achilles to the Wars. See Note 2. Act 2. Scene 2. And also Pallas's
when he brought away her Palladium out of Troy.

(4) Telemachus] The Son of Ulysses.

(5) Pelasgians] Grecians, from Pelasgia a part of Greece adjoining to
Macedonia, which was so denominated from Pelasgus the Son of Jupiter.

(6) Lightly on Hector spread] See Note 21. Act. 2. Scene 2.

(7) So so he is caught] This Ulysses most cunningly feigns, the better to
detect the Mothers fear, and by her sudden surprisal, judges that Astyanax is
alive.

(8) Thus Chalcas saith] This is also feigned by Ulysses, the better to arrive
at the end of his project, which was to gain Astyanax into his power; for as
their Augur Chalcas had said, their ships could not be loosed from those
shores, nor the Greeks return home, till Hector's Son was thrown from the top
of a high tower.

(9) Thy Ghosts] The Ancients gave divine honors to the manes of their friends,
and chiefly worshipped their lares or household gods, above others.

(10 That which you sold] Hector ransomed by Priamus, as is showed before, Note
9. Act 2. Scene 1.

(11) Of Deities your friends] Of Pallas who was helpful to the Greeks, and
took part with them against the Trojans, when he took her Palladium.

(12) Amazon] Queen Penthesilea, as before,

(13) Menas] Agave the Daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, the Mother of Pentheus,
who with other Bacchis frows tore her own Son to pieces, because he despised
their Rites.

Prima videt, prima est insano concita cursu,
Prima suum misso violavit Penthea Thyrso
Matter: -- Membra viri manibus direpta nefandis.
His Mother frantickly first to him ran,
First through her own Son thrust her greedy spear,
And limb-meal him with cruel hands does tear.
Ovid. Met. 3. (14) Thyrsus] The Insignis of Bacchus, it was a spear wreathed
about with Vine and Ivy-leaves, which his Maenades or Priestesses carried about
in his Orgia.

(15) Chaste wife] Penelope, who continued chaste twenty years in her Husbands
absence, notwithstanding the daily enticements of her woers.

Upon Act the third Scene the third.
See Note 2. Act. 1.
(1) The tears of her young Princely Heir. (2) More Faith express.
(3) Alcides] Hercules.

(4) Who Monsters by his strength subdued, broke Hells gates, returned thence]
The Monsters were the hydra, a Snake with 7 heads, which as fast as he lopt off
one, two sprung in the place of it. The Nemaean Lion, the Erymanthian Bore, the
Cretian Bull, the Stymphalides vast Birds in Arcadia, the Hesperian Dragon, the
three-bodied Geryon, the Centaures and diverse others. He bound Cerberus the Dog
of Hell. And as Ovid. Met. 7.

-- specus est tenebroso caecus hiatu:
Et via declivis, per quam Tyrinthius heroes
Cerberon attraxit nexis adamante catenis.
There is a blind steep Cave with foggy jaws,
Through which the bold Tirinthian Hero's strained
Dragged Cerberus with adamant inchain'd.
He brought from Hell Alceste the Wife of King Admetus.

(5) Hercules's Arrows] See Note 12. on the 1. Chorus.

(6) True the place] Where Hector had showed so many noble exploits, and where
he was ignominiously and cruelly dragged by Achilles about after he was slain.

(7) Greeks too have fall'n] Iphiginia as before; Palamedes an Enemy to
Ulysses, and by him circumvented and falsely accused, was stoned to death before
Troy: Ajax who in contention with him for the Armor of Ulysses, being overcome
by his subtilty, slew himself. Ovid. Met. 13.

(8) Solemn Lustres] Which was every five year performed by the Romans, in
purging their Armies by Sacrifices and the Censors registring at the just
valuation of every Citizens estate, then they led about the Army a Bull, a Sow,
and a Ram, and afterward sacrificed them. At which times used to be performed
the

(9) Trojan Sport] Which also was yearly performed by all the choice and noble
Youths of Rome; it was the running with the Spear, or Tilt and Turnament,
brought by Ascanius the Son of Aeneas out of Troy.

Hunc morem, hos cursus, atque haec certamina primus
Ascanius longam muris cum cingeret Albam,
Rettulit, and priscos docuit celebrata Latinos.
Ascanius when long Alba he did frame,
Did first appoint this Custom, and this Game,
And the ancient Latins taught to celebrate.
Virg. Aeneid. 5. [10] Nor with swift feet dance] This was a Dance in complete
harness, invented by Pyrrhus, and therefore called Pyrrhica saltatio, or the
Pyrrhic Dance. By this means the Romans trained up their Youth that they might
be inured to Arms in their tender years, and that by this Military Exercise
they might come to gain a perfect command of their bodies, the better and more
nimbly to defend themselves and annoy their Enemies. In this Dance they were
excited by the

[11] Warlike Strains] Of Curve trumpets, that is, Phrygian, which excited to
War, and inflamed the mind to Battle, and Heroic exploits. There were three
other sorts of Music, which were the Lydian, which was fitted to cheer and
exhilarate those who were dejected through grief. Doric which was grave, and
pacified the Disturbanes of the mind. Ionian which sharpened the wit, and
excited the mind to contemplation of Celestial things. And lastly, the
Aeolian, which was requisite for those who were about to go to rest, conducing
to the settling of the mind.

(12) Hair rent off] It was accounted a great testification of their friendship
to tear off their Hair, at the Funeral of their Friends, and to make it
squallid, and to neglect the tying of it up.

(13) His Ashes lick down] They used rather then the Ashes of their Friends
should come to any misfortune, to bury them safe in their own bowels, so
Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus served the ashes of her Husband Mausolus,
which she drunk mixed with Wine. Gellius lib. 10.

Upon the Chorus.
(1) Tempe] A pleasant Valley in Thessaly, watered with the River Peneus.

[2] Phthia] the Country of Achilles, and the Myrmidons who went with him to
the war of Troy, being a very valiant people, and at first sprung from
Pismires, at the Vote of Aeacus, which Jupiter granted because his land was
laid wast by a Pestilence.

Ovid Met. 7. -- parcum genus est, patiensque laborum
Quaesitique tenax, and quod quaesita reservet.
-- A people given to spare
Patient of Labor: what they get, preserve.
[3] Trachin.] A very stony Country by the Mount Oeta.

[4] Jolcos] The Country of Jason who ventured for the Golden Fleece.

[5] Or hundred citied Crete] An Island at the Mouth of the Aegean Sea famous
for an hundred Cities, therefore called (...), now Candia.

[6] Gortyne] A Town in Crete.

[7] Tricca] A Town in Thessaly.

[8] Methony] A City in Thrace.

[9] Oetian Woods] from the Mount Oeta where Hercules burnt himself.

[10] Olenus] A Town of Elis, a Country of Greece, watered by the River Alpheus.

[11] Pleuron Diana's Enemy] A City of Aetolia, the Country of Meleager, whose
Father Oeneus, when he had sacrificed to other Gods, and omitted the rites of
Diana, she incensed, sent a great a Bore, who spoiled all the Country, but was
slain at last by Meleagrus.

(12) Troezen] A Maritimate of Peloponesus, the Country of Theseus.

(13) Peleon] A Town of Thessalie, whose denomination is from the Mountain
Peleon the Country of Protheus, a Grecian Captain against Troy.

(14) The third Step] It is fabl'd, that when the great Gygantomachy was that
they heaped one Mountain upon another to come at heaven, the first was Pelion,
upon which they threw Ossa; the next was Olympus. See Ovid. Met. 1.

(15) Chiron] One of the Centaures, very skilful in Medicine and Chyrurgery,
whose habitation was in this place, where he became the Schoolmaster to

(16) The Cruel youth] Achilles, who learned of him Medicine, Music and
Horsemanship.

(17) Carystos] An Island, one of the Cyclades noted for Marble.

(18) Chalcis] A City of Eubaea divided from Aulis in Baeotia, by

(19) Euripus the unquiet Sea] which ebbs and flows seven times in the space
of twenty four hours. Into this Sea Aristotle because he could not find out the
cause, cast himself with

-- Quia Ego non possum capere te, tu capia(...) me.
Because I cannot comprehend thee, do thou take me.
(10) Echinae] Or Echinides, small Islands right against the mouth of the River
Achelous.

(11) Gonvessa] A Town in Aetolia.

(11) Enispae] Islands in the Aegean.

(13) Ptrithados] A Village by Attica, a Country of Greece.

(24) Elusis] A City not far from Athens, from Elusius, who kindly received
Ceres, when she sought after her Daughter Proserpina. Here her Sacrifices were
yearly performed, called

Hidden rites] because they were performed in the Twy-light, with Torches, and
only by Women, whose mysteries it was a great crime to blab, or reveal to any.

(25) Salamin] An Island in the Euboick Sea, opposite to Athens, the Country of
Ajax Telamonius.

(26) Calidonia] A City in Aetolia, where the Bore (mentioned note 11.) ranged.

(27) Bessa and Scarphe] two Cities of Thessaly, by which runs the River
Titaressus.

(28) Pylus] A Town in the West of Peloponesus, the habitation of Nestor

(29) Pharis] A City of Laconia.

(30) Pisa] A City of Elis under the protection of Jove.

[31] Elis] A Country of Greece, and also a Town in that Country, where the
Olympic gains were celebrated every fifth year.

[32] Sparta] The Country of Helena, a City in Peloponesus, renowned for the
Laws of Lycurgus.

[33] Argos] A City in Peloponesus hard by Athens, from which the Greecians
were called Argolici.

[34] Pelops Mycena] The Kingdom of Agamemnon, once under the Regiment of
Pelops Son to Tantalus, from whom all that Region took its name Peloponesus, in
which this City stood.

[35] Nevitus] A Mountain in Ithaca.

[36] Zacynthus [An Island under the Government of Ulysses.

[37] Ithaca] The Country of Ulysses, an Island in the Ionian Sea, full of
sharp rocks.

Upon Act the fourth.
[1] Dardanian House] from Dardanus the son of Jupiter and Electra, the founder
of Troy, from whom as also the region about was called Dardania.

[2] Tethis] the Wife of Oceanus, the Ladies of the Sea, were the Sea Nymphs
who attended upon her.

(3) Thetis] was the Wife of Peleus, and the Mother of Achilles, a great
Sea-Goddesse also, and could vary shapes at her pleasure. See Ovid. Met. lib.
11.

[4] Peleus] The Father of Achilles.

[5] Nereus] The Son of Oceanus and Thetis, a Sea God, father to the Sea Nymphs
of whom they were called Nereids.

[6] The ruin, Pest, and Plague] she was the cause of the ruin and utter
overthrow of famous Troy, and the loss of many noble Greecians, she was

Virg. -- Trojae and patriae Communis Erinnys.
Common Erinnys both to Greece and Troy.
(7) Thy Husbands] Menelaus her former, from whom Paris ravished her, and Paris
to whom she had been married.

(8) Nuptial Taxes] It was the Custom of the Romans to use torches at their
Weddings, from which a certain clammy liquor like Tar issued out; they were
called Tedas from the tree Teda. They were five in number, which represented
Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Suadela and Lucina, which were called the Nuptial or
Conjugal powers, for the help they afforded the new married Couple.

(9) Being Venus gift] See Note 18. Act. 1.

(10) O Paris hand that thus so lightly stroke] Who had not wholly slain
Achilles. For Achilles being drawn into Troy under the prext of marrying
Polyxena was, slain by Paris.

(11) A gay troop of Children] Some say she had 15, some say 22, others 50.

(12) I only her call Childe] She had also Cassandra living, but she was not
her companion, being the Priestess of Apollo, and so as it were none of hers.
And therefore she was to be free from the lot, as not to have been accounted as
among the spoil, but she was allotted to Agamemnon.

Achilles Arms] That was to Ulysses, who had the Armor of Achilles in
possession, being to him allotted by the Greeks, from Ajax Telamonius, which so
enraged him that he slew himself. Ovid. Met. 13.

Upon the Chorus.
(1) North west wind] Corus in the Latin: a wind usual in the Sicilian Seas,
which drives the waters on the Italian Coasts.

(2) Phryxus for Helles drowning raves

When that the golden fleeced Ram] Phryxus and Hell were the Children of
Athamas King of Thebes and Nepheles: their Mother being dead, and Athamas
having espoused Ino, she playing the usual pranks of a Stepmother, they were
forced to fly, and taking a golden fleeced Ram which was given them by their
Father, they adventured to swim over the narrow Freet between Europe and Asia
upon his back; but Hell falling off, was drowned, and so Christn'd those
Waters with her name, which has ever since been called Hellespont. But Phryxus
gaining safe to the shore, fled to the Father of Medea, to whom he gave this
golden fleeced Ram, which occasioned the adventure of Jason and the Argonautes
to fetch this Fleece, which they called Phryxeus from Phryxus.

(3) Deucalion and Pyrrha] This Ogygian deluge happened a Thousand and five
hundred years before the building of Rome, and overflowed a great part of
Greece, Of which the Poets speak so large, that some have thought it that of
Noah, when the whole world was submerg'd.

(4) Ida High] Ida is a high Hill by Troy, the South part of which makes a
Promontory, and runs into the Sea. In this place it was that Paris gave
sentence for Venus. Of which before.

Upon the fifth Act.
(1) One Tower] So Ovid Met. 13.

Mittitur Astyanax, illis de turribus, unde*
Pugnantem pro se, proavitaque regna tuentem
Saepe videre patrem, monstratum a matre solebat.
Astyanax thrown is from that Tower from whence
He had seen his Father, by his Mother shown,
Fight for his Kingdoms safety and his own.
(2) What Colchian] Colchis was the Country of Medea, which, ever since she
most inhumanely tore in pieces her Brother Absertes, has been branded with the
stigma of Cruel and Barbarous, yet Andromach complains (the people thereof) to
be exceeded by the Greeks in Cruelty.

(3) Barbarous Scyth] A people in the North abhorring Humanity, they neither
Till nor Sow the ground, nor build Houses, Cities nor Towns, but all their
riches lies in their Cattle, which they drive from place to place, carrying
with them their Wives, Children, and all that they have in Wagons; for which
they have the Epithetes of Barbarous and Wandering bestowed upon them: They
were the original of the Tartars or Tattars, which about the year of our Lord
1200 overran all Persia, and began the Empire which they now hold in the
Eastpart of the world.

(4) Caspian Borderer] The Hyrcanians, which border upon the Caspian Sea,
adjoining to Scythia, who live as the Scythians do, barbarously, without laws
or government.

(5) Busiris] A most cruel and inhumane Tyrant, who used to immolate all his
Guests to Jove, but laying wait for Hercules he was taken by him and slain.

(6) Diomedes] A cruel King of Thrace, who fed his horses with man's flesh, but
Hercules taking him gave him to be devoured by his own man eating horses.

(7) Hermiona] The Daughter of Menelaus and Helena afterward ravished by
Pyrrhus from Orestes, which was the occasion of his death.

(8) The Earth would heavy make] See note 21. upon the second Scene of the
second Act.

(9) Sought all night] When the taking of Troy was, which was performed in the
night, with a bloody rage, horrid tumult, confusion and slaughter. Leaving that
City as Ovid describes it 15. Met.

-- sic magna fuit, censuque virisque
Perque december potuit tantum dare sanguinis annos:
Nunc humiles veteres tantummodo Troja ruinas
Et pro divitiis Tumulos ostendit avorum.
Troy rich and powerful, which so proudly stood,
That could for ten years spend such streams of blood;
For buildings only, her old ruins shows;
For riches Tombs, which slaughtered Sires enclose.
Thus Time and Fate, of the greatest and most flourishing Cities and Empires,
as well as of the weakest and most perishable Creatures and things, has been

THE CATASTROPHE.
POEMS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

By S. P. Gent.



LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane,
and Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey near the Counter, 1660.

A PANEGYRIC TO HIS EXCELLENCY General MONCK March 28. 1660.
NOW almost twenty years have roul'd about
Since first the flames of our late Wars broke out;
And Britain fainting with the loss of blood
Under a lawless Yoke subjected stood,
When now at last her groans by Heaven are heard
Her fainting Soul and dying Hopes uprear'd;
Her sable night of sorrow done away
By the new dawning of a Royal day.
As from the North her first distemper grew,
Thence flows the Sovereign Medicine to renew
Her joys again: She hopes secure to stand
Upheld by her brave Generall's Warlike hand.
Over the British Seas flies his great Name
Born on the swift wings of no common fame,
Our Enemies tremble, and our friends are glad,
To these it is joyful news, to those it is sad
The mighty shouts, and the Stentorian voice
Of the glad multitude that now rejoice
Awak's the drowsy Genius of this I Will,
Who wept so long over Charles's Funeral pyle
Till his swollen eyes with a Lethargick sleep
Were sealed up, having no more tears to weep,
He understands the cause of Englands joy
And least Ambition should their hopes destroy
He boldly does his mind to Monck express
And shows how he may Britains ills redress.
The Genius Speech.
GReat man by blood, by virtue greater made,
Whose presence Banishes the gloomy shade
Of Britains night; the fair Aurora too
The Royal Phoebus ushered in by you:
Thy Sword has cut our Chains of slavery
Thy hands the Gordian knots of Tyranny
Untied; thy strenuous Arms unhinged our Gates
To show thy strength, the greatest pride abates,
To show what thou could do, that we thereby
Might on thy more than Samson's strength rely:
But what thou did was at another frown,
Thou hung'st them up, that kindness was thy own.
Great Hercules of our I Will at last thou'st slain
That Hydra never more to rise again,
Though often crushed, that Monstrous Tail, (which bit
Her own head off) did resurrection git,
But now she is dead, and never more shall rise,
Tryumphs, not tears attend her Obsequies.
And now but one step more and thy great name
Registered stand shall in the Book of Fame
In so great Characters the world may read
Thy matchless story when that thou art dead:
The World too little for thy fame shall be
And Princes honor shall thy name and thee.
See then great General, Britains Genius now
Before thee stands, and willing is to owe
A happiness to thee, wherein thou may
Raise honor to thy self; if thou delay'st,
Time and necessity will thee prevent
And spoil the luster of thy great intent.
Now drooping Britain raises up her head,
Inspired by thee she arises from the dead,
Her War-made breaches now are cured again,
And joys and ease succeed her grief and pain,
Her spotless Virgin Chores begin to sing
Jo Paeans in honor to their King:
Fail not her now-bigg hopes but be content
To raise an everlasting Monument
To thee and thy posterity; that bays
May Crown thy Brows and Ages speak thy praise.
Thou see our wants, and what it is we would have
It is a King of Charles's race we crave;
Since all the people in one voice agree,
God's Oracle, it is God that asks it thee,
Who having scourged poor Britain for her sin,
Returns her Baulme to cure her wounds agin.
We 'ave tried, and too too long, a Commonwealth,
Such as it was, a Bane to Englands Health,
Where fifty Tyrants with one mouth agree,
To eat up Law, Religion, Liberty
Monsters that Kings and Bishops Lands devour,
Kept by extorted sums the Nation poor;
Philosophers that changed all to gold,
And let go nothing that their gripes could hold;
Yet these were they that needs would styled be
The Keepers of our England's Liberty;
But by thy power great Monck wee'r freed again,
And George most bravely has the Dragon slain.
Ambitious Cromwell put the purple on,
And having slain the Father, robbed the Son
Of right and title, to a royal Crown,
To set himself up, pulled another down,
And what he got by rapine, he made good,
Though by Religion cloak'd, by force and blood,
All what our Heroes once contended for,
With the sad tempest of a civil War
Himself usurped; and gloryed in his pride
To have with peace what was to Kings denied;
But yet you see the Nation scourged, that God
Renews his mercy and has burned his rod,
And Cromwell's name grows odious every where,
Which w(...)s obeyed not out of Love, but fear.
Let his example your ambition curb,
Do not our growing happiness disturb,
By mounting of a Throne is none of yours,
For be assured that the sacred powers,
Will blast the first fruits of thy tyranny,
Fraud must preserve what is got by policy.
And now our people used to subtleties,
To be deceived by crafts are grown too wise,
So that the fates deny thy Regiment,
And people to obey no more are bent,
Till he arises in the British sphere,
Whom all desire the royal Crown to wear.
Thou see our griefs and know the ways to cure,
Our Maladies, thy Faith we knows too pure
For to be tempted to betray our hopes,
Who doubts thy loyalty, to treason opes
A way; no though tho say thou wilt us deceive,
Such is our confidence we will not believe,
Since one so good and great as Monck must be,
The only Man can give us liberty.
Britain in sackcloth has mourned long enough,
It Is time to lay aside the Sword and Buff,
It Is time to pull those Puny-Nobles down,
Who speak against, and yet affect a Crown,
That those by blood and virtue truly great,
May be installed in their long-left seat
These shining in their ermin gallantry,
Beget a reverence due to Majesty.
Now I have done, and you have this to do,
To bring him in for whom the Nations sue,
Great Charles, who more then by sev'n twelve months tried,
And in afflictions Furnace purified,
Must come forth brightet then tried gold, more bright
Then lustrous Sol after a darksome night;
Whose brighter beams of Love shall raise the slain,
And make our Halcyon days to live again;
England shall bless thy name when this is done,
And style the Phosphor to the rising Sun,
To thee shall Britain pay her anuall vows,
Whilst Ducall diadems crown thy Princely brows.
A PANEGYRIC ON HIS MAJESTY'S Entrance Into LONDON.
THE Heaven's great Star since He saluted Earth
With his diurnal Light, never yet gave Birth
To such a joyful Day, as that wherein
Charles to his native England came ag'in.
His loyal Subjects Hearts grown big with joy
The best expressions of their Love employ,
To give a cherefull welcome to their King,
From whose arivall all our blessings Spring,
Whilst Foes, and Traitors to his royal Sire,
Grown mad through Envy, in their rage expire.
Now Phoebus ushers in the happy day,
Which for posterity recorded may
In golden letters ever stand; and be
A festival for regained liberty;
And gilding all the Heavens with his Rays,
Dispenses smiles, Serenity displayes.
Revived Subjects throng to see their prize,
Joy sparkles in their faces, and their eyes:
Their tongues, and hands with powerful Eccohs sound
And joyful shouts against the heavens rebound.
The Air is filled on every side with noise;
The voice of War, and death now speaks their joys.
The Bells have tongues, which sound our Joys aloud,
And say that Charles is come: the Drums are proud
To speak his march. The silver Trumpets say
Charles over three Kingdoms does triumph to day:
Which conquest got by virtues has more charms
To hold a lasting peace, than that by Arms.
London in all its gallantry does shine,
Conduits convert their water into wine.
Adorned the female beauties of the Land
To see their Sovereign in Ballconies stand,
The bravest Heroes of the British Isle
Usher our Caesar through the streets the while;
Whose sacred face with beams of Majesty
Surrounded, far out-vies the bravery
Of his adornments: and the lustrous fire
Of's eyes dismays those who denied his fire
And him to reign; now they their folly see
Converted by one look of Majesty.
Ten thousand Hearts and knees do humbly bow,
As he goes by; each heart a solemn vow
Prepares, of praise, and of obedience too,
For long and happy days to Heav'en they sue.
Long live great Charles, and may his sacred Name,
Swell to that worth, not to be spoke by Fame,
May Nestors years his Happy reign attend!
May heavens his breast with Solomon's choice befriend!
The people cry. Loud shouts conclude the day,
Phoebus to the other world hasts to display
The joyful news: Night now would take her turn,
But slaming fires in every Corner burn,
Which Night to Day change: Phoebus place supply,
And make a Day without the Heaven's great eye.
It Is true whilst Charles possesses his own right,
That loyal Britains can expect no night.
Our regal Sun, since Charles the first was slain.
Eclipsed has been, but now shines bright again.
By Heaven enthroned thus, in his peoples hearts,
He shall withstand all Machivilian Arts:
Laurells of peace about his brows shall spread,
And three great Crowns surround his royal Head.
Ita Precatur S. P.

SOME TEARS Dropped over the Hearse OF THE INCOMPARABLE PRINCE HENRY DUKE OF
GLOUCESTER.
FAtal September to the Royal Line,
Has snatched one Hero of our hopeful Trine
From Earth; it is strange Heav*n should not praedeclare
A loss so grievous by some Blazing Star,
Which might our Senses overjoyed, alar'm,
And time give to prepare for so great Harm.
The Springtide of our Joy was newly Flood,
Paying our Thankful Vows for so much good
We gather now, under a gracious KING;
Inspired Bards began strong Lays to Sing,
When (oh sad Fate!) Ebbed are our Flowing Seas,
And Epiques changed to Doleful Elegies.
Cruel Extremes! thus robbed of Joys the chief,
Thrown down like Lightning into Seas of Grief.
It Is past the reach of Mortals to divine,
Why Heaven so soon has broke our Threefold Line;
We may not pry without a black offense
Into the Arcana's of his Providence,
But may believe, since with a Bounteous Hand
God has restored the Blessings of this Land,
That he has flung us into Griefs extreme,
Not out of Wrath to Us, but Love to Him.
He was Fair Fruit sprung from a Royal Bud,
And grown as great by fair Renown as Blood;
Ripe too too soon; for in a Youth so green
An Harvest was of gray-hair'd VVisdome seen.
Minerva's Darling, Patron of the Gown,
Lover of Learning, and Apollo's Crown
He was; the Muses he began to nourish,
Learned Men and Arts under his wings did flourish;
But lest we should commit Idolatry,
Heaven took him from our Sight, not Memory;
For though he is carried to th Immortal Sphere,
Our Loves will make his Fame Immortal here.
It Is Autumn now: and Ceres to our hands
Has poured the Annual Blessings of our Lands;
VVe'ave robbed the teeming Trees of all their fruit,
And left them naked till the Spring recruit
Their store again; till then they hang their head,
And stand like Mourners, leaves for tears they shed;
So the high powers cropped from the Royal Stem,
What was too good for us, and fit for them,
VVhilest we lament, till a new Spring arise,
And CHARLES his Firstborn clear our weeping eyes.
A general Sadness locks up every Tongue,
Amazedness have struck the Laureats dumb:
And who would weep, through too much Grief forbears,
Excess of Grief gives yet no vent for Tears,
But when the coming Springs begin to rise,
Grief then will draw a deluge from our Eyes;
Till then these Loyal Drops fallen into Verse,
Shall wash the Cypress on his Royal Hearse.
POEMS ON Several Occasions.
His Mistress.
AS Phoebus does excel the Moons dim light,
Or as the Moon excells the dullest Star,
Her Beauty, and Complexion in my sight
Excells all others I have seen, so far:
Her Sun like beams of beauty shine so bright,
That others in her sight Eclipsed are
The fairest faces are but foiles, each one
Wears but a borrowed luster from her Sun.
Her Shape in Wax it were most hard to frame,
Nor Painters to express their rarest Skill
Could ever counterfeit so near the same,
But blemish their's her better Beauty will;
Though Venus who for Beauty had the Name
Compare with her should, she would be fairest still;
Paris gave her the Ball as beauties Queen,
But she had mist it had he mine but Seen.
Her Aubourn Hair in Crisped Curles do dangle
Upon her Ivory shoulders, where it spreads
Sly nets, where Hearts themselves do soon entangle,
And captive lie, enchain'd by those bright threads,
Spreading soft chains, and snares in every angle,
It takes all Hearts, whose eye those mazes treads:
Hearts here imprisoned (never can get out)
Those soft Meandres wander must about.
Her Ivory-pollish'd Front with seemly cheer,
Graced at the bottom with a double bow,
Where all the Graces in their Throne appear,
Where Love, and awful Majesty do grow,
Expands it self, and shows a field more clear,
Than Candid Lillys, or the virgin snow;
Her Eyes like Suns shoot rays more sharp than Darts,
Which wound all Flinty, Love-despising Hearts.
Those twinkling Stars, those sparkling Diamond stones,
Those glorious Suns, where dwells the Eastern Light,
Pierce with the vigor of their Charms the bones
Of daring Him, who gains of them a fight;
Beholding Kills, yet he their loss bemones,
And 'd rather dye, than they shut live in Night.
Her Nose a comely Prominence, does part
Her Cheeks, the mirror of Dame Natures Art.
Her checks are damask Roses blown in June,
B'ing equally with Virgin Lillies mix't;
Or snowy milk with blushing Strawb'ries strewn,
Where equal strife the red, and white's betwixt;
Or pure vermillion on white Satin shown,
By Painters rarest Skill, and pencil fixed:
Those cheek: no Colors livelest dye can paint,
Scarlet, and snow seem to their true ones faint.
Her lips are snips of Scarlet, Juliflowers,
Spread with the tincture of Vermilion hew,
Blessed in Self-kisses; past our humane powers
To touch; so high a bliss what Mortal knew?
Between those rubie Gates slide spicy showers,
Which, those slain by her eyes, with life imbue:
Angellick sounds, and charming smiles, so nice,
Thence flow which make her presence Paradise.
Within the portal of her Mouth's locked fast,
(Which when she sings she is enforced to show)
The Orient's Treasure in due order placed,
Of more than precious pearls a double row;
Which stand in Sea-born Coral borders chased,
Like Crimson Satin purl'd with silver snow.
Her smooth, and dimpled Chin does under lie,
Where envies self cannot a fault epsy.
Her Neck's a graceful Tower of spotless snow,
An Alablaster prop to that fair head,
Where Wit, Arts, Wisdom in perfection grow,
Its Basis where are beauties also spread;
For azure streams through milky feilds do flow,
Where blew, with white like Heaven is married:
Her Breasts like lilly'd Globes, or Mounts appear,
Whose summetts Crowned with Crimson cheries are.
Her Arms due measure of proportion have,
Her hands the types of snowy Excellence
With Onyx tip'd; her legs, and feet enslave
Our eyes, and Captive hold from falling thence:
Her whole frames equal Symetry is brave,
And to spectators pays a recompense:
Argus himself cannot discern the rest,
But I presume the hidden beauties best.
The Protestation.
Before bright Phoebus had his beams displayed,
Whilst yet Aurora ushered in the Day,
The prat'ling Echo to my ears betrayed,
As I among the trees in ambush lay,
The amorous whispers of Amyntas, who
With protestation did his Cloris woo.
What went before I cannot tell, but she
Replied to something that Amyntas said,
The murmuring Echo by the Air to me
These gentle sounds in whispering notes conveyed.
Alas! Amyntas would that you could prove
To my distrustful Heart that men can love.
How often are we poor sily maids beguiled
By charms of flattering words? when we believe
To break their oaths men will not be so vild,
Being fo poor a conquest to deceive
Disarmed virgins? when we them reward
With Love, they are cold, and us with scorn regard.
It Is best to keep our own, for when we yield
Our Hearts, men supplyants soon forget to be,
And our affections caught, with scorn repelled
We are subjected to their tyranny:
That maid is more then mad who will be kind,
To men, who waver oftener than the Wind.
Blame not our Natures, but your follies blame,
For we should sooner yield were Men more true,
But since weak virgins to deceive no shame
They think; denialls Cruelty is due.
But yet Amyntas would that you could prove
To my distrustful Heart your constant love.
Amyntas with a sigh replied. It Is true,
Some men are faulty in what you accuse them,
But let not all be blamed for a few,
Nor Women men despise, 'cause some abuse them.
For if I went about it, I could prove,
Men equal Weomen in a constant Love.
Our sexe's cause I will not plead; my own
With you, sweet Cloris, will I only plead,
My constant Love must by Obedience shown
Be; else I cannot be truly scanned till dead:
Constant obedience it is does rightly prove,
A Heart's possessor of a constant Love.
Things that the least of drossy mixture hold,
Last longest; my Hearts flames Aetherial be,
More pure than seven times refined Gold,
Than Cedar's flames: rays of a Deity
They are It is the purity of Love
Which best of all its constancy can prove.
My love like Adamant endure the stroke
Of strong repulses shall; full draughts of smiles,
Nor worlds of beauties, shall my Heart provoke
TO inconstant Change; nor all the intising guiles
A proffered Love can give. The world shall be
First changed, e're I yield to Inconstancy.
The twinkling tapours of the Night shall fall
First from their azure lodging; Hecate
Shall loose her light, and a perpetual
Mask wear of pitch; And Heavens bright lamp shall be
With darkness overcome: Night into Day
Shall change; and cold November into May.
The Sun shall backward course the World about,
The fire shall cease combustibles to burn,
Soft gales shall put the flinty Rocks to rout,
And Neptune shall his fry to grasing turn,
Mountains to Vailes; valleys to Hills shall rise,
Plains shall be made of Craggs that touch the Skies.
All beasts shall Metamorphos'd into stones
Be, and all Mortals shall their exit prove,
Tormented Souls shall cease to fetch sad groans,
The Heavens rent from their center first shall move,
E're I to thee fair Cloris be unkind,
Repent me of my love, or change my mind.
My Tongue may't faulter, may my lips never move,
If unto other but to thee they shall
Make protestations of a Serious love!
Cloris believe! I Heavens to witness call!
The Maid converted joined her lips to his,
Gathering the first fruits of a greater bliss.
The Passionate Lover,
HAd I but wind and Lungs enough to tell
How much I Love; Had I a Stentor's voice,
Had I ten thousand Tongues it would do well,
To speak how much I Love my dearest Choice,
Since wholly filled, If I should not impart
Loves might, its energy would break my Heart.
Say my five senses has not Love's delight
Bound all your powers with its amourous chains,
Disarmed your Subjects? Spoiled and robbed you quite?
Can you ought relish but Love's pleasing pains?
You now disgust all objects of this Ball,
Phillis is the only object of you all.
When that my eye has light on Phillis face,
It tells my amorous Heart news good, or bad;
By which or well the alarmed pulses Pace,
Or ill: my looks by it are light, or sad:
Does sorrow dimm the Light of Phillis eye,
Joys, and Contentment from my Bosom fly.
Does threatening Anger, or disdain appear
Clothed in the Tyrian blushes in her Cheeks,
No Poet's art in verse can paint my fear,
Nor the Horror and dismay my vitalls strikes:
I dumb, and movelesse like a statue show
Struck with the Thunder of her Angry brow
The fearful Lightning, nor the dreadful voice
Of roaring Thunder, nor the horrid Night,
Nor Ghosts, nor Goblins, nor tempestuous noise
Of winds, nor Earthquakes can my senses fright,
So much as when Phyllis with anger glows,
And from her quick Eyes scorn-tip't-Arrows throws.
If pleasing smiles sit on their rubie Throne,
If Joy is painted on her smoother brow,
My senses wrapped beyond the Spears, are thrown
On bedds of pleasure; and forget all woe:
With less Content the Miser does behold
His Stuffed Chests, and full-cram'd bags of Gold.
My Eyes devou're each smile; the more they gaze
On Hers, the more Contentment still they draw;
Her smiles the clue that leads me in that maze:
Her eyes give my obsequious Heart a Law:
For by her smiles, or Frowns I meet delight
Or Woe; or mirth or Grief; or Day or Night.
Seek all the World for pleasing objects, and
Dive to the bottom of the deepest Seas,
Fetch all the Treasures of the Indian strand,
The world's best Beauties, none my fancy please*
Can, like the Heaven of a pleasing smile,
Which kills me with excess of Joy the while.
The sparkling Diamonds of the East I prize
Below the value of her pretty Stars,
There comes far richer glances from her eyes,
Her lips than Pegues, better Rubies wears;
Who round the World for daintest Roses seeks,
May find them growing in my Phyllis cheeks.
The richest Treasures of the Earth seem poor;
Pearls, Gold, and Diamonds Natur's richest Gems,
The World's great Treasury, and Neptunes store,
A Lover (such as I) far less esteems
Than the object of his Love: for more delight
Than in all these I take in Phyllis sight.
But when the sweeter Music of her tongue,
Like the blessed voice of Angels, strikes my ears,
I harken us to Oracles; a strange
Lute in the hands of Orpheus; the Spheres
Sweet Melody; the smooth tongued Orator,
Seem but a duller Harmony to Her.
She charms me to a statue, and amazed
With so much Eloquence, dumb I return
No answers but by eyes; my soul is raised
Beyond the sphere of Words: though joy'd I mourn
To hear her pause, or periodize her speech:
I then her to begin ag'in beseech.
When in the sweetest quavers of a song
Her voice she raises, and with' matchless strains
Runs over division with her warbling Tongue;
Hearts she (as stones Amphion's music) gains.
Harps, Harpsicall, all Violls, Organes, Lute,
Trumpets, and all noise else for shame be mute.
Cease duller strains, all other voices cease,
Sweet Philomel, I prithee hold thy tongue;
You early Larkes, and Thrushes hold your peace;
The best of Music, and of Birds among
The humane, and the feathered Chores, your choice
Lays, reverence do unto her sweeter voice.
Though all the Music in the World should be
By Musick-masters of the rarest kind
Fingered, my ears would taste no Harmony,
No joy my soul, nor no content my mind,
(Nor the Angelick Songs by me I fear
So prized) like that when I her Sonnets hear.
Had Sickness imprisoned me in my Chamber long,
Or bound with closer fetters to my Bed,
As some by music cured, I by a Song
Chaunted by her divine mouth, should be fed
With that Ambrosiack Essence, that would give
Ease to my pains, and dying make me live.
My Ear then ravished equal with my eye,
Counts all sounds harsh, but her sweet Music, and
Commands all others to her melody
To veil, and to her notes attentive stand;
As high Apollo to the Muses, she
(Or Philomel among other Birds) must be.
The fragrant blasts of spicy Arabie,
Panchaean Myrrh, Musk, Civet, Ambergreece,
All the perfumes of Indian Spicerie,
Must to the Sweetness of her breath give place:
Flora's sweet garlands in the Month of May,
No such delicious gales of sweetness pay.
My Soul, as if exhaled by her sweet breath,
Flies to that membrane which receieves the sent,
Raising the sluggish fantasy from Death,
Revives the brain, and gives my Genius vent:
The cherishing Odors her sweet Hybla yields,
Excel the Diapasma's of the fields.
My soul upon no other food can feed,
But the rich Banquet, and delicious fare
Of her sweet presence, when before her spread;
Then eased from trouble, free from duller care
She feeds: the Stomach can no dainties taste,
Nor hunger, whilst this better Banquet lasts.
When that with ardent boldness I aspire
To touch with my profaner lips, her hand,
I think no blisses, in the World are higher,
No joys to that in competition stand:
My soul enflamed, into my lips does fly,
Whilst on that bed of Lillies soft they lie.
But when (a favor, seldom shown) I kiss
The seat of smiles, her tender rubie lips,
Joye spirits dilates, and I expire in bliss;
Called back again from Death by an ecclips
Of so great ravishment, through a withdraw,
As much as Joy did, grief now breaks the Law.
Thus my five senses banquet at that feast
Of beauty, which shines in my Phillis face;
My passionate Heart swells high within my breast,
And grows too tumid fot its strickt embrace,
Oh! cloud my Phillis! hide her from my eye,
Of too much pleasure I with surfeit dye.
CORYDONS Complaint.
THose joys that used to flatter me
o Phyllis when I courted thee,
Under yon' shady beechen tree
To cruel grief are changed
Torments my pleasures; griefs my joy,
Pains my quiet rest destroy,
Since you are to Corydon grown coy,
And from my Love estranged
Did e're I your commands neglect?
That thus my suit you now reject,
And pay my love with disrespect,
My kindness with disdain?
Say how I purchase may releife,
Or murdered must I be by grief*
Speak that my torments may be brief;
Give death to ease my pain.
If you are pleased to martyr me,
Or bind me unto slavery,
There is another tyranny
That you may exercise;
Those burning flames, your eyes can give:
A Slave, bound by Loves Chains I live
May, without Hope of a reprieve;
Thus you may tyrannize.
Since that my words are spent in vain,
Whilst Cruel you laugh at my pain,
I at the feet of your disdain
Will fall, and prostrate lie.
Henceforth I Will banish all my pleasure,
Since you the chiefest of my Treasure,
Have heaped my Griefs beyond all Measure,
I Will yield to destiny.
To SYLVIA Weeping.
FAir Sylvia, you possess more Treasures than
The rubie East; those weeping eyes more Gems
Than the rich Store house of the Ocean,
For you at pleasure can those Crystal streams
Which trickle from the fountains of your eyes
Convert int' orient pearls; but richer prize.
What taking charms lie in your sweeter Face,
When freed from cloudy-weeping Griefs you smile
With a clear brow! If tears with such a grace
Become? if so much luster has the foil
To Beauty? what excess of Glory then
Will bud from those sweet lights when fair again?
Now the (like silvered Cyn(...)nthia's beauty, when
The interposing Earth hides her bright face)
Do suffer an Eclipse; thy tears restrain
Thy beauties radiant beams; Tears fill the place
Of bounteous Light; yet is that shadow fair;
Others with which (at best) may not compare.
Phoebus now hides behind a watery cloud
His brighter head; by which we better may
Gaze on his Light: thy suns (fair Sylvia) shroud
Themselves behind a cloud of Tears to day;
Out of like kindness, and suppress their bright
And splendid beams, to favor my weak sight.
Enough, fair Sylvia! clear those Cynthian Lights,
From that eclipse of sorrow; wipe away
That hanging cloud of Tears; which still excites
Your stillborne Grief such pearly price to pay:
Were you enflamed with scorching Love, as I,
Its ardor soon those dewy pearls would dry.
After Aurora with her silver-showers
Has washed her Grandame Tellus chapped face,
A pleasant Zephyrus the dark Heaven scoures,
And Sol steps out with a far greater Grace:
After a Storm fair weather does suceeed;
Let sable Grief your whiter Joys then breed.
I long to see those fairer Suns to shine,
Freed from the dewy moisture of a Tear,
Now they would seem (after this) more divine,
As Phoebus after an eclips more clear:
Let Day the Night succeed, and cease to mourn,
Banish Grief's night, whilst Joy's day takes its turn.
THYRSIS in despair.
SAd night of sorrow! sable night of grief!
For Lovers torments is there no releif?
Must still my bitter food be grief, and fears?
My thirst quenched howerly with my brinie tears?
No glimmering of the Day of hope arise!
Nothing but darkness muffle up the skies
From my numm'd sight? I in the Bed of care
Do roll; distress behems me round; despair
Like curtains shuts me up. Come pale faced Hag,
And let not leaden plummets make thee lag:
With open arms I do embrace thy Dart,
Which can give physic to my wounded Heart.
They say grief that descends to words is weak
Mine is grown so I can no farther speak.
But by my Death I to Corinna prove
Will, that she tryumphs over me and my Love.
ABSENCE.
SUch is the melancholy Earth, when light
Flies thence, and leaves its room to sable night;
When darkness, Cold and Shadows dwell upon
Her Surface; some pale glimerings of the Moon
Is all she can expect; a mourner then
She is till Phoebus brings his day again:
Such is the matchless, mateless Turtle Dove,
Sighing its murmurs for its absent Love:
Such is the body when the Soul is fled:
Such Pyramus supposing Thisbe dead:
Such the male Palm the female broken down,
As I am now, my fairest Sylvia's gone.
My withered Head declines apace, my green
And growing youth to sprout no more is seen.
My blood's grown cold, and frozen; every limb
As if it wanted heat, and life does seem.
My hoarse complaints the very rocks do move,
Who echo the last accents of my Love.
A silent night inhabits my sad breast,
And now no cheerful thought will be my guest.
Till her return, whose eyes will cause a day,
Thus must I in my own unquiet stay;
Wishing for the bright morning, which must rise
From the Luminaries of fair Sylvia's eyes.
DAPHNIS Fled.
I Will echo in the tell-tale groves
Lycidas and Daphnis Loves
Now she has left this place;
Go grave names in the tender rind
Whisper my trouble to the VVinde,
He Will tell where Daphnis stays:
Send kisses by the Soft lipp'd air,
Beg charming Philomel to stay her
With raptures of her voice:
Bid Zephyrus gently hold her back;
Smooth fronted sand to show her track,
That thus forsakes her choice.
Not all the charms the spring affords,
The pleasures of delicious gourds,
Flora's enameled dress,
Or what is beautiful and fair,
Or what delights above compare,
Can sorrow dispossess.
For Nature now is unkind to me,
And my request denies I see,
For Daphnis will away,
In vain I prattle out my plaints,
She cannot hear my loud laments,
Nor would they cause her stay.
By yonder spring down will I lie,
Whilst one as great flows from my eye,
To mingle with its stream
Till her return, thence I Will not move
But weep the absence of my Love,
With waves as great as them
If my soul flies out in a tear,
And she returns, and that you hear
Her call a loud for me,
Good Nymph that answers him that speaks,
Say if that Lycidas she seeks,
He Is joined to Niobe.
To LUCIA playing on her LUTE.
GReat Orpheus when he struck his Ivory Lyre,
Drew all the Savage Creatures to admire
The sweetness of his charming Music; and
Forgetting their fierce natures tamely stand.
The Wolf, Lamb, Lion, and the Kid agree
To Love, whilst charmed by his sweet harmony.
Stones move themselves called by Amphion's Lute,
And Thebe's build, without man's hands to do it:
Yet fairest Lucia when I heard you play,
I soon confess you have more skill than they:
Your fingers strike a far diviner strain,
And men's Hearts harder than the stones you gain.
Brute Beasts when Orpheus played stood still and gazed;
When you, stiff-necked men are more amazed.
He could unreasonable beasts control,
But you command a reasonable Soul,
For men more fierce than cruel Tigers, lay
Their necks down, and like captives yoked obey.
Who then to bondage powerfull'st captives drew?
Orpheus tamed beasts, a harder task, Men you.
ANOTHER.
WHen last I heard your nimble fingers play
Upon your Lute, nothing so sweet as they
Seemed; all my soul fled ravished to my ear,
That sweetly animating sound to hear.
My ravished Heart with play Kept equal time,
Fell down with you, with you did Ela climb,
Grew sad or lighter, as the tunes you played,
And with your Lute a perfect measure made:
If all so much as I, your Music Love,
The whole world would at your devotion move,
And at your speaking Lutes surpassing charms,
Embrace a lasting peace, and fling by Arms.
To CELIA on some verses sent her by another.
DEar Fair if that some ripet wit
In rapt of some poetic fit
To ease the fancy of his brain
Writ of Love, and Love shall fain,
Shall those lines acceptance have?
Not those indicted by thy slave?
Whose troubled brains no muses move,
But the darling God of Love.
If my lines you 'Count a toy
You know Cupid is a boy,
Yet his trifles often find
Fair acceptance from the kind;
Such are they whose search does sist
The givers mind above the gift.
Let others write to show their wit,
When I; Love shall be Cause of it.
On Love.
LOve is a fire, Love is a flame
Which darting came
Th'orow the azure sky;
And just like the rays, in Sol's hottest days
pierced me from on high.
My heart before so chill, and cold,
'gan to unfold
It self in those fair beams,
But its mighty flame, soon it overcame
Martyred 'twixt extremes.
Lov's masterlesse, and cruel fire
if it grow higher
Will kill with martyrdoms,
As heat forces heat, to a gentle retreat
Love, Love overcomes.
Song.
Ask me not why I am so sad, nor why I here
The Nymps forbear,
Do with my Arms a Cross walk in this grove?
Within the hollow concave of my troubled breast
Which never rests
Lies the true cause, and my tormentor Love.
It Is jealous fear, causes my care,
And burdens thus my Lovesick Heart,
I fear that she, my deity
Delights to see my smart;
For still she frowns, and Knitts her brows
And does abhor my Company,
Whilst Lycon Courts her, with her sports,
I dare not do it though by.
O cruel fair! why do thou thus delight to kill
Thy slave who will
Whilst he has life adore thee? and will be
Courted by none for to neglect his duty, though
you are his foe
And with tormenting pains would murder me.
And since that you, forbid me sue
Or ask for mercy, I will never
With my complaints, and sad laments
In vain disturb your ear;
No, death will do as much as Love has don
VVith's dart he will pierce me through;
Death will be found, to Cure that wound
Which Coelia would not do.
DAMON to a foul Maid that courted him.
WHat mean thou Bacca, Can my senses feast
Upon the members of a parboyl'd Beast?
What boarish appetite think thou I have
That thou should court me, who'd first wed a grave,
And death hug in my Arms, then such a hag,
Whose hide pouch'd like a shrivl'd pudding-bag,
Reaks like another Aetna; thy sous'd face
And hawkie nose has not so good a grace
As Madam monkies; few Hairs on thy scalpe,
Thy mouth is Taenarus, thy Teeth an alpe,
But that no snow, but soot lies always there,
In other parts like a deformed Bear
Not yet licked into fashion. Think thou Man
Not turned Beast, forsake his reason can
To fall int' such a sink: Thon stinking Trull
Thou must like Pasiphae lie with a Bull,
Or couple with a boar thy next of kin;
For never hope you Man can tempt to sin,
For he that do it, were I to judge his pain,
Should be (and it is enough) to do it again.
To LYDIA being retired privately into the Country.
NOw to the secret Groves is Lydia gone
Stoll'n from us all, meaning to live alone
Among the silent woods, where she may be
From busy servants entertainments free,
And hear the pleasant songsters of the Groves,
With whistling lays resound their growing Loves:
With uncontrouling freedom view the trammells
Of Flora which the fragrant meads inammels,
With pleasure walk and see the crystal brooks,
Catching the sportive fish, with silver hooks.
Conversing with the flowery Napaeae,
Making diversity of flowers agree
Bound up together: among the shady trees
Dance in a Circle, with the Dryades,
Feeding on cleanly, though but homely food,
Esteemed the only Goddess of the wood.
O how I fear those rural pleasures may
Entice her there to make a tedious stay,
But J with vows will Frosty Hyems move,
To have the ruins of the leavy grove;
Pray cold mout'h Boreas kiss her tender cheek,
To make her shelter in the town to seek,
Where conversation, and warm fires do bring
Though frost without doors lies; within a spring.
Poema Valedictorium Perdilecto intimoque Suo amico transfr(...)tura.
ALas! what fate (or rather providence)
Is this (dear C) unthought of rapt's thee hence?
What makes thee leave this Isle, and seas pass over
To seek the blessings of a foreign shore?
Cannot ours content thee? yea but thy free hand
Transports the panneous blessings of our land,
And (for exchange bring's back what ours has none
Of,) by exoticks to enrich our own.
Since then it is for public good, and thine,
That thou leave us, it must needs be for mine.
I Will not complain, since truly one friend should
Suffer disasters for another's good,
And this is one (and that of no mean weight)
That thee, and I, (dear C -- must separate.)
Vota Auspicata.
Farewell! farewell! may fruitful Neptune please
To sound retreat unto the surging seas,
By Triton's voice! may his resounding shell,
The threatening rage of all the billows quell.
May great Oceanus, and Tridentifer
(Lest in the envious liquid paths you err)
Be your conductors; Let the Sea-Gods place,
Themselves about your ship for greater grace.
May Amphetrite and the Neriedes
With all the Gods, and graces of the seas,
Assembling sing Io-paeans to thy Honor,
And may the sea for joy thou rid'st upon her
Expressed with gentle leapings! May the twinns
Be never seen apart! The God of winds
Great Aeolus, may he reflateing gales
Enchaine within the Hyperborean vales!
And let none 'Scape but Aura's from his hand
To drive you forward to your wished for land!
May glorious Titan pleasant make the days,
And gild the Sea, with his projected rays!
Serener nights attend you! may the bright
Phaebe, at full, give you her borrowed light!
May Mercury the Negotiators God
Attend you too, with his Cyllenian rod,
And cause your gains ariseing from the fleece
Of English Sheep, Surmount that brought to Greece
By Jason's hand! May these on you therefore
Attend and bring you safe to this blessed shore.
Vero Panomphaeo.
Thou thou true Neptune who the seas command'st,
Without a Trident still the billows can,
And with one single word make all obey
Whether in Heaven, in Earth, Hell, Land, or Sea!
Take thou my C -- under thy safe protection,
Guide him and favor 'im, with thy sure direction,
And he will not fear the threatening of the waves
Anchoring his hope upon a God that saves.
Be thou propitious to my prayers, and then
I shall be sure to see him once again.
Coronis.
Fare well, dear C -- I wish you well, adieu!
My tears stop words, once more farewell to you.
Sospitet Te Deus: Opt. max.
Epigram.
Stay Triton, hold your breath, and over the main
Conduct my C -- reduce him safe again
To Albion's shore: then sound your shell, brave boy,
And make the waves leap to the skies for joy.
THE DEPART.
ADieu sweet Chloris, for the Fates deny
Me longer life and longer liberty.
I'ave lost the one in gazing on that face,
Which justly may ot'h Daphian Queen take place
To thee my liberty's resigned the grave
Tomb shall bespeak me Chloris constant slave.
How can I longer think to live when I
Ravished from the clear Sunshine of thine eye
Feel chilling colds; and winter frosts begirt
Continually with fatal blasts my heart?
No'tis those beams, which thy bright eyes display
That must dispell, and chase these snows away,
That killing absence brings: naught butthy breath
May now redeem me from the dart of Death.
But there is no hopes, no other hopes but I
Banished your presence, must resolve to dye:
Cloris adeiu* for ever now adeiu,
For dye I must being forced to part with you.
TYSTIRUS complaining.
BReak sadded heart, burst thou with griefs complaint
Let thy laments
The hardest marble unto tears provoke:
Make flints to weep
Increase the deep
With drops expressed from that cruel stroke.
Wounded I lie, and suffer from that hand
That gave the wound
Unto my bleeding Soul. And from those eyes.
Lightenings proced
Which strike me dead
Nor w'thout she raise me can I ever rise.
Torment of cruel silence breeds this woe
I undergo;
My tongue is setter'd, and I dare not speak
Although my heart
Feels deadly smart
And swelled with sorrow at the last must break.
But here is a joy which feeds my sadded mind
None has divined
The cause of my sadness and distress,
First shall my Love
My murder prove
Before, to wrong her, I my Love confess.
Damon on Amarillis dancing in a Ring
SEE my fortune; See my fortune
How she flies me
And denis me
Woe alas! woe alas too soon
Still I follow! still I follow!
But she flies me
And denis me
And cannot be wonn.
Cruel sport; In this sort
With woes to fill me
Which will kill me
Ah! from this pain release me.
For whilst she flys, my eyes
They discover
I Am a lover
And that it is her self must ease me.
Round we go, round we go,
But she flys me
And denis me
Still I follow wrapped in woe.
She moves swiftly, and yet sweetly
Don't forsake me
I Will over take thee
If thou will pity bestow.
Cruel sport, in this sort!
To increase my fires
And desires
And to exhibit my despair:
She Shifts her place, apace
I after move
Be'ing urged by Love
But in vain still my endeavors are.
Acrostick.
FEar-killing Faith, Bold-zeal, declares thy name,
Art picked it out but nature laid the frame.
If ever name and nature did agree,
It Is thine which are in perfect Harmony:
Heav'n-blessed Faith, which shakes the Ethereal towers
Cold-burning zeal against Heav'n-opposeing powers
Offer themselves to view: Thy virgin breast
Loves Heaven alone, does sordid Loves detest.
Death cannot shake thy Faith, nor ever may
Zeal like to thine, a purer breast display.
Eternal flames of Heav'n-refined zeal
And (...)oreing Faith, thou in thy breast do feel,
Live ever happy! Faith and zeal with thee
E're stay, to effect this thy name's Prophecy.
Acrostick.
AGe bles't I hope thou art: May many years
Run their swift courses, and the rouling spheres
Tire in their motions; May the circl'ing Sun
About this round globe the row the zodiac run
Giving a hund'red springs and Autumns e're
Earth or the Silent grave entomb thee there.
Bles't be thou here with Age: with virtues more,
Let graces, with thy years increase; thy store
E're multiply: So as thou have begun
Shine thou in virtue till thy race be run:
Death fear to touch this blooming blossom; Now
In April stay until December bow
Her head with age and mak't the earth to kiss;
Open then thy fatal arms; beat her to bliss.
Pluck her from hence, before Age does call thee to her,
E're cursed be, for thou pulls the worlds chief flower.
The Recovery.
HAil gentle virgin! now my joys renew
Their plumes, for they were Sick as well as you,
And had you died they had been buried too.
How'oft betwixt my hope, and fear I died;
Each symptom that my watchful eyes espied,
My heart with thousand Torments crucified.
When scarlet seas did double dye thy face,
Mine pal'd to see how strong thy fever was,
How great a Tyrant to usurp that place.
When thou grewst pale I even sunk for fear
Lest Death's cold ashes had been strowed there,
Or that, that Tyrant came to dominere.
When thou did sound, my heart was made a prize,
To pallid fear, nor could it ever rise,
Till hope to raise it sprouted from thine eyes.
My heart yet trembles, now I think upon it,
The thoughts often with pale sadness paint my front:
Thou liv'st: such mercies e're forget I will not.
My Muse did languish by a Sympathy,
As if her life depended had on thee,
It seems thine was her numbers Treasury.
Distressed she sat in Mourning Liveries,
Whilst the clear Fountains of her crystal eyes,
Wept in soft Tears most doleful Elegies.
As thy cheeks Hyacinths overcome their snows,
As vanquished are their Lillies, by the Rose,
So on my muse new heat and vigor grows.
This Day mythought thy starry orbs were pressed
With wonted luster: and new beauties dressed
Thy Face: which gave flames to my Muses breast.
Inspired thus she now begins to sing,
New ardors now her spritely Numbers wing,
And as thy health does, so her raptures spring.
Both consecrated are my Muse, and I,
To sing the bliss of thy recovery,
And chaunt Io Paeans until we dye.
May Heaven as he has raised thee from the Dead,
(Whose Name be blessed!) his mighty bucklar spread,
From Death's fell arrows to defend thy Head.
Daine but to cherish (with a gentle glance
Of Favor shot from thy bright countenance)
These lines, and it my Numbers will advance.
Such mercies cannot but my spirits raise,
In highest Notes to chaunt my sprightly lays,
And for thy Health to Heaven sing songs of praise.
Innocentia and Politia. Veritas and Panurgia.
WHen that Astrea took her flight from hence,
To find in Heaven a better residence,
Dame Innocentia wanting her protection
Was scorned of all: And Pollicy's infection
Spreading the row Cities, Courts, and such great places
Exposed that Dame to thousands of disgraces.
Sly Subtlety the Merchant entertains,
Deceit the Tradesman, to increase his gains,
The Great man Honor; that vain puf'd-up Pride,
With covetousness of every one; beside
Protean Policy, whose great resort,
Is in the City, and the Prince's Court,
Wherein Deceit so often does frequent,
That Dame's inseparable accident:
But Innocence, of all men was discarded,
Her nackednesse laughed at and disregarded.
At last a Countryman, whose smoother brow
Never entertained Deceit; nor's mouth knew how
With flattering words to speak; with Court intent
To utter that thing which his Heart never meant,
But being taught of Truth his words to spell,
His Heart, and Tongue rann ever parallel:
He `Spies this naked Dame's distress with ruth,
Invites her with him to go dwell with Truth:
She soon consenting, thanks him for his pity.
And bids adieu both to the Court and City.
The stately buildings of the Court she shuns,
Thence swifter than the Eastern-wind she runs,
Far from the City, and the infectious Court
She finds where Truth is wonted to resort:
Met, they as Sisters join, delighting so
That never since they would assunder go,
Their cottage low (free from all Courtly state)
Strong built on holy ground is Situate:
Two moats surrounding mak't an Amnick Isle,
The better to keep forth Deceit and Guile,
A strong-built Wall does it defend, whose Gate,
Like that of heaven is made angust and strait,
That every one who is admitted there
May Not enter if Deceitful clothes they were;
For Truth gives entrance unto none, but those
Who'r naked like her self; or else whose clothes
Prove tegments for to hide Truths parts divine,
From the perverting Eyes of mu(...)ling Swine.
Within the closure of Truth's cottage wall
No high Ambition that aspires (a fall)
No twy-fac'd Guile, no Discord, and no Pride,
Are by these Dames permitted to reside:
But Love and Meekness, and such Heavenly Graces
Cohabit still in those serener places.
The Shadowie Groves with a perpetual spring,
Sweet Philomel making the woods to ring,
With other birds peirch'd on the tender sprays,
Whose notes from warbling Throats salute the Days
Approach; whose trebles to the murmuring water
According, make sweet Music to their Maker,
Makes as if the Earth in Heaven were placed
Or Heaven descended Earth with his Joys had graced,
Such is the state, (and far more full of bliss)
Where truth conjoined to Innocence is.
Thus dwell these Nymps enriched with the Treasures
Of rural joys, and of Caelestial Pleasures,
Useing to travel all the Country round,
'Till the strange echoes of the Trumpets sound,
'Till Mars with blood bedy'd, and horror fell,
Affrighted them back to their closer cell:
Deceit, and Guile, and Policy then flew,
With speedy feet about the Country too
Where they increased so their Progeny,
That never Since the country could be free,
So that pure Truth, and Innocentia fair,
Unto some secret place, confined are.
But now when Hyem's frosty snow-beard swelld
With chilling cold; and neveous mantles held
The World enwrapt; and Mountain tops did show
Their lofty Heads encircl'd round with snow,
Dame Innocentia clothed all in White,
Her usual Badg, Steals from her secret site;
Leaving the Country to the Court she goes,
To view the Quarters of her bitter foes.
B'ing thither come, the first she met was Guile,
Whose clothing made that spotless Dame to smile,
For like to her in every thing she seemed,
So that most men her Innocentia deemed:
Look what she wore Guile ever wore the same,
And counterfeited still that purer dame.
In pure White Garments was she dec't, the snow
Could not than she a color purer show:
But she whose eyes pierced her base covering,
Saw her all bloached with foul spots within,
And the row her plaster'd White, and painted face
Saw that with all men she usurped her place.
The next she met with was Dame Policy,
Who with a thousand shapes deludes the eye,
Her clothes were changeable, and her disguise
To every color would Camelionize,
Her shapes so diverse and her forms so many
That none could truly say that she had any.
Her handmaid Guile who still attends upon her
Bowing her Head full low unto her Honor
Held up her train, when that she near was come
She thus salutes her, Dame we have no room
To lodge you here, our bedds are all implete,
Nor may this court, for you become a seat,
For your carbasious tegment, which does vie
For whiteness with the snow, cannot come nigh
Our sullied garments, but it shows our stains
And Truths perspective shows to all our blains,
Our albeous Garments seem as white as thine,
Our Laws seem holy, our decrees divine,
If thou art absent; but if thou art by
Our white shows black, our seeming truth's a lie,
Our Laws deceitful, and it does appear,
Our Kingdom falls if thou remainest here.
My niece Ambition cannot be displaced,
Her Sister flattery 'ld think her self disgraced,
Should I dislodge them for your sake, they would snuff,
And pride would think you were not fine enough:
But adulation who her words can change
TO as various shapes as there are humors strange
Shall entertain you, and with Speeches fair
Shall fill you full, if you will be filled with air.
We two are inconsonant; we cannot agree,
I you oppose, you are opposite to me,
And it is as hard for us to join (it clear is)
As pale faced Famine to conjoyn with Ceres,
I am not wont apertly thus to speak,
However now my mind I truly break
To you, and tell you, se'ing we cannot agree,
That you must hence, and leave this place for me.
Contraries cannot conjoyn, we here no room
Have, therefore pray depart from whence you come.
Dame Innocentia soon perceived, the place
Nothing afforded to her but disgrace,
And scorn, therefore lest thence she should be thrust
And her white garments spoiled with the dust,
And stains of sin, the court unto her foes
She leaves with speed (while Guile dirt at her throws)
And to truths cottage, where she was before
Returns; and vows to see the Court no more.
Aula procul Innocentia.
An Elegy on the matchless Murder of Charles the First of Happy and Blessed
Memory.
SInce Britains great Apollo left the land,
Laurells are blasted, and dejected stand;
Poets are dumb-struck, and amazed to see
So strange, unutterable Prodigy,
Charles forced to swim in his own sacred Gore
From this accursed, to an immortal Shore,
So that none dares, all struck with silent dread,
To say, Much less to sing that Charles is dead.
For many months my Soul and Blood was froze,
Till Anger thawed this Ice, and zeal arose
Through all my Veins, which gave me Liberry
To weep out first, then write an Elegy.
Lame, and unequal as the woeful times
Painted with Sighs, and Tears, must run my rithmes,
For who can, struck with so much grief, erect
A Verse, but in a faultring Dialect?
He must forget the rugged times the while,
That can indite ought in a pollisht style.
Who will not blush, and fire his Face with Shame,
That thinks by Verset' immortalize that Name,
Which charactrized in our Rithmes, will give
Life to our Lines, and make our Fumes to live,
Whilst Charles shall flourish in man's memory,
Which shall till times supped up b' Eternity
Be? Royal Phoebus gains no ray of Light
By mortals praises; he it is gives them Sight,
So Britains Son, shall never live by verse,
But Men and Rithmes, whilst they his Name rehearse
Shall flourish; for the Theme these shall be read,
And live soul'd by him, though himself be dead.
Dead! ah more! murdered, and martyred too,
By cursed hands (who once their deed shall rue)
That by Pretext of guilt and crimes do draw
To the block of Death the Head of Church and Law;
Both fell with thee great Monarch, when that Fate
Made thee a Martyr of the Church and State.
The Earth and all her mighty Monarchs stand
Amazed, and drooping dare not now command,
Benumbed their Fingers cannot the Scepter sway,
Kings cannot rule, nor people well obey,
Since by thy Death the Soul of Monarchy
Has suffered, and the Head of Majesty
Chopp'd off; no King now thinks himself secure
Since Laws (the Walls where Princes did immure
Themselves from vulgar rage) are wrested so
That murders issue whence Justice used to flow.
Ashamed and blushing Princes stand, to see
Themselves, and regal acts outdone by thee,
To see the Glory of thy setting Sun
Damp all the luster of their splendid Noon.
Heaven, and the Lamp of day, Nights Tapors tell
England, that they an Act to parrallel
Its bloody deed, never yet beheld; thy Stage
O raging Isles! the wonder of this Age,
And thou shall blush died with a Tyrian Stain,
(Unless thou wash it quickly off again
By some notorious Act, as great as good,
And take away the stains of blood, with blood)
And be the scorn of Nations, whilst the Sun
Shall in the twelve roads of the Zodiac Run.
No Pen can reach to words sufficient
To speak thy Death; no Elegy lament
Thy fatal loss can in a strain that is fit,
The more we strive the more fall short of it,
For thou 'rt a Theme too great for thoughts, much less
Can weaker words speak thee; o'r unhappiness
In floods of brinie tears we will ever tell,
And loyal hearts shall make the Ocean swell
With sighs; which will at last bring judgment down,
And 'wake the Almightie's Justice for his own.
Rebels think not 'twas his o're-weight of sin
That pressed him down, alive he still had been,
But for the Nations crimes; we first his life
Took from him by our sins, then with the knife.
God for a Notion's sins often deals so,
Takes off the Righteous, lets the wicked go,
In mercy to the first, to set them free
From following plagues, and sudden jeopardie.
So our yet bleeding Monarch was a gem
Too good for us, and we too bad for him.
Although the murderers grant no monument
Crowned Hero! Fame his hasty missives sent
To all Earth's Monarchs! who already have,
Counting the World two little for thy grave,
Reared up a pyramid of high renown,
Which shall our-last the longest Monarchs crown,
Where long-live'd Fame upon its summit sings
The fatal trag'die of the best of Kings:
In vaulting thee so close, think let them not
That e're their Regicede shall be forgot,
For though thou hidden under ground do lie,
Their Names above ground rot, and ne`r shall dye.
God turns Hells spiteful Arrows on his head,
The world Salvation gained, Christ Crucified,
And murdered Charles the Name of Martyr gains:
Though Life and three Crowns lost: more now remains
For him a Life Immortal, and a Crown,
Of Shining Glory, and of high Renown.
Which spite of Rebels Acts* though he be Dead,
Shall now for ever Crown His Royal Head.
THE END

