The Second Part OF THE COMMITTEE-MAN CURRIED.

By the first Author, S. S.

-- Stulta est clementia, cum tot ubique
Vatibus occurras periturae parcere Chartae.
Printed in the Year 1647.

The argument of the first and second Part of the Committee-man curried.
SVck-dry, one o'th Committee throng,
Forgets himself, and sleeps too long,
And vexed, that so he lost much pelf,
Does cudgel his Domestic Elfe,
Common Curse, one borne to tyrannize,
A gatherer of the Excise,
With Time-Server, a two faced Priest
Within a Tavern meet and feast,
And there when warmed with wine, bewray
How they the Commons do betray:
And after both incensed with spite
Within a wood they meet, and fight.
A faithful subject Loyalty,
One that had fought for Soveraigntie,
Droven to want, and needy cares,
Unto his unkles house repaires,
Of whom he is not the least respected,
But as a castaway rejected:
Yet after by a wily train,
He threescore pounds, from him does gain.
Shallow Brains, Common Curse his Clark.
Does wed a widow in the dark:
Time-server had the plot hit right,
Had dayen with her, her marriage night.
But both (detected by good hap)
Are taken in a watery trap:
Horn, a contented cuckold, keeps
A wife, maintains him while he sleeps;
Suck-drie with him often barters,
That he might come between her quarters:
Is taken in the act of shame,
By one that coveted the same,
Is beaten by him almost dead,
Or (if it please you) Curried.
The Prologue.
A Second part (you will say) the first weel swear
Was neatly writ, though not one goood line there:
Another gives his Vote, and says fie, fie,
The plot was poor, the Authors brains were dry,
And each man gives his Doom; some not affeard
To pronounce judgment e're the cause they have heard,
You not the Author, but your selves disgrace;
And pray consider't, for here lies the case,
It often falls out in penny worths of wit,
As in all bargains else, men ever get
All they can in; and will have London measure
A handful over, in their very pleasure,
Besides you might consider, that the Age
Allows not wit to enter on the Stage
As formerly, the sweat of Johnsons brain,
Nor yet the Comic Fletchers easier strain,
Which once a Hackney Coach conveyed you to,
Where you sat scorning all the rain could do,
And for your twelvepences a piece could sit
As stern brow'd Judges of all fresher wit:
And therefore since'tis so, you Gentiles all,
Would blast your own bliss, to be critical,
The Author praise you, for to think the store
Of wit is wasted by those were before,
And that the fatness of the soil being spent,
Men's brains grown barren, you would not raise the rent.
Exit. The persons acting who present not in the first Part.
URinall, a Physician. A Tailor, two Sergeants. Sleep and Death, according as
they are usually fancied. Poverty. Harlotto Sneaks wife. Three Creditors. A
Maid. Servants.

THE COMMITTEE-MAN CURRIED.
Act 1.
Scene 1.
Enter Sneake and Shallow-Braines. Sneake. THy father left thee much money, and
but a small quantity of wit to manage it. What -- after all this to marry a
widow, a kind of chewed meat -- what a fantastical stomach have thou, that
thou can not eat of a dish till another first cut of it -- who would wash
after another, when he might have fresh water enough for asking.


Enter Time-Server. Time-Serv. M. Shallow Brains, and M. Sneake, the whole
company are troubled at your abrupt departure -- your fair wife M.
Shallow-Braines is very sensible of your departure --


Shallow-Br. Why here Sneake tells me, widows are but chewed meat -- and has
set such a soil upon my appetite, that should I see her, I should go nigh to
vomit.


Time-Ser. Fie M. Sneake, that you with rude breath should go about to
extinguish Hymen's taper ere it is through lighted. Come hither M.
Shallow-Braines, -- M. Sneake, give me leave to pity thee, who would feign
condemn that which I will make thee confess natural; and the sooner the
better.


Sneak. As how, as how?


Time. First, I will prove that a widow is rather the chewer, then the chewed;
for should we not account him strangely fantastical, that would spend an hour
in pulling on a strait boot, when he might be furnished with enough that would
come on easily, and do him more service, and as much cred^t* wine first broacht
drinks not half so well as after awhile drawing: would thou not account him a
mad man, who whilst he might fair and easily ride on the beaten road way,
should trouble himself with breaking up of gaps; a well-wayed horse will sooner
conveigh thee to thy journeys end, then an unbackt Fillie: it is Prince-like to
marry a widow, for it is to have a Taster.


Shall. I begin to have my stomach come to me again.


Sneak. I, but Sir, I pray resolve me, whether it be not better, if a man must
be in prison, to lie in a private room, then in the hole.


Time-ser. I shall answer you with Pythagoras in his 2. Sect. de Cuniculorum,
that it is better to lie in the hole, then sit in the stocks. -- Come M.
Shallow-braines, the widow you have married, I hope, will never give you cause
to curse the time I joined your hands: she is fair and demure; come M. Sneake,
will you along?

The joviall crew will blame our tardy stay,
And may they make the bridegroom drunk to day.

Exeunt Manet Sneak. Sneak. I Will follow you -- I nere yet affected a woman but
as an house of office, to exonerate nature for that time.

Women enjoyed, what ere before they have been,
Are like Romances read, or sights once seen;
Or like to Majesty, which we desire
Often to see, yet if too much we tire,
Fruition's dull, and spoils the Play much more,
Then if one read, or knew the plot before.
It Is expectation makes a blessing dear,
All joys were nothing, knew we what they were.

Exit. SCENE 2.
Enter a Tailor. 2. Sergeants. Tailor. He Is somewhat tall of stature, his hair
somewhat inclining to black; his chin has no bush, save a little down, enough
to give notice to the world, he now grows mannish.


1. Ser. Is he a blade, will he fence, and use his spit dexterously?


Tay. O, no, he wears no sword, the Committees have taken away your fears in
that point, and ordered, that on pain of close imprisonment no Cavalier shall
manage steel.


2. Ser. I like that well, Rapio, is the word, what is the debt?


Tay. Nine pounds, I Will assure you.


1. Ser. Are you sure he is retired into his house?


Tay. Most certain, it is but a little waiting, I shall requite your stay, you
shall find me at the next Tavern.


Exit. 2 Ser. Stand close, I hear one coming.


SCENE 3.
Enter Loyalty. Loy. He Is not at home, this Poverty 's so hated a disease, men
fly from't as the Pox or Plague. -- No matter, to morrow I Will imbarque for
France, and prove, if with the climate I can change my fortune; but before I
go, I have discovered that which cheares my soul, the Statesmen that so long
have revelled, now hang their heads like full-ear'd corn, two of them supt
last night in London at a place where I then was, and in the midst of supper
one asked what a clock 'twas, and when 'twas told, started, as if he had been to
run a race, -- there is some great storm toward, whispering in every corner;
and there has been about the town to day a murmuring and a buzzing, such as men
use to make when they do fear to vent their fears.


1 Ser. It Is he, upon him, upon him.


Loy. How now my friends, what means this outrage?


1. Ser. Quietly, 'twill be your best way.


Loy. Best way, for what?


2 Ser. Why 'twill be your best way, because there is no other; Rapio, that is
the word, you must along Sir.


Loy. Is that the word, then here is my sword.

runs at them, one scapes away.
Exit. Ser. Murder, murder, murder, h'as killed one of the Kings Officers,
murder, murder.


Loy. The people begin to gather, I must not stay.


Enter Constable, People. Con. What Is the matter?


Ser. Here Sir, here, -- oh a man-mender, a man-mender has broacht me in so
many places, all the liquor in my body will run out -- Oh, oh!


Con. In troth neighbor, and in good deed saw, I am very sorry for your hurts;
on my life this was one of the carriers.


Ser. Cavaliers you mean.


Con. I Cavalier, would I had him in hold, the Committee, I believe would order
him.


Ser. Hang the Committee, o shall I bleed to death? some help good people.


Con. Alas neighbor, -- see, h'as tapt him at the wrong end too, he has been
busy with you here behind (as they say) lend a hand some of you; I charge some
-- in the Kings name to follow me.


Exeunt. Act 2.
Scene 1.
Enter again Loyalty. Loyalty. I Shall not escape them sure, which way now?
ther'es no passage that way: -- a door, and open too.


Enter again. Exit. Where am I now?

Enter a Maid. Maid. O Mr. Lovelesse, my Mistress has been in such fears for
you --


Loy. Ha, for me, it is fit I apprehend her, and take the opportunity, (aside)
Alas I could not help it.


Maid. Sir, she is in the garden walks, hoping your presence.


Loy. This is pretty. (aside.) I Will to her instantly.


Maid. She has been so distempered.


Loy. How shall I bear my self? (aside.) I am very sorry for that.


Maid. Come Sir, my Mistress will rejoice to hear your entrance.


Loy. I Will venture in, Love guide me right this night, and lovers shall restore
thee back again those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee. I Will henceforth
learn to love a woman better then I was wont: who knows how this may prove?

The world is of a vast extent, we see,
And must be peopled; children there must be.

Exit with the maid. SCENE 2.
Enter Rebellion, Sneake. Reb. What caused their quarrel?


Sneak. This Sir: because when you, my Master, and M. Time-Server, were with
him at the Sun Tavern, you went away and left him sleeping on a bench, which
act he took so hainously that the next day he sent a furious challenge to my
Master.


Reb. The place.


Sneak. Hide-Park.


Rebellion. Tell M. Suckdry I will be there and back him, as his second
(vengeance pursue him, why made he choice of me) I have had vigor in my arm
ere now, and yet I can do somewhat, tell him I Will meet him at the hour
appointed. Farewell.


Sneak. I shall inform him Sir.


(Exit) Reb. The death of slaves pursue thee: -- So now my hour of death
draws near, I could not force my tongue to a denial -- I shall meet them at
more distance, then a country Gentle-womman, sees the Lions at first time --
I Will go (though by the way I fall to ashes.)


exit Rebel. SCENE 3.
Enter Time-server, with Harlat^ Shallow-braines wife. Time-ser. Is he drunk?
Har. So dead, that you may pound him in a mortar, or shake him in a blanket
stuck with pins, and he nere cry for help.


Time-ser. Very good fortune, this favor does me ample amends for all thy
frowns: Sweet it is thy marriage night, the thought of that creates an earthly
heaven, while now the fool thy husband snorts in's bed, and dreams, that
passing a rough tide, he arrives at Cuckolds haven; I Am swallowed in the Ocean
of thy beauty, and thus I spread my arms for help.


Pulls her to him in a chair, they kiss. Shallow-braines in his shirt peeps
through the Arras. Shall. So, close Priest, I shall pound you with her, my wit
is not so shallow, but it can prompt me to save my head from being grafted on
my marriage night: J, so, revell with your salt lips, the other sport is
fulsome.


Har. Thou know J ever loved thee, and that J took this fool but for a
Stale, his money thee and J will revellout in clothes and banquets.


Shall. O where!


Time-Ser. Ha, ha, ha, was ever such a novice, to fill the bed himself his
marriage night, -- sweet shal's go to a chamber, and there we will feast love
unto the height, and use variety in lust, which shall beget perpetual
appetite. --


Shall. I Will circumvent you -- Sir. --


Har. But now I think on it, first, I pray resolve me Sir, do you find no
remorse at no time, that you who are obliged to be a guide to others, should so
forget the way your self?


Time-ser. And what of that? let men do as I say, and not as I do; is man
enslaved more then the beasts? Does not the womb of one fair spring bring
unto the earth many sweet Rivers, that wantonly do one another chase, And in
one bed, kiss, mingle and embrace: nice observations cleave to easy souls
that love to be deluded.


Har. Can you deceive the world so?


Time-ser. As easily as Whores their jealous husbands; I must seem holy to the
public view, else there is no comings in, it is outsides men are taken with, I
can on the Fast-daies press abstinence, and on Thanksgiving days, teach how
we ought rejoice with moderation, on Sabbath days exhort to strict devotion,
and keeping of that day inviolate, else not a penny from the Sisters purses but
oh away profane.


Shall. I Am very cold, that villan will undo me.


Har. Sir, you are absolute in hypocrisy, an art I Am not to learn, but I
that have been false my self, would feign rely on your fidelity, -- will ye
prove true unto me, Shallow, lightning blast um, would they would rise.


Time-ser. By this and this loves breakfast, [they kisse] and by his feasts to
come, by all the beauty in this face. --


Har. O hold, swear not by that, sickness and mischance, are great devourers,
and when there is not in these cheeks and lips left red enough to blush at
perjury, when you shall make it, what shall I do then?


Time-ser. Our souls by that time, sweet, will by long custom so acquainted be,
they will not need that duller truch-man flesh,

Mean time weel teach love how to aim aright,
While we do wound each other in his sight,

Shall. Ha, ha, ha, they are taken in my toil. --

They arise, and as they go out, fall in at a trap-door, seen to be opened by
Shallow-braine. Now M. Time-server, and my Bride, how stoops down. do you like
your bathe.


Time-ser. in the Vault. We are undone, this vault is full of mire not water.


Har. I do confess my fault, sweet husband draw me out.


Shall. I have no ambition to be hanged for you sweetheart, nor for the
leacherous Priest there, here one of you bind your self to this rope, and view
the light again, -- come now.


pulls up Harlot. Shall. So now pull you up the Priest, or let him lie there; I
think I have so cooled you, you are this night unfit for Venus sports, to
morrow I Will proclaim ye.

Hereafter men for this my name will hallow,
And will esteem them fools, shall count me shallow.

Exit. Time-ser. I sink deeper, and deeper, was I ordained to perish thus in
mud.


Har. here Sir, fasten your body to this rope, -- if my weak strength can help
come Sir.


Pulls him up dropping wet and durty. Time-ser. My clothes are weightier then
if I were armed cap a pe for the battle, where shall I shift my self?


Har. I shake like to a lamb new yean'd upon a sheet of snow; O fatal chance,
this misery Sir you have brought upon me!


Times. I thought he had been so drunk the cannons iron throat could not have
waked him; let us seek some place to shift us.

They pass through whirlpools, and deep Ills do shun,
Who weigh the event, e're that the action's done.

Exeunt. Act 3.
Scene 1.
Enter Loyalty. Loy. WHat have I done unto the Fates that they should thus find
ways to ruin me, this whore betrayed me to my death, and like the Siren uses
to allure those that pass by, to prey on um, for none live here but whores and
villans, J have escapt their hands, this house is full of thresholds and
trap-doors, would I were out: J was in the cellar too where maids were couch't, J
laid my hand (groping for my way) upon one of them and and she began to
squeake; J must submit to chance, and think on some way to relieve my self in
meet time, wait with patience.

We must not let our grief be too profound,
Man's pain should be no greater then his wound.

SCENE 2.
Enter Suck-dry, Com-curse, Shall brains, as in Hide-Park. Common-cur. You have
observed your time, are nobler then J thought you would have been; -- where is
your second?


Suck. Where Is yours?


Com. Here.


Suck. What Shallow-brains?


Shall. Yes Sir; Shallow-braines, who intends e're that his Master shall be
wronged for to beat out your brains? --


Suck. J like thy humor well, go on and prosper, my friend stays long.


Enter Rebellion, and standing afar off gazeth upon them. Reb. As J live, they
are so foolish, as to fight, see where they stand. J would give twenty pound
now for Fortunatus wishing hat, that in a trice J might fly home again, -- J
had thought not to have found them there. --


Suck. Now yonder comes my friend.


Com. Yes, he steals along as he had robbed some henroost.


Reb. J am descride, nor can J now give back, fear seizes on me like the hand
of death.

-- Gentlemen J am come but may not fight.


-- Com. How not not fight, -- Reb. No Sir, this night J had a vision, that
certified me, if J should fight to day 'twere as much as my life's worth.


Com. Base coward get thee home again, draws: Come M. Suck-dry let us now meet
in single battle here, and struggle till we want our souls.


Suck. Alas Sir, you see my second does refuse to fight, and besides, as yet J
have not made my peace with heaven, J nere thought on it till now. --


Com. Under this tree (kneel down) and quickly end thy orisons. --


Suck. Alas Sir, this place is not convenient, let me go home, and any other
day you shall appoint, J will be sure to meet you.


Reb. They Are busy in discourse, Jle take the opportunity, -- runs -- away. --


Suck. Slave, Jle be thy confessor, thou art not worthy of my sword, a wand
were better, -- cuts a cudgel, -- Jle be your ghostly father, -- nay stir
not, if thou do, Jle cut thee into At^oms, and let the humerous wind to fan
the over thee earth.


Suck. Oh, oh! good Sir, let me go home, Jle enter into bond to give forty
pounds.


Com. So perishing sailors pray to storms, and so they hear again, (bangs him)
-- sirrah confess unto me, J know J have been every way as guilty as thy
self, but Tve repented of what has been, and left my cursed calling, and now
Jle Curr^e thee into a better Creed.


Suck. O hold Sir, J will confess.


Com. Come then.


Suck. J do acknowledge, J have hitherto pretended zeal to God and love to
goodness only to blind the eyes of men. --


Com. So.


Suck. And J have contrary to the very light of knowledge extold those men for
virtuous, faithful ones, whom J have known to be the worst of Traitors* --

Men that turn black to white, and can with ease
Form holy earth, the rivers and the seas.

Com. Good, very good.


Suck. That I with them have daily hoorded that coin the foolish Commons have
brought in, -- swaid with a foolish zeal, and that I have used all means to
impede what ere did tend to peace.


Com. Hold, my ears are blistered sore already, and should I hear thee
further, I fear they will drop off; be gone, I Will leave thee, wishing thy
conversion; the constitution of my soul agrees not with this climate; I Will
leave this Isle ere long*

Where want keeps virtue down, and none can rise,
Without they are of the Committees, or th'Excize.

Suck. I Have escaped with life, I Will home, and if I can.
I will till death be a Committee-man.

Exit. Act 4.
Scene 1.
Loyalty put forth in a bed, with him Vrinall a Physician, and three Creditors.
Loy. YOu know what is my disease Sir.


Vri. Yes, and the cure.


Loy. Jf it take, I will reward your friendship: is my uncle sent for?


Vri. Yes.


Loy. My friends, I Have sent for one able enough to pay you.


1. Cred. But is he willing Sir?


Loy. For that you must remain in hope, two hours will not expire ere you
receive your money, or be for ever out of hope.


2. Cred. Of payment? Heaven forbid it sir.


Loy. I Will join with you in the same prayer, but if it happen that unawares you
do receive your money, you will not be timorous to trust anew.


1. Cred. You shall not want for cloth.


2. Cred. For Linen.


3. Cred. For money.


Loy. I thank you all.


Enter a Servant. Ser. Mr. Rebellion is without.


Loy. Admit him in. Sir, von know your charge, [to the Physitian] Now must I
practice my disguise.


Enter Rebellion. Reb. How now nephew, although I once resolved forever to
desert thee, yet natural affection cannot be hid: what is your desire?


Loy. You see Sir, in what a despicable state I am worn quite away with
sickness, my soul now ready to take her flight to him that lent her me. --
Oh, Oh, I can no more.


Seems to swoune. Reb. Help for Gods sake, rub him, rub him, so, so, so, how do
you nephew.


Loy. Death deals with me, but as with tortured men,
Whom states preserve, only to wrack again.

Reb. We must all die, the sisters spin no cables for us mortals: you are his
Physician I suppose Sir, what is his disease?


Phy. A burning Fever Sir.


Reb. Me thinks he looks too pale for that.


Phy. Alas the operation's secret, which renders him the worse, it is Aurum
palpabile alone can cure him.


Loy. I quite dispare of life, were thou a second Aesculapius Doctor, thy
skill were spent in vain, on me only thus Sir I would desire you Uncle, as
you are virtuous, and would not be thought guilty of obstructing my journey
unto heaven, you would before my death discharge those debts I am to these
engaged, which when I see performed, I shall with joy depart; embrace my death
with as much willingness as shipwreck Seamen would the shore, or Malefactors
a repreive: till that be done, my soul is much distracted, and worldly
thoughts incountring those are pious, maintain fierce war within me. Oh! oh!
oh!


Reb. Ha, I Am caught, [scratches his head] cannot for credit of my own
humanity, deny for to perform his hests; I shall be rid of him at once: what is
he obliged to pay you?


to the creditors. 1 Cred. Twenty pound Sir to me for cloth.


2. Cred. Thirty to me Sir for linen.


3. Cred Twenty he borrowed of me, beside the interest.


Reb. It must be so, I Will pay it, Gentlemen you shall have your money.


Cred. We thank you Sir.


Reb. The world shall not say I damned my brothers son. May I use a servant?


1 Cred. O yes Sir: Richard, come hither.


Enter servant. Ser. Your pleasure.


Reb. Go you my friend home to my house, -- Thou know.


Ser. Yes Sir I do.


Reb. And bid Thomas bring me the sealed bag that lies in my Study window;
this key will further him.


Ser. I shall Sir.


Reb. How fare you nephew?


Loy. Sir, now my soul is pacified, and I shall pass away as in a pleasing
dream; pray heaven the fatal Sisters cut not into my vital thread, until I
see the money paid: pray take your seat uncle, M. Vrinal pray sir down;
Gentlemen, pray fill those chaires: I Have a device ere I depart the world,
worthy your observation.


Recorders: Enter Sleep and Death, bearing a young man betwixt them naked, they
lay him down, dance about him. Enter Poverty, she bewailes over him, and
danceth with the rest. Death and Sleep seem to strive for the body, Sleep
prevails. Enter Mammon, and placing two bags of gold under either arm, he
reviveth, danceth with Sleep and Poverty, then Exeunt. Reb. What Is the conceit
of this?


Loy. This is a vision Sir, forewarnes what is to come, and is an excellent
preparative for me.


Reb. I understand not what was meant, but much I like their postures.


Enter Thomas with a sealed bag. Thom. Sir, here is the gold you sent for.


Reb. O very good, Gentlemen draw near, here is pen, ink, and paper, give me
acquittance, and subscribe your names, then take your money.


Cred. Willingly.


They write. Reb. Let me see, there is twenty powers gold on the board. pounds
for you Sir, there is thirty for you Sir, there is 20. for you Sir. Now nephew, I
trust, your peace being made on earth, you will make peace with heaven, I have
discharged your debts.


Loy. I thank you Sir, leaps out of the bed. This hearty love of yours has
wrought my perfect cure.

Fa, la, fa, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, la.


dances. Reb. Does he counterfeit? I Am fooled out of my money, these varlets
have spread a net to catch me threescore and ten pounds, -- I shall run mad, I
cannot contain my self, what shall I do?

I Will get an halter, and on the next tree
I Will put an end unto my misery.

Exit. Loy. Come, let us away, Rebellion hanged and dead,
Loyalty with applause will show his head.

Exeunt. Act 5.
Enter Horn alone. Horn. WOman besides the trouble, has ever bin thought a
rentcharge, and though through the vain curiosity of man, it has often been
enclosed, yet it has seldom been brought to improve or become profitable, it
faring with married men (for the most part) as with those that are at great
charges, wall in grounds, and place, who cheaper might have eaten Melons
elsewhere, then in their own garden Cucumbers, they are creatures (for the most
part) so beholden to Venus, that they cannot contain themselves without variety
of glister-pipes, nay and are so ravenous, that they court men by proxies to
meet them.

Come none, they will meet their slaves, those out o'th way.
A tankerd-bearer for his pains they will pay,
He absent, no man found, ere they will abide
Delay, they will let a horse, get up, and ride.
But I, under the rose be it spoken, have let my wife to farm, and make the
best of her: those Gallants that resort to her, pay liberally, and so that I
gain coin, let them gain -- what she gives them: but there is one Dammee a
Ruffian that would ingrosse her to himself, drives those away that come and
bring in gain, nor will disburse himself one do it.

A fellow takes no rest, if peace he keep,
A quarrel still is prologue to his sleep,
And I that have the Moon before me borne,
With my large Antlers, am but made his scorn:
He are how we quarreled, if a quarrell't were,
Where he lays on the blows, I only bear:
He stands before me, and commands me stand,
And I must be obedient to's command.
Alas, what would you have a man to do
In The hands of one that is mad, and stronger too!

SCENE 2.
knocking within. Whence, who is there? Dammee without. Where Is Mrs. Horns.

Horn. I shall be beat to dust if be set eye on me, I Will send one to him, (goes
off.) Enter James. knocking without I am Who Is there? Dam Open the door you
rogue.


Iam. Rogue, who are you? (^ens the door) OM. Dammee, you are welcome Sir.


Dam Where Is thy mistress?


Iam. Not at home Sir.


Dam. Then all my fears are true, any she is false, false as a falling star,
or glow worms fire: this devil beauty is compounded strangely, it is a
subtle point, and hard to know, whether it has in it more active tempting, or
more passive tempted, so soon it forces, and so soon it yields -- She Is light
as air, I Will once give her the bells, and let her fly to the devil.

I Will to the tavern, that my thought may move,
And then I Will go, and find another love.

Exit. Enter Horn again. Horn James, Is he gone James? His vo^ce does terrify
me more then thunder does the Indians: my game is gone, my wife is run away, I
could for spite now be a convert, and turn ^onest in my age; I have a
Countrie-house in Warwick thire, thither I Will go, and live upon the Onions that
I sow, and Beans that I shall set. W^ along James


Iam. Yes Sir.


Horn. Come then, and since I Have lost my city wife.
I Will for the future lead a countrey-life.

Exeunt. FINIS.

