FOR OUR FAITHFVLL AND EVER HONORED COMMANDERS, THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS
EXCELLENCY, SIR Thomas Fairfax, Major General Skipton, Lieutenant General
Cromwell, presented to them in the behalf of eight Regiments of Horse, by
three private Soldiers, who were sent from the Quarters by the Soldery of the
forementioned Regiments, wherein they manifest to the world their real
affections to this Commonwealth, and their forward and brotherly assistance,
toward the relief of Ireland: If not by some diverted.
May it please your Honors,
WE who have (for these two years, past) been by your honors conducted
through many dangers, and by providence have been hitherto protected, who have
often seen the devouring sword of a raging enemy drawn forth against us,
threatening destruction to us, and now see them vanquished, and our selves
seemingly settled in peace and safety, are yet sensible of a more dangerous
storm hanging over our heads, then ever the malice of our open enemies could
have contrived or their fury c^used to fall upon us, which unless diverted,
strikes not only at our liberty, but also at our lives. To whom (next to our
M^ker) shall we fly for shelter but to your honors, our Patrons, and
Protectors, from what secondary means shall we expect our deliverance, but
from that hand that has so often been engaged with us? And from that heart
that has as often been so tender over us; and careful for our securities.

Can we suffer and you not sympathise? Can we be proclaimed Rebels and your
Honors remain secure? Ah, dear Sirs! Let your wonted care for us be further
demonstrated, cease not to speak for us, who together with your selevs, and in
obedience to your commands, have adventured all that is dear to us, for the
Kingdoms safety.

Has any thing been desired by us that has not been promised us, or then we
have just cause to expect, if there has, then let it and the authors thereof
perish? But can the Parliament upon misinformation pass us for enemies, and
we not therein perceive the designs of our Enemies? Can we be satisfied with
a complement, when our fellow Soldiers suffer at every Assize, for acts merely
relating to the War? Is it not our lives we seek for? Where shall we be
secured, when the mere envy of a malicious person is sufficient to destroy us?
Were our Enemies in the field with their swords in their hands, we should
expect no more then a bare command, and a divine protection in our endevoures
to free our selves but it is another; and a far worse Enemy that we have to
deal with, who like Foxes lurk in their Dens; and cannot be dealt with,
though, discovered, being protected by those who are entrusted with the
Government of the Kingdom; it is the grief of our hearts, that we cannot
desire our own security, without the hazard of your Honors, if but in speaking
in our behalf: When shall we see Justice dispensed without partiality, or when
shall the weal public be singly sought after and endeavored; can this Irish
expedition be any thing else, but a design to ruin and break this Army in
pieces, certainly reason tells us it can be nothing else; otherwise, why are not
those who have bin made instruments in our Countries deliverance, again be
thought worthy to be employed? Or why are such (who for their miscariages have
been cast out of the Army) thought fit to be entrusted, and those members of
the Army encouraged and preferred to that service, when they are for the most
part such, as (had they considered their just demerrits) might rather have
expected an ejection then employment: We are sensible, yea, far more sensible
of the bleeding condition of Ireland, (crying aloud for a Brotherly assistance)
then those forward undertakers in this present design manifest themselves to
be, and shall willingly contribute the utmost of our abilities toward their
relief, when we shall see this to be the only thing sought after, and
indevoured; but we are confident, that your Honors cannot but perceive, that
this plot is but a mere cloak, for some who have lately tasted of
Soveraignity, and being lifted beyond the ordinary sphere of Servants, seek to
become Masters, and degenerate into Tyrants: We are earnest therefore with your
Honors, to use your utmost endeavors, that before any other or further
propositions be sent to us, our expectations may be satisfied, which if they
are not, we conceive our selves, and our friends, as bad as destroyed, being
exposed to the merciless cruelties of our malicious enemies, and shall your
Honor, or any other faithful Servant to the State, be appointed for the
Service of Ireland, and accept of that employment, we must of necessity
(contrary to our desires) show our selves averse to that service, until our
just desires be granted, the just Rights and liberties of the Subjects of
England, vindicated and maintained; (and then) as God and our own consciences
bear us witness, shall we testify to the Kingdom the integrity of our hearts
to the service of Ireland, and our forward actions shall demonstrate the
sincerity of our expressions in reference to that employment, once more we are
earnest with your honors for your assistance, without it we are like to be
wholly ruind, and having obtaind it, may be enabled, as in duty we are bound to
express our selves.

These three Gentlemen Soldiers whose names are hereto subscribed, delivered
the Letter in be half of the whole, Edward Sexby. Will. Allen. Thomas
Sheppherd.

Your Honors and the Kingdoms most faithful and obedient servants, whose
names are here to annexed, as agitating in behalf of their several Regiments.


