St. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND: OR, A Relation of the Manner of the Election and
Installation of the Knights of the most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, called the
GARTER.

Which is to be Solemnized on the 15. 16. and 17. of April next, at the Castle
of WINDSORE.

March. 29 LONDON, Printed for James Thrale, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Cross-keyes, at Paul's gate. 1661.

A Relation of the manner of the Election and Installation of the Noble Order
of St. George, at Windsore, etc.
BEfore I Come of speak of the Statutes of this noble Order, it will be
necessary to acquaint the Reader with it is Founder, and the occasion of it is
Institution. The Founder of it was Edward the third King of England, a person
of a most accomplished Virtue, the Thunderbolt of War, and in times of Peace
nothing inferior to any Lawmaker of the best ages so much celebrated. This
most excellent Prince, the Glory of his times, and a chief Ornament of Europe,
having exceedingly prevailed both against the French and Scottish Kings,
discomforted their Armies and taken one of them in Person, ordained this most
Noble Order and society of Knights, so to adorn their Valor, manifested in the
Wars with honor the reward of Virtue. There number 26. no more ut pretium
faciat raritas, least being else communicated unto many it might at last become
despicable, nor ever have our Kings exceeded the number, but still confined
themselves unto the first intention of the Founder. For the occasion of its
Institution it is generally received that it took beginning from a Garter of
the Queen, or rather of Joan Countess of Salisbury, a Lady of Incomparable
Beauty which fell from her as she danced, and the King taking it up from the
ground, a number of Nobles and Gentlemen standing by laughing at it, The King
said that shortly it should come to pass that Garter should be in high Honor,
and estimation: adding withal these words in French Honey Soit qui maly pense,
(i. e.) Shame be to him that evil thinks. Which after was the Motto, or
Impress of the Garter. Which were it so (says Mr. Cambden) it needs not seem
to be a base original thereof, considering as one says Nobilitas sub amore
jacet, He adds withal that some report how from his own Garter, given forth as
a signal of a battle which speed so fortunatly, he called them Knights of the
Garter. But whatsoever the occasion was, likely it is that it took this name
from the blew Garter, which the Fellows of it wear on their left leg: carrying
the aforesaid Impress wrought with Golden Letters, and enchased with precious
stones and fastened with a Buckle of Gold, as with the bond of most inward
society in token of Unity and Concord, that so there might be a Communion as it
were of Virtues and good will among them. Dr. Cowel reports in his Interpreter
that he has seen an ancient Monument wherein it does appear that this most
Noble Order is a College or Corporation, having a Common Seal consisting of
the Kings of England as Sovereigns thereof or chief Guardians of it 25 Knight
fellows (as they call them or Companions) of the Garter 14 Canons Resident
being Secular Priests, 13 Vicars or Chorall Priests, and 26 of the inferior
sort of Gentry, Military men commonly called Poor Knights of Windsore (whereof
indeed there are but twelve) There belongs also to this Heroic Order the
Prelate of the Garter which is the Lord Bishop of Winton for the time being; a
Chancellor, a Register thereof which always is the Dean of Windsore, An Usher
which is one of the Ushers of the Kings Chamber called the Black rod, and last
of all a Chief Herald, even the most principal of all; Garter first King at
Arms, Instituted by that Victorious Prince King Henry the fifth, to attend
Chiefly on this Order, and to do them service at their Funerals.

A brief View of some of the Statutes of this Order, The Kings of England are
(as I said before) the Sovereigns of this Noble Order, and either do in person
or by their lawful Deputies by them nominated and appointed, elect the Fellows
of the Order, and Solemnize the Festivals, and hold the Chapters. To them it
also appertains to have the declaration, reformation, and disposition of the
Laws and statutes of the said most Noble Order. Which Laws and statutes were
first Instituted and devised by the Victorious Prince King Edward, of that name
the third; after revised and ratified by many of the succeeding Kings. And on
the Reformation of Religion much altered by King Edward the sixth. About this
time (says Sir John Hayward in his History of this Prince) the Order was
almost wholly altered as by the statutes thereof then made does appear. A thing
not to be wondered at, for even the Laws of the most settled States and Kingdoms
have been often changed and varied according to occasion and the Princes
pleasure. Unto them also to the Sovereigns, I mean, or to their Deputies, it
appertains to chose and nominate into the Order whom they esteem to be most
worthy of that Honor, and like to be the greatest Ornaments unto it. Yet so
that six at least of the said Fellows do conveene at the Election, and concur
in it, the residue of them being all warned to be there present, and such as
fail of their attendance without just cause, such as the Sovereign shall
approve, to be amerced. In their Elections two things there are which they
especially observe.

First, that the Party nominated, be a Gentleman of Name, and Arms; for three
descents both by the Fathers side, and the Mothers side. For which cause when
the Garter was reproachfully taken from the Lord William Pagit, by Dudly of
Northumberland to give to John his Eldest son, the Earl of Warwick: he used
this color to disguise that foul dishonor; that the said Lord, (as the first
raiser of his house) was said to be no Gentleman of blood, neither by father
nor mother, as Sir John Heyward tells the story

The second thing to be observed is that the party nominated be without spot or
foul reproach: as viz: not convict of Heresy; nor attaint of Treason; nor by
his Prodigality and Riot decayed in his Estate, by means whereof he is not able
to conserve the Honor of his Order; nor such a one as ever fled in the day of
Battle; his Sovereign Lord, or his Lieutenant being in the field. In all which
cases a Knight Elected, and Installed may also if it please the Sovereign, be
degraded.

The Party chosen by the Prince, if he be a stranger, is certified thereof soon
after by letters from the Sovereign: and many times the Statutes of that Order
have been sent unto him to consider of them, whether or no he will accept of
this Election. But this is a matter merely formal; for commonly our Kings are
first well assured of the Parties good affection to them, before they choose
him: and as for Sovereign Princes it is a true note of Mr. Cambdens, that the
most mighty of them have reputed it their chiefest Honor to be chosen and
admitted into this Company. If he accept it (as no question but he will) then
does the Sovereign forthwith send unto him by his Ambassador and the chief
Herald (commonly) the whole Habit of the Order, with the Garter and the Collar
wherewith they do invest him. And on the other side, the Prince or Stranger so
invested, within convenient time, send their sufficient Deputy with a Mantle of
blew Velvet, to be installed in their room at St. GEORGE'S Church in Winsore.
But if the party chosen be a Subject of the Kingdom, the Garter is delivered to
him presently upon his Election, to signify that he is chose into the Order.
Afterward in the Chapter House, upon the reading of his Commission before the
Sovereign or his Deputy, he is invested with the Robe and with the Hood. Then
follows the Installment, performed with many grave and magnificent Ceremonies:
which done, he does receive the Collar of the Order. This at their
Installations have always an Oath administrated, that to their power, during
the time they shall be fellows of the Order, they shall defend the Honor,
Quarrels, Rights and Lordships, of the Sovereign, and that they shall endeavor
to preserve the Honor of the said Order: and all the Statutes of it they shall
well observe, without fraud or covin. Which Oath is by the Natives of the
Kingdom taken absolutely, and in terms; but many times by Strangers relatively
and by halfes, in reference to some former Order.

So when King Henry the third of France, was by the Earl of Darby invested with
the Garter, Anno 1585. he took his Oath to keep the Statutes of the Order in
all points, wherein they were not opposite to the Order of St. Michael, and the
Holy Ghost, to which he had been sworn before. Upon which reason also Frederick
King of Denmark, though he did joyfully accept the habit of the Order, refused
to take the Oath at all, because he had been sworn before (at his Installation
in the Order of St. Michael) to the King of France. Being thus solemnly
installed and seated in the place belonging to them in the Chap^el, their next
care is to fasten an Escotcheon of their Arms and Hachments, in a plate of
metal, upon the back of their said Stalls, which they remove according as
themselves in Order are advanced higher. And in that order they do also change
the places of their Banners, Swords and Helmets, which are continually set over
their said Stalls, during their being of the Order. This only is the
difference, that at the death of any of the Knights of this most Noble Order,
their plate of Arms is left for ever to that Stall, where last they sat, to
preserve their memory: whereas the Banner, Sword and Helmet, are all taken
down, and offered with all due solemnities, the Offerings made by such of the
surviving Knights, as by the Sovereign shall be destinated to that service. I
said before that they remove their Plates, and Hachments, according as
themselves in order are advanced higher in this Order, they take place
according to the antiquity of their Creation, and not according to their
Dignities, Titles, and Estates, so that sometimes a Knight Bachelour has place
before an Earl or Baron, as not long since we had example in Sir Harry Lea
Knight, keeper of the Armory. Only in Honor unto Strangers which be Dukes, or
sons and brethren unto foreign Kings and Princes, it is permitted that they
take their rooms and places according to their quality.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Election of Saint GEORGE'S Knights and their
admission to the Order. A little would be said now of the means and ways
whereby their rooms are void, and their places destitute: and they are three:
For either they are void by Death, or by Degradation, or by Cession and
surrendry. The second of these (for we will not speak of Death) is Degradation,
(...) piece of Justice more to be commended where it may not, than where it may
be spared. The Cases wherein Degradation is allowed of, I have already shown,
but the examples are but few. William Lord Paget which was so scornfully
degraded by Northumberland, was by Queen Mary with great Honor restored again
unto his Order. And Sir John Fastolfe, which for his valiantness had been
elected of the Order, was by the Duke of Bedford, under whom he served, and
unto whom he was great Master of the Household, divested in great anger, of his
George and Garter: because he had departed from a Battle (which the English
lost) without stroke stricken: but afterward by means of his friends, and upon
good excuse and reason by him alleged in his defense (for certainly he was a
wise and valiant Captain, however on the Stage they have been pleased to make
merry with him) was restored to his Honor. The third and last means of
avoidance, is by Cession or surrendry* and here of the examples are also very
few. This I am sure of (not to make further search into it) that Philip King of
Spain being offended with Queen Elizabeth about her altering of Religion, and
thereby alienated from the English, delivered back unto the Lord Vicount
Mountaque the Robes and Habit of the Order wherewith he was invested on his
Marriage with Queen Mary: By which his Act, as the Historian has observed, he
seemed to break off utterly all amity and friendship with the Realm of England.
It is true indeed, King Philip being once resolved to renounce his Order, was
(...) necessity to send back the Habit; for so it is ordained amongst them,
that even such of them as depart this life, are to take care especially, that
the Garter be restored to the Sovereign; by him, and by the company of the said
Order, to be disposed of to some other: examples in which kind are infinite to
relate.

Windsore, the fairest and most stately of our English Palaces, was by King
Edward who adorned and beautified it, conceived most fit to be the seat of this
most excellent Order which he had established. An house indeed worthy of such
Inhabitants; and therefore worthily honored by them: For here they always
leave in readiness the Mantle of their Order, to be laid up for them, for any
sudden chances which might happen to require their presence at St: GEORGE'S
Chapel, or in the Chapter House: Here do they solemnize the Installations of
their brethren, and perform their obsequies. And lastly, such a reverend regard
they owe the place, that if they come within two miles of it (except that they
be hindered by some weighty and important business) they always do repair
thereto, and putting on their Mantles, which are their in readiness, proceed
unto the Chapel, and there make their offerings. Nor do they go at any time
from out the Castle, if their occasions bring them thither, till they have
offered in like manner.

Having thus spoken of the statutes of this most Noble Order whereby they are
and have been governed, we will descend in the next place to give you notice of
their Patron, which after the opinions of those times, they chose unto
themselves. Of which this Polydore Virgil. This order is (says he dedicated
unto St GEORGE as the chief Saint, and Patron of the men of War; whose
Festival they therefore solemnly observe with many noble Ceremonies. But what
need Polidore have been produced unto this purpose, since from the Charter of
the Institution we have a testimony more authentical. For there King Edward
tells us that to the Honor of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Virgin St. Mary,
and of the Glorious Martyr St. GEORGE, Patron of the Right Noble Realm of
England, and to the Exaltation of the Holy Catholic Faith, he had ordained,
established, created and founded within his Castle of Windsore, a Company of
twenty six Noble Knights to be of the said most Noble Order of St. GEORGE,
named the Garter. It is true indeed what Polidor has well observed, with how
great Ceremony and Solemnity the Knights do Celebrate this Feast: Attending
both on the Vesper, and the day it self at Divine Service, attired in the most
rich and stately Mantels of the Order: and gallantly adorned with their most
rich and sumptuous Collars (which we call of SS.) The Image of St. GEORGE,
garnished with pearls and precious stones, appendant to them. In which their
going to the Church, and in their sitting at the Table, they go and set by two
and two, every one with his fellow which is fore against him in his stall. And
if by chance it happen that his Fellow be not present he does both go and set
alone, I say if it chance to happen: for all the Fellows are obliged to be
there personally present, without a just and reasonable cause acceptable to the
Sovereign or his Deputy, and ^^^nified by special letters of Excuse. Other
Pomp and Rich magnificence of this Feast I forbear to mention, as being unable
to express it. The mind is then best satisfied in such things as this, when the
eye has seen them. But I proceed unto St. GEORGE, of which their Patron, and
the Noble Order it self, the Marriage of the Them, and Isis, and Poem written
some years since, does thus descant.

Windsore relate no more the glorious things
In thee, thy gilded roofes, and Tombs of Kings.
Or that thou art so honored in the rites
Of George, the Cappedocians Martyrs, Knights.
Who clad in Mantels rich, and circuled round
The leg, with that the Garter so renowned.
Does so advance thy name, and with its raise
Splendant and glorious, so the world amaze:
That Burgandy her Golden Fleece neglects
And France St Michaels Collar disrespects.
And Spain and Malta both esteem but small.
Their Crossed robes. Thy Order dims them all.
Hence it is, that the Knights of this most honorable Order, are called in
Latin Equites Georgiani, St. GEORGES Knights, and sometimes also in English,
as in that passage noted out of Poly Albion.

The Temple of St. George, where his honored Knights
Upon the hallowed day observe their ancient rites.
The other Ornaments and Habits belonging to this Order, besides the Garter;
are a Gown, a Kirtle, a Chaperon, a Cloak, a Girdle, and a Collar: all Stately
and Magnificent, both for stuff and fashion, but worn only upon days of
Extraordinary Solemnity for ordinary use, besides the Garter which is for every
days wearing, and their Cloak with the Sun on the left shoulder of it in his
full Glory, which last was added by his late Majesty of ever Blessed Memory,
they have a Blew Ribbon which they wear about their necks; with the picture or
rather portraicture of the GEORGE, appendant to it.

FINIS.

