SEVERAL PROPOSALLS, Tendered to the consideration of the Honorable Committee
for Regulating of Courts of Justice, for a through Reformation thereof, and the
general satisfaction of all the Nation, save only some 20 or few more of the
head Officers; who being taken away, and these Proposalls granted, will save
the Commonwealth many hundred thousand pounds in few years.
THAT the Grand and Head Officers of the several Courts of Westminster, as the
Six-Clearks, Prothonotharies, and the like; having in the Reign of the late
Kings, and times of Monopolies and Patentees, obtained diverse Patents of
several impertinent Offices and vast Fees, have and do take the same, and
force the People to pay them accordingly: By means whereof they have and do
raise great sums of money out of the Peoples Purses and purchase great
Estates therewith; And yet will not suffer the true Laborers, that discharge
all the Offices, and take all the Pains to have so much as will reasonably
maintain them, their Wives and Families.

1. THAT all the head Officers and Masters of Offices, may be required to bring
in all their Fees and Demands, to the end it may appear to the Committee what
vast sums they raise for doing no manner of service for the same, but merely
keep books of Receipts and Entries of what they receive, and subscribe their
names to what they neither peruse nor understand.

2. That all Deputies, Under-clearks and other inferior Officers, that do
perform all the service, and dispatch all the Peoples businesses, may be also
required to bring in Particulars of what they receive for their Fees and
Pains; and what they will be contented to take for dispatching the business
of the Commonwealth in each Office: And also to bring in the names of such
Offices as are burdensome and unnecessarie; to the end the same may be taken
away, and also to Propose a way for supply thereof, less burdensome to the
Commonwealth, with more speedy dispatch of Business.

3. That this being done, all these head or chief Officers may be taken away,
and some honest able Men chosen out of the several Offices, to make Entries
and Registries, to supply their rooms, and to have a certain rasonable
Stipend for the same; and the rest of the inferior Officers and Clearks, that
take all the pains, to have some reasonable allowance for the same, viz. one
part out of three of the Fees now taken by the head Officers, or but half
thereof at most.

4. That all the needelesse and chargeable Entries, tedious Proceedings (which
the head Officers have contrived in the several Courts, for their own vast
advantage) may be abolished: And that the inferior Officers and Clearks, may
bring in Particulars to the Committee for the due regulation thereof, and
shortning of Proceedings, whereby Causes may be speedier heard, at cheaper
rates then formerly.

5. That all Fines paid to Cursitors, in England, upon any Original sued forth,
and all Fines paid upon levying of Fines and Recoveries, in Wales, and all
Dammage-Cleere may be quite abolished; being grievous Monopolies and
Oppressions, which depended only on kingly Government, and ought now, to die
with the Government.

6. That hereafter no Judges, Lord Keepers or Lords Commissioners, or Masters
of the Rolls, may receive any Fees under any notion whatsoever but only a
Stipend suitable to their Places and Trusts; it being a dishonor for Persons of
their Degree to take Fees: And that they may not practice whilst in Commission
for Judges, nor sell any Places or Offices, as formerly they have done, for
vast sums; and suffer the same to be executed by men that were never bred up
in such Places and Employments.

7. That the grievous oppression of Goalers and Keepers of Prisons, and their
under Officers may be eased, and that they may not rob both Creditor and
Debtor, as formerly; but may hereafter have certain Stipends and allowances
suitable to their trust and places, and that there may be fewer Prisons then
are now used.

8. That the like course may be taken with Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Ketchpoles, and
others their Agents; by whose extortion and indirect practice the People are
grievously oppressed and damnified.

9. That all arests by those vexatious Writts of Latitats, Bills of Middlesex,
Quo Minus, Capias and the like, and that indirect proceedings to the Outlarie
unknown to the Party Outlawed may be abolished: And that before any man's
Person shall be arested or restreyned he may have legal summons, by way of
Original or other Writ, directed to the Sheriff for that purpose, to be done
personally, or else at his dwelling house with his Family, or other place of
his usual and constant abode: And that there be fourteen days warning from
the time of his personal summons and the day of his appearance at least; and a
month between the time of summons left at his house, etc. and the day of his
appearance; and if upon due return made of such Summons the Party do not
appear, either in Person, or by Attorney on Record, whereby the Plaintiff may
be enabled to proceed; the Plaintiff to be at liberty, to proceed with
Process against his person or goods; or else, by way of outlarie, to force his
appearance, and obedience to the Law. But I refer my-selfe to Mr. Leach his
Proposalls; who if required to attend the Committee can inform them at large of
these and many more abuses.

10. That all Justices of Peace may have a certain annual stipend out of the
public Treasury, for their service; And neither they, nor their Clerks,
Servants, or Agents, to take any other fees, gratuities, or rewards, save only
the usual allowed fees, taken by the Clerks for their warrants, and for
binding men, etc.

11. That all men's estates may be made liable to pay their just debts; and no
fradulent intayles, or other feined estates in trust, may avoid the real
Creditor. And that no man may be imprisoned, that has not wherewithal to
satisfy his Creditor.

12. That (for avoiding the defrauding of Creditors, and diverse suits and
inconveniences, that come by intayles) these intayles may be taken away; And
that all men's estates may be reduced to a more certainty and plainness. And
that (according to many true and former Proposalls) there may be a public
Register, in every County, to Register all Deeds, Contracts, Agreements,
Bargains, etc. And Commissioners appointed to receive their acknowledgment;
which will avoid many hundred suits, and other inconveniences to the
Commonwealth.

13. That for the avoiding of many litigious suits, for small matters; which
may be easily tried at a cheaper rate, in the Town Court, County Court, etc.
in the proper County where the Action lies. Hereafter no action, or suit, may
be commenced in any of the Courts of Westminster, for any cause whatsoever,
under twenty pounds in value, unless the party defendant live in London or
Middlesex; or does reside or remain there at the time of the Action brought;
whereby he may receive due summons before arrest, according to the former
Proposal.

14. That the Marshalls Court, being a vexatious, troublesome, chargeable, and
unnecessary Court, may be quite abolished and taken away. And that so much of
the Exchequer, and Chequer of Pleas as had relation, and dependence on Kingly
Government; and shall be now found inconvenient, or burdensome to the
Commonwealth may be also abolished.

15. That the fees, and number of Lawyers may be ascertayned; and they not
suffered to swarm, as they do, before they have either experience or
practice: The great ones now devouring the little ones; so that one cannot
subsist by the other. And for the better regulation of the Law, and avoiding
those many grievous inconveniences, which daily experience does teach, by
permitting Lawyers that are members of the House, to have some of them, great
Offices, which by their power they uphold; and others to practice at
Westminster, and in the Circuits, when they should attend their duty, in
discharge of their trust in Parliament. That hereafter no member of Parliament
shall enjoy any Offices belonging to the Law; or practice in any Court, or
Circuit, whilst they continue members of Parliament: which if granted, will
advantage the Commonwealth many thousand pounds in the year.

16. That the number of Attorneys may be ascertained, together with their fees:
and not to suffer every broken man, or litigious person to be Attorney; that
are neither of ability to do the business, or to answer for what they do: it
being often in the power of an Attorney to ruin many, if they be so wickedly
bent. And that no Malignant, or ill-affected Lawyers, or Attorneys, or other
Officers, may be suffered to practice or officiate.

17. That the same course may be taken with Solicitors; and none to be
permitted to solicit; unless he be approved by the Judges of the same Court
and sworn, as Attorneys be; and their names enrolled; and their fees, and
number ascertained. And that no Offices or Places whatsoever, be bought, or
sold, as hitherto has been practiced, to the great prejudice of the
Commonwealth.

If these Proposalls be entertained with the same affection and zeal as they
have been penned, and the Author encouraged; he intends to present diverse
more; which may prove very good, for information of the Committee: and if by
them thought fit to be granted, will prove, in all likelihood, of vast use and
benefit to the Commonwealth.


