THE ANATOMY OF Urania Practica.

OR, A short Mathematical Discourse; Laying open the Errors and impertinencies
delivered in a Treatise lately published by Mr. Vincent Wing, and Mr. William
Leybourne, under the title of Urania Practica.

By Jeremy Shakerley Philomath.

Tota stupet natura Deum, robustaque quamvis,
Viribus in nihilo deficit aegra suis.
Ars stupet, and tantae spectans molimina dextrae
Heret, and ipsa suas damnat egena manus.
Nature's astonished at her god, though fast
And far she go; her strength is tired at last.
To view these works, Art does amazed stand,
Doubts, and condemns her own untuter'd hand.
LONDON: Printed by Thomas Brudenell, 1649.

To the Honorable Major General LAMBERT: The Author wishes Felicity.
Most Honored Sir:
THese few leaves more trusting to the worth of the subject they treat of, then
the worthiness of their Author's performance, have made bold to become an
object of your eye, and though small in bulk, yet great in substance: Its
winged subject has given it occasion to mount on high, and from the top of
Art, to look down on the unartificiall Fabrics of others, which would make us
believe they are fixed in solid Orbs, and not subject to corruption: Yet may it
be doubted, its high flight is endangered with precipices, which every where
make the passage more difficult: And so much the rather, for that the vain
confidence of Artists in these days, has drawn into the number of their
adherents, others who take their Art upon trust, which of how dangerous a
consequence it is, will in some measure appear in the following Discourse. But
I did not know any to whom I would more willingly, or could more justly presume
to Dedicate these the first fruits of my endeavors, then to your worthy self;
who to your many rare and singular virtues, have added the Star of
Mathematical knowledge, thereby to make your excellencies a perfect
Constellation. Under the fortitude of whose favorable aspect, this slender
piece craves a shelter from the malevolent rays of Detraction. Thus far your
celebrated goodness has drawn the hopes of him who is

The honourer of your Virtues, And Your Servant devoted, JER. SHAKERLEY.

To the Mathematical READERS.
THe principal glory of the Mathematick Sciences, is their certainty whereby
they are able to command the approbation of others, and impose upon their
Adversaries a necessity of favoring their Demonstrations, when other Arts,
built upon the experiments of former times, leave room for the refined conceits
of others, who many times change and alter their dubious principles. But these
with their own materials have strengthened their holds, and are of power to
frustrate the designs of opposition. And of these the two cornerstones,
Arithmetic and Geometry have this pre-eminence above other Arts, that they
leave no hole to creep out at, no quirk for dissent, but an everlasting
addition of new Inventions, to what before has been happily demonstrated. But
Astronomy deriving her current from more abstruse and hidden fountains, has
left a harder task to her Observers, to find her out, and trace her through
her curious Laborinth; and unless learned in the other two, here most subject
to fall into many absurdities and untruths. So nice is Urania in the choice of
her servants, and so unwilling to prostitute her Virgin excellencies to the
mercenary embraces of every vulgar Professor.

And hence for the most part it falls out, that in these curious speculations,
the more we desire to know, the more we come to the knowledge of our own
ignorance, our new experiments informing us of the insufficiency of ancient
suppositions, and giving an example to our followers to handle our conceits, as
we have done theirs that went before us. For although what way soever we turn
the eyes of our judgment, and from the beginnings draw down our cogitations
upon each particular, we shall every where find evident testimonies of the
divine omnipotency; and although that our minds by the Towning raptures of
sublime imaginations, exalt themselves above the Spheres, and suffer not
themselves to be bounded with other limits then those that circumscribe the
universe; yet when we enter into these sacred contemplations, we find as much
as we can behold, more then we can understand, these mysteries being too
aenigmaticall for our dull apprehensions, as this load of flesh tries and clogs
our immortal part in its aspiring journey.

Notwithstanding the most necessary care of worthy Artists, has scarcely in
any age been wanting, and the divine Urania still found those who admired and
celebrated her excellencies, whose successive labors have taught us how great
a thing experience is, and what danger there is in conformity to ancient rules.
Little could be expected from them who were guided by so few; yet their
performances were beyond expectation. More may be required from our times,
whose subsidiary knowledge is greater. This last age (by the blessing of God)
does enjoy the benefit of more admirable and useful Inventions, then any, or
almost all before it, and still new ones are added to the old, and the welcome
tidings of Mathematical novelties daily delight us. And indeed what shall we
mortals now despain of? within what bounds shall our wits be contained?
Difficult, remote and envious things are now grown pervious to humane industry.
We have seen the spots of the Sun, and its conversion about its own axis; we
have seen the laterall Guardians of Saturn and Jupiter, the various Phases of
Mars, the horns of Venus and Mercury, the mountains and Seas of the Moon; we
have seen the generation of Comets, the apparition and disparition of new Stars
amongst the Planetary Orbs; we have seen innumerable Cohorts of fixed Stars;
yea, even the small constellation of the Pleiades, beautified with diverse
lights impossible to be numbered; we have seen the Rainbow like colors of
diverse lucid Globes, and the motley outsides of the Dog Star and Orion. O
Heaven and Stars! how much has our age triumphed over you! Neither does our
victory end here, still new miracles add to the number of the old, and no day
passes without a triumph.

Why then shall we subject our selves to the authority of the Ancients, when
our own experience can inform us better? why do we not break their bands
asunder, and cast their cords far from us? certainly the Ancients (were they
now alive) would not condemn our choice. Aristotle that referred the studious
in his time to Eudoxus and Calippus for satisfaction, could not dislike our
Arguments against the corruption of the visible Heavens. Ptolomey that founded
his Hypothesis upon Observations, would not be angry if our Observations
persuade us to another hypothesis then he has constituted. Tycho Longomontanus
and Lansberge (unless puffed up with self glory, or sworn to contradiction)
would not deny our demonstration of the insufficiency of their Theories.
Lastly, M. Wing, and M. Leybourn (if they be owners of that true worth which
ought to be an inseparable companion of a Mathematician) will not storm, when
we show them their Writings are subject to error.

Nor is it indeed possible that one age, or one man should perform all things
requisite in this Science. Many things are impossible ever to be found out, and
many things reserved to the discovery of after ages. How easily, and how justly
may we apply the Prophetical words of sententious Seneca to our present
purpose:

-- Venient annis
Seculae seris, quibus uraniae
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat mundus, Vitrumque novos
Detegat Orbs, nec fit nobis
Ultima Tellus.
But I have been more large and general then for such a small Treatise. At
your feet then (Mathematical Readers, and my honored Judges) I prostrate this
my first. born: For it is the censure of you alone which I value; the popular
voice, like other Agents, never acting beyond their proper sphere of activity.

Your Servant JER. SHAKERLEY

THE ANATOMY OF URANIA PRACTICA.
CHAP. I. The occasion of this Discourse.
I Am not ignorant, how dangerous a boldness it is, to appear abroad in the
world as an Antagonist, and how subject they are to be judged themselves who
would give judgment upon others, especially upon those whom worth or custom
has inthroned in the good-likings of other men; and whosoever whets his Pen
against such as these, is like to be more weakened with the batteries of Envy,
then strengthened with the fortifications of a good cause. For when once we
have enslaved our wits to any Author, and look upon him with the eye of
subjection, we are very hardly drawn from the pressure of that yoke; yea, and
oftentimes we murmr and repine at those, who show us the way to clear our
selves of this burden, and free our judgments from captivity. If then I could
prefer the sloathfull security of My name before the truth, I should rather
have smothered these modest criticisms, and confined them to the chamber of my
private thoughts, then in this censorious age, expose my self to the censure of
the world: for although I do believe that whatsoever I shall write here is
undoubtedly true and certain, and I doubt not will of learned Readers be
approved; yet can I not promise to my self the general consent of every
Reader: for some there will be whom the specious words and large promises of my
Authors have deluded, and these are most likely to call me obstreperous and
impertinent, that after the worthy Labors of these famous men, and the sum of
their endeavors herein, I should yet desire a plus ultra, and manifest my
boldness and impudence, in that having but newly crept out of the limits of
Childhood, I dare bend my Pen against famous Artists of such a continuance.

But it is the part of a slothful timorousness, to be afraid of the rash
censure of the multitude, and it is doubtful I shall not be so much commended
for modesty, as censured for want of boldness, to be fearful to restore the
Truth to her proper Dignity, and clear her nobleness from being partaker in
those counterfeits, which pass abroad under her name. It is to be imagined
that Urania Practica has found her favorites, and there want not those, who
have fixed their devotion on this new Deity: And I must confess, when I heard
the report of her coming, and saw the news of her so considently fly through
the British Isle, upon the paperwings of several Almanacks, I had a good hope
some extraordinary performance would have confirmed those glorious reports, and
upon the Theater of a Mathematical Judgment, acted something worthy those
Praeludia. But when in January 1648/9. I received from my worthy and honored
friend, Master William Lilly, that so much expected piece, and had with a
greedy eye, surveied the contents, the clouds of despair over-shadowed my
thoughts, and involved my hopes in a sable vesture, yea I could scarcely
refrain from blaming my self, that upon such uncertain foundations as the
popular voice had built my hopes to that height: for I did not only fail of my
expectation of a certain course whereby to attain a reasonable perfection in
Astronomical grounds and Theories; but on the contrary, perceived scarcely any
dressing therein, which (if rightly considered) did not misbecome the divine
Urania. I expected a compound of the best simples that could be found in the
Treasuries of those Authors, which Master Vincent Wing has put in his
Muster-roll, recorded in the beginning of his Almanac, 1649. but find that
their errors are here renewed: all which I beheld with an eye, truly pitying
such studious Tyro's, as understand only English; for they are those who are
most subject to swallow these insalubrious baits, so destructive to a perfect
proficiency in these Sciences. For the remedy whereof, and because I knew no
other from whom any such performance might be expected, I adventured upon this
task, and have herein delivered to the eye of the world a detection of some the
most notable mistakes I considered in that Treatise: but I pass by many things
worthy also to be noted, if my professed brevity would grant me leave. What I
have done, is done with such reverence to the sacred name of Urania, that I am
confident I have not in the least any way wronged the meanest of her
favorites: And in regard my Authors are the first that have in English
adventured upon such a subject, my tender Quill shall spare their infancy,
whose errors otherwise merit to be vindicated with more severity.

CHAP. II. An error in finding the Dominicall Letter and Epact in the Foreign
Account perpetually, detected.
THough something below the level of our intended endeavors, it will not be
amiss to begin with this Peccadillo, which must necessarily proceed either
from want of care, or knowledge of the true manner of the Calenders Gregorian
reformation; the explication whereof, I shall choose rather briefly to deliver
from its beginning, then prefcribe to the Reader a rule he understands not.

Whereas the Julian year contained 365. days, six hours, and the Tropicall
year, or time of the Sun's restitution to any point of the Zodiac, only 365.
days, 5. hours, and about 49. minutes, as we shall have occasion to show
hereafter; it happened that by this defect of the Tropicall year, dilating it
self throughout every year, since the first establishing this Account in the
Church, has in process of time, changed the places of the Equinoxes and
Solstices, and altered the time of the Paschall solemnity: This defect having
from the year of the Nicene Counsel 322. to the year of the Gregorian
Reformation, 1582. made an anticipation of ten days, which caused Pope Gregory
the thirteenth to omit those ten days, thereby repairing what was amiss, and
also to provide for the future, that no such anticipation should be; which he
has thus performed. He ordered that from the 5. of October 1582. (at what time
he omitted his ten days, making that day the 15th) until the year 1700. there
should be ten days added to the Julian Account; and from that year inclusive,
every fourth Centenary of the years of our Lord, is only of all the following
Centenaries to be Bissextile, the rest of the Centenaries only common years of
365. days; whereby it falls out, the Gregorian Account, every 400. years gains
three days of what the Julian loses. The differences of the two Accounts in
some succeeding Centenaries, we have here exhibited in this Table.

An. Do^. ad. da Anno Domini. Add days Anno dom. Ad da. From the 5. of October,
1582. 10. From the 24 of February. 1700. 11. 2500. 17. 3300 23 1800. 12. 2600.
18. 3400 24 1900. 13. 2700. 19. 3500 25 2100. 14. 2900. 20. 3700 26 2200. 15.
3000. 21. 3800 27 2300. 16. 3100. 22. 3900 28

Thus by omitting the intercalation in these years, the Dominical Letter and
Epact, which depend on the number of days in each year, come to be changed;
and by reason of the former, the number of direction, and consequently the
movable Feasts, cannot by my Authors rules be truly perpetually gathered; all
which, with some other inconveniences, had been here more fully insisted on,
if we had not thought this that has been said sufficient for the ingenious,
whereby to correct and amend these imperfections; and that Origanus in the
first part of his Introduction to his Ephemerides, has saved our Pen that
labor, which hasts to discoveries of further concernment.

CHAP. III. The inequality of the Precession of the Equinoctial points
examined.
WHat may be happy to Urania, and grateful to her true and legitimate
Favorites, we now adventure upon the Sun and Moons Motions. A large current of
considerations does charge us, and we are likely to have more matter, then
convenience to prosecute it: yet shall my unwillingnesse to trouble the Reader
with more then is needful for our present purpose, and my hope of a future
fitter opportunity, to dilate my conceits upon this subject, prevail with the
urgency of the matter, and confine my Discourse to its intended limits.

The first occasion that invites our Pen to consider hereof, is given by our
Authors, page 52. where mention is made of a mean and true Equinox, in these
words: So shall you have the true motion of the Sun, ab Aequinoctio vero, for
in these tables, the Sun's mean motion is reckoned from the true Equinox, and
not from the mean. Whereby we may gather, that our Authors admit of an
inequality of the Precession of the Equinoctial points: The manner whereof,
with the cause of its admission into Astronomy; and lastly, the validity
thereof, (because none of these are by our Authors so much as touched) it will
not be inconvenient here in as brief a way as may be to deliver.

After that noble Dane Tycho Brahe had to the glory of Art, and joy of Artists,
with incredible pains and diligence, perfected that elaborate table of the
fixed Stars, and rectified it to his own time, a further and necessary care of
perpetuating it, induced him to consider what helps might be drawn from ancient
Observations to this purpose; and perceiving by those accounts that were taken
of their places, first by Hipparchus, afterward by Ptolomey, Albategnius,
Arzabel, Copernicus, and some others, that they had not only motions, but
unequal motions, and inconstancy in their latitudes, in several ages; he was
forced to devise some way whereby these motions might be regulated, to prove
consentaneous to the observations of all ages. The Theory of this inequality is
according to the famous Astronomer, Chr. S. Longomontanus, in this manner.

two concentric circles inscribed with several labeled angles Longomontanus
Theric. lib. 1.


Let A be the Pole of tke Ecliptic, BC that part of the Arctick circle of the
Ecliptic, which the Pole of the earth in B has run, by its equal motion,
upon the center of the Ecliptic, since the Creation: This Arch measures also
the Precession of the Equinoxes, and progressive motion of the fixed Stars; BA
is 23. degr. 42. min the Zodiacks mean obliquity, DGE the small circle
regulating the obliquity of the Zodiac, AD its radius, 10. min. 53. sec. By
which it appears, both how the Zodiac changes its obliquity, and also how the
Equinoctial points, and consequently every several point in the Zodiac do
inequally anticipate: for when the Pole of the Equator, which is carried in
the circle EDG, is at E or G, the obliquity is in its mean deviations, and is
equal to AB, 23. degr. 42. min. But the equation of the Equinoxes is the
greatest, GBA 27. min. 5. sec. and is to be subtracted at G, added at E; wnen
the Pole of the Equator is at D, the obliquity is least, and is equal to DB,
23. degr. 31. min. 7. sec. but when the Pole of the Equator is at F, the
obliquity B F is greatest, and is 23. degr. 52. min. 53. sec. and in both these
cases, there is no aequation of the Equinoxes, by reason of the coincidence of
the lines BA and BG. This is the artifice Longomontanus has used to satisfy
appearances with, which if we should Phiscally consider, I doubt we should
find it more ingenuous then true; for it is scarcely tolerable for any
Astronomers to devise circles and imaginary motions, where with to fill the
heavens, and withdraw the eye of man from a perfect consideration of the
wisdom and power of his Creator, which best appears in the simplicity and
uniformity of these Celestial essences: yet might this Hypothesis have been
allowed, yea highly commended, if any good to Astronomy had come thereby, more
then a needless multiplication of uncertainties. We will consider in a few
words the validity and necessity of this Hypothesis, to perform what it
promises.

Of the necessity hereof, ancient observations can give us no certainty; for
from Proclus to our times, for above a thousand years, the Aequinoctiall points
have made a certain and equal Precession, agreeable to that rule of motion
which Timocharis and Hipparchus observed above 1800. years ago, if we only
except Ptolomey: Therefore if any Circulation more then annual and diurnall
(if those be to be admitted) have befaln to the Poles of the equator, whereby
it has been so enormiously removed from its situation, it was betwixt the
times of Hipparchus and Ptolomey, in the space of less then three hundred
years, and was again restored in the time betwixt Ptolomey and Preclus, in
other three hundred years: Wherefore without injury we may doubt of the
certainty of Ptolomies observations; and the rather, for that he himself seems
to imply as much, by these words.

Non in tropicis tantum Observation bus, sed and in Aequinoctiabus error
accidere po^est, qui ad quartam unius diei partem se extendat: Quod si ^nim in
3600 tantum particula (as if that were little or nothing) Aequatoris situs, aut
Instrumentis divisio, arecta raratione deficiat, illam in Latitudine sive
Decliatione ac ad aequatorem accessu ad aequabit quarta circiter unius gradus
pars, in Zodiaco and Longitudine, etc. Praeterquam quod and majus erratum esse
soleat si per instrumenta fiant Observatirnes, quae non illarum tempore
exquisite positae sunt sed iam olim ita constituta, ut diu firmata lapsu
temporum tandem commoveantur ac in situ deficiant. This and more, Ptolom.
Almag. lib. 3 cap. 2. How sandy a foundation his Observations are, whereon to
build Astronomy, especially seeing they disagree from others, may by his own
words best be gathered.

He that desires to see a more full confutation of this inequality, may have it
in Phocylides his Examen Astronom^ae Lansbergianiae, who from page 38. to page
63. he clearly evinceth the same, from all the Observations of Equinoxes, had
by the best Astronomers in every Age, and proves a constant quantity of the
Tropicall years in all Ages. A short Synopsis whereof, we had here presented
the Reader with, but that it would grow beyond our intentions; and that if the
disposer of all our actions grant me ability and convenience to prosecute the
service of Urania, I may hereafter both enlarge and correct my present thoughts
upon this subject.

The learned Kepler, page 27. Prec. tab; Rudolph. doubts not to assert, that
there has never been any other obliquity of the Zodiac, then what is now,
viz. 23. degr. 31. min. 30. sec. or by reason of his diminution of the Sun's
paralax, 23. degr. 30. min. 30. sec. or consequently any inequality of the
Precession of the Equinoctial points, and affirms he can demonstrate it; but
methinks it is too manifest an injury to the Ancients to deny the one, so
constantly evinced from their observations. But we must ever look with an
indulgent eye upon that worthy man, whole Astronomicall performances do
sufficiently make known his worth, and memorize him to Posterity. It is not one
Age, much less one man, that is able to restore Astronomy: His setting down
five forms hereof in his Rudolphine Tables, show the copiousnesse of his wit;
his choosing of none, manifest the penury and uncertainty of former
Observations. And surely these things, with many more, lie hidden in the
Pandects of Posterity, not to be disclosed, until God, the arbiter of Ages,
shall open this eternal book, and disclose the secrets hereof to mortals.

That noble Frenchman Ismael Bullialdus, the latest restorer of Astronomy,
has in his Astronomia Philolaica, followed Longomontanus in the obliquity of
the Zodiac, but rejects the aequation of the Equinoxes, for these reasons.

First, there are no observations of the Ancients, which gives a sufficient
exactness in the times of the Equinoxes, or places of the fixed Stars,
whereupon to build such a fabric of turbination, and that it were rashness in
any to attempt it.

Secondly, no circular revolution in the Heavens, admits in its whole
circumference, more inequalities then one, being slow in the one semicircle,
swift in the other; but if we admit this inequality of the Precession of the
Equinox, the simple motion is many times intended and remitted: But in other
revolutions, intended but once, and remitted no oftener.

Thirdly, so small a difference is there found in distinct intervals of time,
that it cannot be attributed to any true aod natural motion, but with great
boldness and temerity, whereby we impudently fasten upon the Heavens, the
fictions and Chymera's of our own imperfect intellect.

Fourthly, that body which is furthest distant from the center of the World,
would be immovable, which yet notwithsanding ought to partake of motion, as well
as other bodies which move obout the Sun, although the motion be very slow, by
reason of its immense distance from the Center, and the amplitude of the space
in which it moves; but why should other bodies move, and the whole Systeme of
fixed Stars remain unmovable? every body placed about the Center of the World
ought to have a motion about that, otherwise it would be a stranger to nature,
and no partaker thereof, it keeping all things in motion, and not suffering
them to be idle.

Fifthly, we ought not to think that the fixed Stars have an apparent
progressive motion, according to the order of the Signs; for that cause alone,
because the fixed Stars and the Equinoctial points have a slow motion upon the
terrestrial Poles, in antecedence of the Signs: For although in respect of the
fixed Stars, such an Hypothesis might be true, because there is no exterior
body diversely proved, to which the motion of the fixed Stars may be sensibly
compared; yet is it not to be admitted, because it cannot stand with the
Planets motions; yet might it stand, if the Sun alone did appear: for by the
annual motion of the Poles of the Earth, the Sun, which then would not be
supposed to run his annual motion through the Zodiac, would manifest his
access and recesse; but the Planets would be seen in the circle of Altitudes,
subject to irregular deviat ons, which nevertheless is not: Therefore this
Hypothesis were possible, were there but one Planet; but there being more, it
is not possible, nor ought to be admitted.

Sixthly, this Argument is drawn a simili; we see in the Moon, a certain
direction of her parts to the Earth, it is therefore likely that there is also
direction of the Earths parts to the Sun, and that their axes retain always
the same positure, the one to the other, without any turbination of either.

These are the Arguments which the learned Bullialdus, lib. 5. cap. 2. Astron.
Philol. has brought for the dissolution of this inequality, which I have here
presented to the Reader in the same manner that he has delivered them: which
though some of them vary from my present conceits, yet do the rest notably
fortify my opinion. Add to these what Bullialdus has demonstrated concerning
the perpetual equality of the Tropicall years, and I would fain see how the
Authors of Urania Practica will disprove them. But such is their want of
consideration, they have not sufficiently followed their own Theory herein; and
though admitting of this inequality, yet have given no rules or tables how to
obtain it. The luster of Urania has (it may be) dazzled their eyes, and the
high flight of their Pen has left their judgments behind it; so that we may
justly wonder what concert, whether the desire of being serviceable to Urania,
rr enobling their names, has drawn them to be actors upon the public stage,
where every judicious Spectator may discern their insufficiency.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Sun and Moons Tables.
THe next thing in order we should take notice of, is the Sun and Moons tables,
and hereof we can say little, because our Authors have said nothing, they only
affording us Epochaes for some few years, without any sufficient rule whereby
to perpetuate them. For those annual motions by them set down in the end of
page 65. cannot be perpetually consonant to their own Rule, unless they will
with us deny the inequall Precession of the Equinoctial points, which their
own words (mentioned in the precedent Chapter) do oppose.

Yet what we can gather from the Tables themselves, and our Authors
prescriptions for the use of them, we will here briefly deliver. Our Authors
have in the Table of the Suns equations, followed the Theorie of Longomontanus,
or some equivolent thereto (for there are diverse) only a little, though almost
insensibly increasing the Eccentricity of the Sun, making the proportion of the
radius of the Suns orb, to the radius of his epicycle as is 100000. to 3577.
to which Eccentricity in that hypothesis their equations of the Sun agree. But
for what reason they have made this change themselves do not show, nor can I
conjecture. In the Tables of the Moons equations they have followed Argol, a
man very laborious in calculations, but one who has not to my knowledge given
any reason for what he has done. He has omitted the variation of the Moon,
induced thereto as he says by Observations. I will not question his doings,
because I know not what Observations he used, but certainly if there had not
been a necessity for it, Tycho had never retained it into the Theory of the
Moon, nor had it been confirmed by the after doings of I ongemontanus, Kepler,
and the industrious and expert Bullialdus, especially it causing so great a
difference in the Moons place, extending it self to 40 min. 30 sec. according
to Tycho, but according to Kepler a fourth part more. And although Keplers
variation may be justly thought too big, notwithstanding he seems to deduce
it from Physical and Archetypicall demonstrations, which he so much affected,
yet in a Mathematical eye, which attends preciseness, the variation is not
altogether contemptible.

In the latitude of the Moon, our Authors have merely followed Lansberge, and
together with him rejected the inequality of motion in the Moons Nodes; of
which I will nor dispute, the demonstration thereof depending upon such dubious
Principles as Authors are not satisfied thereof. Tycho making the period of
this inequality menstruall (with whom herein Argol and Bullialdus also agree)
Kepler annual, yet all since Tycho admitting thereof, excepting only
Lansherg, of whose corruption and depravation of ancient Observations, so
wresting them to his purpose, he that is not satisfied may find him
sufficiently characterized by Phocylides in his forementioned book. Thus from
the fragments of broken Authors have our Authors patcht up their Tables of the
Luminaries motions, which, however they will be sufficient to represent
Celestial Observations, I much doubt and am fearful that our Authors have
done the divine Urania wrong in attiring her simple excellence in such a
parti-colored vesture.

CHAP. V. Whether the second inequality of the Moon have dependence of the
Suns mean or true and apparent place.
BY the quality of that table of the Moons equations, our Authors have set
down, occasion is given me to imagine they have therein followed a Theorie
equivolent to that of Copernicus, viz, a double Epicycle, the circumference of
the one carrying the Center of the other: Yet however, the two inequalities,
which are by Copernicus attributed to these Epicycles, are here by our Authors
digested into one Table, which without question were of great concernment to
him that desires speediness in calculation, if the Artist could be assured of
its exactness, and agreement with the Heavens, and those legitimate and
Physical Theories which may be thence deduced. But whereas it appears by the
Precepts which guide us to the use of this Table, that the mean distance of the
Luminaries is one of the steps whereby we attain the Moons equation, we may (and
not without just cause) suspect it of error.

It is true, that in those Theories of the Planets which were used before Tycho
had happily confuted the solidity of Caelestiall Orbs, there might be some
appearance of reason why the Centers of those solid Spheres, rather then the
Centers of the eccentricke Circles should regulate those other inequalities
which depended thereon, they being supposed in that age not imaginary, but
real points, and therefore sufficient whereon to build a connection of mosions.
But after that Tycho had by the help of his exact Instruments, found the
existence of temporary and fading Lights, within that Circuit, which was
supposed to be free from generation and corruption, and thereby solidly refuted
the solidity of those Orbs and Spheres, so laboriously demonstrated by
Ptolemie, Proclus, Peurbachius, and others; this disclosure gave the mind
liberty to think of more rational ways then the old multiplicity of Circles
and Motions, whereby to salve caelestiall appearances. And hereby it came to be
known, that the Causes of Motions were merely Physical, and dapended not upon
the variety of Orbs, but followed that simple and uniforme course Nature had
assigned them, and respected not those imaginary Centers which prudent
Antiquity had for want of other helps devised for them; but the very body of
the Sun, the fountain of Motion and common node of all their Orbs. Why then
the Moon (which though a secondary Planet, yet has relation to the Suns
course) should receive the Laws of her extra-sysygiall inaequality from the
Suns mean motion I cannot see. These reasons will evince she contrary.

1. The mean motion of the Sun, as also of any other Planet, is not in nature,
but only devised to regulate those exorbitances and deviations from equality,
to which their apparent motions are subject.

2. Observations testify that the longest line of every Primary Theory, which
exactly bisects the orb into two semicircles, equal in the quantity and
celerity of the same parts, passes by the center of the Sun, in which the
Aphelian lines of the primary Planets concur.

3. The orbite of every primary Planet is intersected by the Eclipticke in
places opposite by the center of the Sun, and not by any point without it.

4. The fountain of motion, and the general antecedent to the particular
relative inequalities of the Planets, ought rather to be in the most excellent
body then any where without it; for these reasons: first, because the moving
force cannot reside in any Mathematical point (such as this is imagined to be)
but requires a body the more fully to exercise his operating power. Secondly,
it is most cnnsentaneous to reason, that the moving force should be in the
Center of the world (where it is evident the Sun is) there being rest in the
superficies or sphere of the fixed Stars and motion in the intermediate places.

5. The cause why Copernius and Tycho supposed the two Centers, viz. of the
Orb, and of the Eccentrick to be different things in themselves, is not
sufficiently Mathematical, they being drawn hereto by the desire of making
their Hypotheses equivalent to those of Ptolomie. But it was not necessary to
follow the steps of Ptolomie so diligently; for Ptolomie made not every part of
his Hypothesis from observations, but grounded many things upon a
fore-conceived opinion, that the motions of the Planets were equal through
every portion of their own circles, which Observations do sufficiently evince
to be untrue, as may appear by famous Kepler in his learned Comentaries of the
motions of Mars.

To these reasons I may add also, the continued Observations of Tycho in
Eclipses, which clear the Moon of any secondary inequality at the time of
Defect, which is the true, not mean Syzigia of the Luminaries. But to this I
cannot impute any great force, the difference being so little, as it is hardly
to be distinguished from those many irregularities, which attend on the
propinquity of the Moon to the Earth, and of us in these Nothern Regions, by
reason of the great obliquity of our Sphere more perceived. Nor can we as yet
think the manifold motions of this inconstant Torrella, so thoroughly known as
we can for the present build any certainty hereon. I doubt not but that
Astronomia Brittannica (now by the blessing of God almost brought to
perfection) will shortly take away many doubts herein, which have hithereto
puzzled diverse Artists: And I doubt not but I shall discover some things
concerning the Moons motions, which may be useful for Astronomers in this
subject, and more rational then those impertinencies our Authors have here
delivered; for they are out of all possibility of being excused, that in such a
clear Sunshine, will impudently adventure to set out their dim Lanthorn for a
guide to the young Practitioner, through these mysterious Laborinths,
especially such a worthy Luminary as Kepler, having long since put all out of
doubt, and taught Truth to move in her own Orb, not impedited by the
adventitious remora's of humane fancy.

CHAP. VI. A demonstrative examination of our Authors Tables of Eclipses.
WE now come to the touch stone of our Authors judgment, and will (by God's
help) lay open those many absurdities which would follow, should we admit of
our Authors Tables, This speculation is not ordinary for obvious to every young
Practitioner; yea, the intricacies hereof have entangled many profounder
Artists then either Master Wing, Master L^y^ourn, or my Self, few of those many
Authors ^ch to this day have appeared the public Champions of Urania, have had
a full knowledge hereof, excepting Kepler, the late Ballialdus, and the noble
genius of our worthy Countryman, Master Jeremy Horrox, (...), from whose
remains I have gathered the most of what I shall write in this Chapter.

Those who have presumed of their own sufficiency, to be able to demonstrate
those dimensions which are requisite for the calculation of Eclipses, have used
thereto a Diagram, said to be invented by Hipparchus, which they have severally
commented on: Amongst the rest, the late famous Lansberge has in his
Uranometrie made a large discourse thereof; but so simply, as he may be ashamed
to spend those brasts upon so insufficient a piece. Yet has his greatest fault
been, that he has not fitted his numbers to those Theoremes or Elements in his
Uranometrie, as by him that will compare his numbers with the following
Diagram, may be seen. But the like cannot so well be said of Copernicus, Tycho,
Longomontanus, etc. by whom it is likely this demonstrative way was rather
omitted then not conceived: for they perceiving their Observations not to
answer fully the rigid Theoremes hereof, took more care to satisfy their
Observations, then Demonstrations. But the greatest cause of this difference
being the inconstancy of Physical causes, which still interposed themselves,
they are not altogether to be excused, as not professing to deliver the
accidental inconstancies of the Phenomenon, but the true and demonstrative
Principles of Art. But the divine Kepler both understood the excellency of this
Diagram, and has fitted the Precepts of his Rudolphine Tables hereto. He
mentions often a book of his own, entitled Hipparchus, wherein the
demonstrations hereof are contained The Book I have not seen, perhaps it is not
yet published. I shall only at this time touch some few things herein, that
concern my present purpose, referring the Reader for the rest to Astronomia
Brittannica, where it is fully demonstrated, and the manifold uses thereof
declared.

a semicircle and two circles divided by several labeled angles

In the Diagram annexed, let A be the center of the Sun, C of the Perigaean
shadow, H of the Apogaean shadow, B of the Earth; so is the apparent
Semidiameter of the Sun ABE, of the Perigaean shadow CBP, of the Apogaean
shadow HBN, the vertex of the Conical shadow D, the Semiangle thereof BDG, the
axis BD; let the lines GF, PK NO, be parallel to DA: the Semidiameter of the
Earth BG, the Center of the Moon L, the Semidiameter of the Moon in the change
LBM, the Horizontal Paralax of the Sun BAG, of the Moon BLG, whence we thus
proceed.

I. The Semiangle of the Cone of the shadow is always less then the Sun's
apparent Semidiameter, and the difference of these is the Sun's Horizontall
Paralax.

The former part is proved from an opticall principle: Idem objectum quo
proprius cerniter, eo majus apparet, so that the Semidiameter of the Sun being
beheld from B, appears greater then if it be beheld from D, in regard B is
nearer the object then D. The Sun's Semidiameter apparent is ABE -- AGE, the
Sun's Horizontall Paralax is BAG -- GAF. Now in regard the two lines AD and FG
are parallel, it is necessary that ADE should be equal to FGE; therefore
AGE-FGE-AGF-BAG the Sun's Horizontall Paralax.

II. The Semiangle of the Cone of the shadow is equal to the difference of the
Moon's Horizontall Paralax, and the Semidiameter of the shadow.

Let us take the Moon in her Apogaeum, and opposition to the Sun, her
Horizontall Paralax is BHG, whereto BNG is equal; the Semidiamiter apparent of
the shadow HBN: now BNG -- HBN -- ONP, which by reason of the Paralellisme of
the lines NO and DA, is equal to the angle ADE, which is the Semiangle of the
Cone of the shadow.

If we take also the Moon in her Perigaeum, her Horizontall Paralax is BCG,
whereto BPG is equal; the apparent Semidiameter of the shadow is CBP: now BPG
-- BPK -- KPG, which by reason of the Paralellism of the lines PK and DA, is
equal to the angle ADE, the Semiangle of the Cone of the shadow.

Nor need any one think our demonstration invalid or insufficient, for that we
have assumed the angles BCG and BPG to be equal, whereas indeed they are not
((...)) precisely so: For I shall show how inconsiderable a difference this is
and how far it avoids our Observation. For if we take the angle ADE, or which
is the same KPG to be 12 min. o sec. which follows from our Authors numbers,
(for by the first Theoreme AGE 15 min. o sec. AGF 3 min. o sec. FGE -- ADE 12
min. o sec.) the natural Tangent thereof is 349067 -- KG. We shall also from
our Authors Tables take the apparent Semidiameter of the shadow CBP, or BPK, to
be 47 min. o sec. which is the greatest they set down; Its Tangent is BK --
1367260. the sum of the angles is BPG -- 59 min. o sec. the sum of the Tangents
is BG -- 1716327. whereto answers the angle BCG -- 58 min. 59. sec. 50 thirds:
This angle differs from the former BPG, (to which it is assumed equal) only
10 thirds; nor in this practice is the difference ever greater. The like might
have been said of the former Theoreme, but that the difference which is here so
contemptible, is there far smaller, and can in neither of them, though with the
most scrupulous, leave any scruple of the certainty of our demonstration.

This Theoreme is the ground of the 148. Precept of the Rudolphine Tables,
whose words run thus; Conjice in unam summam Parallaxes Horizontales Solis and
Lunae; ab hac summa abjiciatur Semidiamiter Solis apparens relinquitur Sem
diameter umbrae justa ad tempus: which is the same our Theoreme does require, I
might here show.

III. That if the Cone of the shadow be so continued beyond the Earth, that the
Diameter of the Sun be the base thereof, and the Center of the Moon be in the
axes thereof betwixt the Earth and the Sun, the sum of her Horizontall
Parallax, and the Semiangle of the Cone is equal to the apparent Semidiameter
of the Cone in that distance.

IIII. That the difference betwixt the apparent Semidiameter of the shadow and
the Horizontall Parallax of the Moon in the shadow (that is the Semiangle of
the Cone of the shadow) in the same distance of the Sun from the Earth is still
the same, and receives no change from the Moons varying her distance from the
Earth.

V. That it is impossible for any Planet or Star, that is situate without the
Earth, to be utterly void of Horizontall Parallax, if we speak Mathematically;
though sensibly the fixed Stars and other remote bodies cannot be said to have
any Parallax, in regard that the Semidiameter of the Earth, which is the
Tangent of their Parallax, to the Radius of the distance, bears no evident
proportion to that distance.

But these things to him that understands any thing of Geomitrie, need no
demonstration, but are evident from the Diagram it self, and partly for that
cause they are here omitted, partly because I hold it superfluous to use more
Engines against our Authors falsities, then are needful for the confuting
thereof; and lastly, because that all those Theoremes which may be deduced from
the precedent Diagram, are not to our present purpose, but have a nobler Object
then any our Authors seem to have aimed at; their rules and tables being made
of such abject stusfe, they deserve not the title of Mathematical or
Astronomicall, as not agreeing to the pure and undoubted Principles of Art,
which we will here manifest.

In the first Theoreme we demonstrated, that the difference of the Sun's
apparent Semidiameter, and his Horozontall Parallax was equal to the Semiangle
of the Cone of the shadow: and in the second Theoreme, that the difference of
the Moons Horizontall Parallax, and the apparent Semidiameter of the shadow was
likewise equal to the Semiangle of the Cone of the shadow: It follows hence,
that these two differences are likewise equal one to another. But how well our
Authors have accorded hereunto may appear by the following Synopsi^, The
numbers whereof we have taken from our Authors Tables.

I. Apog. Apog.
Min. Sec. The Semidiameter of the Sun 15 0 AGE The Horizontal Parallax of the
Sun 3 0 AGF The Semiang. of the cone of the sha. 12 0 FGE -- ADE The Horizontal
Paral. of the Moon 59 9 BHG The Semidiameter of the shadow 43 0 HGN The
Semiangle of the Cone 16 9 ONP -- ADE Differing from the former 4 min. 9 sec.
whereto it should be equal.

II. Apog. Perig.
The Semidiameter of the Sun 15 0 AGF The Horizontall Paral. of the Sun 3 0 AGF
The Semiangle of the Cone 12 0 FGE -- ADE The Horizontal Paral. of the Moon 62
39 BPG The Semidiameter of the shadow 47 0 BPK The Semiangle of the Cone 15 39
KPG -- ADE Differing from the former 3 min. 39 sec. whereto it should be
equal.

III. Perig. Apog.
The Semidiameter of the Sun 15 30 The Horizontall Parallax of the Sun 3 0 The
Semiangle of the Cone 12 30 The Horizontall Parallax of the Moon 59 9 The
Semidiameter of the shadow corrected 42 32 The Semiangle of the Cone 16 37
Differing from the former 4 min. 7 sec. whereto it should be equal.

IIII. Perig. Perig.
The Semidiameter of the Sun 15 30 The Horizontall Parallax of the Sun 3 0 The
Semiangle of the Cone 12 30 The Horizontall Parallax of the Moon 62 39 The
Semidiameter of the shadow corrected 46 32 The Semiangle of the Cone 16 7
Differing from the former 3 min. 37 sec. whereto it should be equal.

Thus are our Authors Tables unmasked, and laid open to the view of every
Artist, their disagreement to the demonstration being so great, as no Physical
Salve that can reasonably be applied, is sufficient to counterpoise these
differences. In every one of these positures, if we grant our Authors their
numbers, it would follow, that the semiangle of the Cone is greater then the
semidiameter of the Sun; which is as if we should affirm, that FGE, part of the
angle AGE were greater then the whole angle, which is absurd and impossible.
But who can tell whether or no our Authors desire of exterior helps, has
furnished them of spectacles fitter for a greater age then their own, which
amplifying the semiangle of the Cone, made it appear so much too big for the
room whereon it stood, and yet unlucky, did not amplify the room withal.

Hence likewise would follow, that the Sun's distance from the Earth is not
only infinite, but (if we may so say) a degree beyond infiniteness: And yet
with much confidence can they proceed to determine (as we shall show anon) the
distance of the Sun from the earth in miles; whereas it appears by their Tables
no such distance is ever possible to be defined, and their very distances there
set down, are not only disconsonant to the Truth, but also to their own
erroneous assumptions.

Hence would also follow, that the Sun's Horizontall Parallax were not only
nothing, but even less then nothing (contrary to the fifth Theoreme) which how
we should salve, I know not, unless we should imagine, that the Sunbeams
passing through the Christalline Orbs of the inferior Planets, find in their
journey a burning point wherein the several rays concur, and invert the
species of the Object, so that hereby the property of the Sun's Parallax comes
to changed: But I never heard that this was the confirmed experiment of any
Optist, and am of opinion, that our Authors never dreamt they should have stood
in need of such supporters as these for their new Tables; yet have they in the
Title page spoken more truly then they thought, in these words, Nothing of this
nature being extant in the English tongue: for scarcely shall we find any such
absurdities drop from a Pen that professes to be able to perform so much.

I might here urge the Diagram further, and from thence show not only the
general, but particular defects of our Authors Tables, bu as it is true in all
Arts, that Contra principia neg^ntem non est disputatio, so neither Contra
principia non babentem: Aliqua tamen claritas immittenda erit, ne erroris
sussumig um oculos obtenebret, vapidisque n^gis impeditum mentis visum teneat.

I further observe from these Tables of our Authors; first, that the quantity
of the Suns semidiameter, page 120. cannot agree to that Hypothesis from which
the equations, page 59. seem to be derived. For it the eccentricity be taken
3577. to the Radius 100000. which follows two overlapping triangles with
labeled angles from the greatest equation 2 d. 2 m. 59 sec. we shall in the
Diagram annexed have EB the Suns greatest distance from E the earth 103577. the
least distance ED 96423. the angle of the Apogaean ^m diameter AEB, which we
will a siume with our Author 15 m o s. and from thence proceed to find the Per
gaean semidiameter CED, thus: Radius 1000000 Tang 15 m. o s. 4363. EB 103577.
AB 4519. which is the tangent of the Apogaean semidiameter 35 m. o s. the
radius being 103577. to which the line CD is equail: then ED 96423. CD 4519.
Radius 1000000 Tangent of 16 m. 7 s. 4687. which is by our Authors Hypothesis
the Perigaean semidiameter, and is greater by 37 sec. then our Authors have
made it: Nor will the diminution of the eccentricity to make it equal with
that of Longommtanus, any whit avail them, that proportion still leaving half a
min. difference.

It is true, they have only followed Argol herein, but his authority cannot
shelter them, for he has in the Equation of the Sun followed Kepler's
Hypothesis of the bisected Eccenticity, whereto his Semidiameters do agree: but
our Authors have confounded their Tables, by assuming several parts of
several Hypotheses, which disagree amongst themselves, and thereby have made
their work as unseemly a spectacle, as the Daw in her stolen plumes, or the
Arcadian Dametas in his borrowed Armor.

II That the semediameters of the Moon, which our Authors have given us, page
121. are not consonant to the Observations which have been made by Artists,
especially in Eclipses of the Sun: for the Apogaean Semidiameter of the Moon,
15 min. 15. sec. is almost equal to the Perigaean Semidiameter of the Sun, 15
min. 30. sec. whence it would fall out, that in most part of the Suns Eclipses,
where the Moons visible latitude is small, the Sun would be totally eclipsed,
which nevertheless is contrary to all Observations of this kind.

Chr. Clavius, in the fourth book of his Comentaries (upon my Countryman) John
de Sac. Bosco, tells of an Eclipse he observed at Rome, Anno 1567. April 9.
wherein he saw the obscure body of the Moon comprehended all within the light
body of the Sun, and so that the unobscured part of the Sun, was a bright
circle about the Moons body. To this Observation, our Authors Calculation will
not agree, the whole process whereof we had here set down, had not our room
failed us; yet the general heads thereof we will deliver, as far as concerns
our present purpose

This Eclipse falling without the limits of our Authors Epochaes, we took this
course for obtaining the mean motions for the time of the Eclipse. First, we
took the Radix 1667. and by the annual motions set down page 65. gathered the
motions of 100. common years, to which we added the motion of 25 days (being
the number of Leap-yeers therein) the sum subducted from the said Radix, gave
us the Radix anni 1567. as in the following Paradigma.

Long.. Apog. Lon. a Anom.. Lat.. Si. D. M. S. S. D. M. S. S. D. M. Se. Si. D.
M. S. Si. D. M. Sec. 1667 9 20 0 42 3 6 51 47 6 7 44 42 2 24 2 53 10 2 38 35
100 11 6 10 50 0 1 42 20 0 2 16 40 7 21 59 19 3 21 15 0 d. 25 0 24 38 28 0 0 0
4 10 4 46 7 10 26 37 29 11 0 44 1 y 100 0 0 49 18 0 1 42 34 10 7 2 47 6 18 36
39 2 21 59 1 1567 9 19 11 24 3 5 9 13 8 0 41 55 8 5 26 14 7 10 39 34

Hence there follows
D. H. Min. Sec. The mean of and at London 1567. Apr 8 9 4 22 The intervallum
to be added 13 28 30 The true Conjunction at London 8 22 32 52 The equation of
days ( tab. page 117.) ad. 8 8 The apparent time of the true at London 8 22 41
0 The differ. of Merid. of Lon. and Rome ad. 1 7 0 The apparent time of the
true at Rome 8 23 48 0

At which time is given
S. D. Min Sec. The Anomaly of the 9 21 30 44 The Anomaly of the 3 8 4 17 The
mean distance of from 0 6 50 11 The true motion of latitude 2 24 33 51 The
place of the and 28 32 58 The difference betwixt the true and visible
Conjunction add. 20 15 The time of the visible April 9 8 15 The Semidameter of
the 0 15 9 The Semidiameter of the 16 29 The sum of the Semidiameters 31 38 The
visible lati ude of North 0 5 The scruples deficient 31 33 The digits eclipsed
12 28 22

This calculation is fitted to the Horizon of Rome, whose latitude, according
to our Authors, page 182. is 42. degrees. o min.

Hereby it appears, that the Eclipse was total, and that the body of the Moon
covered the body of the Sun a total solar eclipse on every side, the limb of
the Moon exceeding the Suns limb on the south part, 1 m 15 sec. on the north
part 1 m. 25 sec. whereas it ought to have been short of it on every side, and
contained it self within the luminous body of the Sun, according to the
observation of Clavius.

Nor can that be objected hereunto, which the learned Kepler has discoursed in
Astron. Opt. page 297 concerning the possibility of this appearance: Those
physical causes having not so much power and force, as to take away all this
distance of the limbs; and besides, never taking place but where the Suns light
surrounds the limb of the Moon, for otherwise the splendour of the air which
would increase the Sun's semidiameter, quite vanishes and leaves the
Luminaries to their just bigness.

Neither can the groundless limitations of Longomontanus or Lansberg be of any
use in reconciling these difficulties: For by the rule of Longomotanus,
Theoric. page 177. there should be 33 sec. subtracted from the semidiameter of
the Moon; and by the rule of Lansberg, Uranometr. page 66. there should be 45
sec. subtracted from the semidiamer of the Sun, because the Moon is seen in a
greater angle then the Sun. The former way could something lessen the error,
but not wholly take it away; the latter way would increase it, and make it more
notorious.

But why should I spend time in seeking such helps for our Authors, as perhaps
they will not accept of; none of these limitations being so much as mentioned
by them, their Tables freeing themselves of such unnecessary burdens, thereby
to run more freely into error and falsity.

There have been had other observations of Solar Eclipses of this kind, as
that which was had by D. Jessenius, Anno 1598. February 25 at Torge in Misnia;
Kepler, Astron. Optic page 299. and that which was observed by the Fisherman,
near Bergen in Norway, upon the sea shore; where the bright circle about the
Moon was 1 Digit. This befell Anno 1601. December. 14. Longom. Theor. page 165.
The calculation of these, he that lists may try by our Authors Tables, and see
how near he can reconcile them with observation.

CHAP. VII. Of the aequation of Natural Days.
OUr authors have, page 87. given us a precept for the finding of the
aequations of natural days, wherein they have followed Tycho, whose Table is
not consentaneous to Demonstration: For the aequation of days derives it
current from two fountains, the one whereof is the motion of the Sun, in a
circle inclined to the Equator, which is the true measure of time, and out of
this disagreement of the arches of the Equinoctial, and the Ecliptic, arises
the first inequality of time, which alone our authors have used, consisting of
the difference of the right ascensions of the Zodiacall arches from the arches
themselves. The other cause of this aequation is the unequal progression of
the Sun in the Zodiac, occosioned by his eccentricity; the difference of which
diurnall arches, from the arch of his diurnall mean motion 59 m. 8 s c is the
diurnall aequation: Yet must both this, and the former part of aequation be
converted into time, before it be fit for use.

Yet have Tycho and the most of his followers rejected the later part of the
equation, whose authority has also drawn our Authors into their number. None
of them showing any reason for their so doing herein, but this, that their
restitution of the Moons motions, and the observations of Eclipses, did seem
to require it; But this Empeiricall way can never be true, because it satisfies
not the exactness of demonstration. And who can affirm that they have so
restored the caelestiall motions, as that we may rather trust them then our
alone senses. Experience is indeed the Lady president of Vrania's republicke,
and merits regard, so long as she prosecutes the Mandates of Demonstration, the
supreme Authority; but when once their results agree not, experience must yield
and resign her power to Demonstration.

CHAP. VIII. Our Authors determination of the distance of Caelestiall bodies
from the earth examined.
I Shall not need to particularize the Stars and Planets severally. An
example-will be sufficient to demonstrate the insufficienty of the rest.

We begin with the Earth, whose dimentions since our Authors have not here set
down, we must borrow from another place. In Master Wings Almin^ck 16^8. the
circumference is given 21600. miles, and to this the conversion of degrees into
miles ( Vran. Pract. par. 5 cha 3) do agree. Whence he has formed the
Semidiamiter 3436. miles, which nevertheless is not exactly true, for as
314159. is to 100000. (of this see Ludolphus van Culen and Lansberge de
Cyclemetria) so is the cireumference 21600. to the Diameter 6875. and so is the
Semidiamiter 3437. But we will take his number 3436. and see how the rest agree
thereto.

We find ( cap. 4. par. 4.) that the mean distance of Saturn from the Earth is
according to Argol 10571. semidiameters, which makes (if we will believe our
Authors) 9091960. miles. But he that shall multiply the number of semidiameters
10571. by the number of miles in one semidiameter 3436. shall find another
number, namely 36321956. So likewise in Jupiter 3990. multiplied by 3436. gives
13709640. not 343120 And in Mars also 1745. multiplied by 3436. gives 5995820.
not 1500700 In the Sun the distance in semidiameters of the Earth is not given,
the distance is in miles 989000 which being divided by 3436. gives the distance
in semidiameters 287. which gives the horizontall parallax almost 12 min. four
times as big as that which our Authors have given in their tables of Ecclipses.
I will spend no more time in reckoning up the rest. I hope these errors
(obvious to every Schoolboy) are sufficient to manifest the likeness and
(...) of the rest.

But in regard our Authors are so careful of the common good, that over and
besides this work of Urania Practica, Master Wing has publicly invited those
that desire to be satisfied in any thing touching the Mathematics, to repair
to his judgment for satisfaction; and because he is holden a man of much
dexterity in these sciences, I shall make bold to propound unto him and his
(...) Master William Leybourne, a question or two, and upon their answer shall
be ready to content them for their pains.

1. I shall enquire how the proportions of the fixed Stars to the Earth ( page
173.) are gathered, and a demonstration that those of the five several
magnitudes, are so many times greater then the Earth, as is there set down; and
also how those of the sixth magnitude, are found to be less then the Earth. I
shall also demand how those of every several magnitude, are approved to be so
many in number, as they are there given, and no more.

2. I shall desire to know, how and in what manned the Ancients have
demonstrated the distance of the Heavens by fixed Stars from the Earth to be
130715000 miles, or indeed whether any such Demonstration can be made, now that
the Sphaeres are found no less fluid and penetrable then this air of ours.

3. I shall desire to know how the Planets distances from the Earth were
gathered, or whether the Analogies of Tycho, and the so much mentioned Argol be
grounded upon sufficient principles, or no; or whether those apparent diameters
of the Planets, which our Authors have borrowed from Tycho, be consentaneous to
the truth or no, it being propable that the rays of the Stars illuminating the
air they pass through made them appear far bigger then indeed they were.

And let my Authors know, that I will not suffer my self to be overruled with
the authority of any Writer, unless his Reason have a greater authority then
his Name, and Judgment tread on the heels of Invention.

CHAP. IX. A brief summary of some other Defects and Imperfections.
BUt my room grows narrow, and so tyeth my Discourse to a period: Good Reader,
be pleased to take the rest of my collections in a bundle; I shall only tell
you what it contains, and would, if my professed brevity had granted me leave,
have laid open the several pieces to your view.

First, I s^y, that by our Authors rules, the Sun's altitude cannot be gathered
universally: for though the Example, page 99. be truly wrought, yet if we turn
to the fixed Book for a precept, we shall find none, but only a few concise
Tables, calculated for some latitudes which are too narrow and insufficient for
him, whose intentions are for narrow and insufficient for him, whose intentions
are for generality and exactness.

Secondly, the tedious calculation of the Moons Paralax in her circle of
Altitude, detracts from the praise of the Book, and might have been with far
more ease, and by the only help of the Logarithms supplied thus. As the Radius
to the Sine of the Horizontall Parallax, so the Cosine of the Luminuries
altitude, to the sine of the Parallax in that altitude. This way is no less
demonstrative, and far more easy then the other which our Authors have used,
page 99.

3. That the table of hourly motion of the Moon from the Sun, page 118. cannot
be exactly true, because it supposes the Suns motion to be equal, and still of
the same quantity; which nevertheless by reason of his Eccentricity is not so,
nor can be affirmed.

4. The herozontall Parallax of the Sun is not still 3. min. o. sec. according
to the Paper adjoined to the end of page 118. but if that be his Parallax in
his mean distance, the Apogaean Parallax is 2. min. 53. sec. The Perigaean
Parallax 3. min. 7. sec. according to our Authors Eccentricity.

5. I affirm no Eclipse of Sun or Moon can be truly calculated, if we use no
other rules then what our Authors have given us. For it appears not whether
they have used any reduction of the Moon from her Orb to the Eclipticke; or
of the Sun from the Ecliptic to the Moons Orb; either of which ways
(consideratis considerandis) would serve. If they used the first, they find
only the greatest Obscuration, which is not the middle of the Eclipse. If they
used the second, they find only the middle of the Eclipse, which is not the
greatest Obscuration, Vide Kepl. Astr. Cop. page 865.

Thus has my Pen run over these imperfections which are the principal Moles
in the face of Urania Practica, and that without all hatred or desire of
Contradiction; the Causes whereof have no predominance in the least over my
affections. I wish my Ink had rather been water to have washed a way these
blots of Art, then marks to make them notorious. Yet I shall be glad if my
Authors can clear themselves hereof, which for the present I see not how it may
be done. My wishes are, that God the creator of the stars, and the disposer of
their influences, would second the weak endeavors of me and others that
desire the restoration of these sciences, for the common good of Mankind,
and the glory of his Name, Amen.

Domino Vincentio Wing in Mathematicis studioso.
Vir Clarissime,
ME nec tua (...) multum scribere nequmea (...) conticescere permittit. Hot
tantum utrique donabo, ut liberioris calami prolixitatem reprimam, nec sinam
ulterius tendere, quam quod caeteram nostram brevitatem deceat. Privatam quidem
tecum speravi literarum communionem, net forsan Anatomia haec nostra lucem
vidisset, si nostras ad te literas dignat us esses agnoscere. Vnam quidem circa
finem jam proxime anteacti Novembris, alteram circa medium Ianuarii ad te
miseram, sed quid de illis sentires, aut quomodo amicitiam oblat am acciperes,
scire nondum potui. Verebar imprimis ne Mathematicus ille candor sublimia
ingenia comitari solitus in te locum non haberet. Leviculis enim velitationibus
huic Tractatulo praelusi and sperasti forsan, spretis and suppressis nostris
literis, suppressa etiam fore in tuam Urania^ (...), sed aliter res cecidit,
neque rei difficultas, neque Uraniae Practicae fama me ab hoc utili
contradicendi munere deterruit. Veritati saltem imperium deferendum erit, ut
faciliori sceptro possit tam suos tutari quam in rebels decernere. Ipsa per
se satis elucescit, nullis nubibus impedita, nullis verborum lenociniis fucata.
Nec deest legitima soboles, quae ad tuos cantus aures occludit, and cognoscere
nolit que probare non possit. Nobis non sufficit speciosa Tabularam Parapegmata
in tuiri. Splendidulis escis vixdum capimur -- Manet alta mente repostum

Quam male Perpetuas jactavit Belga Tabellas.

Condonabis igitur juventuti nostrae calami libertatem, quaeque hic tela libro,
non solum in te, sed and in Authors tuos directa puta. Sed inexcusabilius ipse
peccasti, dum post faeliciter demonstratos little errores, hanc telam retexis,
fallaciisque fallacias superstruere conaris. Egregia quidem fuisset, summisque
laudibus evehenda tua cura Astronomiam Orbi Britannico asserendi, si veris
insisteres fundame^tis, and Cramben recoctam dedignareris introducere.
Proficuum fortassis and in posterum erit, si inutiles veterum nugas veritati
posthabeas, and cures ut Progymnasmata illa Astronomica quae meditari te
profiteris, absurdis Authorum tuorum positionibus depurata prodeant, and ut
tandem dediscas servitutem ingenii, nec ab aliorum authoritate tibi ipsi
patiaris imponi. Multa quidem sunt, de quibus privatis literis tecum
disceptandi occasionem datam gauderem; mulra proponere statueram de vero mundi
Systemate, de causis motuu^, de Harmonia Sphaerarum non sonora illa quam
Veterum aliquis prodidere, sed Musica motuum and Orbium contemperatione. Multa
de Luminarium motibus and Theoriis; de physicis inconstantiis, quae motus
reales turbare videntur: Multa denique de novis Coeli Phaenomenis, and eorum
causis agere erat animus, sed silentium tuum ulteriorem progressum intercepit.
Sed jamdudum definitos carceres vagus transilivit calamus. Deus Opt. Max. tuos
and aliorum in Astronomia restituenda conatus, pro misericordia sua adjuvare
dignetur. Hoc summopere precatur

Magnus quamquam minimus Vrani^ cultor tuique amicissimus JER. SHAKERLEY.
Carre juxta Colne in agro Lancastrensi 8 Martii 1648/9. Aetat. nostrae 23.
labente.
A Postscript to the Reader.
IT is a piece of difficulty as well to avoid the just Censure of some, as the
unjust Calumniation of others. That little piece of mine which my worthy and
honored friend Master William Lilly was pleased to insert in his late
published Book of Astrologicall Predictions, etc. has been subject to the
misconstruction of some pure-nosed Critics; who have (they suppose) sented out
an error in the erection of the Figure, page 14. for that the Sun is there
placed below the Ascendant; whereas my Letter mentioned only the time of
Sunrise, for the time of the first visibility; nor indeed was it likely that
the Parelii should appear before the Sun. Let such therefore as have stumbled
upon that Bloke, give me leave to remove it; and consider that the refraction
of the Suns rays in the Atmosphaere, or Region of vapors, cause him to
appear in the Horizon, when indeed he is below it; which this Figure in some
sort demonstrates.

an arc and two concentric circles, connected by several labeled angles

Let C be the Center of the Earth, CR the semidiameter, R a point in the
superficies intimating the place of observation. OAB the superficies of the
Atmosphere, HOR the sensible Horizon, DC the true Horizon: so that when the Sun
is seen from R by O in H, he is not in H but in S for the beams of the Sun
emitted from S and falling upon O the superficis of the Atmosphere, proceed not
on in the line OA, but are refracted in O, the point refringent and pass
through the diaphanous Atmosphere, in the line OR which is a part of the
sensible Horizon, and so appears the Sun in H when indeed he is but in S, and
lower then the sensible Horizon by the quantity of the angle HRS, which is by
Tycho aslumed 34 min. But as it is not HR but DC which is the true Horizon, so
likewise is it not the angle HRS but DCS which is the Suns depression or
inferior distance form the Horizon. To find which, consider that if from the
arch HDS which subtends the angle of refraction HRS you subtract HD the
remainer will be DS subtending the angle DCS. Now HCD being (the Suns
Horizontall Parallax) according to Tycho 3. min. subtracted from the angle of
Refraction HCS which is sufficiently equal to HRS, leaves the angle DCS the
Suns depression below the Horizon at what time he appeared ther^n. And he that
shall from this Depression, and the lati^ude I used, proceed to find the hour
of the day, and the Cuspes of the 12. houses, I believe will not find them
much different from what I set down. Only in the cuspes of the eleventh and
fifth houses. 17. degrees is but in stead of 7. by some mistake of the Cutter,
or otherwise the minutes agreeing exactly.

Thus much I thought it not amiss to certify concerning that fiigure, least
any should pass an overhasty Censure thereupon, and either condemn my unknown
self of ignorance, or traduce the approbation of Master Lilly, whose worthy
performances have so much dignified these Sciences, and still been able to
confront Envy in her most pestiferous furniture.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. The occasion of this Discourse, page 1 Chap. 2. An error in finding
out the Dominicall Letter and Epact in the Foreign Account perpetually,
detected, page 4 Chap. 3. The inequality of the precession of the Equinoctial
points examined, page 6 Chap. 4. Of the Sun and Moons Tables, page 12 Chap. 5.
Whether the second inequality of the Moon have dependence of the Suns mean or
true, and apparent place, page 14 Chap. 6. A demonstrative examination of our
Authors Tables of Eclipses, page 17 Chap. 7. Of the aequation of Natural
Days, page 29 Chap. 9. Our Authors determination of the distance of
Caelestiall bodies from the earth examined, page 30 Chap. 9. A brief summary of
some other Defects and Imperfections, page 31
FINIS.

