THE SAINTS JEWEL, shevving how to apply the promise.

In A Sermon preached by THOMAS SHEPHERD.

For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2. 29.



Printed in the year. 1642.

To the Reader.
REader, the body may as well subsist without the soul, as the soul can
without a promise, and as the body is not wearied with bread (being the staff
of life) though it has it every day for nourishment, so likewise the fainting
hungry soul can never be cloyed with feeding upon the promises: for which
cause I have also adventured this little Sermon, not doubting, but it may reap
it is due fruit, from those whose hearts are rightly affected, which God
granting. I shall account my labor abundantly requited. Farewell.

T. S.

THE SAINTS JEWEL, shevving how to apply the promise.
Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. 2
Cor 7, 1.

THe Apostle Paul in the former chapter exhorts the Corinthians to beware of
unequal yoking themselves with unbeleevers, and he gives a double argument
for it, one from the unequalnes of it, the other from the promises, as in my
text, Having these promises.

In these words are three parts.

Having these promises, dearly beloved.

let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God.



That which is in the last part of the division, is first in order of the
words, and therefore we will look upon the words, as they ly in order: and so
from the last part and first words I shall handle this doctrine.



I am come to you this day not to set out unto you the excellency of wit or
learning, or the creature: but the excellency of a naked promise, according to
that. 2 Pet 1, 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and and pre^ious
promises.

Now all the promises of God unto his people, are such as concern the body, or
the body and the soul: those that concern the body are with this limitation,
that is, so far as concerns Gods glory, and the good of our souls: but for
the body and soul, consider that place. For the Lord is a sun and Shield,
the Lord will give grace and Psalm. 84. 11.
glory, and no good will he withhold from them that live uprightly.

I Come to the reasons why God has thus made many promises unto his people,
and they are three.



believing soul; as suppose we should go to friends for comfort, it may be
they want comfort for themselves, and so are unfit to comfort us, or it may be
they will not comfort us, or it may be they are a great way off, and so cannot
do it: or perhaps though able and sometimes willing, yet they are mutable in
their comforts, so as though at one time they are willing and do comfort us,
yet another time they fail us: but Christ, to whom the soul is led by the
promise, not only has comfort and is able to comfort us, but he is willing
also to give comfort to us, who knows our wants, and is near to all that
Psalm. 145. 18.
call upon him in truth, and also he is immutable in his comforts. And were
the creature a sufficient ground of comfort to Gods people, then to want the
creature were a sufficient ground of misery to them: but a man may want health,
wealth, liberty, and the like, and yet through and in Christ, his soul may
have satisfying comfort: but if he want Christ, though he has a fullness of
the creature, he is most miserable and without all satisfying comfort; the
promise only is able to afford comfort to the soul in health, in sickness, in
life, and in death.

The third reason, why God has made many promises unto his people is, that
they may become mutual comforters one of another, by having somewhat by
experience from a promise, wherewith they may be enabled to comfort others, so
that you may see the promise is not given, to comfort our selves with only,
but also one another.

Now for use. Is it so that God has 1 Use.
made many promises unto his people, let us try our selves, whether we have any
right to the promises, or no, I will name but one note that you may the better
remember it, and it is a true one, for you shall find it in Scripture. But the
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus
Christ might be given to Gal. 3. 22.
them that believe. So that you may see it is to them, and to them only that
believe: he that can exercise faith in the promise, has right to the promise,
For ye walk by faith, and not by sight. 2 Cor. 5. 7.


If Christians be in afflictions and see that it does them good, then it is
easy to believe that promise which God has made, All things shall work
together for the good of them that love God. But to believe this Romans 8. 28.
promise, when we cannot see any good come of affliction, that is to believe
by faith and not by sight: but when we can see no good come by affliction, but
find our selves more dead and dull, and also God to frown upon us, and yet
we trust in God, and believe the promise, and stay our souls upon Gods word;
this is to live by faith, as we are commanded, Who is among you that fears
the Lord, that obeys Isai. 50. 10.
the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light, let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Faith makes things
absent to be present, and makes the promise good to us, though things seem to
thwart the promise never so much. Now faith is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1.
with the eye of sense. As Abraham believed Rom 4. 18.
against hope, that he should have a child, according as God had promised: so
must we trust God upon a naked promise, that if health should be gone, or
wealth, liberty, strength friends, yea life it self almost gone, and God
seems to be gone, and hell to be threatened, yet still to trust in God, and
believe, this is to live by faith, and comfort is in the promise for all such,
but I speak now to Gods people.

seeing God has made many promises unto his people, it is a ground of comfort
unto them all, that though they go up and down sad, as if they were the worst
people in the world, yet have they the only cause to rejoice, and they only
in all the world* for here is comfort against all their sins, God has
promised to do them away. I am he that blotteth out thy sins, for Isai. 43.
25.
mine own names sake, comfort thy self, Christ is thine. I am my beloveds,
and my beloved is mine, if therefore there be enough in Christ's merits hold up
thy head and take comfort to thy self.



I will subdue your iniquities, and cast your sins into the midst of the sea,
and in the Mic, 7. 18. 19. 20.
20 verse you may see the oath of God, for the truth and mercy of the promise
was gone forth before.



will tread down Satan under your feet shortly. Comfort Romans 16. 20.
thy self in this though Satan may trouble thee for a time, yet thou shall
have him under thy feet shortly.



Though hand join in hand, etc. Though men join Pro. 11. 21.
themselves together, and strike hands, even with the devil against Gods
children, yet shall they not overcome them.



Job. 1, 15. etc
comforts, and left him so poor, as it is a proverb at this day (As poor as
Job:) but after a while, God did not only restore unto him his former
comforts, but gave him double: And this was written for thy comfort, and the
strength of thy patience: comfort thy self therefore, happiness is above the
creature.







hear his children pray.







he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we 1. Cor. 13. 10.
are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may
be able to bear it.



were a cruel mother that would cast her child into the fire, Christ must do
so, if thou should go to hell; yea more, if that should be so, he should
rend a member from himself, for he is thy head, and thou art one of his
members: therefore for thy comfort know this cannot be; the Lord says, I will
make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to
do them good. But you may say perhaps I shall turn from him, see therefore what
follows in the same verse, I will put my fear in their hearts, and they
shall not depart from me.



I will give to him that thirsts of the water of life freely.



then be separated from Christ, and to close with Christ, even upon any terms:
it is thy burden, because thou can not desire to believe as thou should.
Then comfort thy self, God will accept the will for the 2 Cor. 8. 12.
the deed in this case.



And whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. Rev 22. 17.


But it may be the wicked will say, I will have Christ: but stay, not every one
that says so shall have Christ, but art thou willing to part with thy sins,
and it may be to part with health, wealth, liberty, friends, yea and your own
life also, what say you? Are you willing upon these terms?

hold thee there? If thou can find these things. then comfort thy self, for
thou have right unto Gods promises.





curse, as it is, If any shall hear the words of Deu. 29. 19. 20
this curse, and bless himself in his heart saying, I shall have peace though
I walk in the immagination of my heart, etc Then the Lord will not spare him,
but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses of this book shall be upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under heaven, etc. Also, I will heap up mischief upon you, and I
will send mine arrows upon you. Oh what a heavy thing is Deuteronomy. 32. 23.
this, I pray you consider it sadly; not to have right to Gods promises, is the
condition of a man that is cursed, and miserable in his life, at his death, and
after his death, You rich gentlemen and gentlewomen, give me leave to speak to
you, I pray you consider thus much, if you have not right to Gods promises, the
curse of God is stamped upon every cross and penny, and upon every thing you
have, See but this place, I have cursed your blessings, says the Lord, as if
he Mal. 2. 2. 3.
should have said, though I have given you plenty of corn, and money, and
other things, yet they are to you but as curses, and is not this a very sad
thing: give me leave to deal plainly, it is as if a man had but two pence in
all the world, and he should go and buy a halter with it, to hang himself,
yea further, all that thou have in this conditon, is but as if thou should
twist a cord together to hang thy soul in hell. And to you of the poorer sort,
that have not a right to the promise, you are in a miserable condition, for you
are both miserable here and hereafter also. Israel has not returned to him
that smote them, neither do they seek unto the Lord, therefore Isai. 9. 13. 14
the Lord will cut off from them both head and tail, branch and rush in one
day. Again whatsoever you do in your calling is accursed unto you, yea your
praying, reading, hearing, fasting and mourning, all is sin, for The sacrifice
of the wicked is an abomination Prove. 15. 8.
unto the Lord.



Unto the pure all things are pure: but Tit 1. 15.
unto them that are defiled, and unbeleeving, nothing is pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled, So that to you, to perform duty it is sin,
or not to perform duty is sin: but yet omit not duty, for though in performing
duty thou sinnest: yet not to perform duty, is a double sin.

To perform duty, whiles thou art in thy natural condition is sin for the
manner, because though thou may do the duty for substance, as pray, hear,
confer, or the like, yet because thou do want a principle of grace,
nothing is done aright, and so wants acceptance: but to neglect duty is a
sin, in regard of matter and manner; also, for as it is sinfulness it self
not to do the duty, so it is sin to have the heart not rightly disposed for
the manner of performance: it is with you, as it was with the leapers, they
said among themselves thus, Why sit we here till we die? If we say we will
enter into the city, then the famine is in the city 2 King. 7. 3. 4
and we shall die there, and if we sit still here, we die also: Now therefore
let us come and fall unto the host of the Syrians, if they save us alive, we
shall live, and if they kill us we shall but die. So say thou with thy self,
If I do duty I sin, and if I do not perform duty, I commit a double sin,
but I will go to duty, if God will save me, I shall live, if not, I can but
perish: and for thy comfort consider, it may be God will cast an eye of pity
upon thee, thou art in the way, that is the means God has appointed to bring
you home to Christ: but yet until thy condition be changed, all thou do is
sin, for, The very thought of the wicked Prove. 15. 26.
are an abomination to the Lord.

But oh strange, Though firebrands out of hell be spitted in your faces, yet
you are not affected: But it may be some of you think to do it, when you are
sick, or upon your death bed, but it may be too late then, when God opens
and awakeneth your conscience, and if you be not awakened here, you shall be
sure to be awakened in hell. I remember I heard of a young prodigal, when he
was dying, looked on the fire and said, as that fire burns there, so shall my
soul burn in hell. Another said on his death bed, Oh that I might live,
though it were but the life of a toad. God is very careful to send his Angels
for the godly: but for the wicked, the devils stand ready at his bed side to
fetch him into hell as soon as his breath goes out of his body, and then they
will cry out. Oh the time of mercy that I have had, but now it is past, the
gate of mercy is shut, never more to be opened.



The Lord of that servant shall come in a day, when he Mat, 24. 50, 51
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut
him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Oh consider this against the day of judgment, it is a sad day for all such,
when mercy and patience and Christ shall plead against them: yea, The dust of
ministers feet shall rise up against them. Oh but if so, then Luke. 10. 11.
what will their condition be, when drops of blood and sweat shall rise up
against Luke. 22. 44.
them: yea more, the husband shall rejoice to see the damnation of the wife.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees vengeance on the wicked, because God
has gotten the Psalm. 58. 10.
glory of his enemies.





Consider in the first place, that not to believe and lay hold on the promise
is a sin of unbeleefe, And he that believes not is damned. See the evil of
this sin of unbeleefe in these particulars John. 3. 18.


Hereby we grieve the holy spirit of God, whereby we are sealed to the day of
redemption, What a grievous thing is it for Ephesians. 4. 30.
thee who desire to be assured that the promise is thine, that thou by
unbeleefe should est grieve that holy spirit, which seals up the promise to
thy soul, see that place. Hear ye now, oh house of David, is it a small thing
for you to weary men, but you must weary Isai. 3. 17.
my God also. If a man promise to do another man a courtesy, and after some
delay, that man comes to him and says, Will you do as you promised me? He
says, yes, but says he will you indeed? and thus he pleads with him a whole
day, and does not believe him, will not that exceedingly grieve his friend, who
promised him so to do, and fully intended no less: even so is it with all
those that are Gods people, and will not believe what God has said unto them,
but stand and plead with God, two or three years or more: as those that
bebeleeve glorify God, so those that will not come in, rob God of his honor
and glory, and grieve him.





when we will not wait in a way of believing upon the promises of grace, and
cheerfully attend Gods leisure.

He that believes, etc. He that believes 1 John. 5. 10.
not in every ordinance he comes to, he makes God a liar, because every
ordinance bears record of Christ.





But your iniquities, etc. Isai. 59. 2.


We must pray lifting up our holy hands, etc. Iam. 1. 6.


slavish fear, when we fear man more then God, contrary to that counsel,
Fear not Isai. 8. 12.
their fear nor be afraid, etc.





In the next place, take these helps to lay hold on the promise.





Do not flutter up and down from one promise to another, but lie a great while
on some one, and wring and squeese it by meditation upon it.



God grant our desire, Gods time is the best time.

Psalm. 103.


In the next place to those that yet stand out, and are not closed with the
promise, I entreat you, come in to God, take his gracious offer, lay hold on
the promise: which that you may do, take heed of those things that will be
lets, and hinder you,

your sins have kept back good things from you.



FINIS.

