A LETTER Sent by Mr. Henry Iarmin, Now resident in PARIS, TO Mr. William
Murrey, OF His Majesty's Bedchamber: As it was intercepted at Sea by Captain
JAMES MORGAN, Captain of the good Ship, called the Mary-Rose of Bristoll.

Wherein is expressed the full and real intentions of the said Mr. Iarmin, and
the other English Fugitives in France, against the proceedings of the
Honorable, the high Court of Parliament here in ENGLAND.

London, printed for James Jobson. Ian. 26. 1643.

A Letter sent by Mr. Henry Iarmin to Mr. William Murrey of his Majesty's
Bedchamber.
Honest Will:
IT will seem strange to thee, to receive any tidings of me from France; as it
did appear miraculous to me, to hear the state of all affairs in England
from thee by the last Post, that intelligence I hope will hope, if you care to
direct and manage it, so that it may meet no interception. I would not write
back to you by the said messenger, lest my letters might have arrived sooner at
London to the Parliament, than to thee at Oxford, and so fortunately
encountering a man of Sir Ralph Hoptons at Paris, where I am now, who brought me
some Expresses from his Master out of the West of England; I thought best by
him, both for the security and suddenness of the conveyance, to send back by
him an answer of thy former letter, and my true respects to thee my dear Will,
whom since my departure I have still worn about my heart.

I am exceeding glad that his Sacred Majesty is so well and strongly seated
(as I am informed he is) at Oxford, and hope his Council will advise him there
to continue, till all the turbulent business of the times be reduced to an
happy period, I hope, and so does all the rest of his servants here, who suffer
in his Majesty's cause, that He will not want strengths at home to settle Him
in his wonted Royalty at White Hall, where we had all rather be attending his
Sacred Person in our former garb and greatness, than live here like Honorable
Exiles at Paris; for that is (trust me) the best account the French men make
of us.

Concerning the managing your domestic affairs, and the prosecution of the
present war in England, it were a needless presumption for me to ^dventure on
advising you. I know his Majesty has so many able head-pieces about Him, that
were I there present, I should blame my modesty, should I intrude me on any
counsel in the directing those affairs, which certainly had my success
answered my intentions, or my power my will, had by the course I shaped, been
at far more settled rate than now they are, His Majesty had never been driven
to these straights, nor the Parliaments endeavors succeeded so prosperously.
But they were blasted in the bud of their expectation and progress, and so no
more can be said of them; but that were like too early fruit, easily shaken
down to earth, and there betrayed to rottenness.

For the services which my self, and others of his faithful ministers here in
France, under the umbrage of banishment, have endeavored in the advancement of
His Majesty's present wars; I shall give thee a short and real account, such
as may befit the integrity of my heart to the King, and my affection to thee
my friend. I have for mine own part, having by reason of the Queens commends,
and the interest of my former acquaintances best credit in this Court, employed
my whole studies to engage the King of France to the succors of the King our
Master, as I have by former letters advised thee. But during the life of the
Cardinal Richelieu, who for what cause I know not, was still adverse to my
proceedings, my suits and endeavors were cast against the wind, and so
vanished. Since his decease, I have found my addresses in that business, and
easilier entertained both by his Majesty of France and his Council, who
notwithstanding by a politic pretension of conserving the league inviolable
between the Kingdoms of England and France, have waved my desires so, that
have not suited to so full an effect as I aimed them. I find this Nation
flexible enough, I mean the great ones of it, to give ear attentively to the
King our Masters wants and sufferings; but when I urge them home for a
supplement to those wants, with a complementall courtesy they answer; They
could heartily wish the differences between his Majesty and Parliament were
fairly composed, and that to work that composition, they would willingly engage
their King to employ his utmost powers; but still with that clause, Saving the
amity between our Kingdom and the Kingdom of England: so that verbally I may
define, ready to serve the King, but cordially the Parliament, which has so
much afflicted me, and discomposed my little patience, that I have often in
plain terms intimated to them, the great disparagement it would cast upon the
dignity of Kings in general, to be forced to stand to the arbitrements of
their subjects, they have answered me flatly, they understood not how matters
went between the King of England and his Parliament, whom they believed to be
far better instructed in the laws of the Kingdom and the prerogative of our
Kings, against which, it was not likely they would attempt any thing, then they
which were strangers. And-when I requested there might be some ayds of men and
ammunition sent over by the King of France, as testimonies of his love to his
Majesty of England, they have replied, that with all their hearts they would
be yielding to the transferring any such succors, but that they did believe
their King could not in his wisdom, considering his pregnant necessities,
being engaged in several parts of his Dominions against the powerful forces
of the Spanyard, transmit any of his soldiers as auxiliaries hither, since he
was scarce furnished with men enough to keep the field and maintain his frontier
garrisons against his adversary, that so many ways infested, every part of the
Realm of France, wearyed and disheartened with these circumstantiall delays,
which were indeed flat denyalls. I was resolved to cease any further
prosecution of that business, determining with my self to rest my self here
in a quiet banishment; and since I could no other way advantage his Majesty's
affairs, as much as I would by my prayers, till now within these late days:
the French and Spanyard both tired with the tedious expenses of their precedent
wars, began to effect some treaty and overture of peace, which if it be once
(as I hope it will be ratified between them) I shall not doubt to procure his
Majesty very considerable ayds out of these parts. To facilitate the effecting
of which, I have spared no pains, no diligence, nor omitted any cost which was
within my abilities, to the favorites and Minions of the Court of France, to
endeare their Master to the King our Masters assistance.

I have remonstrated to them the many indignities which have been offered to
his Majesty, his royal Consort, their Kings sister, and all their royal
Progeny, by expelling them from the Court at White Hall, since which time, her
Majesty has been forced to live in the manner of an exile in Holland at the
Hagne.

I laid before them the many straits and grievous exigents which the King our
Master was brought into by the disobedience of his Subjects, being deprived of
his revenue and magazines, and how acceptable such supplies of his present
wants would arrive to him, and in what an eternal obligation of friendship it
would indeare his Majesty to the King and State of Franch to receive such
demonstrations of their aptitude to his relief, as were men and ammunition.

Many other motives, such as either my wit or judgment in the Kings present
affairs could prompt me to, did I intimate unto them; by all which I think
(for I have no assurance but imaginary, on which I can build no certainty) I
have won so much on the King of France and his Council, to intend some succor
to the King our Master: For since that time, Ships fit for service have been
stayed in all the ports of Normandy and Britain, and the adjoining parts;
choice of all the able Mariners made for manning the said vessels; store of
harness and millitary provision sent to the forementioned parts, and the most
signal Commanders in France commanded to give their attendance thereabouts:
15000. well experienced soldiers being provided for the furnishing those Ships,
whither they are bound is not yet divinged, but the rumor goes for England,
which if it be so, and that they can get safe landing there, and join with his
Majesty's present forces, we may then assuredly hope the best, and that his
Majesty will be victorious over all his enemies.

But in troth, dear Will, we can but only flatter our selves with these
hopes, as men do which with it should be so, but not affirm it so; many
pregnant reasons inducing me to think the contrary, as the infallible
knowledge the State of France, of the prevailing power of the Parliaments
forces and their strength (...), where the Frenchmen are no ways so good
soldiers as they are at land, nor to be held comparable to the English, who
now are reported here, to guard the Coasts of England and the narrow Seas.

Besides, it may be a fine trick of French policy, whilst the Spanyard is
amazed with the present overture of peace to beat him at his own weapon
(craft) to provide this Navy, and these soldiers in store for the succor of
the King, so to have them in readiness upon all occasions (which are not
unlikely to fall out) of breaking of this treaty of peace, to fall upon the
Spaniards towns in Flanders, or to set forth for the invasion of some other of
his Dominions at the approach of the Spring, till when, they cannot be rigged
nor in readiness to set out; such tricks there are frequent in the actions
and policies of State, but we hope the best; and if these provisions be really
intended for the assistance of his Majesty, I shall think my enforced
discontinuance from my Country and friends fortunate, since by it I have been
an instrument to promote his Majesty's peace: howsoever, my kind Will, I wish
with all my heart matters had never proceeded to this unluckie height between
his Majesty and his Parliament, then had we enjoyed one another company in
peace at Whitehall, and these miseries never been inflicted on our own unhappy
Country, where, so all matters were fairly composed between his Majesty and
the Parliament, I could heartily wish my self in my former condition, that I
might be happy in the society of thy self and all my other friends, to whom I
desire thee to do my best commendations; and as my last Encaric^mento, and so
of most consequence to be performed, I desire thee to let his sacred Majesty
know, that I prostrate my life at his royal feet, wishing no longer to enjoy
life, then I shall ever strive to be esteemed his Highness humblest and
loyallest Subject and servant, and thy true friend,

H. I.
Paris, 19. January, Stilo Novo.
FINIS.

