THE JOVIALL CREW, OR, The Devil turned RANTER: Being a Character of The
roaring Ranters of these Times.

Represented in a COMEDY, CONTAINING A true Discovery of the cursed
Conversations, prodigious Pranks, monstrous Meetings, private Performances,
rude Revellings, garrulous Greetings, impious and incorrigible Deporements of a
Sect (lately sprung up amongst us) called Ranters.

Their Names sorted to their several Natures, and both lively presented in
Action.

London: Printed for W. Ley. 1651.

depiction of the devil's chariot rolling over Britain The Prologue.
Bedlam broke loose? yes, Hell is opened too:
Madmen, and Fiends, and Harpies to your view
We do present: but who shall cure the Tumor?
All the world now is in the Ranting Humor.


THE PERSONS.
Apostatus, sometime an Episcoparian, a Scholar. Violentus a Painter. Dose an
Apothecary. Pigwidgin a Tailor. Robustio a Soldier. Asinego a Gentleman.
Pandorsus Agent for the Devil. Lucifer. Mrs. Minks wife to Apostatus. Mrs.
VVriggle wife to Pigwidgin. Mrs. Fulsome a Widow. Mrs. Incorrigible wife to
Violentus. Mrs. Crave-drink wife to Dose Mrs. Dissimulatio wife to Asinego.
Mrs. All-prate a Seamans wife, her husband absent. Mrs. Idlesby, Mrs.
Doe-little, citizens wives. Horn, Byas, their husbands. Sycophanti a Vintner.
Spolario a Drawer. A Constable. A Watch. Clink Keeper of Finsbury. A Beadle and
Officers.
The Scene, LONDON.

THE IOVIALL CREW, OR The Devil turned RANTER.
ACT. I. SCENE I.
Enter Apostatus, Dose, his head bound about with a Napkin bloody. Apost. Where
in the name of Priscian have thou been, thou sanguine syring-man?


Dose. Oh this wicked world! I Will tell you Sir the story: This cap you see
(pointing to his head) covers a cruel wound. I yesternight met with a crew of
those, who talk of heaven, and of a place of torment, to whom when I began to
preach our Doctrine, one of the company with a pewter pot struck me upon the
head with all his might.


Apost. Alas poor Dose, there is no such strong necessity for to divulge our
Doctrine in all companies.


Dose. That men should be such fools, to pinnion their own arms, tie their own
legs, and propose such strange nothings to themselves, on purpose for to keep
themselves in awe. When would they but perceive their happiness, both this
world and the next is solely theirs; nor can they lose their way although they
would.


Apost. No more of this at present (my dear Dose) thou know, though by our
only sacred Laws, every man's wife must be at his friends use, yet Pigwidgin the
Tailor thwarts our custom; he is content to rant with other women, but to
expose his own Spouse he denies; now have I plotted for to circumvent him: Thou
know we meet anon at Sychophantios, where while (as is our use) we drink and
roar, step thou home and bring thence some sleepy potion, which I Will infuse
into his cup: so while he steeps, I Will use his wife before him, 'twill be rare
sport.


Dose; With all my heart, it is a work meritorious: we must sometimes save souls
against their wills! Oh here are all the Gang. --

Enter the Devil and Pandorses.
Devil. How now Pan, where have thou been my dear Pandorses.


Pandorses. My much admired Master, I am but now come from my sad employment, I
am so wearied and tired with ranting it, that I am not my self, so
consequently yours.


Div. Why, what have done for our infernal grace? prithee report, do they
increase and multiply?


Pan. Most reverend Devil, I have obtained in your behalf the choice of all
the Town, as Citizens wives, and others that will be led away, and there
improved much.


Devil. I must confess my most obsequious Ningle, thou have behaved thy self
and our affairs with admirable diligence, and for thy pains, thou shall obtain
my favor for thy gains.


Pan. Pray Sir your approbation.


Div. I have surveyed the Universe, as France, Spain, and Italy, yet cannot
parallel the Ranters of this our English Climate; I Have blinded them with
pleasures of this world, by putting on a mask of Religion to make it no sin,
that makes my proselites run headlong down to the infernal lake, where
Cerberus transports them to their supposed joy, where yet at last, into
infernal flames at length they are cast.


Pan. A good reward for such servants.


Div. But prithee Pan, let me see how they improve, let us have one merry Jig
before we depart.


Pan. Please you great Sir you shall.

Enter Violentus, Pigwidgin, Asinego, Robustio; Mrs. Minks, Mrs. Wriggle, Mrs.
Fulsome, Mrs. Crave-drink, Mrs. Dissimulatio, Mrs. All-prate, Mrs.
Incorrigible, singing in Chorus, and dancing
Violen. Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,


Pigwi. Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Joviall Ranters.


Assine. Let fearful souls refuse their bowls,
And tremble for to tipple:

Robu. Let moon-men fear to domineere,
And halt before a Cripple.

Chor. Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Joviall Ranters.

Apost. No hell we dread when we are dead,
No Gorgon nor no Fury:

Dose; And while we live, we will drink and --
In spite of Judge or Jury.

Miu; Come on my Boys, receive your joys,
And take your fill of pleasure,

Incori. Shoot for shoot, away let us doo'r,
But we must have our measure.

Fulso. All lie down, as in a swovvn,
to have a pleasing Vision.

Crave. And then rise with bared thighs,
Who'd fear such sweet incision?

All-pr. About, about, ye Joviall rout,
Dance antic like Hob-gobblins;

Chor. Drink and roar, and swear and whore,
But yet no brawls or squoblings.

Omnes. Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Joviall Ranters.

Pan. How like you these mad pranks of these our Joviall Crew?


Div. Most exquisitely well performed, I have not known the like, let them go
on, and for their hire, I will revvard them with eternal fire.

Vanish in Thunder.
Apost. What means this horrid noise? sure it is some dire presage of these our
horrid actions, yet I hope my dear Associates, this is but the praeludium to
our mirth, let us now to Sychophantios.


Assine. Where we will drink svveet Wine and strong Tobacco, till we become
immortal, there is Philosophy for you.


Apost. Away.
Black night put on thy thickest mists, and try
For to abscond us from Joves piercing eye.
Exeunt.
ACT. II. SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. Idlesby, and Doe-little, two Citizens wives. Idlesby. Gossip, if
I am not on fire to be acquainted with some of this new Sect, may I want
silver-lace for my next petticoat, and be enjoined not to vvear so much as a
Buckinghamshire edging upon my smocks.


Doe-little. And so have I Mrs. Idlesby, without doubt they are a rare
Society, lead heavenly lives, nothing but acting good for one another, drinking
love-healths, and amorous departments.


Idlesby. They are the only people: O what a put^e^ our Divines do keep for
honesty, honor, and virtuous life! not to make Minotaurs of our gentle
husbands; no mirth, no due refreshment must be had, save what our impotent
husbands will allow: I am resolved to be of their Religion, and go to heaven
the nearest way.


Idlesby. A match, then we will be Convertites together: this very day the prime
of all the gang, the chief'st Theologists, and worthiest fisters of all that
zealous Tribe are met together at Sychophantios house, the lime-hound Tavern,
shall we go to 'em?


Doe-little. With all my heart, Iovve my life unto thee for the motion, let us
away.


Idlesby. The breeches are my own, henceforth I Will rant.


Doe-little. No way but this to be predominant.

Exeunt. Enter (as in a Tavern) the whole crew of Ranters, viz. Apostatus,
Violentus, Pigwidgin, Robustio, Asinego, Minks, All-prate, Dissimulatio,
Fulsome, Incorrigible, Wriggle, Crave-drink. Enter Spolario.
Robust. Drawer (he knocks) where is your Master Sirrah?


Spolar. At hand quoth pick-purse.


Robust. Fill me all the empty vessels in the house, I Will except none, with
pure and sparkling Racy.


Spolar. Chamber-pots and all Sir?


Robust. Out Rogue, jeer me! strikes him.



Spolar. Oh, oh, oh!

Enter Sychophantio.
Sychophant. What Is the matter Noble Gentlemen?


Robust. This Rogue your servant here --


Sychophant. Sir, I am much obliged unto your love, that you would deign to
castigate him; what wine wilt please this honored company to have brought in,
and eke what quantity?


Apost. 'Twould be too tedious and too troublesome, to drag a But of right
Canary hither, fill us some twenty Gallons of rich Sack, let lights adorn the
room in every angle, a pound of right Varina, and a gross of shining pipes,
fit for a females touth.


Violen. Twenty Flaggons -- 'twill not amount to thimble fulls a piece, thirty
will serve to give the onset with.

A little wine, will make's a little rant,
But seas of Sack will not suffice us scant,
when we would reach the highest pitch of mirth.

Sychophant. Your humble servant, the wine proposed shall wait you presently.


Apost. Kiss close, kiss close my hearts, each suck Nepenthe from his females
lips, until our Nectar do approach.

Enter Sychophantio, and two Drawers with Wine.
Sycho. Alll joys wait on this joviall company, this in obedience to your just
commands.


Asinego. Rare Sychophantio, thou art the best Steward to Venus that ever filled
quart pot.


Apost, Ha! ha! ha! Steward to Bacchus you mean Asinego, but Wine and Venery
are so near allied, 'twas but a slight mistake: now drink like Dutchmen (while
we sing Paeans to the plump cheek'd god) let us tipple till we have swallowed
down their Charter, that for the future, when men quaffe profoundly, they may
be said to drink like us: Here Mrs. Pigwidgin, to our next procreation.


Pigw. Hum, hum, hum!


Dose. A health to Mrs. Wriggle, as second to our Master; I propose it.


Wriggle. I thank you fellow creatures, I Will serve either of you soul and body.
They all drink lustily, while Apostatus whispers Dose, and he goes off.



Robustio. Lovely Mrs. All-prate, in this I celebrate the creatures health, who
now is plowing on the angry main, whose saddle I supply, he will thank me for it.
--

Mrs. All-prate. He were a devil else: Here Is to thee dear Violentus, this will
enable thee against next performance, you were faultringly feeble in the last.

she drinks. Mrs. Crave drink. Here Is old drinking to me, have I a dogs face
that I Am so neglected?


Pigwidgin. Better this Town were buried in the Sea: here dear Mrs. Crave-dri.
my best endeavors ever wait upon you.

(he drinks) Mrs. All-prate. Here sweet Mr. Dose: Ha! where is Mr. Dose.

Apostatus Perhaps gone to evacuate: see he is come.

Enter Dose with a noise of Fiddlers, dancing before them and singing.
Dose. I am the rar'st Ranter
Of all the whole crew Boys,
And he that denies it,
I Will prove him a Jew Boys,
For roaring; and whoring,
You know I speak true Boys.

Violent. Fit to be Tutor to a Tribe: here fellow creature, here is a whole
slash to thee.


Dose. I Will pledge thee, were to him they call old Rug:


Assinego. Put off your hats Gentlemen.


Apost: The Devill's an Ass like thee, and not worth drinking to: strike high
ye sons of Orpheus and Arion.


Pigwidgin. A Hall, a Hall:


Apostat. What power may us daunt,
While we sing roar and rant, They dance confusedly, and sing this song in parts

A fig for the talkative rabble.

Robusti. We know what we do,
And to heaven we will go
Spite of the Watch, and the Constable.

Pigwidg. There Is but one Religion,
The Turk with his Pidgeon,
No man shall be punished for's Vices;

Asinego. All those that deny
With us to comply
Are Caterpillars and Cockatrices.

Violent. What more can be craved,
We all shall be saved
Though our lives are never so vicious.

All-pra. What ever we act
It Is an heavenly fact,
And for our salvation auspicious.

Minks. Come some man or other,
And make me a mother,

Wriggle. Let no man fear for to board me:


Fulsome. Come as many as will,
I give 'em their fill,
And thank 'em for that they afford me.

Incorri. Come any strong Rogue
That would fain disimbogue,
Let Us mingle, and try who is the strongest,

Dissimu. I fain would comply
With him that dare vye
To stand to his tackling the longest.

Robust. Come my brethren of the Base Violl, some whim, some air, some catch.
Fiddler The best and newest Sir in Town.

He sings. Now let us stay, and never knock off till the envious day
Shall disturb us.
No Constables staff, must hinder our quaffe,
It Is the reckoning alone that can curb us.
Let Us mingle in mirth, and drink till our Noses
Are brighter then Berry, and redder then Roses,
He only can rant whom Canary disposes.
This must go round, do off your hats till the pavement be crowned With your
Beavers:

A red-coated-face frights the Sergeant and his Mace, And the Constable
trembles to shivers.

Then in state march your faces like some of the Quorum,
When the whores do fall down, and the Vulgar adore 'um,
And their Noses like link-boys run shining before 'um.
Call, call aloud, and never cease till the pots together crowd In Battalia;

Let our tippling make known, we came from the Town,
By the vulgar y^leped Westphalia.
Let the Bar-boy go sleep, and the Drawers leave roaring,
Our looks shall account for them and a moring,
When such pimples that rises shall have a quart scoring.

Robust. Excellent! did this Minerva take flight from John Tailors, or Martin
Parkers brain.


Fiddler. From neitheir Sir, an utter Barester fathers 'em, which makes some
laugh, that the fool should be so ambitious to rock the Cradle.


Asinego. Sweet Mrs. All prate, I grow proud beneath the Navell, and must needs
crave your aid with an etc.


All-prate: Sir, I am none of your Jigging girls, who will play with any babble,
I am sufficiently acquainted with the flatulency of your Nerve.


Asinego: Mum, mum.


Apost. Here Is a health to all our friends in Kent, let her pledge me that
dares make the Beast with two backs before the whole Society.


Fulsome. By all the flesh on my back, a cordial motion, the work is pious we
attempt, 'twill add to the audacity of our Brethren.


To. Rare rare, here dearest fellow creatures, I mean you that walk in Adonis
Gardens to gather flowers once a month, more Wine there.


Spolar. I come Sir, the Devil choke ye, ye rude Rogues, I must think of some
way to be revenged for my broken pate.

Exit. Spolario enters with Wine.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Sychophantio.

Sycho. Honored Gentlemen; here are two handsome Females without, that desire
admittance into your company.


All-pra. Let 'em come in, let 'em come in, I know the parties very well.


Apost. Conduct 'em to us; two handsome women say thou?


Dose: Some of our own Society sure.


Pigwidgin. Or else desire to be.
The Wine dies upon our hands.

Dose. You shall find it lively enough anon Sir, to the lulling of all your
sickly senses.


Spolar. I shall observe it strictly Sir: excellent opportunity; I'^e be
revenged on all for one man's folly.

Assist me Bachus in this queint Vagary,

As thou expect'st the sale of thy Canary.

Enter Spolario with Wine: Dose whispers him, and gives him a paper. SCENE II.
Enter Idlesby and Doe-little. All the Ranters rise up and congratulate their
approach.
Apostat. Welcome ye lovely pair: your amiable aspects do proclaim you come as
friends for to associate us; treachery cannot lurk under such looks, where
Cupid and the Graces love to lodge.


Pigwidgin: Excellent creatures! Oh my bodkin troubles me.


Viol. They rival Venus, mother Dione, Juno her self, or fair Astioche.


All prate: These faces are unknown to me, yet welcome fellow creatures.

They all kiss the two new Ranters. Idlesby, Know holy crew, the fame of
your fair lives, having once reached my ears, set me a longing to be made one
of your blessed Society, more then when I was big with my Son Toby, and needs
must eat a piece of roasted Bacon: be pleased to name me one of your Associates,
and I dare challenge Superiority above an Eastern Queen.


Doe-little. She speaks my thoughts, and my desires.


Robust. They Have certified enough, what need prolixity?


Violent. Drink to the two beauties, and then imitate them with members of
our bodies.


Dose. Drink deep my hearts for joy of this new Union.


Pigwidgin. And let the stream of the strong Indian weed involve us as we sit
in the clouds.

They drink healths round, smoking unanimously.
Apost. So this was punctually performed: this (my pair of Beauties) is the
first graduall step to your uniting; come fellow creatures now unto our
Ceremonies.

All the old Ranters hand in hand surround the two new ones (who are upon their
knees) singing about them. The Song.


Apost. Round round all in a ring,
Fellow Creatures let us sing:
Here are two that come to be
Annexed to our Society:

Viole. By Pluto's Crown, Proserpines hair,


Robu. Cerberus yell, Alecto's chair,


Pig. By Epicurus happy life,


Dose. And Messalina, Claudius wife;


Asine. By Venus Gloves, and Lais paint,


Min. By Iezabel our chiefest Saint:


All-p. By Goats desires, and Monkies heat,


Fulso. Spanish flies and stirring meat,


Crav. By the vigor of an horse,


Dissi. By all things of strength and force,


Incor. By Alcides back of steel,


Wrig. By Jove's escapes, Omphales wheel,


Apo. We adopt these happy pair,
Of our Liberties to share:
They dissolve their hands.
All-p. Arise, arise, blessed souls, and know,
Now you may rant, cum privelegio.

Apost. Now having finished this pious work, let us drink deep healths unto the
happy solace, we of the shirt may find with these two Sisters.


Violentus: What ho! some Wine and more Tobacco there.

Enter Spolario with Wine.
Spolario: Here Gentlemen, now Rhamnusia aid me in my revenge, vovvd for my
broken scull, that which Dose gave me for to spice Pigwidgins cup, I Have mix
amongst all this wine -- ha -- those two faces I have seen e're now in
milder company: he spies Idlesby and Doe-little! Ostrange, they two turned
Ranters! I Will presently acquaint their husbands vvith't:

Drink deep my Rogues until you fall asleep,

A guard I Will fetch, your persons safe to keep.


Robust. Me thinks vv'are dull, quite lost unto our liquor: this quart I Will
svuallovv: now fair Mrs. Idlesby and Doe-little, to those dulced joys we shall
make ours the time we mingle limbs.

They drink apace one to another.
Violent. It Is almost midnight -- come, we lose time.


Apost. I wonder Pigwidgin holds up so long, art sure Spolario gave it him?

He whispers Dose.
Dose. O doubt it not, there is plummets hangs upon my eyelids, I hardly can
keep open the casements.


Asine. Goodnight Brethren of the ranting humor, I must needs snore a while:

They all fall asleep. Enter Spolario with the Constable, and the Watch.


Spolar. Not a word to my Master --


Constable. Never fear it, the State shall give thee thanks for this discovery: I
charge you my friends in the Kings Name, cry mercy in the Name of the Keepers
of the Liberties of England, to endeavor to awake these persons as well by
kicking as pinching, and other laudable means, according to the Statute.

1. Watchman: Sir it is in vain, they have drunk themselves dead, or else (as
the wise man says) are dead drunk.

Enter Sycophantio.
Sycho. Noble Mr. Constable, What Is the matter here?


Constable. Matter quoth you? Sir you keep a disordered house; the State shall know
it: for ought I know these men and women here have drunk their lives away.


Sycho. I Will assure you Sir they had not above a pottle of Sack amongst 'em, I
wonder at the accident.


Constable. Call me a hackney vessel hither, I Will have them (drunk or dead as they
are) to Finsbury, 'twill be a piece of extraordinary justice: every man take
one of these on his back (pay your selves for your portage with what you find
in their pockets) lay them in seemly ranks within the coach, and guard them
hence to Finsbury.

2. Watchman. It shall be done Sir.

[They bear off the bodies.]
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Apostatus, Asinego, Robustio, Violentus, Dose, Pigwidgin, Minks, Crave-drink,
Fulsome, All-prate, Incorrigible, Dissimulatio, Idlesby, Doe-little, as in
Finsbury Goal asleep. Robust. first awakes. Robust. The Other quort my hearts;
this health deserves, the highest celebration. What all asleep! drunk as I
live. He looks about him. He knocks.
Ha! this room is strangely altered since last night. The Rogue Sycophantio has
put a trick upon us.


Clink. What want you Sir?

Enter Clink.
Rob. Want say thou? prithee what place is this? where is Sycophantio?


Clink. This, my friend, is Finsbury, a receptacle of thieves, debtors, and
drunkards: I am the Keeper of the place.


Robust. Here Is a miracle: prithee how came we here?


Clink. A coach Sir brought you hither, and a Constable.


Robust. So ho, so ho, so ho! He wakes the rest


Apost. Sweet sister, I am not now disposed for dalliance; another time I Will
doubly do my duty.


Robust. What ho! They have drank Laethe sure, some Poppey or Mandragora: We Are
all undone: A Constable and his Watch (like saucy Devils) have given us
transportation to this Goal, we know not when nor how.

They all awake.
Idle. Mercy on me; where are are we now?


Asine. Then fill more wine, it makes us divine;
Here Is a health to Thomas the Tinker.
Ha! What stable's this?
Looks about him as in a maze.
Idle. O Mrs. Doe-little! we are all undone.


Doe-little. Peace fool; are we not all Ranters? That Dose whispering Apostatus.
very epithete is of force enough to protect us against our husbands violence.
This Rogue Spolario has spoiled us all.


Apost. You should have followed my advice, and done the task I did prescribe
your self.


VVriggle. O Pigwidgin, what will become of us!


SCENE II.
Enter Mr. Horn and Mr. Byas, husbands to Idlesby and Doe-little (in disguize)
truncheons in their hands. Apostatus. What are you?


Horn. As you are, Ranters.


Robustio. Ranters? Byas, yes Ranters, our women are all in common.

We drink quite drunk together, share our Oaths,
If one man's cloak be rent, all tear their Clothes.

Apost. If you are one with us, you will subscribe unto these several Articles.


Horn. Good Sir let us hear 'em, we are pliant boys.


Apo. Imprimis, That you believe you are the best servants to heaven, when you
roar lowdest, drink deepest, swear profoundest, whore the oftnest, swear the
execrablest, and rant the highest. Byas. very good.


Apost. Item, That you acknowledge your selves obliged to prostrate each man
his wife to the use of his fellow creature, and are so far from loathing the
form of the act, that you would renounce and disclaim her, in case she deny a
compliance. Item, That you have taken an Oath to Bacchus (having solemnly sworn
over a quart of Canary) to be drunk at least five times a week, and to use your
utmost endeavors to convert all out of the faith, to our manner of life and
worship.


Horn. All this we were long since sworn to, and to give you full satisfaction
in that point, the females here of your Society must go along with us for
satisfaction.


Pigwidgin. I hope Wriggle thou will not go along with these.


Wriggle. Oh husband 'twere a sin for to deny 'em, we will be a while in private
with our new Brethren.


Robust. Sirs, though our Laws allow an equal share to all of our Society
with their women, we first must be assured you are of us.


Horn. No more dispute, they must along.


Robust. Must, they shall not Sir.


Byas. We Citizens are exposed to lead strange lives,
When we are forced to fight for our own wives.
They fall together by the ears, the Ranters are soundly beaten; and their
women carried off.


ACT V.
Enter Clink, Horn, Byas, Idlesby, Doe-little, and the rest of the she-Ranters.
Byas. Dear Mr. Clink, you have extremely obliged our gratitudes: good Sir, what
have you done with the other gang?


Clink. Ene clapped 'um altogether in one room; they are strange fellows, and may
be well called Ranters; they have unclothed themselves unto their shirts, and
their apparel they have laid to gage for strong drink and Tobacco: they drink
healths, and swear and roar, as if they felt no cold, each with a pair of irons
on his heels.


Horn. You use our fellow creatures too severely, but it is not in our powers to
help the matter: let us entreat you dearest Sisters all, to follow Mr. Clink to
the next room; we will begin with these two Ladies first, and so with all of
you by turns.


Clink. Come Ladies

All save Idlesby and Doe-little go off with Clink. To'ther go naked for their
pleasures, you

Shall for my profit be as naked too.

Exeunt.
Horn. Now thou vile strumpet, do thou know this face?


Idlesby. My husband! Oh I am undone.


Byas. Impudent whore, is this your zeal to goodness, to journey every morn
e're six a clock unto S. Antholins to hear a Lecture, with a great Bible of
Geneva print; your Table Book too, to take Sermon notes?


Doe-little. Take heed Sir what you do, I am a Ranter.


Byas. Yes whore, I find thou art.
I can rant too for a need,
These are but fillips, I should make thee bleed.
Beats her.
Doe-little: Oh, oh! dear husband.


Horn: This punishment is too poor for their deserts: you huswife I Will not
beat, or spurn, I will do more then that: these clothes I gave you, come
uncase, uncase.

Pulls off her clothes.
Byas. You minion must participate her fate.

Tears off her clothes.
Idlesby. For heavens sake husband pardon me.


Horn. Thou art beyond the bounds of absolution.


Byas: Ene go together, these would comber you: now you are fitter to dance
Lavaltoes.


Doe-little: Can you be so hard hearted?

Idlesby and Doe-little in their smocks.
Byas. Yes I Will assure you, no thou art a right Ranter.


Horn. Here I for ever take my leave of thee: nay, no whining now: see here are
all your fellow-Caco-Oxmons --


Byas: Go, go, mingle your selves amongst 'em, it is but in vain to tire me with
Petitions.

Doe-little upon her knees begging. I Will get me a new Mate, but I Will beware
whom I wed for thy sake, whom I durst once have sworn to be most virtuous.

Enter Apostatus, Violentus, Asinego, Dose, Robustio, Minks, Fulsome, and all
the She-Ranters in their shirts and smocks, a Beadle with a whip, and other
Officers.


Beadle. March faster Gentlemen Ranters, march faster; I have others that wait
to be dispatched as well as you.


Asinego. O Apostatus, what shall we do!


Apostatus. Do? be as thou art in show, a man, and bear affliction patiently.


Asinego. Oh Sir, but when affliction comes like a fury, with a Whip in her
hand! Oh it is a sore trial; would I had never learned the Art of Ranting.


Horn. Here Sir, take this She-Ranter in amongst the rest.


Byas: And this too, she is one of the Society, though of a younger date.


Robust. The more the merrier, I am resolved to Rant it to the last.


Horn. Farewell sweet Idlesby; now we must part,


Byas. Lash my wife well prithee, I Will pay thee for it.

Exeunt omnes.
Written by S. S. Gent.

Licensed and Published according to Order:

FJNJS.

