Mistress SHAWE'S Tombstone. OR, The Saints Remains. Being a brief Narrative,
of some few (amongst many) Remarkable passages in the holy life and happy
death, of that precious servant of the Lord Mrs. Dorothy Shaw, (late the dearly
beloved wife of Mr. John Shaw Preacher of the Gospel at Kingstone upon Hull,)
who sweetly slept in the Lord, December. 10th. and was interred at Trinity
Church, in Hull December. 12. 1657. Collected by her dearest Friend: with many
useful instructions, especially for his own and his six daughters consolation
and imitation.

Job 1.1. Job was a perfect and upright man, and one that feared God, and
eschewed evil.

Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace.

Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.

2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of glory.

In Christo vixi, morior vivoque beata;
Do sordes morti, caetera Christ tibi.
Nolui aliquid loqui vel scribere quod improbaturum putem Christum.
Oecolamp. London, Printed for Nathanael Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1658.

TO THE Right Honorable, and truly Religious Ladies, the Lady Frances
Strickland, the pious Consort of William Lord Strickland of Boynton; and the
Lady Anne Strickland, the gracious Consort of Walter Lord Strickland, One of
his Highness the Lord Protector's Honorable Council, J. S. Wishes grace and
peace.
Right Honorable,
THough I my self cannot bring forth any thing worthy your Honor's view, yet
that which is dearest to me, the memory of my dear and precious wife, I commend
to your Honors: and though I have ever judged both of you Eminent in Piety,
yet something perhaps in this deceased servant of Christ, may not be unworthy
of your serious thoughts, and may further stir up your pure minds in the
ways of God, yet more to honor that God who has so much honored you: The
Lord has exceedingly blessed you both, with Pious Your marriage is conjugium
non conjurgium.
Comfortable and Eminent Yoke-fellows, and yet has more honored you by
marrying you to Gods own Son, the heir of heaven, (and indeed therein lies your
chief and lasting happiness). Probably this short discourse (which was very
hastily written, as it dropped from my pen, in much grief and sorrow on the
sudden, to divert that flood of grief which I found my self unable to
withstand at present, as well as I would) may somewhat further your Honors
Comforts against the hours of approaching and inevitable death: God has called
both your Honors to great estates and places, and you cannot but know that
therein lie snares. When the Duke of Venice had shewea to Charles the 5th. his
most stately Palace, he, after the sight thereof, only answered, Haec sunt
quae nos faciunt invitos mori.
These things are they that make us unwilling to dye: We use to say, there are
two manners of Enough, and indeed there is Esaw's enough (or (...).
much) in the world without God, Genesis 33.9. and Jacobs enough (...).
(or all) first God, and then content in these other things with him, Genesis
33.11. This latter enough, I hope God has given you, Christ and with him all
other needful things, Romans 8.32. Let this Tombstone be to your Honors, as
King Phillips Monitor, to put you in mind of what is certain, yet we are too
prone to forget, Lam. 1.9. viz. death. The Egyptians used to have a deaths-head
at their greatest feasts: think we of death in the greatest plenty. When Moses
and Elias talked with Christ, at his glorious transfiguration on the Mount,
their discourse was about death, Luke 9.30, 31. Christ once cured the blind
man's eyes with clay, so may he still more open our eyes with the consideration
of our clay, and mortality; do as Eumolpus Ego sic semper and nbique vixi
tanquam ultimum diem, nunquam rediturum, consumerem.
said he did, namely endeavor to live every day as if it should prove his last
day. God has of late much exercised both your Honors with weak bodies, (so
that what would be a curse to some, would be a blessing to you, to wish that
which John wished to Gaius, 3 John 2. that your bodies may prosper as your
souls prosper). The gracious God give you these two choice mercyes, which are
most sweet when they go together, Psalm. 103.3. forgive your sins and heal all
your diseases. I hope you will not take it ill from me (whom you have
Constantly so much I may say of both your Honors with Jerome, vobis and quod
possum debeo, and quod non possum.
favored) that I propound to your Honors so mean a person for your imitation:
be pleased to consider, that its the best that I had, (...), said the poor
Grecian to the Emperor.
and whose example I my self desire to follow in the way to life; It is the use
at the Election of the Emperor of Germany, to show to him on his Election day
several marble-stones, desiring him to choose, of which of those he would have
his Tombstone made, to mind him even then of his Death; I have here showed you
the Tombstone of one that lived very holily, and dyed very happily, which may
encourage your Honors against the night of sable death; Satan is busy to vex
whom he cannot destroy, and though he cannot bring a child of God to Hell, yet
he will bring Hell to a child of God; and oftimes brings his sharpest darts
toward his death; though Satan cannot make him fall out of the state of grace
yet he labors to make him fall in the state of grace, and its good to have
your hearts Comforted against that day. Senarclaeus says of John Diarius, that
the day before he was slain by his own brother, (as Abel was by Cain for
Religion's sake) he spoke to him so sweetly, and feelingly, that he thought
that he felt the holy Ghost come powerfully upon him with his words; and surely
I could say much to this purpose concerning this deceased servant of Christ,
that she spoke even to her death with that affection, warmth, and life, as one
that first felt what she spoke, and then spoke what she felt: That holy learned
man Mr. Brightman, (who dyed about fifty years since) desired much (if the only
wise so pleased) to dye a sudden (though to him not sudden) death, and so he
did. Augustus Caesar was wont when he heard of any that dyed easily and
suddenly, to wish such a happy Which he called (...).
death. I cannot say that she dyed exceeding suddenly, Though she was at the
Congregation twice on the Lords day, December. 6. and asleep in the Lord on
Thursday, December. 10.
but I can say that she dyed exceeding happily. May your Honors in these
saying-dayes, (wherein is so much disputing and unedifying janglings about
Religion, 1 Timothy 1.4, and 6, 5. wherein Rachells sight exceeds Leahs
fruitfulness) may your Honors (I say), take that counsel, which holy and
learned Melancthon gave his mother (then troubled with variety of disputes
about Religion) namely, Go on in holy practice, to do what you know, and
trouble not your selves (as you do not) with the endless and needless
brabbles of the times, which would weary, and not edify you: and which made
holy Strigellius and Melancthon (very learned pious men) to desire to dye, to
be freed from They desired to dye, to be freed, ab implacabilibus odiis
Theoiogorum.
them; how many in stead of heart-searching and holy practicing, mind only
opinions notions and disputes, which the serious thoughts of death might
happily aellay: the Poet says (and perhaps you know), that swarms of Bees
meeting in the air, will sometimes fight with great violence, yet if you cast
a little dust Virgil. Hi motus animorum atque haec certamina tanta Pulveris
exigui jactu compressa q^iescunt. Sir Hen. Wotton Provost of Eaton, would have
no other Epitaph on his Tomb but this, Hic situs est author illius Sententiae,
Disputacdi pruritus fir Ecclesiarum scabies, says learned Dr. Arrows. And
Luthers prayer was, a doctore glorioso, a pastore contentioso, and inutilibus
quaestionibus liberet ecclesiam suam Dominus.
amongst them, they are presently quiet; Oh that the serious consideration of
our dust and mortality might cease and quiet our needless differences, and
unprofitable disputes. Go on I beseech you to study Gods word, and your own
hearts, death, and your great account; Learned Suarez used to say, that he more
esteemed, that little pittance of time, which he constantly set apart every day
for the private examination of his own heart, then all the other part of the
day which he spent in Voluminous controversies; hold on therefore in Gods work
and fear not to lie down in the bed of the grave which Christ has made soft
for you; Christ has, both conquered for you, and conquered in you: the great
work is past here, if God has made you new Creatures, raised you from the
dead, (the death of sin and nature) has changed you from darkness to light,
its an easier work to put that new Creature so made, so raised, into heaven,
and to remove him from the lesser light of grace to the greater light of glory:
he that has done the greater (which you experience) will surely do the lesser.
-- But I cease your Honors further trouble, only humbly crave your pardon for
this my boldness, herein, and my plainness in the ensuing narrative, (for
sorrow knew neither exactness of method, nor curiosity of phrase) and when
your Honors have leisure, vouchsafe to read the life and death of her, who was
most dear to him that is,

A poor faithful remembrancer of your Honorable Consorts, and your: Ladyships,
at the throne of grace. I. S.
Charter House near Kingston upon Hull. December 23. 1657.
TO The Dear Kindred, Friends, and Acquaintants of his deceased servant of
Christ Mr. Dorothy Shaw, especially those now inhabiting, in Kingston upon
Hull; in Derbyshire, Cuttthorp, Somersall, etc. in Yorkshire, at Penistone,
York, Sickhouse, Hal-broom, Brom-head, Rotherham, etc. in Lancashire,
Manchester, Alding-ham, etc. (...).
Dear and Christian Friends!
THe Apostle says, Heb. 11.4. that Abel being dead, yet speaks (or is spoken
(...).
of, as is said of that woman, Mat. 26.13.) I question not but this precious
servant of the Lord, mentioned in this ensuing Narrative, will be much spoken
of among you; and the good example of her holy life, and happy death still
speaks aloud to you all, and calls upon you to attend the means of grace
watchfully, whereby she felt very much profit; and take heed that you be not
drawn from them, by the subtilty of the old Serpent or his factors who are full
of wiles; for whom Satan cannot keep wholly ignorant, or draw away to open
profaneness; yet with other sleights, he withdrawes them by degrees from all
Gods ordinances, one after another, so as they grow quickly cold, or negligent
in Family duties (which they call not, their duties but liberties) and put all
their Religion in their private opinion, on which they spend all their zeal,
and though they regard the Lords day, no more then singing Psalms, yet seem to
do something on that day, merely to keep their proselytes that day from a
powerful Ministry, (a Popish Antichristian plot, and set on by the Prince of
darkness, lest his kingdom should go down, and poor seduced souls be saved;)
Our Savior forewarns us that before his coming, Math. 25. diverse
Virgin-professours, who though they had no oil of grace in their hearts, ver.
3. yet had something that kept their Lamps burning, verse 8. some sound
principles, and common graces; shall, before Christ come, even lose those
Principles, and their Lamps go out. And truly many sometimes-professors have in
these days, lost even their principles, and become almost noChristians, or
very Atheists; but this servant of the Lord kept both sound Principles, her
Lamp burning, and saving Graces: she was not like Nebuchadnezzars Image, her
feet were of gold, as well as her head; she relied on Christ alone, as the
only personal foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. fundamentum fundans, and on the
Scriptures as on the only doctrinal foundation, Ephesians. 2.20. fundamentum
fundatum; Christi satispassio fuit ejus satisfactio: scriptura fuit vita ejus
regula regulans, conscientia regula regulata; she could not bear with cursed
blasphemies, Rev. 2.2. but as Zuinglius, when the Heretic Servetus condemned
him for his harshnesse toward him, he answered, in aliis mansuetus ero, in
blasphemiis in Christum non it a; or as Luther, Inveniar sane superbus, etc.
modo impii silentii non arguar, dum dominus patitur, or as Jerome in the like
case, Mori possum, tacere non possum.

She still speaks to you more to look after the power of godliness, and to
faith and profession join sincere obedience: we use to say, that Philosophy
seeks, Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit, religio possider.
divinity finds, but the power of godliness possesses the sweet and comfort
of true happiness; though she could not (to use Junius his distinction)
placare Deum, pacify God, (that is Christ's work alone,) yet did she placere
Deo, she had this testimony that she pleased God, Heb. 11.5. She did what
Luther directs, servare mandata, scilicet in Christo; and that is sweet.
She obeyed God with fear and love, Psalm. 2.11. she had obedientiam servi, yet
not servilem; She had amorem mercedis, an eye to the recompense of the reward,
yet not amorem mercenarium, she served God as well with the heart and love, as
with the hand and life; with the fear of a child, and love of a spouse, Math.
28.8. She gave to God both totum cor, and totum cordis, her whole heart and
that in the sincerity of it: she was watchful as well in duties, as against
sins, and as well against one sin, as another; though she could not keep totum
logis, yet she observed totam legem, James 2.10. Psalm. 119.5, 6. She lived
though not sine vitio, without sin, yet sine crimine without blame, as
Elizabeth and Zachary did, Luke 1.6. She well knew that though God did not
ordain good works, that we should live by them, yet that we should live in
them, Ephesians. 2.10. she desired as well a Christ in her, Gal. 2.20. Col. 1.27. as
a Christ for her, as well as to partake of Christ's redemption by power to
rescue her from corruption by his spirit, as of his redemption by price to
rescue her from condemnation by his merit; she was much troubled to see men
seek so much after new light, and so little after new life; to hear men talk
so much of Christ's temporal reign in the world, and yet observe so little of
his reign in their hearts and lives.

She speaks to you, more to vallew grace, and love godliness wherever you see
it, to prize goodness above greatness, magnitudinem virtutis, supra
magnitudinem molis: she was of Moses's mind, Heb. 11.25, 26. prized real
Saints above all the world, as the most Scripture calls Good Magistrates the
only men of that place, Jer. 5.1. and elect men, as if they were all the men
in the world, Joh. 12.32. because they are the top and chief of men: As men for
that cause are called every Creature, Mark 16.16.
excellent, Psalm. 16.3. Piscelinus being a great Scholar was made by the
Emperor a Noble man, and afterward he rejected the society of Scholars, and
clave wholly to the Company of the Nobility, which made the Emperor Sigismund
to scoff him, saying, I can give Nobility, but not parts and learning. But as
the Scripture calls grace, glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. so she did value it as her glory
here, and way to glory hereafter; and her heart was much after those (above all
worldly pomp) in whom she judged, that grace bare sway. I think she was
somewhat of the mind of some of the Ancients, that said, that Herod might have
kept his oath, Mark 6.23. and yet have spared John Baptists head, because John's
life was worth more then all Herod's kingdom.

She speaks to you, to be more weaned from this world, and to have yours
affections and conversations more in heaven; I will not say of her, what Luther
said of himself, that though Satan shot his fiery darts, Hortibilia de deo,
terribilia de fide etc.
of remptation against him, yet he never tempted him to covetousness; nay I am
bold with Learned Mr. Capell to think, that Luther spoke herein, as he verily
thought, but not really as it was; (though, if he spoke as it was, I wish that
herein we were all Lutherans) yet I can truly say, that by faith she had in a
great measure weanednesse from, and victory over this world, 1 Ioh. 5.4. She
speaks to you to get up your evidences and assurance, that Christ is yours,
and you are Christ's; and not to know only, that there is a God, a Christ, a
Heaven, but that this God, this Christ, etc. are yours, Psalm. 48.14, and 144,
15. Cant. 2.16. Quid est Deus si non sit meus: (...), says Chrysostom, Faith
appropriates God to a man's self, Gal. 2.20. If it was not for this possessive
[Mine] says Learned Mr. Trap, the devil might say the Creed to as good purpose
as we. See that you can say with Thomas truly, My Lord and my God: David in one
verse, viz. Psalm. 18.2. names eight titles, and in the whole verse, nothing but
those eight expressions concerning God, and appropriates them all to himself,
my rock, my fortress, my deliverer, my God, etc. She speaks to you, to bear
afflictions patiently and cheerfully. When she observed her legs to swell, and
it was told her, that that was a dangerous sign, oh, how cheerfully and
joyfully did she speak, which makes me think of good Grasserus, when he
observed his legs to swell with a dropsy, he joyfully said, Euge Deo sit laus
and gloria, quod jam mea instet liberatio, and horula gratissima; Blessed be
God, my freedom now draws so near. Though grace be not that lapis
philosophicus, yet its far better, its that lapis theologicus, that precious
stone that can turn all afflictions, yea death its self into gold and gain
Marble sweates against rain, yet never the softer; so the wicked relent under
afflictions, yet after with Pharo^h repent of their former repenting, but to
the elect, afflictions lead them to the truth, and the holy Ghost leads them
into the truth.
to a believer, Phil. 1.21. as Christ's obedience for us takes not away the
necessity of our obedience; so neither do his sufferings for us, take away the
necessity of our suffering afflictions and death, but yet they take away the
sting and curse, and sweeten them to a believer: she that with Paul, Gal. 1.18,
and 2, 1: counted her life not from her first, but her new birth, (or as old
godly Similes said, that he had been in the world 60 years, but had lived but
seven,) she needed not fear that sting of death.

She speaks to you to search your own hearts diligently, Psalm. 4.4, and 77, 6.
and not to be Athenians, all for news abroad, and strangers to your own
hearts. Seneca says, that its the nature of men, magis uti perspecillis quam
speculis, rather to use spectacles or optickglasses to see abroad among others,
then looking-glasses, to reflect upon our selves; it was never well with the
Prodigal till he came to himself, Luke 15.

She speaks to you to pity those, even your very enemies, that lie in their
blood, she could do those two things that no wicked man can righly do, (1.)
love her bodily enemies, (2.) hate her spiritual enemies; she was far from
Poyery, yet did she often pray for the dead, and commend others for preaching
to the dead, such as were dead while they be alive, not dead Physically and
orporally, but morally and spiritually.

She speaks to you, still to look well to your spiritual marriage with Jesus
Christ here by faith, that is your great promotion and honor, that bond will
not break in the saddest hour. Armundus Visabunda.
One tells us of five sisters of the same birth pedigree, and race, whereof one
was married to a King, another to an Earl, a third to a Gentleman, a fourth to
a mean man, a fifth to a filthy beggar; though they all were alike by birth and
descent, yet their difference lies in their marriage: Truly we are all alike by
creation, by the fall, by nature, by the first birth, but the hearts and
affections of some are joined to the world, some to their lusts, and sins, and
some to Christ; and there is their true honor in life, and death, and after
death. -- But my sad thoughts detain you too long; only let us all learn by her
example so to live, as that we need not to fear death, which will shortly ceaze
upon us. We read of King Lewis the eleventh of France, (and some other Grandees
in the world) that they charged their servants, and all about them, that when
they saw them sick, they should not dare ever to name that terrible word
[death] in their hearing. But she of whom I now write, took Hezekiahs medicine
in her life, to prevent the terror of death, Isai. 38.3. and Paul's, 2 Timothy
4.7, 8. so as she could look either backward Hoc est Vivere bis, vita posse
priore frui.
or forward with joy. Whom you loved living, now follow her steps to her death;
then shall you not need to fear death, so, as if dying and damning would Non
metuo mori, sed damnari, said a dying man.
go together; but as Sir Fulke Grevill defired to have this Epitaph on his
Tomb, [here lies a Friend of Sir Philip Sidney]; so may you have that comfort
and honor, when you are laid to sleep, which this servant of Christ now
enjoyes [here lies a Friend of Jesus Christ, John 11.11.] A Courtier, and
favorite of King Cyrus being poor, and one telling him of it, he said, he had
enough because King Cyrus was his Friend; the like Polybius said, being in
Caesar's Court, because the Roman Emperor was his Friend; but these Friends
soon dyed, but in life, death, and ever, hapyy they who have God reconciled for
their Exodus 33.11. 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isa. 41.8 Joh. 11.11 and 15.14, 15. James
2.23.
Friend.

These hasty Observations following, dropping from a sad pen, which might
justly have had Antoninus his title, [Notes for my self] I have communicated to
you and others, for your and my own consolation and direction: pray, pray,
pray; and when you have sweetest Communion with God, forget not him who begs an
interest in the intercession of Christ' and supplications of his hidden ones;
and who is Christ's and his Churches and yours, or not his own.

John Shaw,

Four things there be, that in my heart, I fixed have;
The thoughts of Heaven, of Hell, of Doomsday and my Grave.
Birk.
TO The Christian, and Candid Reader.
Reader!
STay but a few words, before thou pass to the ensuing Narrative, and then
much good may it do thee. (1.) Know, that what follows; was not any Sermon or
Sermons Preached, and therefore wonder not, that there are so many Histories
and humane quotations: otherwise I readily yield what Lipsius says to be a
truth, ut drachmam auri sine imagine Principis, sic verba praedicantis sine
authoritate Dei contemnent homines. In Sermons, its Scripture authority only,
that comes cum privilegio, (2.) know that the Author hereof when this was
penned, had but half a heart left, and his head full of thoughts, and both head
and heart much, (very much) disturbed; and gathered up such thoughts, as
suddenly offered themselves. Wonder not then, if there be not that exact
Method, and curiosity, which perhaps thou may expect. (3.) There is no worth
and excellency in these thoughts, more then in many Sermons Preached by the
Author. (I think its no vainglory to say that there is less, for) I am sure
those Sermons have been far more desired, to have seen the light, which yet lie
buried, as many will confess into whose hand this will come, how much they
have importuned him to publish those Sermons vindicating of, and directing to a
right use of Gods Ordinances, as the right call to the Ministry, qualification
necessity and work of the Ministers of the Gospel, (the great enemies of all
Antichristianism,) with satisfaction to Cavills and Scruples; from those texts,
1 Cor. 4.7. 2 Cor. 6.1. the necessity and use of a Christian Magistrate under
the Gospel, with the extent of his power, circa sacra, about matters of
Religion, from Isa. 1.16. Romans 13.4. and the case of peoples subjection in
these days; the lawfulness, benefit, and right manner of singing Psalms,
from Col. 3.16. in the days of the New Testament. The warrant for, benefit by,
and right improvement of Child-baptism, together with the error and danger of
Antipaedobaptism, from Col. 2.12. The nature, ends and use of the Lords supper,
and who ought to come, and how qualified: and if men offer to come, by whom and
upon what account men ought to be admitted, or rejected; from several sorts,
the morality of the Sabbath, in the new Testament, and the right manner of
observing the Lords day, etc. And therefore if thou get any good by these
ensuing thoughts, thou art in part beholding to the Authors passion and
affection.

I only now commend 5 things to thee, and beg other 5 for thee, and then
farewell. (1.) Take special care to love thy self; no^ thy lusts, thy carcass,
etc. but thy soul is thy self, Compare Mark 8.36. [lose his own soul] with Luke
9.25. [lose himself] the soul is the man, 1 Pet. 3.20. (2.) Hate thy enemy, and
be revenged on him; not thy neighbor, whom thou should love as thy self, and
who at worst can but kill the body; but thy sins which are God's, and thy
soul's worst enemies, and which can kill the soul; be revenged on them, 2 Cor.
7.11. here kill or be killed. Zenacherib after his Army was destroyed by an
Angel, Isa. 37. and he returned home again with a hook in his nose, Isa. 37.29.
he enquired of one about him, what he thought the reason might be, why God so
favored the Jews; he answered, That there was one Abraham their Father, that
was willing to sacrifice his Son to death, at the command of God, and that ever
since then, God favored that people: Well, said Zenacherib, if that be it, I
have two Sons, and I will sacrifice them both to death, if that will procure
their God to favor me; which when his two Sons heard, they (as the story
goes) slew their Father, Isa. 37.38. as rather willing to kill, then be
killed; so deal thou with thy sins. (3.) Strive to get riches, and be as
covetous after them as thou can: but not these riches which are full of
poverty and vanity; but true riches, Luke 16.11. James 2.5. unsearchable
riches, Ephesians. 3.8. Covet the best things, 1 Cor. 12.31. get all, get Christ, who
is all in all, Col. 3.11. beg the spirit, which is all good things; compare
Math. 7.11. with Luke 11.13. (4.) Labor always to have thy own will; but this
only in Luther's sense; by always resigning and submitting thy will to Gods
will, fiat voluntas mea, quia tua Domine: let Gods will be thy will, and so
thou may always have thy own will, without sin. (5.) Be sure to take the
stronger side, not in that sense, as those meant, whom Epiphanius calls Cainits
(or Cainists) who he reckons among Heretics, who Sainted and honored Cain,
because he prevailed against Abel, so as to kill him, and therefore they judged
that God liked him; they always liked the strongest side: but take Christ's
side, stand with the Lamb, according to Scripture-rule, he is stronger Nazian.
observes that Christ is in Scripture compared to the weakest things as a worm,
water, Lamb, etc. and the devil to the strongest, as Lion, Dragon, etc. yet
still Christ is stronger and overcomes.
then the strong man, Luke 11.21, 22. he goes Conquering and to Conquer, both
in us, and for us, is the best comfort in the best times, and the only comfort
in the worst, and will always prevail at last, -- And five things I beg for
thee and me. (1.) That living and dying, we may be found not in our own rags,
or old Adam, but in a Christ, Phil. 3.9. the Virgin Mary did not so much
rejoice in Christ her Son, as Christ her Savior. In the holy of holyes, all
things were gold or covered with gold: and if we be accepted, duties or
persons, in life or death, we must be covered with this Christ.

(2.) That we may have interest in the second Covenant, (which allows The
second Covenant contains both promises of grace, and promises to grace.
pardon to penitents, wherein God promises Salmeron holds that after the
Angels sinned God gave them some space to repent ere they were condemned; but
he has scearce one other of his opinion. Offer of pardon to such as repent, is
a privilege of the second Covenant, made not with Angels, but Men.
to work in us, what he requires of us, accepts of sincerity etc. things which
the first Covenant knew not) Jer. 31.33. 2 Samuel 23.5. and that not only, quoad
jus faederis, but quoad faederis beneficia, an interest both in the Covenant of
grace, and in the grace of the Covenant.

(3.) That the kingdom of God may come in us now, Luke 17.20, 21. (while
others are disputing about a temporal kingdom of Christ without us) that so
we may come, into Gods Kingdom hereafter. (4.) that God (who only can teach
to profit, Isa. 48.17.) would teach us to profit, both by his word and rod, his
ordinances and providence. (5.) That God would guide us by his counsel, and
after receive us into glory, Psalm. 73.24. -- Paul may plant, Apollos water; and
now the great God give the increase. Farewell.

Thine, J. S.
Charter House. December. 30. 1657.
Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi, gloria coeli.
Et dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Birk.
A Saint, Dear Mother, and a precious wife,
Does now possess an everlasting life:
In Christ she joyed, and for sin repented,
She lived beloved, and she died lamented:
She was the gift of God (as was her Dorothy, (...), the gift of God.
name)
And God that gave the gift, called for the same:
Her other name showed all things here are vain,
But where is perfection, now she does remain:
Twice born, twice married, three lives she has seen,
With her first Husband Christ, she raigns as Queen.
Besides the life of nature, grace, and glory.
Let her still live in this our mournful Story.
J. S.

The Blessed Soul's ECHO.
Dear heart! let us talk again, tell me below,
Some little, of those great things, now you know:

Souls Answer! Till we meet, here; I cannot speak my fill,

Yet ask, I Will Echo something to you still.
What is it now (Dear soul) that you enjoy?

Souls Echo. Joy.

Is your joy small, or is it plentiful?

Ecc. Full.

What is that State whereof you now so glory?

Ecc. Glory.

Is that your glory short, or everlasting?

Ecc. Lasting.

Who is it now (Dear soul!) that thus does ease you?

Ecc. Jesu.

Does he embrace you in his arms of bliss?

Ecc. Yes

Would you be here again, or else above?

Ecc. Above.

Where shall we meet, and talk anon in the even?

Ecc. in Heaven.

Tell me I pray, can you now sin or no?

Ecc. No.

You are so changed now, how shall I know you?

Ecc. I know you.

Which is our way to you (as you believe)?

Ecc. Believe.

Will not Profession serve and curious notion?

Ecc. Motion.

Will not disputings serve, and pious talking?

Ecc. Walking.

How would you have us live below, (Dear love)?

Ecc. in Love.

What Rule would you to us on Earth Commend?

Ecc. Amend.

This joy, full, glory, lasting, bliss, above,
Sweet Jesu grant me; for it is thee I love.
That I sin not, but thine in Heaven may know,
(As Adam, knew his Eve when first her saw).
Grant me this faith, to Move, Walk, Love, Amend,
That I may live with thee, world without end.
A thousand times farewell dear heart,
Till we shall meet, and never part:
Oh may we shortly meet again,
To praise our God; Amen, (Echo) Amen.
I. S.

CHristian and Ingenuous Reader! (for such I desire thee to be who vouchsafest
to read this (...)) I cannot, I shall not call he a faultfinder, though thou
find many faults, both in the Author and Printer hereof; but as for the
blessed Saint enshrined under this Tombstone, some that have long known her,
yet no way related to, or interessed in her, have often said, and still do,
that they never knew any other with whom they were acquainted, but they have
heard one or other, good or bad, to speak or report some evil of them; but
they never heard any either good or bad, (no not the worst) ever say any evil
of or against this now glorified Saint, (though she daily found and sadly
complained of manifold infirmities in her self; I say infirmities, for she did
not wickedly depart from God, 2 Samuel 21.22. nor from his Statutes, verse. 23.
but kept her self from her iniquity, verse 24. and was clean in Gods sight,
verse 25.) But oh could the walls and several Rooms about the Charter House;
could the walks in her garden, and most especially her garden-house speak, they
would tell her sighs, and sobs, her tears, and wrestlings; and what sweet talk
she had with her beloved frequently: besides her more constant standing duties,
her beloved took her in the fields, etc. Cant. 7.11, 12. She was of Epictetus
his mind, (...), si vis esse bonus, primo creed quod es malus. Her lowly meek
and upright spirit, her humble and inoffensive conversation; with her sincere
and ready endeavor to do any good to whomsoever she was able, did much
increase that love and esteem, that respect and good name, which she had from
all sorts; and therefore the sadder is my and our loss: Though I endeavor to
follow Epictetus his rule, (...), etc. i. e. Never say that thou have lost a
friend, wise, child, etc. but only restored them to him, of whom thou did
receive them, etc.
Alstedius tells of some that thought this world would end in the year 1657.
because the numeral Letters of that Chronogram [MVnDI Con-Lagratlo] make up
that number of 1657, but sure I am this world then ended as to her, December. 10.
Being just that very same day, whereon 25. years before we were married.
1657. and my self and 6 poor Pupils, may say that much of our worldly comfort,
(or portion, Eccles. 9.9.) then ended here: and may sadly remember that which
God bad the Prophet Ezekiel, so perfectly remember, viz. the tenth month, and
the tenth day of that month, Ezekiel. 24.1. (its thrice in the 2d. verse, that
day, this same day, this same day.) But for (1.) the Author of this Narrative,
he cannot so clear himself; for know that these thoughts suddenly dropped from
him in a sad hour, and were immediately sent to the press, as they stood in
their Sheets, the Author not having any Copy of them left with him; but upon
second and better thoughts, the Author sent for these back again, to review,
correct, or enlarge them; but not obtaining that, he by Letters prevailed with
some reverend and godly and learned brethren to view and judge of these notes,
and according to their judgment, they then be to pressed or suppressed, but their
modesty overmastered their great abilities, as you may see: after that, he sent
up half a sheet more to be added, but for want of a Copy at home to direct him
he could neither righly inform the Printer where it should be inserted, nor
himself whether any of those new additions were formerly in the Narrative; and
this is the true reason of some Tautologies and repetitions of some things, and
of the displacing of others: (though l a l he done it more exactly, he could
not have expected to have satisfied all, for (...). (i.e.) quis satia verit
omnes, theog.
(...), neque enim posset Jupiter, And (2.) for the Printer, know that the
Author lives above 130 miles off from the press, and therefore many faults
are, and many I fear, uncorrected; and I am much of Carthagena's mind, who, to
those three things which the Ancients held impossible says that to find a Book
Printed without Errata's, should undoubtedly have been added as a fourth
Impossible, if the art of printing had been then invented; though the Author
had Briarius's hand, and the Printer Argus's eyes: I can only say with the
Poet, liber optimus ille, qui minimis urgetur, at est sine crimine nullus. I
only beg thy care (good Reader) (1.) to amend thy own faults, (2.) to pray for
the Author that he may amend his, (3.) to do thy understanding that right, as
to correct these following (being some of greater) mistakes of the Press. thus.

Expect, but fear not death: Death cannot kill,
Till God (that first must seal her patent) will.
Would thou live long? keep time in high esteem;
Which gone if thou can not recall, redeem.
Quarl. Hierogl. Vade liber, quanquam fis parvus mole, sed ampium
Lectori fructum, Det deus Omnipotens.
Jo. Sh. M. A. sometimes of C. C. C. P. at Kingston upon Hull.

THE Testimony of the worshipful Doctor Robert Wittye, of the City of York,
Concerning the deceased servant of the Lord, Mrs. Dorothy Shaw, in a Letter to
her Husband, soon after her death.
Dear Sir!
I Cannot but Sympathize with you, in your loss (and so do all here) who have
lost a dear loving Friend: she was in all my observation most loving to her
Friends, faithful in her Relations, eminently pious toward God, owning both
the form and power of godliness; and, as I can well witness, one that was
never daunted or discouraged, when you was involved in the greatest troubles,
that I have known you in from truth's most potent and bitter enemies: she was
pitiful to the poor, and helpful to such as stood in need, she was Nathanaels
Sister, an Israelite in whom was no guile; Jacobs daughter, who was a plain
man; her inside was always outward; her life was to all her sex a pattern of
piety, and her death of patience: she now reaps the fruit of her labors, and
the end of her faith; and is in the arms of her Savior, which is better then
yours: and bears her part with that heavenly quire, whose song is Halleluiah:
As to the world and its emnity, (wherein she had some share with you) she is
(...): I am certain, her gain is greater then your loss, which may much lessen
your and our sorrow; Me thinks I hear her say, with our sweet Savior, Luke
23.28.
Weep not for me, but for your selves, etc. Fix your eye on her gain, rather
then lay your finger on your own sore; she was very fit to dye, and had nothing
else to do. Which that we may so be, is the prayer of

Sir, Your Sympathizing Friend, R. Witty.
York, December. 23. 1657.
THE Testimony of Mr. Heathcote Pastor of Rowley, in the Eastriding of the
County of York, concerning the precicus servant of the Lord, Mrs. D. Shaw,
(whom he had been acquainted withal from her youth) in his Letter to Mr. Shaw
dated, Jan. 8. 1657.
To my Reverend Friend, and beloved Brother, Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of Gods
word, at Kingstone upon Hull.
Dear Sir!
I Am very sensible of, and deeply affected with your great loss, in that sad
breach which the Lord has been pleased to make in your Family: I know you have
parted with as sweet a Yoke Fellow, and as meet an help, in my opinion, as ever
I knew; I cannot therefore much blame you for your much sorrowing; yet when I
consider her incomparable gain, I rejoice much more on her behalf then I can
possibly sorrow on yours, and I beseech you, moderate your passion, and divert
your sorrow from her, and mourn for your self and the sins of the times: she
has left behind her in the hearts of all the godly, that knew her, a most
precious name; and for my part, I doubt not in the least, but she has sound by
happy experience, that her deaths-day was far more joyful to her then her
marriage day; her burial day, then her birth day, Eccles. 7.1. she has only
changed her habitation and her company, and is arrived where she desired, and
obtained what she had earnestly labored, and much longed for, Phil. 1.23. I
have known her about these thirty and four years, and I can with much delight,
and do to my great comfort call to mind her great pains, and constant
laboring in her young days after the means of grace, for the obtaining of
that grace, which did abundantry shine forth in her, in her latter days. I
remember her constant coming every Lords day from Cutthorp-Hall to
Chesterfield, (which was two good miles) to partake of worthy Mr. Wain-wrights
Ministry, and was neither detained by the scorching heat in Summer, nor yet
deterred by the coldness of the Winter; she had resolved to take Gods Kingdom
by force and violence, Math. 11.12. and I am most consident, she is now an
inheritrix thereof, and has reaped the sweet of all her labonr and sweat. When
she kept her Fathers house, (after her Mothers decease, though then she was
young) she made it a receptacle for the Saints, and was very bountiful to the
poor, especially to the household of faith; her old father freely allowing her
liberty to do therein, as she pleased. I have often admired and observed her
sincere spirit, and true zeal for God, in whose cause, and for whose Saints she
would have spoken, (even before any, Psalm. 119.46.) and neither have been
ashamed, nor shrunk; yet always with much humility, mildness, modesty, and
discretion, excelling therein most of her sex that I ever knew, or heard of:
the pains that she took, and the care she had to educate her six daughters in
a godly and religious manner, both by private instruction and catechizing, and
also by bringing them constantly to the public ordinance, does very much
already, and I hope will more and more appear in every of them, to your comfort
and all their benefit: her soundness of judgment, and constant profession of
the truth in these wanton times, and that to her very end; together with her
sweet and comfortable declaration of her faith and joy in Christ, concerning
her eternal estate when I was last with her (about two days before her death)
stops the current and stream of my passion; and I desire that you would
comfort your self with these things, and many others of the like nature well
known to you. Now the good Lord whose doing this is, give you a submissive
heart herein, and teach you and all her friends, to make a right true
spiritual use of this wise providence, and all other His dispensations; which
is and shall be my hearty prayer for you, whilst it pleases God to continue me.

Your very loving fellow labourer in the Lords Vineyard. Nicolas Heathcote.
Rowley, Jan. 8. 1657.
Courteous Reader,
IT is not that I have a conceit, that my Testimony can add any reputation to
this piece, that I appear here; but only because I was entrusted with it by
the reverend Author; and because having had some knowledge, and full
information of that Worthy Saint deceased, whose memorial is here intombed, I
am the more able to attest to the truth of what is here suggested, concerning
her. Nor do I, in the least, doubt of the verity of every particular here
spoken to her praise: not only because of the known integrity and
unquestionable veracity of the worthy Author, but also because of that savor
which her name has left in these Northern parts, which I have a special
Relation to, by birth and education: And therefore I do heartily commend this
piece to thy diligent perusal, and am confident thou will not count it lost
labor. Thou will find here an illustrious example proposed to thy imitation,
by looking to which, thou will see, if thou art one of a more private capacity,
how thou may be serviceable to the public, without going out of thy Sphere.
Nor is this proposed in a rude and indigested manner. Here is not only a good
dish, but it is well cooked and served up, with such sauce as will both provoke
and satisfy thy appetite. The Author has well tempered, utile dulci. But I
have detained thee too long from the Treatise it self; I commend it and thee,
to the blessing of the Almighty, begging that He would make it effectual to
every one that reads it.

Math. Poole, Pastor of Michael's in the Quern. London.

Some Consolatory thoughts sent to my Dear and Reverend friend Mr. John Shaw,
upon the death of his late excellent wife, Mrs. Dorothy Shaw.
1. MOst tell more news then truth, yet he who shows
Thy wife's in heaven, speaks truth, but tells no news.
Now heaven has took her up, what did it more
Than often it did? heaven took her up before.
She, taken up with heaven on earth, expressed
She should, took up to heaven from earth, be blessed.
Eve'n here, heaven dwelt in her; if so, they tell
No news, who speak her now in heaven to dwell.
The Hen to the young of flying fouls may lend
Her brooding wings; yet, fledged, they upward tend.
She whom heaven natured, earth but nurtured
So fully grown, to heaven is fitly fled.
Is It strange she should with, time be filled, since she
Foretasted here a blessed eternity?
Allow we with her Bridegroom to reside,
In love so strong, of love so sick a bride,
Who found no cordial like His Company,
To cure her of her fainting Malady.
It Is true, his pictures pleased her (though the same,
She saw set often, but in a rotten frame.)
She loved indeed those messengers He sends,
Who said, Thy Lord to thee, his love Commends.
Her Love's love letters too, with joy she eyed,
Yet [rather come thy self, than send] she cried.
He came, and knocked at the door by sickness (some
Started at it) she said, I hope He Is come.
She opes unto him, sees him, joys; he tells,
He Is come to lead her, lodge her where he dwells.
She lay but in John's bosom while she stayed;
Now she is in His where John beloved was laid.
Thus loved and lodged, 'twere cruelty to crave,
Her thorny pillow she again might have.
Seems it not cross to love, and all its laws,
If that which cures her sorrows, thine should cause?
While here she stayed, thy helper she was known,
Now grudg her not to go and be her own.
She living said, My husband's gain is mine.
And now she is gone, her gain esteem as thine.
Her worth instructs us how a wife to choose,
And may thine teach us how a wife to loose.
If God thy Friend has killed, he kills thy sins,
Though Sampson dies, yet it is with Philistines.
If God remove's the good which sense injoyes,
He takes the bad, which more the soul annoyes.
To spare the precious soul, the sin he spils,
He loves the garment, and the moth he kills.
It Is gainful loss, when ere mine eye shall part
From that, which seen, from Christ takes off my heart.
The slip is service; Joseph fitly flies,
When Is mistress him, more than her husband eyes.
Dear friend, it is fit, what ever hinders love
From Christ, or sharp, or short, or both should prove.
Blessed change, not robbery! for God to give,
What cannot dye, and take what cannot live.
Yet one gain more; the fellow of your bed,
You loose: we gain this issue of your head.
That loss the north solely, though sorely, wounds,
But both to north and south, this gain redounds.
All ill from th'north? Fond proverb cease to live,
Since th'north such wives, and such a book can give.
W. Jenkyn, Pastor of Blacktryers, London. TO THE Christian Reader.
Good Reader,
THe Reverend Author was pleased to give me a sight of these papers, (wherein
he has imbalmed the memory of his dear and gracious Yokfellow) before they
were committed to the press. I cannot dissemble the contentment that I took in
the perusal of them, finding him to discover every where, as much of the holy
Christian, as the tender Husband; and of the able Minister, as of the
Christian, whilst he improveth her example for thy good, and interlineth the
passages of her life, with many holy and useful instructions.

The Lives of Gods precious Saints, (how private so ever their station be) are
very well worthy of record and public notice, as exhibiting not only a
pattern, and lively transcript of Religion, (and truly now and then it is good
to look upon Christ's 2 Cor. 3.3.
Living Epistles) but also much of provocation and encouragement to holiness.
Simeon the Metaphrast in the Life of Chrysostom, does so fully speak out my
sense, in the case, that to the Learned I shall put down his very Words; (...).
Examples have a secret Charm by which they draw out the heart to imitation and
practice, when we press strictness, people think our doctrine is calculated
for Angels and blessed Spirits, that have divested themselves of the interest
and concernments of flesh and blood, and so go away with a prejudice; but when
they read in the lives of Gods Children, that had like passions, necessities,
temptations, with themselves, with what strictness and diligence, they carried
on their hopes of a Blessed eternity, it has a marveylous convictive influence
upon their hearts, and a secret excitation, pressing them to go and do
likewise: therefore I say the Lives of the Saints written, are very useful, and
I doubt not but this, being so faithfully collected, and judiciously improved,
will have its use and find acceptance with the godly.

Thine in the Lord, Tho. Manton.
Covent Garden, May the 3d. 1658.
The Author of this Narrative, has diverse other pieces in print, As
1. The Grand sacrifice, or broken heart, on Psalm. 51.16, 17. 2. Two clean
birds, or the cleansing of the Leper, on Lev. 14.4, 8. 3. Britains
Remembrancer, or the National Covenant, on 2 Chronicles. 15.12. 4. The Three
Kingdome's case, with their causes, and cure, etc. on Isai. 42.24, 25. 5.
Britannia rediviva, or, The Sovereign remedy, etc. on Prove. 14.34. 6. EIKON
ASILIK, or the Princes Royal, on Psalm. 45.16.
THE Saint's Tombstone, Or a plain NARRATIVE, OF SOME Remarkable passages, in
the holy life and happy death of Mrs. Dorothy Shaw, (lately the dearly beloved
Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull) who
sweetly slept in the Lord, December. 10th. And was interred in Trinity Church in
Hull, December. 12th. 1657. Collected by her dearest Friends specially for her
sorrowful Husband's and six Daughters consolation and imitation.
THe man after Gods own heart, holy David tells us, Psalm. 112.6. that the right
eous shall be in everlasting rememforance, (with God, with good men. as
Demetrius, 3 Johnv. 12. and in the Consciences of wicked men:) and his Son,
wise Solomon confirms it, Prove. 10.7. that, The memory of the just is blessed:
he is full of bles sings while he lives, v. 6. and his memory is blessed, when
he dies, v. 7. yea, the Hebrew is, his memory shall be (...) for a blessing:
which a learned Dr. Jermin.
Expositor interprets thus: [The very remembering of them, shall bring a
blessing, to such as do remember them. God will bless those that honor the
memory of his Servants; and besides, the memory of them will make them
imitated, which is a blessing that shall be rewarded with blessedness.] The
Septuagint reads it, the memory of the just is with praises: The godly are the
only rising persons in the world, happy in life, better at death, better at
judgment, (that better resurrection of the just) and best of all to all
eternity: contrarily, wicked are the most falling As Pope Pius Quintus said,
that when he first entered into holy Orders, he had some good hope of his
salvation, but after he was made cardinal, much feared it, and now being Pope,
he quite despaired of it.
men, Prove. 10.7. The godly are positively happy, and blesled in their poorest
and lowest condition: for as Peter names a Chain of graces, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
(better then all Chains of Gold or Pearl,) and Paul, a Chain of life and
salvation, reaching from eternity to eternity, Romans 8.30. So does our Savior
name a chain of happiness, Mat. 5.3. to 12. consisting of 8 links, the first is
Poverty, the last is Persecution, yet in both, the person is Blessed: which
Moses, that wise Statesman, well knew; and therefore when he came to perfect
years of understanding (full 40. years old,) he chose the poorest condition
with the Lords people, before the highest condition of all wicked men, ( Heb.
11.25, 26.) nay, they are comparatively happy, there is more happiness in their
estate, then all the riches of this world can afford, Psalm. 144.15. which made
David so rejoice in that, above all worldly interests, Psalm. 4.7. and Austin
say, that he would not be a wicked man one half hour, for all the world,
because he might die that hour: yea, they are superlatively happy, Psalm. 1.1.
(Blessed is the man:) the Hebrew is blessedness in the abstract, eminently
happy, yea blessednesses, superlatively happy: Blessed is the man; Heb. that
man, with an accent, that eminent man, (as 2 Cor. 12.2. a man in Christ). Such
are happy in life, and more happy in death, death cannot kill them, Rev. 2.23.
but cure them: it is not death, but life, that kept them so long from God and
glory: Death cannot kill a godly man totally (not his soul, which is with
Christ far better, Phil. 1.23. is in Paradise) death does by the godly, as
they, Mark 14.51.52. did by the young man, caught his Garments, but the person
escaped, so death catches the body, but the principal part escapes to glory;
nor can death kill the body finally, only brings it to bed, as King Asa's
Coffin is called, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. so are the Saints graves called, Isa. 57.12.
Death only lays them to sleep till the morning, Joh. 11. It was an ancient
Custom among the Jews, (as I read) for people, as they went with a dead Corpse,
to pluck up grass by the way, intimating, that the dead friend should spring
again as grass. Death comes to a godly person, in the hand of a Mediator, as
part of the Covenant, a Covenant-affliction, Psalm. 89.32, 33, 34. as part of
our jointure with Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. The sting and curse of
death, is taken away by Christ their head, who has sanctified the grave, and
made death to be to them, no other then as Elijahs fiery Charet, to fetch a
dear Child from a hard Nurse, or sharp school, to his Father's house; Godly men
are in the 4 next verses, Heb. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. twice called Christ's Brethren,
and twice his Children, and therefore to such, Christ turns their water into
wine; the Serpent in Moses hand, into a staff to lean on; and makes that rod
to blossom and bring forth fruit, meat out of the eater, water from the Rock;
so that this red Sea does not drown them, but hasten them from Egypt, to the
promised Land, death cannot separate them from God, Romans 8.38. but perfect
them, Luke 13.32. it brings them to a better house, 2 Cor. 5.12. to a
Mansion House, Joh. 14.12. (for indeed here are no Mansion-houses, Heb. 13, 14.
though some are so called) to a better Country, Heb. 11.15, 16. In this
Low Country we are strangers, the world knows us not, 1 John 3.1.2. David was
so in his own house and kingdom; and therefore must not wonder at strange usage
here, Psalm. 39.12. David says not; that he was a stranger to God, but a
stranger with God, that is, (as some expound it,) God and he were both
strangers here, but death will bring them to their own, the high Country; for
a godly man to die, is but as Bernard calls it, repatriasse, Ubi pater, ibi
patria.
to go home again to his own Country, where, (or from whence) he was born: as
he is godly, viz. newborn, death brings him to a better Inheritance, of which
Peter mentions 5. excellent properties, 1 Pet. 1.4. its kept for him, and he
for it, v. 4.5. death brings them to their resting place, Heb. 4.9. Rev. 14.13.
where is their Father, Husband, Brethren, Friends, etc. to their reaping-place,
Gal. 6.9. yea, to their Crown, justly gotten, a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy
4.8. and everlasting, a Crown of life, Jam. 1.12. Rev. 2.10. and full of
honor, a Crown of glory; 1 Pet. 5.4. These earthly Crowns, have two great
wants, want satisfaction and perpetuity; they are both unsatisfying at present,
and uncertain for the future; here all is not only vanity, but vexation, every
Crown of gold, ilned with a Crown of thorns, (which made a great man once say
of his Crown, O Crown, Lam. 4, 5.
more noble then happy,) and here we read of many heads, that have been weary
of Crowns, and Crowns weary of Heads. In this Nation, how has the Crown
walked, (even since Christ's birth,) from Britains to Saxons, Danes, Normans,
Plantagenets, Tudors, Stuarts, etc. William the Conqueror was crowned three
times, every year, in three several places, namely, Gloucester, Winchester, and
Westminster, yet soon did his Crown fade, and he (as great Alexander before
him) when dead, could scarce get a grave for some time: we read in Scripture of
a City, for strength, called infinite, (namely No, or Alexandria in Egypt)
Nahum. 3.9. and of an Constantius so Rome, was called aeterna, yet is falling,
and Roma mira perenis erit, etc.
Emperor (in story) that would needs be styled his eternity (ordinary Titles
would not content him) yet the first was soon ruined, verse. 10. and the last
but short-lived, only 40. years; but death brings us to a satisfactory Crown,
where no want, Rev. 7.16, 17 and 21.4. nor any more death, but shall be as the
Angels, Luke 20.36. and everlasting: Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes quae cum
naufragio simul enatent, said good Jews of Bavyer. Look well to such Crowns as
will last to eternity, House and Lands are movables, as well as Goods, if not
from the Center, yet from the owner: godly may live poorly, but they die rich;
but however a wicked man lives rich, yet he dies poor: to him, death is
properly the King of terrors, As Aristotle called it. (...).
Job 18.14. Which made a great man in this Nation, when he was assured by his
Physicians, that he must die, to cry out, I would (said he) I might live,
though but the life of a Toad; for better that, then Hell. And it made Cardinal
Wolsey when he died at Leicester, to say, If I had served my God, as I have
served my King, God would not now have left me: but now I am forsaken, both of
God and man.

Drexellius tells us of a young man, of very bad life, who was very fearful of
being in the dark, who after falling sick, and could not sleep, cried out, Oh,
if this darkness be so terrible, what is eternal darkness? Such are men without
hope, as Homer says of Achilles, that he wished rather to be a servant to any
poor Country Clown, then to be a King to all the souls departed, because he
had no hopes of a better life. Its a sad case, when at once the body stinks,
the soul burns, and the name rots, Prove. 10.7. yet to the godly, death is no
loss, (they part with nothing but sin and vanity) but great gain, (others may
gain while living, but these gain by dying,) it brings them to perfection of
grace and glory, to see Christ, (and therefore to be like him, 1 John 3.12.)
not through a Glass, but clearly, 1 Cor. 13.12. face to face, to enjoy him
whom our soul loves, to be ever with the Lord; 1 These. 4.17. Only our duty is,
while we live, to be making our Title sure: that which is sure in it self,
should be made sure to us, 2 Pet. 1.10. this ornamental grace, is so necessary
to our well-being, that without it, we can neither live, nor die comfortably:
therefore a good man, when he was asked, why he constantly prayed six times a
day, and lived so strictly, he only answered, I must die, I must die.

King Henry the 7th of England, pretended a sixfold Title to the Crown, by
Conquest, Military Election of Soldiers in the Fields near Bosworth, by
Parliament, by Birth, Donation, and Marriage; but sure I am, a Child of God
has a far better Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, by Christ's purchase, by new
birth, by Marriage with Christ, the Son and Heir, by Gods free promise, etc.
yea, here they have eternal life already, Joh. 3.36. and 5.24. Ephesians. 2.6. in
our Head, in the promise, the earnest, seal, bud, etc. They are in Christ now;
therefore though they may have a cross, yet no curse; correction, yet no
condemnation; a Fathers rod, yet not an enemies wroth; how sweetly may such as
these, go to the grave, (which the Jews call Beth Chajim, the House of the
living, Job 30.23.) and not only use Chaucers Motto (mors mihi aerumnarum
requies) or as he whom some call St. Francis, who when Physicians assured him,
that death drew nigh, said, ben veniat soror mea mors, welcome Sister Death; but
as old Alderman Jordan used to say, that Death would be the best friend that he
had in the world, he would willingly go forth to meet it, or rather say with
holy Paul, Oh Death, where is thy sting, etc. triumphing over it, 1 Cor. 15.55.
For, as Austin said of Elect men, that by Christ's death, they are non solum
instaurati, sed meliorati; so by their own death, they are brought to a sarre
better condition, then here they had, -- but quorsum haec? All this is but to
usher in, and give you an example and instance hereof, in the boly life, and
happy death, of that precious servant of the Lord, (still Gods Servant, Josh.
1.2. still Christ's friend, Joh. 11.11. though she sleep) Mrs. Dorothy Shaw,
(late the dearly beloved Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel in
Kingston upon Hull) who died in the Charter House near Hull, on Thursday
December. the 10th, 1657. Concerning whom, observe these (among very many other)
few gleanings remarkable in her life and death, and learn (especially her
Husband and Children) these few Lessons after her death.

She was born in the Parish of Brampton, in the County of Derby, (two miles
from Chesterfield) the Daughter of Mr. George Heathcot, and Dorothy his Wife,
of Cutthorp-Hall persons of very good note, both for the things of Heaven and
Earth, both for needful spirituals, and useful temporals. She was the eldest of
eight Children, four Sons, and four Daughters, whereof three only now remain
alive; namely, two Daughters married in Hull, and one Son, late an Officer in
the Army, Ninis sero te amavi domine, said Austin, Gods adverb is mane early,
the Devils verb is Mane tarry.
and now in Ireland: She began to look after Heaven and godliness betimes:* she
first sought Gods Kingdom, and gave her first fruits to God, which her Father
joyfully observing, would usually call her forth to read Chapters, and good
Sermon-books, at evenings to the Family, and question her about the Sermons
that they and she had heard, and other points of Religion, wherein she would
always give a very profitable account, and was a great help, and good example
to all the Family: when she was but young, shewas much unsatisfied with (one
called) a reading Minister in Brampton Parish, and therefore shewent usually
every Lords day, to Chesterfield, (which was two long miles) to hear a faithful
Preacher, and instead of her dinner, went to a private house, where many godly
persons used to meet, where the Sermon was repeated, and other duties
performed, and so again to the public Ordinance in the afternoon, and so home
at night; and all this very joyfully and cheerfully, till they got a faithful
and powerful Preacher, often times to help them at Brampton, whom she was very
instrumental, (though young) to procure thither; and after her Fathers death,
contributed toward his maintenance, out of her portion, to and beyond her
abilities; and besides that, she did with much hungring affection, frequent the
word on the week days, as she had any opportunity; and sure, if David so
prized the Word, above thousands of Gold and Silver, that he often calls it his
delights, (in the plural number) Psalm. 119.29.92, 14. when there was but a
little of it written, neither the new Testament, nor a great part of the old;
no wonder, if now in the days of the Gospel, she hungered for the word above
her necessary food, who might say with Austin, Sacrae scripturae tuae sunt
sanctae delitiae meae, Lord, (thy holy Scriptures, are my holy delights; -- But
pass we these, and come we to the times since I better knew her, in which time;
I have (and others might) clearly observed these particulars.

1. Psalm. 32.2. She was not without guilt, yet without guile: there were none
but the two Adams, in whom (...): yet there are some in whom (...), John 1.47.
She did not uti deo ut frueretur mundo, with Jehu and Judas.
Amongst all the Saints, that yet I had the happiness to be acquainted with, I
never knew any more eminent in that bottom and top grace of a Christian;
namely, sincerity, plainness, and uprightness in all her ways toward God and
man: (the weakest Saint is sincere, and the tallest Saint is but sincere).
Sincerity is the honor of a godly man in his life, Job 1.1. and his great
comfort at his death, Isa. 38.3. And for this grace, all that knew her, did
honor and admire her; she looked as much at Gods glory, and as little a squint
as any I knew: The Hebrew word that signifies blessedness, comes of a root,
that signifies, to go right forward, having oculum ad metam, an eye to the
mark, sure upon this account, this Saint was blessed. They say, that in the
Low Countries, half of the cost and pains in building their Houses, is in the
foundation under ground, unseen: sure she was much for the foundation,
unseen-work to men's eyes, Mat. 6. a plain Jacob, a sincere Nathaniel, much in
inside heart-work: which was much in this age, where so many are for talk,
notions; shows many, like Antigonus doson, that promised much, but in deeds
performed nothing, and though they are unwilling to have head and body severed
by the Axe, yet are willing to have heart and body severed by hypocrisy; Mr.
Firth of Mansfield.
she was, (as it was expressed by him (e) that excellently preached at her
Funeral) a doing Saint in saying-times; and so afraid to be too high for
others, that she was rather sometimes too low for her self; and surely, persons
are better judged by their doings, then their sayings, Mat. 7.21. Prove. 20.11.
How many in these days, have the Rickets, their heads swell with notions, talk
strange phrases, speak of high seize, but all their life withers; audi,
nemo melius; specta, nemo pejus. She could never like of women's She was of the
Apostles mind. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
preaching, and yet her life was a continual Sermon, Exemplis sane quae docet
illa docet. God loves curristas magis quam quaeristas (says Luther,) walkers
better then talkers, motion more then notion.

2. When ever she heard of the Church of Christ, or any that stood up for
Religion, truth, and godliness, in our Nation or abroad, to be in trouble or
danger, she did constantly spend much time in her Closet in prayer, and her
eyes were constantly so bleared with weeping, that they told that which she
would fain have concealed from men. Rivers of waters ran down her eyes, Psalm.
119.136. She was one that sighed and mourned in Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9.4. When any
Diurnals, weekly, were brought to the house, she would say, let me hear so far
as concerns the Church, and Cause of God: for other things, I let them pass;
she was no Athenian, like them Act. 17. but with Nehemiah, enquired much how it
went with Jerusalem and the Church, Nehem. 1.2.

3. Her Husband cannot remember, that in all these 25 years, (for so long, just
to a day, she was married to him) she did ever do any thing that she thought
might offend That could not be said of her, which a Doctor says of some Women,
liberum arbitrium pro quo tantopere contenditur, viri amiserunt, uxores
arripuerunt.
him, yea, but whatever she thought might be his just desire, she would be sure
that that was done; and if she at any time saw him displeased, she would meekly
hold her peace, till she saw a fit opportunity, to give him all just
satisfaction: She was far from the Heathens mind, that said, Non amo quemquam
nisi offendam.

4. The zeal of Gods house, and love to his public Ordinance, did even consume
Non amat qui non zalot.
her; she would neglect no opportunity, in public, or private meetings, for
any worldly business usually; yea, when others thought that she was very
unable, and weak, yet she would attend the means of grace, and say, that she
never got any harm, by attending on Gods Ordinances, or doing him service; she
kept that ear-mark of Christ's sheep, (which many have lost, in these days,)
she was careful to hear with attention of body, intention of mind, retention of
memory, (as in that Text, John 10.27. where all the five steps of our
salvation, are laid down.) Since we were acquainted, I never knew her part from
me with that grief, as she did last October the 11th, being the Lords day,
whereon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was administered, and her weakness of
body would not allow her to be there present: sure I am, we parted with tears,
truly I faw no such appearance of trouble or grief in her, when death
apparently seized on her; and the next Sacrament-day, November. 15. (which was
the last time the Lords Supper was administered before she dyed.) she was a
sweet partaker of that sealing Ordinance, though forced to rest her sometimes
in the way, 'twixt her house and the Congregation, Psalm. 122.1. I was glad when
they said to me, let us go into the House of the Lord.

5. I never heard any motion, or proposition made; tending to the service of
God, and advancing piety, but she was pressed in spirit, and her heart was hot
after it, and more eager to suffer it, then a worldling could be for a great
bargain, Isa. 2.3.

6. She was a special help to her Husband, for saving his life and liberty in
these troublesome times, and a cheerful sufferer with him, Phil. 4.3.
to the hazarding both of her-health, liberty, and life in the time of the
Wars, and since; sometimes she was hurried by the Cavaliers, toward prison in
Rotherham, sometimes fled in great danger by Sea in Lancashire; her House and
Goods robbed, or plundered, that she might say as Paul, 1 Cor. 11.26. that she
was in danger both by Land and Sea; by robbers, by false Brethren, etc.

7. She was as free from She did ubique pietatem attendere nunquam ostentare
causas.
pride, and covetousness, as I ever knew, or in these days heard of any;
whether pride in apparel, Plautus calls the body only vestis, farium, She
minded the soul much above the body.
she followed Tertullians Counsel, who advised the gallant women in his time,
to put on the Silk of piety, the Satin of sanctity, and the purple of modesty,
so (said he) shall God himself be your suitor; or rather the Apostle's advice,
1 Pet. 3.3, 4. like modest Rebeckah, Genesis 24.65. (of both whom that of the Poet
was not true, Fastus inest pulcris, sequiturque superbia formam,); and free
from pride in gifts, performances, which rots and spoils all we have and do.
Hence Austin, Caetera vitia in peccatis, superbia in recte factis maxim est
timenda. 3 John 2.
So also from covetousness: only she had a great measure of that godly
covetousness after grace, 1 Cor. 12, 31. She would say, Proud persons are
called pride it self. Jer. 50.31, 32.
I desire never to hoard up any of these things, only I would have to bear my
charges, through my Inn here below, much of Paul's mind, Phil. 4.11.12.

8. 1 Timothy 6.6. Luther had rather be the Author of the meanest work of the
poorest Saint, then of all the Victories of Alexander's and Caesar's.
She did more value and love the poorest godly man or woman; yea, Servants, in
whom she judged the life and power of grace to appear, and more rejoiced in
their Company, then in all the greatest persons and honors in the world, she
might truly say, what another godly woman said before her, that she never loved
the Company of the wicked, alive, and therefore hoped, that God would never
send her to them when she died, Psalm. 16.3. and 119.63. Fiscellinus valued
Nobility above learning, which made Sigismund the Emperor, to marvel: she
valued godliness above them both, as the best gain.

9. She would oftentimes press her Husband to act vigorously for God, and to
go boldly, and thorough-stitch in Gods work, and let never the care of her, or
their Children, be any impediment to him herein, for she could trust God with
them fully, she knew that God cared for them, and reason good, for he bought
them dear, 1 Pet. 5.7.

10. When motions were made to her Husband, of removing from Hull, where he had
very much work, and very little pay, to a place of very great preferment (as to
outward means) he desired (as usually) to know her mind herein; her answer
was, I will go with you any where cheerfully, as I have hitherto done, through
Darbishire, Devonshire, Yorkshire, etc. but I mainly desire, that you would
only look herein at this end, where you think, that God may have most honor by
you, and let no other by-end whatever, move you at all, God having never put us
to any straits, for temporal estate: she would not have him stir a foot, Exodus
33.15.
without the Lord any way; she was troubled to see any follow the Ministry (as
a Popish writer complains of their Priests) tantum ut eos pascat and vestiat,
only as a Trade, for back and belly, or as men-pleasers.

11. In all these 25 years, she never once failed in her Husbands absence, her
self to pray with the Family, at the least, twice a day, (a morning and evening
sacrifice) and usually sing a Psalm, and read some portion of Scripture to
them, and when her Husband was sometimes very late busy at his study, she
would constantly call the Family together, and have some Scripture read, and
sing a Psalm, and so keep the Family employed, till her Husband came down from
his study, to perform the rest of the Family Duties.

12. She was of a most meek and quiet spirit, and was upon all occasions,
stirring up her Children in the Doctrine and practice of godliness, and very
much rejoiced to see godliness, so much appear in them: she was much of holy
Clavigers mind, who said, if I can but find the fear of God in my Yoke Fellow
and Children, and those about me, satis habeo, satisque mihi, uxori mea, filiis
and filiabus prospexi, then I have enough in this world, 2 John 4. She would
often say, that if God was so pleased, she desired that her Husband might
outlive her, because she judged him more able to educate their Children in the
ways of Heaven.

13. She was a very great helper to Gods poor Saints, that were troubled in
these late national distractions, and was always full of courage, professing
since, that when she was hurried toward prison, in Rotherham, that she did not
fear any thing, save only that her Husband should have suffered some want,
through her absence, he being at that time hid in Rotherham, where the Enemy
sought him narrowly, yet he could have touched them; they proclaimed him
Traitor, and all others Traitors, that knew of him, and brought him not in John
11.57.
within 24. hours, plundered him to the full; yet God hid So was David hid. 1 Samuel 20.5. and 26.1. and the Prophets. 1 King. 18.4.
him, Jer. 36.26. (the story hereof is fully related in the Praeface to a
Sermon of his, on Isa. 42.24, 25. called, The three Kingdom's case) he lay hid
on the hard stones, most part of three days, and three nights, from Thursday
May the 4th, 1643. when the Town was taken, till Saturday even, May 6. The like
courage had she, when she fled to Sea in Lancashire: yea, her Husband heard of
some pieces of her charity, in the Sermon preached at her Funeral And more
since. Acts 9.39.
, which she had kept secret, (though she had always from him a general grant
and allowance for all such works of charity) which he never knew before: she
would not let her left hand know what her right hand did. Swine only do good,
when they die, but sheep while they live: many leave their estates to others,
merely because they cannot keep them; but she did good, both heart and hand
alive.

14. Most tender she was of the poor people in the Charter House, both for
their bodies and souls, and was daily conferring with, and advising of them,
and seeing them supplied, and did much endeavor to have such preferred
therein, as were noted for piety and godliness.

15. She had a very fresh look, but exceeding weak Body, so as usually at
night, when she was lying down in bed, she would speak to this purpose, Oh how
weary am I? what a wise and good God have I, that did not necessitate me to get
my living by hard labor, as many Servants do? Oh how good is God to provide
these beds of rest? how many work hard all day, yet have none, or hard beds at
night? Oh how are our Brethren in Piedmont, or Poland, etc. now suffering it
may be? And yet here is the sweet of this mercy, that this is not my portion,
but that there still remains a better rest for the people of God.

16. She would much complain of spiritual wants, as hardness and badness of
heart, (as the Church complains, Isa. 63, 17.) though others As Hannah, 1 Samuel
1.15. complaints that she was (...) Hard in Spirit, ah a hard bea^^
thought that she had a large measure of grace, yet she would say, oh but they
know not my heart: much she complained of her weak memory, that she could not
remember the particulars in a Sermon (though she would bring away the
sweetness and savorinesse of most Sermons, and find her heart love the word
and Christ more) yet she would cheerfully recollect and check her self
sometimes, and say, Yet this is some comfort to me, that I find my memory is
bad also in other things that concern this world, which gives me hope that its
not altogether spiritual wickedness, but natural weakness: if ever she was
drowsy under the ordinance she would much bewail it. And indeed, if Nero was so
angry with Vespasian because he slept at his Music, how much more may our God
justly be angry with such as sleep at the dispensing of the Mysteries of life,
and of the kingdom; she was very far from She was far from the mind of proud
Vega that said coelum gratas non accipiam.
boasting or presuming on any thing in her self, frustra nititur, qui non
innititur, the voice said to Austin, In te stas, ideo non stas. Learned Ames
says of such men, that their case is more desperate, by how much they do less
despair: she was far from Castellio's opinion that men are of 3. sorts; some
unregenerate, some regenerating, and others regenerated; and that these last
have no combat betwixt flesh and spirit: this was cross to Paul's experience,
Romans 7. Gal. 5.

17. She was not only a willing companion, but also a great Comforter, of her
husband in all the oppositions that ever he has met with, in the course of his
Ministry for the Gospel's sake (of which he has had his Theologus nihil aliud
est quam centrum ad quod omnes lineae dolorum tendunt Meis. Veritas est causa
discordiae: mori possum, tacere non possum. Hieron.
share from different hands) and when ever he had unbosomed his troubles to
her, she would quickly so cheer up his spirit with the Lord's word, and former
experiences (which he would readily recollect); and discover such issues and
ways of delivery, that usually he went away with Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18. and was
no more troubled, but found his muddy bitter waters, turned into wine: she was
not like Job's wife, to aggravate his afflictions.

18. She was mighty in prayer, and would therein express much warmth and
affection, and that she had not only the gift, but a large measure of the
grace of prayer, and much familiarity with the Lord; and as a dropping vine she
wept much in prayer like Jacob, Hosea 14.2.
Hos. 12.4. As its said of Charles the Great, That he talked more with God then
with men; so was she frequent and fervent in Prayer; which can Vincere
invincibilem, and ligare omnipotentem, bind Gods hands, Exodus 32.10. as Jacob
and Moses did. She offered to God not labia vitulorum, but vitulos labiorum,
the Calves of her lips, as learned Rivet speaks.

19. She would often, (especially of late) speak to her husband to this
purpose, I am afraid that we do too much love one another, and take from God,
that which is his due, and that God will not therefore let us live long
together here, but however we shall meet together again, where we can neither
sin, nor part, for ever.

20. She would oftentimes be pressing, and calling upon her husband, that,
besides family, and secret prayer, they two might go to prayer together by
themselves; And upon this account, I well remember what straits they have
sometimes run through, when at first they tabled in the house of a Friend: and
to this end she would often be remembering to him the Example of Mr. Bolton, who
used to pray 6. times a day, twice by himself, twice with his wife, and twice
with his Family and the practice of the Lord Harrington, and such as she had
read of. She did not, like Jezabel, stir him up to evil, but to good, Isa. 2.3.

21. She was a knowing Christian (for her Sex) well acquainted with the doctrine
and practice of Religion, she had both scientiam visus and gustus, head and
heart-knowledg: she knew the History and Mystery of the Scripture, in a good
measure, or, to use Calvin's phrase, she knew not only Cerebraliter but
Cordialiter, she felt the word she talked of, and so was haypy, Joh. 17.3.
first felt what she spoke, then spoke what she felt.

22. She did much read the Its said of the virgin Mary, that she spent the
third part of her time in reading the holy Scriptures.
Scriptures, her meditation was in it night and day, Psalm. 1.2. It was said of
Thomas a Kempis that he found no rest any where nisi in angulo cum libello, in
a nook with his book. And Luther said, he would not live in paradise without
the word, and with the word he could live in hell. I may truly say of her, that
she dearly loved the Scriptures, and was daily reading some part of it, and
made conscience to read as well with her heart as with her eyes; and practice
it also; She was one of those to whom the word of God was not only delivered,
but they delivered into it. (...). Romans 6.17.
Ille vere Scripturas legit qui verba vertit in opera.

23. When her husband would sometimes be saying to her, that he had been a
constant, and (according to his abilities) a painful Preacher now well toward
30. years, and had perhaphs preached as many Sermons, as our Chronicle says
Doctor Lichfield made, viz. 3083. in the reign of King Henry the 6th; and
though he had had considerable maintenaince (and might have had greater) yet
never to this day (one year considered with another) had he got so much as had
maintained him and his Family, by the Ministry; she would cherfully answer,
God saw that we did not need it, and has ever kept us before hand, from all
wants and straits this way, and not you (as many other a 1000. times better, or
at least not so ill deserving as we are) to study, as well for maintenance of
their Though he lost much and got nothing in tehse late troubles.
Families, as for their Sermons: and if God had not otherwise provided for us
to live on, I hope (said she) I could have cheerfully sit down with bare
clothes, and bread and water, and have done what that godly dying servant of
Christ, Anne Winter of Rotherham said of me, on her deathbed, when her head by
feavour was much distempered; which Story was thus: When Rotherham was taken by
the Kings party, May 4. 1643. (of which before, and in the preface, When
Panlinus had his City, gold silver, and all taken away, he said Lord let not
the loss of all these troubled me for thou art all, and more then all these to
me.
more fully, to the 3. Kingdoms case) and this deceased Saint was very hardly
used, a precious godly woman of Rotherham, Anne Winter, lying very weak, and
her head distemptered (so as she knew not well what she said) so me good women
being whispering together in the room where she lay, she spoke to them sharply
thus, What are you whispering about? if it be any thing for the advancing the
cause and Church of God, go on: else leave off; and if it be about the troubles
of the Mistress, (meaning Mrs. Shaw) fear not, for she can live of a penny a
day, if God call her to it as the Martyrs did in their troubles.

24. She was a most strict observer of the Lords day, and much bemoaned the
coming out of the book of Sports allowing them on the Lords day: since when,
she would say Gods hand had ever lay heavy upon this Land, (though even this
God could turn for good): she accounted the Sabbath her delight, Isa. 58.13.
(as the ancients called it, desiderium dierum, and regina dierum): she said
not, When will the Sabbath be gone, Amos 8? but, When will it come? like that
holy man, that went forth that morning and said, veni sponsa mea: she remembered
the Sabbath before it came, when it came, and when past; and was very careful
all that day of her thoughts, words, deeds, and duties, as also of all her
relations. I well remember that when her Ague had seized upon her about the
beginning of September last, which continued till about 14. days or near it,
before her dissolution, and then (as we thought) left her; a faithful and
intimate Friend of hers, and an able godly Physician, ( vir sui Dr. Witty.
nominis, as was said of the Emperor Probus) being then in Hull, told her that
they must needs take the disease in the beginning, and it being known that her
aguish fit would seize on her the next time on the next Lords day, in the
afternoon, the Doctor told her, it would be necessary for her to take a vomit
on that Lords day to remove the approaching Malady: she was persuaded to it, as
a work of mercy and necessity, but would go to the congregation in the morning;
yet some have observed that she stayed at home in the afternoon with sadness
of spirit, and took her vomit; but when it was perceived that she was troubled
at the taking of it on the Lords day, because it hindered her from the evening
service of that day in public, sufficient means of satisfaction was given
her, yet it was sometimes replied, so it was lawful to fly in case of necessity
on the Sabbath day, yet it was grievous to the godly Mat. 24.20.

25. She did oftimes very directly foretell things to come, as her own death
shortly approaching (as is in part before flinted) and that she should never
see her Daughter Dorothy again after she should marry and go to Rotherham,
which proved true; and diverse other things considerable, the truth whereof I
will try before I will publish them, lest we might seem to be as foolish as
some others, who have vainly printed and preached Christ's coming on Earth
personally to Reign in the year 1656. and 5. great things to come pass in the
years 1655. or 1656. which fool ies God has confuted, and both God and Man
have befooled them, or rather they have made fools of themselves. Only
concerning Revelations in general in these days, I think, (1.) that all
Revelations of the spirit are not wholly ceased, but that there still are and
may be Revelations, 1 Cor. 2.10. or inspirations, Job 32.8. yet (2.) all
Revelations pretended to be of, and from the Spirit, but not according to Gods
word, Isay 59.21. are to be rejected and abhorred in these days, as proceeding
from men's deceived Fantasies, or Diabolical delusions, and God never revealed
such things to them: they have seen nothing more, no nor so much as other men,
Ezekiel. 13.23. Jer. 14.13, 14, and 23, 16. And though I believe that God since
the Canon of the Scripture sealed, revealed no new truth, but that all needful
truths are in the Scripture expressly or by consequence, yet I conceive that God
may and sometimes does to some choice Saints reveal matters of fact according
to the word; and though no new light, yet new sight and discovery of the
mysteries in the Word; as for example in Queen Mary's days, Mr. Fox (that
wrote the book of Martyrs) being with other exiles and confessors at Basil
beyond the Sea; Mr. Fox preaching to his brethren there, told them
confidently, that now was the time for their return into England, and that he
brought that news by Command from God: for which bold saying, some graver
divines at present sharply rebuked him, but ere long it appeared that Queen
Mary died the very day before his Sermon (which thing he could not then
possibly know by any ordinary means:) Mr. Fox also (the same grave and holy
man) told the Lady Anne Henage lying then very sick, and Physicians and Friends
quite despairing of all hope of life, that she should recover; as also she told
the like to Mrs. Honywood, who had long laid sore distempered, and that she
should live to an exceeding great age, all which came to pass: Mr. Clark in
the life of Mr. Fox.
likewise Bishop Ridley, when a sudden tempest arose on the Thames, as he was
crossing that River, at which all in the boat were terrified looking for
nothing but to be drowned, Fear not, said the Bishop, for this boat carries a
Bishop, that must be burned and not drowned. Likewise Bishop Hooper at Zurick
in King Edward the sixth his Reign, taking his leave of Mr. Bullinger and about
to return for England, promised Mr. Bullinger to write often to him, but (said
he) the last news of all I shall not be able to write: for where I take most
pains, there shall you hear of me to be burnt to ashes; So Luther writ to
Myconius when he was sick, and most likely to dye, Deus non sinet tuum
transitum, me vivo. But these I think are rare, and unusually but to some
choice And sometimes to others as I could give some choice instances, but that
I will not transcribe this over again.
servants of the Lord.

26. She was very found in the doctrine of Religion, and exceedingly sore
grieved at the As she abhorred damnable practices and works of the Devil, so
also damnable doctrines, 2 Pet. 2. (Heresies of destruction) and doctrines of
Devils. 2 Timothy 4.1.
dangerous errors lately spread in these Nations, and especially when any fell
off, who had formerly been of our society, chiefly at one old man, heretofore a
professor in Hull; mightily was she troubled at those who fell to loose life,
and under pretense of fearing a covenant of works, cast away the works of the
Covenant; or, under pretense of higher seize, forsook the form of
wholesome words, and holy practice: she loved new sight and discovery in the
Scripture, but no pretended new light As Columbus saw no new world but made a
fuller discovery of the old.
contrary to the Scripture; she was clear for a needful separation in a
Church, but not, for a needless separation from a Church; but sore grieved
with those that do (...), Jude 19. through pretending the spirit, and are
(...), men out of their place, (which Luther judged the cause of all distempers
in Church and State): she read that Christ and the Apostles saw many
corruptions in the Church of the Jews, both in officers, administrations, and
practices, as John 9.22, 34, 35. Mark 7.9. Math. 5.21, 48, and 21, 12, 13. yet
in that Church was Christ circumcised, his mother purified, he heard those
teachers, Luke 2.22, 46. joined with them on Sabbath days in public prayer,
Luke 4.16. etc. Hophni and Phinehas were very bads Priests, and some in those
days did therefore separate from Gods Ordinances, 1 Samuel 2.17. but it was
their transgression, so to do, verse 24. and Elkana and Hannah then did not
separate, says holy Hildersham, (Lecture 29. on John 4.): she did most highly
value the old non-Conformalists, who would separate from the corruption, but
not from the communion of the Church, as Christ, though he joined with the
Church of the Jews then, yet would not use the Jewish superstitious
purifications, Mark. 7.6, 7. nor put off the passover from the right day, as
the Jews did, Math. 26.27. She would often say, that if those who separated
from us, (some of whom she had dear affections to, as judging them godly, for
Diversum sentire duos de rebus iisdem, Incolumi licuit semper amicitia) would
have joined with us, to have purged out the cursed errors that broke in upon
us, (which by their flying from us they much (through perhaps not purposely)
encouraged,) we might have been much purer and more reformed ere now: had there
no hammer been heard in building up our Temple. She disputed not, whether our
Parishes were Churches, or Churches were in our parishes; but loved godliness
wherever she saw it, and labored to practice it. She was sore troubled at the
Anabaptists, yet I never heard her so sharp toward them, as that holy Martyr
Philpot (one of the learned Martyrs in Queen Mary's days) who in his letters
in the book of Martyrs says, that the Anabaptists are an inordinate kind of
men, stirred up by the devil, to the destruction of the Gospel, Vol. 3. p. 606.
She was as much as any for Christian Liberty, but not for unchristian
licentiousness, nor antichristian Cruelty, and did much observe that those
that cried up so much for that liberty, (or rather libertinism, which Austin
calls libertas perditionis, and Tertullian, licentia haeretica) when they were
below and at an under; yet when they but thought that they were getting above,
they would not allow the least of it to others, as we have seen instances too
many near us, both in print and practice. She judged Christian liberty not to
lie, in a liberty to hold truth or error, to do good or evil, for then God and
good Angels had not that liberty, (who yet are most free) but she thought that
that was Christian liberty enough, when a man might hold all truth, and do all
good that God commanded him; and she did not think, that to restrain error or
wickedness was in it self, any restraint of Christian liberty.

27. She fervently prayed for a hearty union amongst Gods people, that they
might be one staff in the Lords hand, and worship God with one lip and
shoulder: and if Paul thought it beseeming an Apostle to write a part of the
Canonical Scripture, about the agreement of two godly persons, Phil. 4.2.
surely we should much desire the agreement of so many; yet did she not limit or
measure her love, merely by union in opinion, but loved She did, as Bucer, love
any in whom she saw aliquid Christi. See learned Calvin's, excellent note, on
Isa. 24.16.
all the Saints, Col. 1.4. yet would she much fear that our biting and
devouring one another, was so bad a requital of the Lord for all his
goodness, that it would much endanger out being devoured one of another, as it
did much endanger the Exiles at Franford in Queen Mary's days. I know not what
she would have thought of the Schoolmen and Bishop Halls opinion, (if she had
heard it) namely that the holy Angels may holily vary in the way, though they
perfectly agree in the end, urging to that end, Dan. 10.13, 20, 21, and 12, 1.
but sure I am she looked on that paroxysm twixt Paul and Barnabas, as a foul
fault in good men, Good men sometimes have groaned (as the word is. Jam. 5.9.)
in prayer one against another which is very sad. (...).
and she did much bewail that prejudice wherewith men's heads and hearts were
prepossessed against the truth, judging things according to their praeingaged
opinions (as Masius observes) that when Moses and Joshua came down from the
Mount, and heard the people singing, dancing, playing, etc. before the golden
Calf, Joshua being of a warlike disposition, interprets the noise to be the
noise of war; but meek Moses interprets it to be the noise of singing: and as
men's tempers are, so they usually judge, and hereby oftentimes detain the truth
of God as a prisoner, Romans 1.18. through blind prejudice: she much desired that
as the lines in a circle, the nearer they come to the Center, the nearer they
come one to another; so godly men might draw nearer to God, and so nearer one
to another.

28. She was a most tender Mother, exceeding full of She was not like Bishop
Bonner who was full of guts, but empty of Bowels.
bowels of compassion to her Chrildren's, both souls and body. In this her long
ague, and weakness, if she imagined any of the children (though in other
Chambers) to be sick, she could not be persuaded even at Midnight to keep her
bed, but would needs see how they did, or what they wanted; but especially in
their souls, she Gal. 4.19.
travailed in birth again of them, as Austin says of his Mother, toties fillos
parturiebat, quoties a Deo eos deviare cernebat, she laid up many fervent
prayers for them, and I hope, Impossible est, filias tantarum lacrymarum
perire.

29. In her pains and extremity, she was much in blessing God, saying, Oh!
this is not Hell (which yet I have deserved): nay blessed be God for a Christ,
there is nothing of Hell in it.

30. As she lived, so she dyed, meekly, quietly, holily, having her
understanding perfect to the last breath; and in her extremity, never did she
utter one grumbling word, only would say often, hold our faith and patience
(somewhat like Calvin's word, quousque, Domine, quousque? how long, O Lord, how
long). And when her husband said to her, that ever since he knew her, she had
dearly loved Jesus Nihil isto triste recepte.
Christ, and his people, and his ways, and that she was now going to Christ,
and his Saints made-perfect, where Christ would sweetly welcome her, and had
provided a mansion for her, she (as well as she was able) spoke these (...),
her last words: I have (said she) dearly loved all the people of God, and shall
shortly go to Christ, and therefore why should you so weep and be discontent?
God sweetly whispered her in the ear, (as the Hebr. is) 2 Samuel 7.27. and she
had praemium ante praemium, a Heaven of peace, before that Heaven of perfect
glory.

31. She did highly prize the Ministry of the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. the
feet of them that brought the glad tidings of the Gospel were beautiful in her
eyes; and that not only at first, when she began to look after heaven, but even
to the last, she did grow in the prizing of the Ministry more and more to her
death: when her stomach was weak to her bodily food, yet was the Stomach of her
soul, then sharp and eager after spiritual food: she was not like those
Changling- Galathians, that could have pulled out their eyes for Paul at first,
Gal. 4.15. and have pulled out his eyes at last. Or as many now a days that
despise and cast off those in the end, whom they professed formerly to have
reverenced as their Fathers in Christ. Yet did she ever distinguish betwixt
persons qualified with gifts and graces fit for an office, and being actually
officers; she thought that a man that had both gifts, abilities and graces, and
eminently every way qualified, for the place of Magistracy, Collonell, etc. yet
was not therefore a Magistrate, or Colonel, etc. till actually and outwardly
called thereto; gifts and graces fit one for an office, but make no officer,
nor authorize any man to do the work thereof; if a private man, sufficiently
gifted and qualified to judge and determine causes, should step up to the bench
at the Assizes, and take upon him to sit in judicature and pass sentence; the
passing of a sentence was specifically in its kind a good thing, and if he
passed a just and right sentence, it was materially good, but still it was
relatively bad in him, unlawful, invalid, because he had no outward call to
that office: and thus she judged that gifts and graces make not a Minister, nor
authorize any to the work of the Ministry; whether gifted men, Numb. 16.3, 5.
or gifted women, 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.12. Two things she much bewailed, 1.
that many took upon them publicly to preach that were not competently gifted
and qualified for that work, only were puffed up in their vain conceits, others
in the mean while could neither pick sense, nor truth in their discourse: 2.
that others who were inwardly gifted and qualified for the Ministry, would
take upon them ( in ecclesi a constituta, extra casum necessitatis, which Dr.
Fulke calls vocatio providentiae,) to do the work of the Ministry, contemning
that exernal Call that God has appointed, as a right entrance into that
office, 1 Timothy 4.14. Tit. 1, 5. She did believe, that because such did reject
Gods Ordinance, God did reject them; and that they did more hurt then good: she
knew it was not the letter of the word, or men's parts (though eminent) that
could convert, or do men any true good, except God owned them, and did afford
his spirit in his own way, and ordinance, to make them to profit, Isay 48.17.
the word and spirit must go together, Isay 59.21. And therefore men rejecting
Gods appointment and ordinance could not profit the people, Ier. 23.32. She
much bewailed that in the Bishops times, there were many Ministers that were
not preachers, (but dumb dogs, etc.) and now, that there are many Preachers
that are not Ministers. And whereas some objected, that they needed no outward
Call, because that was only requisite to such as preached a new Doctrine, she
thought that upon that reason, of all men, those kind of Preachers most needed
a clear call; for many of them broached most strange and new Doctrines.

32. She was not a speculative but practical Christian, more for motion then
notion, she did not content her self to hear only; but oh, how busily and
carefully did she every Lords day, Lecture-day, and such other times, gleane
after the Reapers with good Ruth, beat it out at night, what she had gleaned,
and distribute to her Children and Servants, Ruth 2.17, 18. Lewis the 9th. King
of France was found instructing his poor Kitching Boy in the way to Heaven; and
being asked, the reason, he answered, The meanest has a soul as precious as my
own, and bought by the same blood of Christ. She was very far from that
Florentin's mind, that when he lay on his death bed, called his Children, and
said, in this one thing I rejoice quod vos divites relinquam, that I shall
leave you rich; but hers was, that she left them gracious: she did not content
her self to be of any opinion, form, or society, and there rest, but she looked
to practice, walking above talking; she was more for Zebulons sincere heart, 1 Chronicles. 12.33. then for Nepthali's goodly words, Gen 49.21. She knew that the
Saints of old that went to heaven were walkers, Genesis 5.24. Genesis 17.1. and that
no kind of Lord, Lord, (whether in prayer, profession, etc.) would serve her,
except she did the will of her Father, Math. 7.21. nor would evidence her true
relation to Jesus Christ, Math. 12.50. John 15.14. She highly prized that
precious grace of Faith, as the great work, John 6.29. the great Commandment, 1
Ioh. 3.23. the second Covenant's inftrument or condition, Mark 16.16. yet she
knew that a faith without works would not save her, James 2.14. nor knowledge
without practice help her, John 13.17. 1 John 2.4. (though knowledge be an
excellent grace, John 17.3.) she thought that love of God was only a pretense,
which was joined with careful practice and obedience, 1 John 5.3. John 14.15.
as she expected not to be saved by, so neither without works: she desired first
to glorify God, as well as after to be glorified by God, she judged that, that
itch and curious search which is in these days after strange new notions and
speculations (which does in many eat out the life of the old practiall
godliness) was a plot of the old Serpent, Genesis 3. and a temptation of the
flesh, Col. 2.18.

33. As she much labored for truth and growth in the fundamental graces, that
her salvation might be certain, and she get to Heaven surely; so did she labor
for that Ornamentall grace of Assurance, that her salvation might be certain to
her, and she get to Heaven comfortably; she had in a very comfortable measure
attained to assurance both, 1. discoursive, and 2. intuitive: discoursive, by
searching her heart and life, and discoursing with her own conscience, she
found such qualifications, graces, and works of the spirit wrought in her, such
marks and signs of grace and sanctification, as the Scripture lays down for
infallible evidences of Election before time, and salvation after, 2 Pet. 1.5.
-- 10. and as cannot consist with reprobation or damnation; such as the Apostle
lays down in all that first Epistle of John, as, walking in the light, 1 John
1.7. obedience, 1 John 2.3. purfying her self, 1 John 3.3. and other signs all
over that Epistle, and the Scripture: especially she found Hezekiahs mark of
Sincerity, Isa. 38.3. (she was one that would not lie, Isa. 63.8. as its said
of Golden-mouthed Chrysostom, that he never did,) she was much of the same
mind with the Emperor Galliu, whose Motto was, Nemo amicus, idem and adulator,
she thought that no flatterer could be true friend to God or Man): and the
beloved Disciple's mark, 1 John 3.14. dearly loving any, in whom with Bucer she
saw (aliquid Christi) any thing of Christ: and David's mark, dear love to the
Word, Psalm. 119.47, 72, 92, 97, 127, 167, etc. 1 Pet. 2.2. besides that of St.
John 1 John 2.15. she had a very great victory over the world, 1 John 5.4, 5.
yea a great contempt of the world; she was almost come to what old Latimer
says in his Sermon of himself, that if he had an enemy to whom it was lawful
to wish evil unto, he would chiefly wish him, great store of riches, for then
he should never enjoy quiet; or as an Emperor said of his great Empire, nihil
se amplius assecutum, quam ut occupatior interiret, etc. And in these marks as
fruits of the spirit did her conscience much comfort her, as Paul's did, 2 Cor.
1.12. so 1 John 3.19. -- 21. she discovered Gods active grace, and love to her,
by discerning Gods passive grace in her: 2. She labored much in prayer,
(striving in prayer, Romans 15.20. watching to prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7. wrestling with
Jacob, Hos. 12). For that intuitive assurance, viz. that God would superadd to
these marks and evidences which she found in her, the sweet joy and comfortable
testimony of his spirit, Romans 8.16. and as in a good measure she found that the
marks of grace, held out in the word, and those in her heart and life, did
answer; as the impression on the wax answers that which is cut in the seal; so
in a sweet measure did the Lord superadde the joy and testimony of his spirit:
sometimes she would look downward into a basen of water to see the shining of
the Sun, and sometimes upward to the Firmament to see the Sun it self: We have
3. ways usually to confirm and make things sure, 1. we confirm bargains, by
earnest, 2. writings by seals, 3. at trials in Law, we produce witnesses to
confirm. The spirit of God is all these to us: Our earnest, 2 Cor. 1.22, and 5,
5. and seal, Ephesians. 1.13. and witness, Romans 8.16. a pure spirit, and a purged
conscience afford much assurance; she was able by her experience to have
confuted the Papists, who deny that in an ordinary way, a man can be assured
that he is for the present in the State of grace; and learned Bellarmine when
he was near 80. years old knew it not, yet she could say, though Papists
ordinarily are not, cannot be assured, that she felt and knew that she was now
the child of God, 1 John 3.2, 14. And whereas the remonstrants and others say
that we may know that for the present, we are in the state of grace; but yet we
cannot be assured of our salvation, because ere death we may fall away totally
and finally; she could answer with St. John, in the same verse, 1 John 3.2.
that we know now that we shall see Christ in glory, and be like him there; yea
if Sons here, then no falling away, but be with Christ hereafter, ibidem. She
did think that though a just person under the first Covenant might fall from
grace, (as Adam did) yet not a justified person in Christ, in the second
Covenant, whereof Christ is Surety, Heb. 7.22. She thought, that a justified
person might fall like Mephibosheth fowly, so as to hurt him; or as Eutichus,
Acts 20. so as to weaken him: yet not finally, not as Eli, so as to kill
himself, because God upholds him, Psalm. 37.24. Dr. Arrowsmith.
1 Pet. 1.5. As our most learned and godly late Professor speaks. She thought,
that not only old professors might be thus assured, because that first Epistle
of St. John was writ for that very end, that we might be assured of eternal
life, 1 John 5.13. and yet was writ to Children, as well as Fathers, 1 John
2.12, 13. Nor did she think that this assurance would make any one more secure;
and careless how they lived, but more holy, 1 John 3.3. more to purify
themselves, the more hope they have: and though she had not always been
without her doubts and fears; (our Lord Jesus who had always the grace of
union, and of unction, yet had not always the grace of vision) yet she still
recovered her comforts again, and could and did dye with much assurance and
joy, and free from that trouble of Roger Bishop of Salisbury in King Stephens
days who was so troubled, that he could not live, and durst not die, etc.

-- But oh, in the gleaning of these few, how many handfulls have I lost, that
might most profitably have been observed in her life! and in these few, how far
does the picture come short of the life of her glistering graces; so that when
I run over what I most hastily and passionately (currente calamo) have write, I
am ashamed of my self, and may sadly say, in regard of my own defects herein.
Cum relego, scripsisse pudet; quia plurima desunt;
Plurima sunt quae (me judice) digna lini.
But now she is gone to sleep, having put off her Cloths, not her life (as we
do when we go to bed) she still lives, nay never lived so well as now, vita
Christi nostram instruxit, mors Christi nostram destruxit, Bern: and I hope I
may say as that learned Lord du Plessis did, concerning his wife when she was
dead, that she had been an aid to him in living well, and should be so
hereafter in dying well: her death shall make me more consider (I hope) the
vanity of this life, and say with the Poet, -- Oh! What is man?
A Scuttlefull of dust, Quarles,
a measured Span;
Man's breath's a bubble, and his days a Span;
It Is glorious misery to be born a man.
The first piece of houshould-stuffe that Zeleucus brought into Babylon, was a
Tombstone; and it is the last that I have brought into Hull; the Tombstone of
a dear Saint, of whom I, with hundreds, more, may say, what Uylsses sometimes
did of Achilles, Si mea cum vestris valuissent vota --, etc. if our prayers and
tears could have prevented, she had not died: but herein is our comfort, that
her soul is happy, and her body shall ere long be like to Christ's glorious
body, Phil. 3.21, (...), for quality, not quantity, as Theodoret speaks.

When she could not longer live, yet she could sweetly and happily dye; and
might say with the Poet, certe coelum patet, ibimus illac: and though much work
be yet undone, yet [her] work is done; though she was not very long, yet she
did much in a little time, and wrought hard for God while she had time. Christ
dyed about the 33d. year of his age, (younger then she) and though much work
was then to do, yet he said, I have finished that work that thou gave me to
do, John 17.4. so Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7.

And now she is gone to her rest, Rev. 14.13. Isa. 57.1, 2. She sweetly slept
in the Lord on Thursday, December. 10. being that day just 25. years from her
marriage in York, and was carried to the place appointed for all living, Job
30.23. December 12. 1657. where she lies interred in the middle alley of
Trinity Church in Hull. Papists take it for a great wonder that Stapleton their
great controversall Divine, was born on the same day, whereon their Sir Thomas
More dyed, and why may not we take notice, that this Saint dyed near Hull, the
same day 25. years that she was married in York. And that, by a quite
unexpected providence, her Daughter Dorothy was married the On December. 10.
1657. The Sun shone very bright, but that night the Moon was sore Ecclipsed,
and so it proved to be with us.
same day, whereon (but before) her Mother dyed; surely these Wheels are full
of eyes: the Martyrs used to call their dying day their wedding day, and invite
their Friends that day to their wedding; so this Saint was betrothed to Christ
here, Hos. 2.19.20. but married to him at death, And others observe that the
same day whereon Pelagius was born in Britain, Augustine was born in Africa,
as Remarkable. God set a death's heads at our feast, as the Egyptians used.
her blessed marriage day. Mr. Firth of Mansfield, by a special providence
lying then in Mr. Shaws house when she dyed, preached an excellent Sermon at
her Funeral, (at which there was the greatest assembly of people that any
remember, that they have seen in Hull at a Funeral for many years, as
sometimes to Hezekiah, all Israel did her honor at her burial, 2 Chronicles.
32.33.) His Text was John 20.17. whence he observed that Covenant relations are
soul quieting; and heart comforting relations, will comfort men against the
departure of dearest Friends; which Sermon I wish that he would recollect and
publish for the good of many. The last Sermon that ever she heard on Earth, was
preached by her Husband, on that text, Isa. 56.5. being on the Lords day in the
afternoon, Decomb. 6. holding out comfort to Godly persons, that wanted some
worldly privileges, as Sons and Daughters to comfort them here, and bear up
their names when they are dead, yet God would give them far better privileges,
then these, which would abundantly supply all other wants, even an everlasting
name, which now she has got in heaven: and though she has not left any
Children, but only daughters on Earth, (and we know that the word in Hebrew
that signifies a male, (...)
comes of a root, that signifies to remember and the word that signifies (...)
women, comes of a root that signifies to forget;) because males keep up the
name of the family, which females cause to be forgotten, yet has she left a
sweet name She was not filia terrae, Jer. 13.13. nor desired a name among the
great men upon Earth. 1 Chronicles. 17.8. but looked after a name in Heaven, Luke
10.20. in the book of life, Phil. 4.3.
and savor on Earth, which will make her family to be remembered, for whom she
had sent up formerly many servent prayers to heaven, and they shall find it;
All her troubles and enemies, and dangers by Land and Sea could not cut her
off, till her work was done, Rev. 11.7. and her hour come, John 7.30, and 8,
19, 20. God kept her to a day, but her soul being joyful embraced in the arms
of her best and lasting Husband, and her body laid down in her bed of rest to
sleep, till the better Resurrection of the just. Let us for a while draw the
curtains quietly about her, and see what good we may get to our selves by this
sharp affliction: for the good and wise God would never have suffered any evil
(either of sin or forrow) to be in the world, but that he knew how to bring
good out of it; and the Scripture tells us, that sad afflictions, (1.) before
they come, are 1. appointed by God, they pass the great council of Heaven,
God does (and it is best he should) choose our afflictions, therefore they come
wisely, 1 These. 1.3. 2 deserved by man, therefore come justly, Ezra. 9.13. (2.)
when they come, 1. there is a great need of them, we would not strike a beast
without need, much less would God strike his child, 1 Pet. 1.6. Without them,
we should have been worse, 1 Cor. 11.32. therefore they come seasonably, 2.
much good and benefit by them, Heb. 12.10. Psalm. 119.67, 71. therefore they
come profitably, 3. God limits, orders, guides them, therefore they come
moderately, Ier. 30.11, and 46, 28. so as they may prove great blessings here,
Job 5.17. Psalm. 94.12. and may add to our glory hereafter; therefore they come
happily, 2 Cor. 4.17. Romans 8.18.

And now, my dear and sweet Children, seeing the wise God has taken from me
the desire of my eyes, Ezekiel. 24.16. and your Mother from your head to day, 2
Kings 2.3, 5. seeing God has cut off the one half of my heart, and one half
of that root you grew upon; seeing our Master's rod is upon us, let us ply our
Books, the Book of Gods word, and of our own hearts; and learn some heavenly
lessons: there lies not only a command upon me, a Father's duty, but also the
trust reposed, and charge imposed on me by your Mother: let me advise you
therefore often to look on this picture She would never be persuaded to have
her Picture drawn, while she was alive, I have now here drawn it, when she is
dead, no wonder if it be but darkly and imperfectly; though she had very much
of the image of God, both on her and in her.
of your dear Mother that I have here sadly limmed for your use, and when you
view it, say as sometimes Boleslaus King of Poland, when he looked on his
Fathers Picture, oh said he, that I may not do any thing unworthy of such a
Father; dress your selves by this glass, so far as it is agreeable to the
word, stick to the truth, as she did, both in times of persecution and other
alluring temptations: I know that God (partly by her help) has given you a
large measure of knowledge for persons of your age and sex, but besides the
tree of knowledge, look to the tree of life; build on the rock, by doing the
word, Math. 7.24. John 13.17. add to your knowledge virtue, and not only
moral virtue, but that (which some have questioned, whether it ever be called
by the name of virtue in Scripture) the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. Your body
excells your estate, your soul excells your body, but grace excells the soul:
for you are not happy because you have souls, but because you have grace, that
good work, Phil. 1.6. that good thing, 1 Kings 14.13. such a beast and so
foolish am I, that I doubt, if it had laid in my power, I should so badly have
requited all her love, that I should have raised her again to have lived here
on earth: but sure its well for her that I could not; only I have here (though
darkly) drawn her picture for my and your Consolation, and Imitation. I know
you never paint your selves, norwear any foolish pictures or garish attire, but
yet I pray you wear this picture, and often remember the holy counsels and
practice of such a Mother; there was a very sharp Law among the Romans, against
parents for mal-education of their own Children; there lay action at law
against any parent, and he might be sued, that did not bring up his Children
carefully, because hereby not only the Children but the Commonwealth, and the
Neighbors were injured; there was no action could lie against your Mother, nor
I hope shall against me for this fault; and I am very confident so far as I
have either seen by you or heard of you, that you will never prove such, as it
was said of the Emperor Commodus Baffianus Caracolla, etc. that they were the
shame of civil parents; I have gathered a nose-gay for me and you to smell at,
consisting (as you see) of 33. flowers, amongst 1000 d. that grew in the Garden
of her life, (you may remember many more), and I shall here add 20. Lessons
for me and you to take out and practice, and the rather because this rod (which
did not come by chance, nor did it arise out of the dust, Job 5.6. has a loud
voice, Micah. 6.9. Exodus 4.8.) does call us aloud thereto. I say not that every
one of these flowers is a certain sign of grace, and mark of salvation, but,
as we say of Christ, that many things spoken of him in Scripture, may belong to
others also but all of them jointly belong to none but the true Messiah; and of
Antichrist, that some things spoken of him in Scripture, may belong to others,
but all of them jointly belong to none but the Pope, (though in these our times
many men that have plus fellis qudm humerorum, more heat, then head, more
passion then discretion, call every one that is not just of their judgment,
Antichristian and so often smite the lamb instead of the Beast): so may I say
of these eivdences, that all of them belong to none but a real Saint. I would
not have you overwhelmed with sorrow, so as to hurt your selves, or hinder
duty, as it did the Isralites, Exodus 6.9. your tears cannot help neither her,
nor your selves, but yet I cannot condemn you, nor would I my self be
condemned, for being sensible of Gods sharp stroke, 2 Samuel 1.24, 25. 2 King.
2.12.
and our great loss. If our Father had but spit in our face, should we not be
ashamed? Numb. 12.14. when the Lord thus smites, should we then make mirth?
Ezekiel. 21.10. If I see any in the fiery furnace, and not so much as the smell of
fire upon their garments, I shall take it for a Miracle; Jesus Christ wept at
the grave of Lazarus, and it was a clear sign of his love to him, John 11.35,
36. devout men made great lamentation, not for (but over) Stephen, Act. 8.2.
who yet was as sure of Heaven, as any man alive could be, Act. 7.55, 56.
Abraham came from his own tent, to Sarahs, to mourn for her being dead, Genesis
23.2. and she was the first that we read of in Scripture mourned-for: gratia
non tollit sed attollit naturam. God forbids us not to mourn Ezekiel. 24.16. So
Joseph mourned for Jacob, Genesis 50.1, 3, 10. See John 11.31. Mark 5.38. The
contrary is threatened as a curse, Jer. 22.18. Ezekiels not mourning, was only
as a sign to the Jews that their Colamities should exceed all sorrow, Ezekiel.
24.16, 23.
so it be not as men without hope, though I confess, we had much more need
with Peter and David, etc. to mourn more for our tran gressions, then
afflictions. That deep measure of sorrow was commanded for sin The Scholemen
say, that sorrow for sin, ought to exceed all sorrows, 1. in Conatu, 2. in
Extensione, 3. in appretiatione, 4. in intensione. He grieves with a witness,
that grieves without a witness for his sin.
which was forbidden for affliction: compare Isa. 22.12. with Levit. 19.27, 28,
and 21, 5. Deuteronomy. 14.1. they might not make themselves bald in their sorrow for
the dead, but in their sorrow for sin, God called to it. She is now above our
tears, so also is she above our praises; yet Solomon highly commends a virtuous
woman, which thing the holy Ghost, registers, Prove. 31.10. etc. and the
Septuagint (as I hinted) renders Prove. 10.7. thus (...), memoria justorum cum
encomiis, and so the vulgar cum landibus, the memory of the just shall be with
praises; Bernardus Bauhusins made a book in praise of the Virgin Mary, a large
book, yet all of it, but one verse, he calls his book, (unius libri versus,
unius versus liber) only he changed this verse 1022. ways according (as he
thought) to the number of the Stars; the verse was this, Tot tibi sunt dotes,
virgo, quot sidera coelo. How do our Chronicles commend the wise of Archbishop
Parker as a great example of humility, chastity, fidelity, etc. as also
Magdalen the wife of Dr. Paraens, for that, after she was married, and 40. years
of age, out of love to the Scriptures, she learned to read, and took such
delight in the word, that she got much of it by heart: and many other virtuous
women are much commended for our imitation. I am far from comparing this
deceased servant, with the first, yet I think she was not exceeded by the last;
or if so, yet as Josiah exceeded Hezekiah in some things, but was exceeded by
him in others, so if in any thing they exceeded her, probably in other things
she out-stript them; why may I not therefore commend her example to you, and to
others? But my pen is full of sorrow, and drops apace: Let us come to such
lessons as we may, to our profit, learn by this example, and sad providence.

1. Learn we to be more weaned from this vain world, which is both uncertain,
and uncertainty it self, 1 Timothy 6.17. not only unsatisfying, but vexes with
thorns and hinders satisfaction, 1 Timothy 6.10. not only unsanctifying, but
hinders oftentimes sanctification, Math. 13.22. Let this sharp affliction teach
us (for afflictions are (...) Gods free Schoolmasters, Psalm. 94.12. schola
crucis schola lucis) let it (I say) teach us more to consider the emptiness
and vanity of all these Divitiae terrenae sunt paupertat is plenae.
things below: if life it self be so uncertain and short, what are all these
things that depend upon it? Eccles. 1. and 12. as holy Clavger said Omnia
praetereunt praeter amaere Deum. Let us not so plot for this world, as if it
would never end; and so little regard the next world, as if it would never
begin; as if we were pilgrims and strangers in the next world, and only at
home here. That will in some measure be true of us, which was said of our King
Henry the 2d; Cui satis ad votum non esseut omnia terroe Climata; terra modo
sufficit octo pedum; He, whom alive the world could scarce suffice, Psalm. 62.9,
and 146, 4. and 131, 2.

When dead in eight-foot earth, contened lies.


Though the South wind be hot and dry, and the North wind cold and moist, yet
every wind blows good and profit, to those who can gain by losses and by
death; and therefore, let it blow, Cant. 4.16.

2. Be we humbled that we got no more good by her alive by her heavenly
discourse and example. Plato and Xenophon thought it fit and profitable, that
men's speeches at meals should be written, (as Luthers, Colloquia mensalia, his
table talk is printed,) had we well observed this, what good might we have got?
Let us yet gather up some crumbs, such as we can remember: better late thrive,
than never.

3. Let me (who have now so many obligations from God, and your Mother upon me)
charge you as holy Mr. Bolton, on his deathbed, did his 5. Children, that you
do not dare to appear before God, and her, at the great day in an unregenerate
estate.

4. Redeem we our time; be careful how we spend every day, which may be our
last. When that good old man was invited to a feast on the morrow, he answered,
Ego a multis annis crastinum non habui; It Is long since I had a morrow (said
he). If a Heathen Emperor would bewail any day which he had spent, and could
not remember some good that he had done, saying, Diem perdidi, Nulla dies sine
linea.
oh how much more we Christians! if heathen Seneca could say, Non multum
temporis habemus sed multum perdimus, we rather wast time, then want it, and
hoc animo tibi hane epistolam scribo, tanquam cum maxim scribentem mors
evocatura sit: let us redeem our time from sin, and vanity, for God and piery.
When I have sometimes said to her (that now triumphs,) we are as sure to part
and dye, as if it was just now in doing, and others were at this hour carrying
us to our graves, how would she have been affected, and stirred up therefore to
improve her time for heaven while she had it.

5. Let us have a care so to live as we need not fear death, Bernard says that
he heard his Brother Gerard, when just in dying, rejoice and triumphing say,
Jam mors mihi non stimulus sed jubilus.
or (to use holy Mr. Steph. Marshalls Phrase) so to believe in Christ rather,
as not to be afraid of death, knowing that death ends a godly man's death, and
not his life: get we our oil ready in our vessels that when the bridegroom
calls he may find us ready, having nothing to do but to dye.

6. Lay we our hands on out mouths, hold our peace, submit we to Gods will,
which we have prayed may be done on earth, let us not think to call God to
account for any of his works, before our tribunal who must shortly call us to
account: let not our weakness and folly dispute with Gods infinite wisdom,
and say to that great King, Why do thou thus? but rather say, Good is the
word and work of the Lord; (I said nothing because thou did it, Psalm. 39.9.)
The Lord gave, and the Lord rook away, and Blessed be the name of the Lord, as
well for taking away as for giving, Job 1.21. Say we, There is infinite
wisdom, goodness, mercy, faithfulness in this stroke; therefore seeing its
Gods will, let it be our will, for had that great Physician that (...), that
Iehova Rophe, Mal. 4.2. been so pleased, she had not now dyed; Remember that
saying of Luther to Melancthon, Monendus est Philippus, ut desinat esse Mundi
gubernator; when Melancthon was sad about the Churches troubles, Let God alone
to govern the world (said he): let God choose our afflictions for us, that may
do what he will, that will do what is best; and though we do not so well know
yet (till all the wheels of Providence further move) what God means, and why
he does (as perhaps we think,) lay his hands cross, and therefore with Joseph
we desire to remove them, Genesis 48.17. yet we shall know hereafter Gods meaning
better, Joh. 13.7. and find that God did it wisely, Genesis 48.14. and in very
faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. and perhaps say periissemus nisi periissemus.
Tiberius the second, (a good Emperor) by taking up a cross, found a masle of
treasure under it; so may we in time find benefit by this cross, Psalm. 119.71.

7. Let us look as well at the bright side of the cloud, and not only at the
dark side; thanksgiving is a duty not only limited to mercyes, but required in
afflictions, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Job 1.21. we must glorify God in the very fires,
Isa. 24.15. This would stop the floodgates of all immoderat sorrow; you know
your habitation is very near the ebbings and flowings of the Sea, and we see
the flowing is useful, as well as the ebbing, but if it overflow the banks,
then its dangerous and hurtful. So look we as well, at our abundance of
undeserved mercies as at this ten times deserved cross, as (1.) we had the
society of this servant of God many years, I had her 25 years to a day. God
might have called for his own the first hour: may not the Lord do with his own
what he will? Themistocles invited many Philosophers to supper, and borrowed
all his dishes: in the midst of the supper, the owner sends for the one half
of them; Can you endure this disgrace, said the Philosophers? Yes (said he)
very well, for he might have sent justly for them all. God has left to you a
Father, and to me Children, still to both of us Friends, sweet Christian
Friends (which the Scripture calls necessaries (...), Acts 10.24.) nay more,
has not taken away Himself from Fas nobis non est de fortuna queri, salvo
Christo and promissionibus evangelil. Salvo Christo, salva sunt omnia.
us, this was David's comfort at Ziglag, when goods, wives, all were gone, Town
burnt, Soldiers ready to stone him, yet God was not gone, 1 Samuel 30.6. he
still affords us his Gospel, Promises, Spirit, his Son; and not only a
Competency in this world, but the tenders and hopes of a kingdom in heaven,
(2.) Look down below us, what others want, what sorer afflictions they bear,
what greater troubles they have endured: see Martyrs, remember Musculus (of
whom you have read at large) a learned holy Minister, forced to weave for his
living; and, turned out there, forced to dig in the ditch; a pad of straw for
his bed. See those Scripture- Martyrs Heb. 11. Remember David's troubles and
sorrows, Psalm. 69. near perishing, Psalm. 119.92. see Job, eminent for piety and
as eminent for afflictions; nay Jesus Christ himself a man all of sorrows, Isa.
53.3. God had one son without sin, but none without sorrow; unum sine Unum sine
corruptione nullum sine corruptione. Omnis Christianus est Crucianus Iuther.
flagitio, nulium six flagello. Read over the book of Lamentations, think of
our Brethren in Piedmont and Poland, etc. at this day: nay see the lot of all
the Lords people, Heb. 12.8. Acts 14.22. (3.) To quiet our hearts, see Gods
wise over ruling providence in it, that orders all things to the falling of a
sparrow, Math. 10.29, 30. its he appointed it, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. he ordered it so,
that she dyed not (as many precious men) in the Sea, or from home, but in our
arms, 1 Samuel 7.14, 15.
(4.) Afflictions are part of Gods Covenant with us, he has promised them in
mercy to us with his Son: He that promised that he would not condemn us, yet
pomised to correct us, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. (5.) Gods loving-kindnesse remains
still: we have lost a Friend but not a God, Jer. 30. and 46, 28. (6.) God has
neither done her nor us any wrong: He had best right to her, and had fitted her
for himself, and said, That he would have her where he is, John 17.24. Exodus
33.32. Isa. 49.1.
not only God knew her name, but in Scripture Phrase, God knew her by her name,
(which is much sweeter), and he called for her by her name, (7.) She died not
as a fool dies, 2 Samuel 3.33. we had no such cause to mourn, as David for a
wicked Absalom, whose destruction he might justly fear: she went but from the
lower, to the higher house, to her Father and our Father, John 20.17. And
therefore in regard of her it may be said, as Christ said, if we loved her, we
would rejoice because she is gone to the Father, John 14.28. Its sweet when God
fits When God calls us from death to life, before God calls us from life to
death. 1 John 3.14.
before, he calls us away, (8.) Consider we the Change that she has made; lest
us, for better Friends: she dearly loved the people of God, now she is with
only Saints, and they freed from corruption and temptation. Doctor Tailor
blessed God that ever he came to prison, because there he had the company of
that Angel of God, Mr. Bradford. Oh what is Heaven then? Themistocles about to
sell some Land, bid the Crier proclaim, that who everwould buy it, should have
good Neighbors, as if they added to the worth of the purchase. Oh how sweet,
is a Heaven full of blessed Saints! for Christ to be here with Paul is great
security, but for Paul to be with Christ is perfect felicity. She could not
here see Gods face and live, Exodus 33.20, 22. therefore she was willing with
Augustine to dye, that she might see it, and that more clearly, (9.) The very
body now laid to sleep, shall rise again: Hence some think that Sarah is 8.
times in one Chapter, called Abraham's dead. Genesis 23. because of the hope of the
resurrection. Fiducia Christianorum, resurrectio mortuorum. Tertull.
this Paul fully proves, 1 Cor. 15. and not only a mortal and a corruptible
body, but (as pointing to himself,) he says (this) mortal shall put on
immortality, and (this) corruptible, 1 Cor. 15.53. Credo resurrectionem hujus
carnis, said the Primitive Saints, Job 19.25, 26, 27. See how Christ confutes
the Sadduces, Math. 22.29, 30. yea and she shall rise again, though with the
same body, yet far more glorious; as the same bell new cast: as iron fomerly
rusty, now glossy in the smiths forge, is still the same, yet more glorious, so
shall the Saints bodies be like Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.21.1 Cor. 15.53.
etc. No more thirst, hunger, or sorrow, Rev. 7.16, 17, and 21.4. no more death
but shall be as the Angels, Luke 20.36. Ejus est timere mortem qui ad Christum
nolit ire, said Cyprian, let them fear death who are loath go to God: (10.)
Though she shall not return to us, yet we shall go to her, 2 Samuel 12.23.

8. Let us lay hold on eternal life, make sure of salvation, 1 Timothy 6.12. We
cannot make sure our houses, our Estates, our Friends, our lives, but we may
make our election and salvation sure, which is far more sweet and needful, 2
Pet. 1.10. consider how short our time is here. The last week we enjoyed her,
now her seat here is empty, as sometimes David's was at the feast, 1 Samuel 20.18.
but she is placed for eternity, let our thoughts much run upon eternity. It Is
said that Mr. Wood after some holy discourse, being at dinner, fell a musing,
and cried out for near half a quarter of an hour together, (for ever, for
ever). A great Sir. T.M.
man of this Nation being in prison for that which he called his Conscience,
his Lady coming to him, did chide him, that he would not do as others did, and
so live at his own gallant house with his wife and children; Wife (said he) if
I should do so, how long think you I might live; I think said she, you may live
these 20 years; well said he, it is but 20 years, (and yet its not likely that
I should live so long,) yet they would end, but I must be after that for ever
and ever. Mind we eternity; if that (as once one said) be well looked to, all
is well looked to.

9. Let us lay up some Cordialls against our own death, which may comfort us in
such an hour. First Cordial, Consider that though death (which is unavoidable)
will break many near bonds, as (1.) the union twixt near kinted and
acquaintance, nay twixt Mother and Children, which are one blood, (2.) yea
nearer, the union twixt Husband and Wife which are one flesh; nay (3.) yet
nearer, union twixt body and soul which are one person, yet there are 3 better
unions or bonds which death cannot break, as (1.) the bond of the Covenant
twixt God and his people: the Covenant is everlasting though we be mortal and
dye, Ier. 32.40. Many hundreds of years after Abraham Isaac and Jacob were
dead, yet God says, that he was still their God, [I am, and Math. 22.31, 32.]
namely their God in Covenant, and they then alive to him; God is as well their
God, when they are rotting in their graves, as when flourishing in their
houses: God promised Jacob, Genesis 46.4. that he would go down with him into
Egypt, and he would (surely) bring him up again, yet Jacob was dead ere he was
brought out of Egpyt, but Gods promise still was of force, (2.) the bond of
union twixt the believing soul and Jesus; this marriage-knot, death cannot
break. When Christ dyed, death separated twixt his body in Joseph's tomb, and
his soul in paradise; yet the union with the godhead was as firm as ever, so
here, though the natural union twixt soul and body may be dissolved by death,
yet not the Mystical union twixt the soul and Christ: (3.) the bond twixt the
soul and eternal life, is not dissolved by death, the believer has not only
right to it by purchase, promise, etc. but has possession, the beginning of
eternal life already, earnest of heaven here, John 3, 36. and though temporal
life, may fail, yet this other here begun, will never end. Some tell us of a
temporal Kingdom of Christ, that must only last certain years, is yet to
begin and must have an end: but the Scripture says that its begun (not after,
but in the days of those Kings) Dan. 2.44. and shall last for ever, even for
ever, and ever, Dan. 7.18. (so shall the believers eternal life, here begun,
never end.) 2d. Cordial, that though the grave be our long home, yet it is not
our lasting home, its our long home, Eccles. 12.5. but not our last home. A
godly man does, as Myconius writ to Luther, mori vitaliter, non lethaliter,
dies to live: he dies as corn dies to spring again, and that more gloriously;
as a grain of wheat cast into the ground, rises again with more beauty, blade
and ear, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21. 3d. Cordial; Consider, that to godly men death is
not an eeven bargain, but great gain, Phil. 1.21. The sting of death is gone,
but the honey is still to be reaped: all ill is gone by death, it cures them of
all sin, sorrow, possibility of sinning or suffering from man or devil. Christ
our Sampson has slain this Lion death, and brought us honey out of the carcass
of it; we not only may, but we must needs dye, 2 Samuel 14.14. must is for this
King. We use to say that necessity has no law, but for death there is both
necessity and law; necessity, by reason of our constitution and corruption, our
bodies are like tents patcht up of a few bony sticks, covered over with skin
and flesh: our food and clothing show our death, we feed on dead beasts, and
often wear their hides and fleece; death was born with us into the world, rockt
with us in the cradle, bred in the bone, will nor out of the flesh; we travel,
work, lodge, lie down with it daily, we cannot out run it; but especially sin
has so fretted all the threads of our garment, that it easily falls in pieces:
we do not dye because we are sick, but because we have sinned; yea though
Christ has not taken away the course of death, yet has he taken away the
curse of death, and made it to be every way for our advantage. We do not think
it any loss to part with an ague, the stone, etc. cold water out of our
shoes: no more loss has a godly man by dying; its our perfection, Luke
13.32. not our destruction; a way to rest, Rev. 4.13. not ruin; it brings us
home, 2 Cor. 5: to our kingdomg. Fourth Cordial, Consider, that to a godly
man, death is a most happy change, Job 14.14. thereby is neither body quite
lost, nor soul lost; we lose not our friends, nor any goods that we have need
of, or use of, Prests wife of Exeter.
(for as that Exeter-Martyr said, In Heaven money bears no worth, is not
current); we shall then (and not till then) be above ordinances, 1. We shall
need no repentance, etc. shall have better houses, friends, etc. Here are
nothing but changes, sorrow and joy, health and sickness, changes in body soul
and estate; but death ends all changes, there shall be no more. 5. Cordial,
Though here we part, and lie down in several beds at night, and at several
hours, yet we shall comfortably meet again in the morning, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Psalm.
49.14. My dear and tender Who dyed in. December, 1634.
father, and my only January, 1636.
son lie interred at Bradfield, where I was born in the Westriding of
Yorkshire. My dear and loving January, 1652.
mother lies interred at Pattrington in the Eastriding of of Yorkshire, where
my eldest daughter and husband (Mr. Matthew Woodell) then Pastor there,
didolive. And now my dear and precious December, 1657.
wife, I interred in Hull: and where we shall be sown in the Earth, the only
wise God knows: but err long all the Eagles shall flock to the carcass, Luke
17.37. Sixth Cordial, Consider, though the stream be gone, yet the fountain is
as full as ever: we that live in Hull, often times see the cocks that convey
water to private houses, cut off, yet still men may freely go to the spring; so
we have a God, a Christ, a promise still, as fresh, as full as ever; Open our
mouths wide, suck honey out of this rock, God cares for us, 1 Pet. 5.7. Nimis
avarus cui Deus non sufficit, he is too covetous whom a God cannot suffice:
Luther said, Lord do with me what thou will, since thou have pardoned my sin.

10. Learn we to price Gods Ordinances, as this deceased Saint did above her
necessary food. When Christ was hungry, Mark 11.12. and went to a figtree and
found no fruit to eat, v. 13. yet when he came to the City Jerusalem, v. 15. he
went not (that we read of) to any victualling house, but to the Temple, and
taught, showing it was his meat and drink to be doing his fathers will. In
former times want of bread was Englands misery: we read in Queen Elizabeth's
days, that such a man was one of the 4. or 5. Preachers in such or such a
County; in her days Mr. Tavern^ur Sheriff of Oxfordshire, did in Charity (not
ostentation says Mr. Fuller) give the Scholars a Sermon at St. Mary's in
Oxford, with his Gold chain and sword. And before that, in King Henry the 8.
and Queen Mary's days, how would some have given whole cart-loads of hay or
corn for a few Chapters in the New Testament. But alas, our fault is
surfeiting, contempt and loathing of the Manna, as its said of us in regard of
ears of corn, That if there be much scarcity of corn, the poor pine; if great
plenty and cheapnesse, the rich repine: so its for soul-food, When great store
of it, many slight it. Heretofore was sad perfecution: when Joan Clerk (said
to be a godly woman) was forced by the bloody Papists to set fire to burn her
dear Father William Tylsworth, who was burnt for the Gospel at Amersham in
Buckinghamshire, and many suffered much for private meetings wherein they did
pray for themselves, the Church and State: but now we are in more danger of
sleighting, or of hypocrisy; to profess the Gospel and the service of God
only for reward, (which Antigonus so condemned) yea for reward and advantage
amongst men; nay many in these days, that in times of persecution seemed
forward, are now Apostatized, and gone back. Diogenes once in a great assembly
went backward, at which all the people laughed him to scorn; whereupon he told
them that They might rather be ashamed, who had so long gone backward, and
declined from good manners and conversation; oh! how many has Satan cheated
and seduced of late from the ordinances, and holy practices!

11. Learn from her, to be very tender and watchful against the least sin:
how afraid was she of the very appearance of evil? how did she mourn for
original sin, which both is in its nature a sin cross to Gods pure law, 1
John 3.4. defiling our whole natures; and the sruit and effect of sin, Dr.
Prideaux.
as Adams sin, which (as a learned man says) was peccatum originans, ours
peccatum originale, and the cause of sin, the spring of our actual sins. How
did that poor woman cry to King Solomon, of a dead child found in her bosom;
so may we, (though not quite dead) yet, of that deadness in our hearts to what
is good, as Paul, Romans 7.24. that while we carry a dying body without, we are
pestered with a body of death within; nay alas, often we are guilty of much sin
in our inside, when it appears not yet in our practice. Christ said to Judas,
John 13.27. What thou do, etc. He was then doing, viz. betraying, murdering
of Christ, whilst he was at supper, There are not only strong bony sins (so
(...) notes.) Amos 5.12. But sins of omission, which Bishop Usher so Complained
of.
he was murdering of Christ inwardly; what sin we would do, but cannot, dare
not, or are prevented, that we do in Gods account, Josh. 24, 9. Balak is said
to war against Israel, because he gladly would, but durst not: so speculative
adultery, Math. 5.28. and heart-murder, 1 John 3.15. is loathsome to God. Mr.
Howel tells it as a strange thing, that a Serpent was found in the heart of an
English man, when he was dead; but alas, this old Serpent is by sad experience
found to have too much power in many of our hearts whilst alive: labor to
withstand the first beginnings of sin, else you will find (though you are no
great Logicians) that if you yield the Premises, you cannot deny the
Conclusion. Austin says that his good Mother Monica by sipping and supping
when she filled the cup to others, came at last to take a cup of nimis
sometimes.

12. Learn from her to love godliness above all empty vanities and fading
joys: I do not discommend decency in your garb (our Chronicles tells us that
starching is but an invention brought out of Flanders hither by Mrs. Dinghen in
the year 1564. not a 100d. years since) nor the use of lawful things in a
right way, but look upon piety and godliness as your life, 1 Pet. 3.7. And
your choicest Ornament, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. as you know that was the very joy of
the heart of your dear Mother. Diogenes could say of a fair woman without
virtue, oh quam bona domus, sed malus hospes: but make you Moses choice, Heb.
11.25. and David's choice, Psalm. 4.6, 7. account not gain to be godliness, but
godliness to be your gain, 1 Timothy 6.5, 6. Learn from her not to content your
selves with glittering, yet dead moral virtues, which very Heathens had,
(though Austin and Prosper deny that) but look to living saving and
distinguishing graces: you know how careful she was this way, though she was
well furnished with moral virtues. Scipio (that gallant Roman and Conqueror of
Africa) had a Son that had nothing of the worth of the Father, but only his
name: he was cowardly and dissolute, who coming into the Senate House with a
ring on his finger, having his Fathers picture livelily engraven, the Council
made an Act of State, forbidding him to wear that ring, who would not imitate
his Fathers virtues: and Alexander seeing a Cowardly Soldier of his own name,
bad him be valiant or forsake his name. I have not hitherto had any discomfort
in you, nor any visible grounds of fears; yet I beseech you, let her that is
dead, but yet speaks, prevail with you, not to sit down in any State, that
may consist with reprobation and damnation; love the power of godliness.

13. Seeing we have parted (though to her advantage) with such a helper,
adviser, etc. learn we to run more to God, to fly to Christ for Counsel, and
support, daily; and lean less to Creature Comforts, (which Luther calls
consolatiunculae Creaturulae;) Christ (said the dying Martyr in his Letter to
his sad wife) will rock the cradle, wash the dishes, do all for thee that thou
want; if we thus run to him here, we may sweetly resign up our selves to
him hereaster, and say with Wigandus, Do sordes morti; caetera, Christ, tibi.
Hos. 6.1. Be sure to make God your friend (other friends we see will leave us)
and whosoever has him a friend in Heaven, shall not want friends on Earth, as
namely his own conscience within; godly men, so far as regenerate; yea ungodly
men so far as good, Prove. 16.7. As Cyrus, Darius, Ez. 6. etc.

14. Learn we to be willing to be at Gods disposing, in what condition he sees
fit: we are worst when we are at our own disposing, and best when at Gods;
trust God, who has been with us in the six troubles, that he will be with us
in the seventh; yea through the fire and water, Isa. 43.2. Its good Scripture-
Logic for a Saint to argue thus, God has done thus for us, therefore do for
us still O Lord: thus Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3, 4. in the 3 first verses are six
[Hasts] thou have, thou have, etc. and all to usher in the fourth verse,
therefore do for us still. Numb. 14.19. thou have pardoned, therefore do
pardon, 1 Samuel 17.37. 2 Cor. 1.10.

15. It draws toward evening, let us be packing up, pack up all our Comforts
in God, and then we shall never lose them, Ipse unus (says Austin) erit tibi
omnia, quia in ipso uno beno, insunt bona omnia; quiet not our selves in any
riches on this side infinite; nor in any gold on this side Eliphaz. his gold,
God himself, Job 22.25. nor in any thing that may consist with hell. Plutarch
tells of a great Gentlewoman of Ionia, that showed to the wife of Phocion all
her rich treasure, pearls and jewels which she had: Phocions wife again showed
to her, her Husband, saying all my riches and jewels are in my Husband, so
should we say of God, Habet omnia qui haber habentem onania.
Psalm. 73.25. and with Bernard, ipse deus sufficit ad praemium. When the States
of Venice showed to the Spanish Ambassador the rich treasury of St. Mark (as
they call it) in Venice, which is so cried up through the world; the
Ambassador groped underneath to see if it had any bottom, and being asked
why? he answered, my Master the King of Spain his treasure differs from yours,
for his has no bottom, (meaning the Indies). We may soon find a bottom and a
vanity in all earthly, but not in God, not in Heavenly treasures, which are
unsearchable, Ephesians. 3.8. The mother of John Galear, Duke of Millain, when her
husband was dead, caused a Coin to be stamped with this Motto [Sola facta,
solum deum sequor]: while her husband lived, he too much doted and trusted on
him, (as perhaps she did 1 Timothy, 5.5.) but now found that she got good by that
which she thought would have been her ruin: it made her more pack up all her
Comforts in God.

16. Take heed in these seducing times, that you be not drawn aside, from the
faith which you have been taught, Col. 2.7. hold fast the form of sound words,
2 Pet. 3.17.
2 Timothy 1.13. Many much delight in new and strange words, and love (...) and
(...), affect new and uncouth expressions, which Austin of old and Luther since
observed, are very prejudicial to the truth, and usually when men Coin now
Pharses, they are about to forge some new Doctrines, Did we more mourn aright
for our sins, we should prevail for the removing this unclean spirit of error
out of our Land: compare Zach. 12.12, 13, 14, with 23, 2.
non parum interest ad Christianam venitatem, quibus verbis utamur, says
Austin, quia ex mutata temere phrasi secuta esi dogmatum mutatio. Satan that
old Serpent is subtle and hat hhis Methods, depths, devices; and has his
factors lying in every corner, with their (...) and (...), plausible words and
fair speeches fine phrases, Romans 16.18. such as have their (...) and (...) and
(...), Ephesians. 4.14. their coggings sleights, toylsome craft, and Methods and all
to deceive; take heed of itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. hearken to whole some
words, and doctrine that is according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. you know how
sound, how established, and careful she was this way whom no thing would
divert, but like that devout pilgrim, traveling to Jerusalem, and by the way
visiting many Stately Cities, Towns, Buildings, etc. and meeting with many
friendly entertainments, yet would still say, I must not stay here, this is not
Jerusalem: and so, do you and I.

17. Prepare we for our own death, that we may not be dismayed and troubled
thereat which is approaching and inevitable. God has given us fair warnings to
prepare for death, both by this breach in our own family, by the great
mortality in these days in the Country and Nation about us, yea death is in
our own backs and bones. When Christ was transfigured on the mountain, Moses
and Elia (long since departed hence) talked with him, and would you know what
discourse they there had? the text tells us; it was about death, Luke 9.30, 31.
well may we then often seriously meditate of it, and yet how backward are we
herein, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Lament. 1.9. How prone to forget our latter end, like men
in two boats on a river, they in the one boat see the other, as they think,
go swiftly; but their own boat seems to stand still, or move but slowly, so we
see others dying and decaying, yet are we prone to think that we may still live
long; but alas, Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo, Et subito casu quae
valuere ruunt: Now to enccu age us against the time that death come and seize
on us, Consider of these 7 meditations. (1.) that Jesus Christ has gone
through the grave and sweetened it, taken away all curse from it, and made it a
sweet bed to sleep in for a time, Isa. 57.1, 2. The Welsh men were never use to
fly, till their General or Leader fly: shall we be afraid to follow such a
Leader, who will be with us, though we go through the valley of the shadow of
death. (2.) As Christ has sanctified the grave, so he has provided mansions
and resting places for his in glory, and is gone before, to welcome us to
glory: as he came for us, from Heaven to Earth, so is he gone for us from Earth
to Heaven to intercede for us in life, and to entertain us at death: we shall
not be strangers there, John 14.2, 3. (3.) Our debt is fully paid, we are not
in danger of any arrest, or prison, our sins are fully paid for, to the utmost
farthing: our sins though many, are but the sins of men, but the satisfaction
is by the payment of God-Man; who gave not his Heaven and Earth but his very
Self to pay to the full. (4.) Consider that we are not to stand and appear in
our own rags, but in such a robe wherein God himself can find no spot, and
therefore may rejoice in the thought of that appearing before God, Rev. 19.7,
8. [Let us be glad and rejoice, etc. and why? to her was granted, that she
should be arrayed in fine linen clean and white, which is the righteousness
of the Saints.] (5.) we shall not dye (for our times are not in men's, but in
Gods hands, Psalm. 31.15.) till Gods work be wrought in us; and till his work be
wrought by us; till his work be wrought in us, and so we fit to dye; As Christ
took not away the being but the reigning of sin, so neither took he away the
being but the hurt of death: sin in the godly is like those beasts, Dan. 7.12.
whose dominion was taken away, but their being is prolonged for a time.
like ripe fruit, fit for the barn, Job 5.26. and till we have finished our
work, John 17.4. The work of payment and purchase is by Christ, fully wrought
for us; and that work of duty and obedience that God has sent us into the
world to do in our generation, shall be wrought by us, we shall finish our
testimony ere we depart, Rev. 11.7. (6.) Death when it comes, will be our very
good Friend, (as old Mr. Jordan used to say) it will not kill a Saint but kill
his sin, (non mors hominis, sed peccati;) sin brought in death into the world,
and death carries sin out of the world. Christ does that for us by death, which
he did not do by grace for us, at our first conversion; for then he took away
the reigning, but never till the wall fall down by death, the in-being of sin;
death, is to such the outlet to sin and sorrow, and the inlet to perfect
glory, mors est sepulcrum peccati: And death will do that for us, which all
Friends and Physicians could not do to the body, cure us of all pains,
diseases, etc. as Hugh Laverock and John Aprice, two Martyrs in Queen Mary's
days burnt at Stratford-Bow, whereof one was blind, the other lame; one said
to the other, Be of Comfort Brother, My Lord of London is our good Physician,
he will help you to legs, and me to eyes for ever. (7.) Fear not the pains of
death, see the joy of the Martyrs in their death: Remember how patiently,
comfortably, cheerfully, this servant of the Lord dyed; you are frequent in
reading the book of Martyrs; see how old Latimer, when ready to suffer, urged
that promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted, above that you are able, etc.

18. Search we our hearts, Lam. 3.39, 40. and beg we of God to know why the
Lord contends with us, what Jonah, what cursed thing there is amongst us
provohing the Lord, Job 10.2. Learn we the voice of the rod; for we may say of
sin, what Martha said to Jesus, John 11.21. if sin had not bin here, our dear
Relation had not dyed.

19. Seeing we are under the Lords rod, let us more avoid, and watch against
our sins: learn we the sweet lesson of Elihu, Job 34.31, 32. Surely its meet to
say unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more, etc. And
that of Christ, John 5.14. The Lord puts us in this boiling pot to take away
our scum, Ezekiel. 24.6. puts us in the furnace to take away our dross, Isa.
1.25. into the water, to whiten us, Dan. 11.35.

20. God whips us to sharpen us in the ways of God, we have gone too slow a
pace, let us now be zealous and amend Rev. 3.19. per vineula cresco, is the
Saints motto; they grow better by afflictions.

And now as Joseph sometimes put off his prison Garments, when he went in to
King Pharaoh, and put on his robes; so this Friend of Christ, has put off the
rags of mortality, and put on the robes of immortality. And if we had such an
officer in use amongst us, as once was amongst the Greeks, which did measure
the monuments of persons, when they were dead according to their virtues, and
good conversation in their life, then might she have had a chief Sepulcre, 2 Chronicles. 32.33. Sic mihi contingat vivere sicque mori; So let me live, so let me
dye,
That I may live eternally.
Discupio solvi, tecumque O Christ manner:
Portio fac regni sim quotacunque tui.
Beza. Horribilis mors est? fateor; sed proxima vita est,
Ad quam te Christi gratia certa vocat.
Praesto est de Satana, peccato, and morte triumphans
Christus; ad hunc igitur laeta alacrisque migra.
Musculus.

I may now say, what a Pious and Learned man said before me, and so conclude.
-- Quae mihi vita fuit, dulci cum conjuge fugit,
(Proh dolor!) infelix ut felicissimus idem,
Quod sic uxori monumentum fio sepultae.
Mr. Dugard.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Nath. Brooks, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversy, Sermons, Devotions.
1. THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councels,
and Ancients Fathers; in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by
Edward Chesensale Esquire Octavo. 2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio. 3.
The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from
the Laity at the Lords Table; by Dr. Featly D. D. Quarto. 4. The Quakers Cause
at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets. 5. Re-assertion of
Grace: Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Gospel: or a Reply to Mr.
Anthony Burgess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford: by Robert Town. 6.
Anabaptists anatomized and silenced: or a dispute with Master Tombs, by Mr. J.
Crag: where all may receive clear satisfaction in that controversy: the best
extant. Octavo. 7. The Zealous Magistrate: a Sermon by T. Threscot. Quarto. 8.
Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, August 1648. by J. Shaw
Minister of Hull. 9. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March.
24. by J. Shaw. 10. Judgment set, and books opened, Religion tried, whether it
be of God or men, in several Sermons: by J. Webster. Quarto. 11. Isreal's
Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on Earth: by K.
Matton. 12. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error and Profaneness: or a more
hopeful way to Grace and Salvation. by K. Young, Octavo. 13. A Bridle for the
Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the wavering, to stay the
wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by I. Brinsley of Yarmouth. 14.
Comforts against the fear of Death; wherein are discovered several Evidences of
the work of Grace: by I. Collins of Norwich. 15. Jacobs Seed: or, the
excellency of seeking God by prayer, by Ier. Buroughs. 16. The sum of
Practical Divinity; or, the Grounds of Religion in a Catechistical way, by Mr.
Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel: a useful piece. 27. Heaven and
Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings, and Princes, their Governments are
turned and changed, by I. Davis Minister in Dover: admirably useful, and
seriously to be considered in these times. 18. The Treasure of the soul;
wherein are tanght, by dying to sin, to attain to the perfect love of God. 19.
A Trearise of Contentation fit for these sad and troublesome times; by I. Hall,
Bishop of Norwich. 20. Select thoughts: or, choice Helps for a pious spirit;
beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus; by I. Hall, Bishop of Norwich. 21.
The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is added, Songs in
the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions; by I. Hall, Bishop of Norwich.
22. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed Soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Artithmetick, Surveying,
and other Arts or Mechanics.
23. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or, the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed; after a new and most expeditious
manner, (together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of mensurall comparison)
and in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Dimension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with usual
experiements of Measures and Weight, observations on Gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the Art Metricald: by T. Wibard. 24. Tectonicum, showing
the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stone, Steeples,
Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to
be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners, Carpenters and Masons: by L.
Diggs. 25. The unparalled work for ease and expedition, entitled, The Exact
Surveyor: or, the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all
manner of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood Lands, or
Mountains, by the Plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of
any Land, to Protect, Reduce, or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or
Chart, to make a map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any
other Eminent Surveyors Method: a Book excellently useful for those that sell,
purchase, or are otherwise employed about Buildings: by J. Air. 26. Moor's
Arithmethick: discovering the secrets of that Art, in Number and Species; in
two Books, the first teaching by precept and example, the ordinary Operations
in Numbers, Whole and Broken. The Rules of practice, Interest, and performed in
a more facil manner by Decimals, then hitherto has been published; the
excellency and new practice and use of Logarithmes, Nepayres Bones. The second,
the great Rule of Algebra, in Species, resolving all Arithmeticall Questions by
Supposition. 27. The golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial,
or Decimals; the Theory and Practice united in a Sympathoticall Proportion,
betwixt Lines and Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of
Form, Figure, Magnitude, and Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated
by Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species; made
compendious and easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by
Th. Wilsford, Corrector of the last Edition of Record. 28. Semigragphy, or the
Art of Short Writing, as it has been proved by many hundreds in the City of
London, and other places, by them practiced, and acknowledged to be the
easiest, exactest, and swiftest method; the meanest capacity by the help of
this Book, with a few hours practice, may attain to a perfection in this Art:
by Ier. Rich, Author and Teacher thereof, dwelling in Swithings-Lane in
London. 29. Milk for Children; a plain and easy method, teaching to read and
write, useful for Schools and Families, by L. Thomas, D. D. 30. The Painting
of the Ancients; the History of the beginning, progress, and consummating of
the practice of that noble Art of Painting; by F. Iunius.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Surgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
31. Culpepper's Semiatica Uranica, his Astrologicall judgment of Diseases
from the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding
out the cause, change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely
to live or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected,
according to the judgment of Hippocrates, and Hermes Trismegistus: to which is
added Mr. Culpepper's censure of Urines.

