A BROKEN HEART, OR THE GRAND SACRIFICE. AS IT WAS LAID OVT IN A SERMON
PREACHED AT St. MARY'S in Beverley, in the East Riding of the County of York,
upon the monthly Fast Day in Christmas-weeke, being December. 28. 1642.

By JOHN SHAWE, Pastor of the Church at Rotherham in the same County.

ISAIAH 57. 15. For thus says the high and losty One; that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

ISAIAH 66. 2. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word.

Printed at London in the year 1643.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Mr. THOMAS RAYKES, Major of the strong and populous
Town of Kingston upon Hull, and all the Aldermen thereof, to Mr. Richard Wood,
Sheriff, and Mr. James Lupton, and Mr. William Raykes, Chamberlaines of the
same famous Corporation, and to all the rest both of the high and low Church
Parishes: I. S. wishes truth add peace here, life and glory after by Jesus
Christ.
Right Worshipful and much honored Sirs,
THE eagerness and importunity of those amongst you whom it most concerned,
so pressingly inviting me to come over to you for the service of your Faith,
the work of the Ministry, when dangers and troubles should arise in mine own
Hemiphere, together with your unanimous and free choice of me for that work,
during the continuance of such storms, have moved me to hazard my self on
the public censure, that I may hereby acknowledge your kind respect, and
return you deserved thanks. Accordingly when storms arose at home, and the
providence of God opened a door; at your request I came over to you, why I
staid not with you, (but remain here at B^verl^y, six miles from you, and forty
miles from the smoke of mine own cabin) you well know: I have not now to
accuse any, or Magistrate, or Minister, or people; this only I am most
confident of, that the great God who now knows, and ere long will reveal and
judge the secrets of all then, will manifest that in this business I had (and
I verily so think of you) neither intention, nor endeavor, but such as are
agreeable to Gods Word, and the Parliaments order: I heartily wish that the
succ^sse of this business may further (that which in the Sermon I drive at)
both in you and me, Broken heartedness and contrition of spirit: my prayers
are, that the public curses wished may never fall on you; but that the
blessings of peace may ever flourish within your gates, both peace within you,
peace of conscience, by framing your conversation to Gods Word; and peace above
you peace with God, through the Reconciler Jesus Christ; and peace without you,
peace with men, which is always good and pleasant, especially now, and chiefly
in your Town, when it is attendant to truth and holiness. The Lord ever keep
you from that evil spirit of dissension, Judge. 9. 23. and grant that those
especially who ought most to be men of peace, may never for their own Number. 11.
29 otherwise affected were John Baptist, John 3. 29, 30. and Paul, Phil. 1. 18.
honor, gain, or private ends, make any breach in the walls of Jerusalem. I
had rather with Jonah be east into the Sea, then wilfully make public rents
in Christ's seamlesse Coat. My entreaty to you is, not to trust in any outward
strength or fortifications, lest selfeconfidence be your ruin, Isa. 30 3. Jer.
17. 5, 6. you see in Isa. 22. verl. 8 9, 10, 11. that Judah got Arms and
soldiers, made ditches, trenches, bulwarks, etc. But hear what God says,
verse. 12, 13, 14. That without Heartbreaking and humiliation, all these could
not save them: You know what was said to Phocas, If you build your walls to
heaven, yet if singer in, it will ruin them all: These fortifications cannot
keep out the worst enemies, as first sin, second Gods wrath, third sickness,
fourth death, fifth devils, sixth burning conscience now, seventh hell, etc.
Labor therefore, I pray you, for true repetance, that is the way to make a
Kingdom or Town stand, Matthew. 11. 21, 23. had Sodom and Gomorrah repented,
they had stood till this day. How did this prolong Nineveh? Jonahs first words
to Nineveh employed this, and holy Bradfords last words at the stake expressed
it, viz. Repent, O England, repent, repent! Of al enemies and treacheries take
heed of that cheating thief, and devilish traitor, reigning sin: that would
both discourage and ruin you. I remember a sweet and experimental passage of
the old Earl of Essex (Father to his Excellency that now is in the Field)
which was preached at Paul's Cross the Lords day next after his death; When I
have gone out in a morning (said he) and found some guilt lie on my conscience,
no man was more cowardly then I; but when I went to prayer in a morning, and
found a clear conscience and evidence of peace with God, I durst have
encountered an army of men, as bold as a Lion. Such like expression I find of
that Leichestershire Martyr, old Father Latimer. Secondly, practice that which
was the close of many of the Martyrs Letters, Pray, pray, pray. When Jacob
stood like a Virtue betwixt two vices: on one hand, had had Laban, and now Esau
and his crew on the other; Jacob goes over the brook alone, and wrestles with
God; and though the longer he strove, the weaker, the lamer he grew, yet holds
out (like Moses on the Mount) till the day, til he got a blessing, and Esau's
killing is turned to kissing, Genesis 32. 24. and 33. 4. See how prayer helps and
saves in the worst times, Joel 2. 31, 32. I remember what I have read of
Luther, that he prayed five hours a day (easque studio optissimas) and that
when he dyed, the bords of his closet, where he used to pray, were found rotten
with tears that fell from his eyes in prayer. Thirdly, labor to believe, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. by faith get into those chambers of protection, Isa. 26. 20. the
chambers of Gods attributes, of his decrees, of his promises, of his special
providence, principally the rock Jesus Cant. 2. 14.
Christ. I remember another passage of Luther, when they told him of the
malice, power, and preparation that the Pope and his accomplices had against him;
Come, come (said he) let us sing the 46. Psalm, and let them do the worst
they can: O but (said some) they have made a decree against you at Norinberge;
Oh! (said he) but there is another decree in heaven, and that must stand; I
(said he) have hitherto kept out Pope, Spain, and the Devil, by prayer; and
when I am gone, they that would keep him out must use the same way. But the
porch grows great; give me leave to present these abrupt meditations (such as
they are) to your hands, eyes, and hearts; and to shelter them (that I say not
my self) under all your Patronage: The blessing of him that appeared in the
Bush go with them, and be on you; who shall ever have the ferventest prayers,
heartiest thanks, and true affections of him who is,

At your command in and for the service of my Master Christ's JOHN SHAWE.
Beverley, Jan. 5. 1642.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, ESPECIALLY TO THE INHABITANTS WITHIN THE TOWN and
Parish of Rotherham; and others, to whom the Author has had particular
relation.
Christian and courteous Reader:
IF you ask me why, first this Sermon, secondly at this time, thirdly in such
a plain dress, homely garb, and phrase, comes now to stand in white sheets
before the public view; take my answer to each in a word.

To the first, thus, When this Sermon was preached in this place (where by the
providence of God I am cast at present) the watery eyes, attentive ears, and
tongues of many, most begged this. Secondly, among other notes (whether safe or
lost I well know not) these on the sudden I thought not unsuitable to the
present times.

To the second, thus, I being now absent from home, found some (though but
little) time, to write over these my thoughts: Again, I thought hereby
somewhat to recompense my necessitated absence from mine own people this way.

To the third, thus, I was at the preaching hereof forty miles absent from my
books, and suddenly called to this work, and had time only once to write
these notes over, and that in the time of no small distractions, and was
willing to print it as it was preached, as near as conveniently I could (else
I could not well have called it the same Sermon) moreover, I thought the
plainest phrase, without all curious dress, did best become these times, and
the day and occasion of this Sermon. God grant I may do that by printing, and
you by reading, which may keep us both from sinning, and further us in the way
of heartbreaking. If thou either bring a broken heart to the reading of those
notes, or hereby do got one, their plainness will down the better: if
neither, I much regard not thy censure. How-ever, if thy palate be too curious,
I shall commend the perusal of them to others, in whom I conceive my self to
have some more interest, as being my special friends, at As Cutthorp,
Somersall, etc.
Brampton in Derby-shire, at Chimloigh in As Heanton, Newplace, Bury, Colla^on,
Rashl^y, and M. To. Sk. etc.
Devonshire; Alhallowes on the pavement in York; Bradfield, and To some who in
these times have fled hither for refuge, as the Lady M. who has been already
plundered in York of a (...) 1000. p^unds, and ^s yet out above 700 Ald V. and
diverse others inhabitants also.
Beverley, and principally my tenderly affected stock at Rotherham in
Yorkshire; let (oh let) me prevail with all you to set after heaven with a
godly violence, Matthew. 11. 12. Fear not the present distempers, combustions,
rubs, and troubles; it is one sign Antichrist is going down, he rages so sore,
Rev. 12. 12. no violent thing is permanent, when one works exceeding hard, we
say he will get done quickly; dolor si gravis, brevis; it is but nub. cula cito
transitura. Cheer up and courage (beloved) as David did in the worst times;
when not only friends and goods, but wives and al gone, yet God was not gone,
1 Samuel 30. 6. this made him, and those blessed worthies to take joyfully the
plundering of their goods, Heb. 10. 34. heaven will pay for all ere long; know
that no affliction or cross comes on us, till there be great need of it for
us, 1 Pet. 1. 6. comes not without an everlasting knowledge and decree of God
before time, Act. 4. 28. Ephesians. 1. 5. and is ordered by Gods all-wise disposing
providence in time, not only God takes care of things in heaven, but on earth,
Psalm. 113. 6. not only of men on earth, but beasts, yea birds, yea little
birds, yea poor sparrowes, whereof two are sold for one farthing, Matthew. 10.
29. and five for two farthings, Luk, 12. 6. yea these poor birds move not; hop
not from bough to bough (ibid.) without Gods providence; may, takes not care
only of man's essential or internal parts, but of his very hairs which are
but excrements, Matthew. 10. 30. if a hair cannot fall from our heads without
Gods providence, much less our heads from our shoulders; nor shall any of
these crosses last longer then serves for our profit, Hebr. 12. 10. My times
are in thy hands (not in man's, or my enemies) O Lord, said David, Psalm. 31. 15.
When the sore is healed, the plaster will fall off, when the enemies have
pushed us nigher heaven, God will then knock, off the horns, Zach. 1. 20, 21.
burn the rod, Isa. 10. 5. What can sword or staff do without an hand to guide
it? The end and issue will be happy, Isa. 3. 9. only be we mourners, get
Christ's mark, Ezekiel. 9. 4. He that has delivered us from the Lion Romans 8. 28.
and the Bear, will deliver us from this Philistine. Let us pray, hear,
read, etc. but let all come from broken hearts; lap up all in contrition of
spirit. T though we have sought long, and still things seem to go worse and
worse; yet see how Jacob at length (not at first) prevailed with the Angel.
Moses on the Mount; Exodus 17. the importunate widow with the judge, Luke 18. 5.
and 11. 8. After the Luke 11. 8.
sharpest storm comes the sweetest sunshine: God can make the valley of Achor
for a door of hope, Hos. 2. 15. Let me beg of every Christian Reader a prayer
and a tear: I have said; let us both practice, and God give a blessing. Amen,
and Amen:

So prays I. S.
Jan. 6. 1642.
PSALM 51. ver. 16, 17. For thou destrest not Sacrifice, else would I give it:
thou delightest not in burnt Offerings, 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.
Wonder not (Right worshipful and beloved) * A Christmas as poor people say
against a good time.
that these times (by the voice of the multitude called good or the best times,
but by the practice of the most, made the worst times; wherein many use Christ
worse then hellish Judas, or devilish Pilate; they let him live till he was
above thirty three years old; but many use him like a Babylonish brat, dashing
out his brains as soon as he is borne) wonder not I say that these times, too
commonly made times of feasting and merriment, are now become times of fasting
and mourning; (yea, not the sixth or seventh (as Zach 7.) but the twelvemonth
fast) our Savior tells that when he Bridegroom should be takne away, then
should they fast in those days; Now when our Bridegroom Christ seems to
remove from the Temple, from the Cherub from the thr^shold, to the Mountain
(Ezekiel. 9. and 10. and 11.) When our God seems to be removed from our Land
(heretofore the glory of Lands, the fortunate Island) by reason of our sinues,
witness our wars and divisions from his ordinances; witness that want of
former efficacy, and power: from his peoples feeling, witness their fears and
troubles: and when his sacred Majesty also is removed so far (alas too far)
from his great council; no wonder if we fast in these days; I have read, in
our Chronicles, though now I cannot on the sudden tell where, (being far
removed from my study, Books and papers) that heretofore there was in England
a Christmas kept, called the silent and dumb Christmas; because of a great
affliction of God upon this Land, the people were silent from their wonted
mirth and sports; sure if ever this Land had cause, now much more, to keep a
silent and dumb Christmasse; It was a savory passage of Vriah, 2. Sam. 11. 11.
When the Arc and Israel and Iudab abide in Tents; and my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord encampe in the Fields, shall I then, etc. Take my lawful
liberty? and David himself, If I forget Jerusalem in my mirth, etc. Fasting
and Prayer if rightly performed have a great prevalency with the great God; a
wrestling power, and binding power, Ex. 32. A commanding power, Isa. 45. 11.
See in old Testament, Judge 20. There was a scareful civil War in the same
Land, amongst Gods people of the same religion (by profession); the cause was,
Benjamin would not suffer malignant delinquent parties to come to condign
punishment. The eleven Tribes send first to know the truth whether there was
such a fact done or no, its proved ver. 3, 4, 5. Secondly, they offer fair
terms of peace to their brethren, only let the delinquents be punished verse.
12. 13. Thirdly, when these fair proffers were rejected, then resolve they to
go and fight with their brethren, some of them to fight, and others to be
sutlers for the Army Verse. 9. 10. And forth they go. 400000 of Israel against
26000 of Benjamin; so that the people of Isarel had far more men, a far better
cause, and a good warrant (the Command of God himself (Verse. 18. 23.) Yet lost
they in two Battles far more men then the enemy had in all, even 40000 Verse.
21, 25. But when they went to fasting and prayer (which before they omitted)
Verse. 26. Then they beat down all before them; till themselves fell a weeping
for the loss of a Tribe Judge. 21. 23. Mat. 17. ^1.
So in New Testament some devils are not cast out by Prayer only, and other
good means, but by fasting and Prayer. See how fasting turned quite about the
heart of the greatest King in the World, to hate malignants and to affect Gods
Church, though against his own decree and purpose; one night above all the
rest Abashnerus could notsleepe, he calls not for company, but a book; no
book, but book of Chronicles would serve; no page in that wherein Mordecaies
good fact was mentioned, Est. 6. But see how Esther first prevailed with God,
Cap. 4. 16, 17. So when a Kingdom was upon the knee, within forty days of
giving up the Ghost; yet Fasting and Prayer was one help to bring all safe
back again, Jonah 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. I might be large this way, I only show how
needful this work is even now. Only (that we may do it aright) know its not
abstaining from meat and drink for a day (so far as our bodily health and
infirmities will admit) and from works of our calling, sports, and costly
apparel (so indeed sackcloth and ashes might better become us this day, if it
were the custom of Isa. 58. 5, 6, 7. Fast day should be spent as a Sabbath,
Lev. 23. 28. Isa. 58. 13.
our Country, then costy apparel Jonah 3. 5.) all this is but the outward, the
least part; but the main work of a fast stands in three things, 1.
Heartbreaking humiliation, called a day to afflict a man's soul in, Levit. 23.
27. Soule-pricking sorrow. Secondly, to endeavor after, and beg reconciliation
and peace with God; things can never go well.) hence its called a day of
atonement. Levit. 23. 27. Thirdly, Reformation to amend in Persons, Families,
Congregations, Kingdoms, what is amiss, so far as in us lies; else let Joshua
and Elders weep, rent their cloths, and fast, it will not do, till cursed
persons and cursed things be removed Josh. 7. 6, 7, 10, 11. Isa, 58. Neh. 9.
38. and 10. 28, 29.
5, 6. Fasts used therefore to be closed up with a Covenant; Neh. 9. 38. Now
that we may perform this inward and maine part of a holy Fast this day, I have
grasped up some few thoughts (such as in this want of Books, in this
distracted condition I can,) which may help us in this heartbreaking, and
soule-reforming work; a thing always needful, but for the salving of
distressed Ireland, and cementing distracted England, a very None such; out of,
Psalm. 51.

This is David's maine penitential Psalm, which Psalm. 51.
after he had so foully sinned with Bathsheba, been guilty of the murder of
Vriah made his servants accessory, etc. And, Secondly, after almost a whole See
the story of it in, 2 Samuel 11. 12.
years lying in this sin, Nathan had both covertly and openly reproved him,
and Thirdly, God had smitten his Conscience, and given him true repentance,
when he penned this Psalm.

1. Wherein he heartily and exemplarily expreseth Psalm has two parts,
concerning himself in ver. 18. and concerning the Church till end.
his Repentance in three things. 1. Confession and that, First. Of his sins
in general, how many and heinous they were, Verse 1, 2, 3. Secondly, of his
particular sins he was in especial guilty of Ver. 14. Thirdly, of the
fountain, spring, and root of all this mischife, Ver. 5.

2. Petition, and that of three things, (in all the World most necessary,)
First, Justification or free pardon of sins, Verse. 1. 2. Secondly, of
Sanctification, or healing and renewing grace, Verse. 10, etc. Thirdly, of
assurance, (which is the wel-being of the soul) Verse. 8. 12.

3. Resolution, what David would do upon this, Viz. Serve and praise God
better, Verse. 15. The manner how David would hereafter praise God is set out in
my Text two ways, 1. Negatively not with Sacrifices nor burnt Offerings, 2.
Affirmatively, but with a broken and contrite heart: for the first, why he
would not do it with Sacrifices, etc. He gives two reasons, 1. A priori God
never desired them aforehand, 2. God never delighted in them afterward.

For the second, why he would serve God with a broken heart, etc. He implies
in these words three reasons, 1. A broken heart is Sacrifices in the plural
number, i. e. Whereas there were five sorts of Sacrifices in the old law, viz
Burnt-offering, Meate-offering, Peaceoffering, Sin-offering and
Trespasse-offering, this broken heart is instar omnium, as good, nay better
then all. 2, Sacrifices of God:] i. e. The best and eminentest kind of
Sacrifices, (as Mountain of God, Word of God, people of God, are the
eminentest.) 3. Such as God will not despise, i. e. Highly prize and value, as
1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Despise not, i. e. Highly prize prophesing.

There remains now one maine rubb, or material Objection in the way to be
removed, and then I shall post apace, and case you with what have I may.

Object. How can it be said that God required not neither delighted in
sacrifices? etc. Seeing in the book of Leviticus, in all ceremonial Law, God
commanded them, his people in the old Testament daily offered them, and God was
well pleased with, and accepted of them, Heb. 11. 4. Genesis 8. 20. 21. Nay in the
next Verse but one of this, Psalm. David, promises them verse 19.

Ans. To this our Divines do (as I conceive truly and fully) give answer in
two points. First, God never required Sacrifices comparatively: i. e. In
comparison of a broken heart its nothing, its not to be compared with it, thus
Hos. 6. 6. Mercy and not Sacrifice, i. e. More, or rather then Sacrifice, thus
Joel: 2. 13. Rend your hearts and not your garments. i. e. Rather. Secondly,
God never required them abstractly and severed from a broken heart; the best
Sacrifices without a broken heart God never delighted in: thus Isai. 1. 11, 12,
13. Who required your Burnt Offerings, Sacrifices, Sabbaths, new Moons, id
est, God never required or delighted in the best of these, joined with living
in their sins, verse. 16. and severed from a broken heart; thus concerning
fasting, see Isai. 58. 4, 5.

I will slash our Text no longer, as some do their garments, till more gay and
less warm, idem vitii habet nimia, as nulla divisio, this is not a day of
curious dividing Texts, much less Kingdoms, but hearts only; this sad day and
time speaks, no curious toys, but plain dealing; expect not much from me
(beloved) that can perform but little at best, especially on this sudden,
chiefly now, being from books and means, thus torn, distracted and divided.

Observe only (after our plain homespun Country manner) two plain truths
from these two verses, 1. from the 16. verse.

Obser. That all the best outward duties and services (such as God in his word
requires) if performed without a broken and contrite heart are no way
delightsome but displeasing to God. See for this Isai. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. and
66. 2, 3.

The Scripture mentions, that the best duties and services done without a
broken heart, God abhors the duties, Isa. 1. 13. Psalm. 66. 18. Isa. 66. 2, 3.
as if it had not been done, Romans 2. 28, 29.

2 Abhors the person or doer of such services, calls them dogs dirt, chafe,
etc. 1 Cor. 10. 5. God was not pleased with such persons; and the Pharisee for
all his fasting (more then ordinary,) and paying, and praying, went away not
justified, Luke 18. 12, 13, 14.

3 Will damn them hereafter not withstanding all their duties, Matthew. 7. 21.
Luke 13. 27. All these can no more hinder the fire of Gods wrath, from
destroying Kingdoms or persons, then a wispe of dry straw can stop fire from
entering in at a gap. Zach. 7. And not only Scripture, but all reason speaks
this truth.

Reas. 1. From the words of text, because God never required them; Prayer,
hearing, keeping Sabbaths, receiving Sacraments God indeed requires and
enjoynes (so did he Sacrifices) but Prayer, hearing, receiving, etc. without a
broken heart, such God never required; from the first of Genesis to the last of
Revelation, no one place ever required such, Isai. 58. 5. Ier. 7. 22, 23. God
never spoke one word of such.

Reas. 2. Because such empty services Hos. 10. 1. as are without this
brokennesse; are in Scripture called, duties and no duties, services and no
services (as is said in the Riddle) 2 Kings 17. in verse. 33. Text says, those
mongrel Samaritans feared God. But next verse it says, they feared not God, so
1 Samuel 28. 6. Its said that Saul enquired of the Lord, yet 1 Chronicles. 10. 14.
Saul enquired not of the Lord, so in 1 Samuel 2. 23, 24. with 3. 13. Thus
ancients expound those places, where its said that the Jews sought not God,
fasted not, were not circumcised, as Jer. 9. 25, 26. etc.

Reas. 3. Because such services are but bodily exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Now of
your dearest Wife, Child, etc. What do you care for the presence of their body
(though never so beautiful and pleasant formerly) if it want a heart, a soul?
no, you say with Abraham, let me bury my dead out of my sight; no more does God
care for carcasses, and rotten outsides of duties, such Circumcision bodily
only, is nothing, Romans 2. 25, 26. Ier. 9. 25, 26.

Reas. 4. When men form glorious outward services without broken hearts, they
pride themselves in, and rest on them; now resting upon duties, upon the opus
operatum, or work done, is one kind of spiritual Idolatry; I know no more
reason that a man should worship the Cross, because Christ suffered on it;
then that a man should worship the Gibbet or Gallows because his father or
brother suffered thereon: The Cross was no piece of our redemption; I know no
more reason why I should worship an Image (though never so gloriously gilded,)
then that I should worship a dog, or grass, that is the workmanship of man;
these of Gods hands, and so more eminent; and yet I know no more reason to rest
on duties then either of the former.

Is there no kind of Idolatry but worshipping stocks, and stones? yes Ezekiel.
14. 7. witness second Commandment resting on Temple of the Lord, Temple of
the Lord; God can abide nothing worse Ier. 7. 4.
then pride in their performances, this honey in their Sacrifices; when they
come with handfulls to God; see Mat. 7. 21. 23. Luke 13. 27, 28. Pharisees did
perform abundance of duties, hecatombes of Sacrifices Matthew. 6. 2. 5. 7.
some say they prayed eight hours a day, and yet except our righteousness go
beyond theirs, no heaven Matt. 5. 20.

Reas. 5. Breaking of the heart is the end of Sacrifices, therefore better then
they; what are they without it? Sacrifices not only (though mainly) typed out
that true propitiatory Sacrifice, The Lamb of God that takes away sins of
world, but also shadowed out the cutting asunder, and breaking of the heart of
him that brought it; renting of cloths, noted renting of heart.

I see more Corn under my hand, then I can thresh out speedily, and yet your
extraordinary occasions Mr. Major sent us word that he had especial command
about the Soldiers that day.
this day cause me cut short my distracted thoughts; and therefore because I
would mainly insist on the second point, I must adjourne the other reasons and
uses of this point, and remain your debtor till another time, only mentioning
one or two of the heads, and that but like Gideons Soldiers, lap and away.

Use 1. Its no sign then of the true Religion to have an outward glorious
pompous outside; no, if it want a broken heart, its but vain oblations, Isa.
1. 13. but taking Gods name in vain. Satan may still dwell in the heart, for
all Iudases devotion, Ioh. 13. 27. And himself be a devil, Ioh. 6. 70. We
may for all them neither truly draw nigh to God, Mat. 15. 8. Nor he to us,
Prove. 1. 27, 28, 29. Indeed was it not so, I would confess that bloodsucking
Monster of Rome (that kills the bodies, Rev. 13. 15. and sells souls of men,
Rev. 18. 13.) To carry away the Bell from all Churches, for gilded Pictures,
Vestments, Tapers, Images, cringings, bowings, Crucifixes, Altars, Music,
etc. Long Prayers, strange gestures, (to make sport for children) and I hear
them brag of these; Alas who required these; and had they bin good, (as they
are not) yet one broken heart, or one poor servants Prayer with a broken heart
is worth 10000. of them.

Use 2. Would have told us, that in old Testament as well as new, God required
spiritual service, else cringing and laying hand on head of Sacrifice, would
not serve, without slaying sin, and broken hearts.

Use 3. Those may be dubbed for fools then, that ground their salvation, and
boast upon their good duties without brokenesse and humbleness of spirit: alas
Ahab repeated, Simon Magus believed, Herod reformed, Judas preached, many
wrought miracles, Matt. 7. Pharisees fasted, gave Alms, and prayed. Matt. 6.
yet lost both themselves and their labor, there are source things men count
eminent, and much rest on.

1 Natural abilities of body and mind, yet for all Achitophels wit, Goliahs
strength, Absolons beauty, Balams subtilty, may perish eternally.

2 Artificial Endowments: Yet Demetrius for all his art, Julian for all his
learning may perish, etc. A thousand others have had good parts and gifts this
way, good head-pieces, but bad heart-pieces, like a Toade with a Pearl in her
head, but poisonous body.

3 Glorious duties: yet all they, Matt. 6. praying, hearing, Matt. 7. 21, 22.
Luke 13. 27 Cry, it is not in me; are they Gods to save? they are but Bridges
to lead us to Christ, 4. glittering graces, such as five foolish Virgins had.
Ahabs repentance; Magus's faith, etc.

Use. 4. This would tell us also of the strait gate to life and broad way to
hell; not only heathenish Pagans, Secondly, idolatrous Christians (if so I may
term so foul a thing with so fair a name,) Thirdly, profane vicious
Protestants, but Fourthly, foolish virgios that have lamps without true Oil,
Math. 25. 3. Want the Oil typed out, Exodus 30. 23, 24. Made of the dropping
myrre of true Repentance; the strong Cinnamon of a lively faith, the large
spreading Cassis of universal obedience, a sweet smelling Calamus (or Oil
Olive) of love. I say even the best of these without broken hearts cannot
please God, therefore many perish, etc.

Use. 5. Sheves a golden path between two Rocks, neither leave the duties
undone, nor yet carnally shuffle them over, but do them, 1. From a right
principle, a broken spirit, Psalm. 1. 25 4. Ioh. 4. 23. The want of this spoild
Jehues zeal, 2 Ki 10. 31. Judas his piety, Jews devotion, Mat. 15. 8. and 23.
28. Like watches, clocks, jacks, ran apace, (are Automata) but no life within.
2. For a right end, not for our selves, Hos. 0 1. Our praise as Pharisees to be
seen of men, or Profit, as Judas for bag; or fear of punishment only as
Jews Zach. 7. 5, 6. For knavery, to cover and color it. Pro. 7. 14, 15. But
for Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. 3ly. By a right rule, according to Gods Word,
Heb. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 19. 1 John 5. 14. They err therefore that do duties from
a wrong principle, Lamps without Oil: a wrong end, as Iehu for a Kingdom: by
a wrong rule Isa 58. 5. Outwardly without heart, Mat. 15. 8. When rest upon
them, the Temple of the Lord, Temple of the Lord: when still live in their
sins, Isa. 1. 16. Ps. 66. 18.

Use. 6. Try whether we are like to do poor Ireland, distressed England any
good this day, we have now kept fasts these 12. Months, but is it with broken
hearts, Zach. 7. 5. 6. Or only like a bulrush, fresh, green smooth outside
without a knot, but within nothing but a spongeous Vain pith: no wonder if we
still fare no better, while still we keep such unbroken, slinty hearts; I
remember Demetrius, and the rest Acts 1934.
of his crafty fellows, cry out two whole hours great, great, is Diana; What
was Diana? an Idol: what is an Idol? nothing, 1 Cor. 8. 4. Now what a stir
had these men made two hours about a great, great, nothing; magnum nihil, if
we have all this twelve month sown the wind, we can expect no more but to
reap the whirlewind; if all this without broken hearts, God may give us that
sad answer, Mat. 7. 23. Ten righteous persons would save Sodom, but they must
be broken hearted ones, also in Gods account are no men, Ier. 5. 1. But your
occasions constrain me only to salute the first, that I may larglier settle
on the second and maine point from the 17. Verse, which is this.

Obs. 2. A broken heart and contrite spirit is exceeding pleasing and
acceptable to God; so the Text its Sacrifices its Sacrifices of God, its such
Sacrifices as he will never despise: such a frame of spirit God commauds, Ier.
4. 3. Hos. 10. 12. Such he commends by clear Texts, Psalm 34. 18. and 147. 3.
God has two chief places of residence, the highest Heavens and the lowest
heart, Isa. 57. 15. At the proud, God who is higher then the highest, scorns
to look at them, but has an Eagles Eye to a broken spirit, Isa. 56. 2. To
help such was Christ anointed, Isa. 61. 1. Such are blessed, Mat. 5. 3. By
parables; broken hearted Prodigal, Luke 15. The broken hearted Publican, Eu.
18. By example; broken hearted Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. 1. Josiah, 2 Kings 22. 19, 20,
21. Manasseh 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12, 13. etc. A broken vessel (as St. Bernard
well) holds Gods liquor the best: And now you that are the stronger flock of
Christ, and could journey faster. afford us a little patience while I unroll
the stone for your Lambs, and great with young, to drink a Acts 19. 34.
little, (for why should not we spend our brains and lungs, for the poorest of
these, for whom Christ died) and then I Will coast the shore with what good
speed I may. Let me a little unfold these two things, 1. What is meant by
heart, and spirit? 2. What, by broken and contrite?

Q. 1. What Is here meant by heat and spirit?

Ans. Not that fleshly heart in man's body, for if that be pricked or broken the
party dies presently; but man's soul or inside; (take me with you thus in
short:) man consists of two essential parts (or in Scripture phrase, two men,
inward man and outward man) body and soul, inside and outside; now the soul
(or inside) according to its several relations or Offices is called by
several names; from its nature is called a spirit, from its principal seat,
the heart; from its enlivening the body, the soul; from one maine Office, the
conscience; yet one and the same soul: as one man is both Father, Master,
Husband yet the same Man: for I take not the spirit, for the purer and more
spiritual part of the soul, viz. The understanding, and the heart for the
lower part or affections, as some are pleased to speak.

Q. 2. How man's soul is said to be broken and contrite?

Ans. This phrase implies two things. First, that by nature our hearts are
flinty, stony, rocky, hard, need breaking, such are we, such are our Children
by nature, Ezekiel 11. 19. Secondly, that our souls might be softened, melted,
made contrite which consists mainely in five things.

First, conviction; when by the word outwardwardly, and spirit inwardly God
convinces the soul of its corruption by natures cursed estate, sinful life;
perhaps at first charge the soul with some maine principal sin as here to
David, so with unchastity to Woman of Canaan. Ioh. 4. 18. With persecution to
Paul, Acts 9. 4. And afterward charge a whole swarm of sins (of which he
never dreamed himself guilty, Romans 7. 9.) And cries with Nathan here, thou art
the man; now he sees his money is but brass, he is not so good as he dreamed
of; before ask him, are you a sinner? yes, God have mercy upon us, we are all
sinners; why? have you broken the Law or Gospel? Else you have not sinned: now
come to particulars, ask him, have you broken the first Commandment? no, I am
no Atheist: have you broke the second? No, I am no Papist: have you broken the
third? No, all the Parish knows I am no swearer: have you broken the fourth?
No; all my Neighbors know I am a good Churchman: have you broken the fifth?
no; I am as dutiful a Child as lives; and so of the rest. Come to the Gospel;
do you believe? yes, and ever have, ever since I was borne, else pity I
should live; and so indeed glories that he has not sinned; but now when God
sets the spiritual part of the Law, and his sins in order and danger before
his face, now, he holds up his hands before Gods Bar, and cries guilty, Lord
guilty! every word hits a thumpe on his heart, and he cries. Oh! I have been a
vile Traitor and Rebel against Heaven, Acts 2. Strikes him dead. Romans 7. 9.

2. Soul afflication; not only conscience is convinced, but his heart is
pricked, vexed, afflicted, Lev. 23 27. what law says outwardly, spirit of
bondage fastens it close to the heart inwardly, Romans 8. 15. Pricked, and
pierced in heart, Acts 2. 37 Cries out oh damned! I fear damned, Acts. 16. 30.
What shall I do? is there no balm in Gilead? The soul throbs and cries, Oh
what a fool was I? What a good God have I angered? what a sweet Christ,
abused? what a precious soul have I defiled? What fearful danger have I
incurred? etc.

3. Soul shaming; smites upon his thigh, Ier. 31. 19. How mad was I to trade
and tug in these Brick. kills of Egypt, and prefer the puddles of Damaseus
before silver streams of Jordan, ashamed with Daniel c. 9, 7. Blush with Ezra.
c. 9. 5. Confounded in himself with prodigal, Lu. 15. 21. Grieved
exceedingly, Zach. 12. 10, 11.

4. Soul hating and leaving sin, or leaving it with hatred. Many leave and
part with their sins; Phaltiel parted with his Wife Michol (formerly married to
David) when David sent for her, be left her for fear of being killed by Abner,
but his tears at parting argued he did not loath her, 2 Samuel 3. 16. Or as
mariners in a storm cast their goods into the sea for fear; but hate them
not, but now he looks upon his lusts as a very death. Romans 7. 24. Casts them
away with detestation, Isa. 30. 22. Ezekiel. 7. 16. Ye loath themselves for them,
Ezech. 20. 43. yea, part with them. non cum animo revertendi, Hos. 14. 8. 2
Cor. 7. 11.

5 Soul humility. A lowliness in his own eyes; shall ever I be proud, and
puffed up, that have had such a heart, such treachery against the King of Heaven?
when ever proud flesh arises, his own vileness keeps him low, down proud
heart; what thou proud, that have done thus, and thus against thy good God? Job
7. 20. and 42. 5, 6. Genesis 18. 27. thus that Manohester Saint, and Martyr,
Bradford, closes up his sweet Letters, miserrimus peccator, a very hypocrite,
John Bradford; thus Saint Bernard, quasi quoddam monstruminter filios hominum
Sto. Thus Saint Paul, less then the least of Saints; the Centurion, unworthy
to come under thy roof; John Baptist, unworthie to untie the latchet of his
shoes; thus Prodigal, unworthy to be called thy servant, etc. Isa. 57. 15.

This short inch of time enforces me to pass by the reasons; which I had
gleaned, to assert this truth; hoping at this time you will take God on his
bare word; and so I with what haste I can, post to the Uses, which are like to
Moses Arc, from within, and before which let me now draw out to you, 1 Aarons
Rod of reproof: 2. The Pot of Manna: 3. The two Tables. And first of the last,
the Tables of direction.

Use. 1. These Tables plainly show us what a heart every of us has by nature,
viz. hard, stony, flinty, needs melting, grinding, hewing, unsensible,
inflexible, compared to a stone, that drops melt not; to a dead man whom words
move not? Ephesians. 2. 1. Ezech. 11. 19. Ask your servant or child when you come
from Church, where was the Text? what was the Sermon? they scratch, but not a
word; you would wonder how they could so quite forget it, or how those flocks
of devils that follow the hearer (as birds the sower) have stolen all, Luke 8.
5. Let this Servant go to Market, ask him how this or that grain or goods
sold? what news? ask him of some play or show, he tells you a very ready tale;
oh the flinty mind to saving truths!

Offer a man 1000 pound a year, to this or that convenient thing; threaten him
with great fines, imprisonments, death; oh, he strats, runs, shrinkes, etc.
tell him of eternal glory in Heaven, besides a hundredfold gain here, or of
eternal garboiles and flames in Hell, besides a hundredfold loss here; all
these never startle, never move him; oh the rockie heart to saving good! such
are you, such thine by nature, etc.

2. This Table would have directed us in trying of our selves, whether we were
ever broken hearted or not; and in this Table I had thought to have mentioned
four searching signs and trials; but having much before me, I must be feign
at present to reprive this.

Use 2. I come next then to the pot of Manna, and it will help us the way, how
a sinful people; with whom God is angry, and has a terrible controversy, may
yet come to be at peace, and at one with their God again, how to recover a
fainting dying Nation; truly its not Sacrifices, Offerings, but a broken heart
that will help us, this has proba^um est upon it, de facto is has done it.
Jonah 3. 6, 7, 8. Ierem. 18. 7, 8. this has the promise for it, 2 Chro. 7. 14.
Ezech. 18. 30, 31. Joel 2. 13, 14. 2 Chro. 34. 37. and wonder not, for 1.
renting of the heart will heal the rents of a Kingdom; the more hearts are
rended the more will the land and its divisions be glued and cemented, Joel 2.
13, 14. Again, where the hearts are rended for sin, there Gods heart is
rended with compassion to such sinners, Ier. 31. 18, 20. Hosea 11. 8.

3. God will break us inwardly or outwardly; if not inwardly, then look for
outward breakings, (for broken we must be) as Pharaoh when his heart would not
break, then he was broke in pieces, and his Kingdom also; but if heartbroke,
then God has his end, which is not our affliction or destruction, but
heartbreaking, Ezekiel. 18. 32. Isa. 57. 15, etc.

4. When hearts are broken, then sins are pardoned (as here Nathan told David,
2 Samuel 12.) and when sin is pardoned, controversy is removed, so as though God
may chasten in mercy, yet not punish in wrath, Isa. 1 16, 18, 19.

Quest. But what means may I use to get my heart broken and contrite (for I no
way trouble you with the School distinctions of attrite and contrite, etc.

Answ. 1. Go to the great heart-maker, heartmender, heart-searcher, by fervent
prayer, as David here did, verse. 10. God claims as well heart-mending and
curing the spiritual stone, as a privilege to himself, Ezech. 11. 19. as
well as heart searching, Ier. 17. 10. not withstanding, use the means we must:
as,

2. Use the hammer of the Law of God, Ier. 23. 29. when the Philosopher jeered
Anthony the hermit for want of books, he told him, Oh Philosopher, I have
three great books, Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and in each of these variety of
letters, Stars in the book of Heaven; Men, Beasts, and Plants in the second
book; and Fishes in the third; yet none of these so proper to break the heart,
as this of the word; glass thy self in this Word, this Low, and it will
discover to thee four things to break thy heart: First, the defiled, woeful,
cursed estate by nature at first; as David here Psalm. 51. 5. as Paul tells Romans
5. 12, 15. we hate toades for their cursed natures (and so serpents likewise)
though they hurt us not; now this great Sea of our misery, runs (as divines
speak) especially into six branches: 1. We lost all our grace, and spiritual
image of God (for the natural image we could not) whereby we were holy and
rightequs (in cur model) like God, Genesis 3. 7. and 6. 5.

2. All mankind, every part of man is defiled with Adam was the Root, we the
Branches, he falling, we all fell; he Fountain, we streams, he poisoned, we
are all infected; he Parent, we Children, he being a traitor, all out state is
consiscate by all Law of Nature and Nations.
the roots and seeds of all manner of corruption, and made prone to all that
is naught, Psalm. 52. Romans 3. and 1. 29.

3. In that estate our persons are slaves, in bondage to Satan, and to his
master, (sin;) bound already, hand and foot, and indarknesse; only wont
tumbling into the pit, Romans 14. Eplos. 2. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 26. and so bound as all
world cannot free us, but Jesus Chirst John 8. 35.

4. During this estate we are quite disabled from doing God any acceptable
service Prove. 15. 8. 9. John 9. 31. etc.

5. Have in that estate no true saving (but only a common, civil,) right to
the Creatures, and outward things, Til. 1. 15 (Rom: 8. 20, 21.

6. Liable to all misery, Isa. 59. 1, 2, 3. Ierem. 5. 25. Math. 25 41.

Secondly, the Law shows also the actual sins of thy life: As 1. thy vile
thoughts, desires, wishes, in thy heart (whether outwardly expressed or not,
and these are all known to God now, and shall all be revealed hereafter, Job
42. 2. 1 Cor. 4. 5. and these thoughts (which are as thick in a wicked heart
as moats in the Sun) are sins in Gods eyes, Prove. 24. 9. the thought of fosly
is sin, yea and great sins, Acts 8. 22. pray to God if perhaps the thought of
thy heart can be forgiven.

So 2. Wicked and idle words, and of the least of these we must give account to
God, Matthew. 12. 36, 37. besides lying, swearing, cursing, etc.

So 3. Of thy life, against the first and second Table, toward God and man,
against every Commondement, that (as the ancients speak) in the Gospel, some
were dead, but not carried forth, as Iairus daughter; some dead. and carrying
forth, but not buried, as Widows son; some dead, carried forth, and buried,
as Lazarus; such are our sins, some dead thoughts in heart, not carried
forth; some dead words, carried forth by the tongue, but not buried; some dead
actions, carried forth and buried in the life: and thus we sin, by neglecting
good, committing evil, and dead performance of what is good.

3 The law shows us also that we are guilty of the sins of many others, some
whereof may happily be already in hell for them, some perhaps already hardened,
others in danger; its a fearful thing to be guilty of one Vriah's blood; one
Abel's blood cries loud; Oh what is it to be guilty of so much soul blood? of
wife, children, servants, friends, companions, kindred, neighbors, by
persuading, humoring, enticing, not hindering (where thou have a calling and
power so to do) or any other way furthering their sin? (peccatum qui non
prohibet cum possit jubet) the ancient fathers some of them used to pray Domine
remitte nobis aliena nostra peccata, our other men's sins; the Rabbis have a
note from Genesis 4. 10. the voice of thy Brothers bloods, that because the word
is [bloods] in the plural number in the Hebrew (as you see in your Margent)
therefore its meant, that Caine not only killed Abels person, but all those
that might have come from Abels loins, (had he been married) and from their
prosterity successively to the worlds end; so thou by thy sins infectest thy
children, servants; they have families, and many children; and teach theirs
accordingly; thy sin may spread to many thousand persons ere day of Judgment;
how is Jeroboam branded, with this brand? Jeroboam that made Israel sin; Oh
what is it to destroy a soul? 1 Cor. 8. 11.

4 Law shows our danger in this cursed estate; If any of these three things
happen to us which I shall now name; (and any of them or all of them or all of
them may any hour) we are utterly undone for ever; viz. If 1. In this estate
God suffer us to sin that unpardonable sin against Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12. 31,
32. 1 John 5. 16. Or 2. that God swear against us in his wrath, and give us up
to our own hearts lusts, Romans 1. Psalm. 81. 12. Ioh. 12. 40. If God say let
never grace grow on thee while world lasts, as Mark. 11. 14. Or 3. If death
(any one way of a thousand; quolibet momento mill moriendi modi,) come and
seize on thee, thou art eternally undone, thou have supped sure; Farewell God,
Heaven, hope, for ever: and for want of hope thy heart may break; Let this
danger work upon thee, (ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas.) Thus the Law will
be a means to break our hard hearts.

Thirdly, A third means is melting Gospel; the consideration what Christ has
done and suffered for thee so vile a wretch, tendered to thee so unworthy a
worm; this Feather bed breaks some flints more then hammer of Law, thus did
it to the prodigal, Luke 15. I remember a Story in our Chronicles (the place I
cannot cite, not having books) of a poor Cobbler that sometimes lived in
London, near a very rich honest Merchant, the Merchant was so exceeding kind
to the Cobbler, that he wanted neither money, gold, cloths, meat, any thing,
but the Merchant helped him; told him that he should never want any thing which
he had; ere long, days of persecution for the Gospel came on, and who was the
main man to accuse and persecute the rich Merchant and endanger both his life
and fortune, but this Cobbler? yet so it pleased God the Merchant escaped;
afterward the Cobbler would never meet the Merchant, but ran to the other side
of street, or turned back when he came near him; but in a strait lane one day
the Merchant purposely met him; and says, I freely forgive thee all the wrong
you have done me, I will never think worse of thee, come to me at any time,
and I will afford thee any help or means I can; at which kindness the Cobbler
falls down, almost baptized again in his own tears, was so overcome with
this free mercy; that it broke and melted him into as loving and dutiful a
poor Neighbor as lived: Oh! Jesus Christ has laid down his life for us
wretches! Tendered to us Gospel, Heaven, etc. Yet we by our sins show this
Christ, brought upon him unspeakable sufferings, persecuted him in his members,
proved false with him in the covenant, etc. Yet he follows us to our doors
and consciences with free mercy, promising both to forgive, Exodus 34. 7. And
to forget what has been amiss, Ier. 31. 34. And Mica. 7. 18. And to help us
for this life, for next, for body, soul, grace and glory; Oh let all this
kindness melt us, let all this goodness win us to Repentance, Romans 2. 4. As
Jer. 3. 22. When the Jews had foully fallen and again back sliden, and still
God calls and runs after them with mercy, Oh this melts them and they cry out,
Oh Lord! behold we come to thee for thou art the Lord our God. Such a melting
glory Ruffin, tells of Saint John the Evangelist toward a young man fallen
away, but I hasten, etc. Goats Milk breaks this Adamant, etc.

Fourthly, means to break our hearts, is the consideration of Gods Works,
even these may help us this way, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. Psalm 119. 71. Luke 15. 16,
17. And because this is Verbum diei most suitable to the present times, lend me
so much patience as a little to enlarge it in some particular considerations
relating to our own case, and here consider, 1. What great mercies England
has had; mercies positive, great peace, great plenty, great store of Gospel;
comparative mercies (give me leave so to speak) great peace, Gospel, and
plenty, then any other Nation in the World, since the first light darted from
above: Before the fall of Adam, he had never that great mercy of Christ to dye,
etc. (having no sin, needed no Savior,) he had a covenant of works, we of
grace, he (as the Angels now) justified by inherent righteousness, (though
then no merit) we by the Righteousness of another impured; 2. From the fall of
Adam till Christ the Church was in its swaddling cloths, under dark types and
shadows, Moses's padagogie; but now the Veil is rent, Types fulfilled, Christ
is come, and all things cleared, 3. After Christ, during Primitive times, what
raging ten Persecutions, many hundred Christians sluine every day in the year,
save the first day of January? And what hellish heresies did the Dragon belch
up? Especially four, that occasioned four general Counsels; 4. Since then
how has God cleared up the Gospel in these parts? and for peace; admirable!
Its thought worthy the Registring in Scripture, that twice, the I^wes had peace
and rest forty years, Judge. 3. 11. and 5. 31. But once for a wonder its
Chronicled that Gods Church had peace eighty years together, Judge 3. 30 But we
beyond them, above eighty years peace; our forefathers would have given whole
Cart-leads of Hay and Corn in King Henry the eighth his time, for a few
Chapters of St. Matthews Gospel, or St. James's Epistle; yea Bibles in English
not permitted; yea latter; in the beginning of that Virgin Queen Elizabeth's
Reign; we have heard, such a man was one of the third or fourth Preachers in
the shire, now more good Sermons in one City in a month, then was in all
England in a year; and for plenty, admired by our friends, envied by our
enemies, tell me of any Nation in all points the like, Et eris mihi magnus
Apollo.

Nay let me add, superlative mercies, above all men's expectation, who would
have said, Genesis 21. 7. That Sarah should give suck; so who would have said
three years ago, that we should have a Parliament, a trienniall Parliament,
and that not to be broken up without mutual consent? etc. Who would have said
such great things should be done or endeavored thereby? Nay mercies above the
ordinary course of Gods providence and dealing with others, a promise in the
Bible; we have such natural sins for which God plagued and threatened other
Nations, yet we exempted by special prerogative (as a godly Divine said well.)
Nay mercies above all the plots of devil and devilish men; have we not had
formerly and lately, against us French plots, Spanish plots, Irish plots,
English plots; and a plot, a plot, a plot, and still a plot, yet God has
soared us above all, as on Eagles wings.

Add to these also, privative mercies; has not God delivered us from
heathenisme when this poor Island worshipped every several day a several God;
the Moon on Monday, Tuisco on Tuesday, etc. But God delivered us: after this,
came Egyptian darkness of Popery, but God gave the beast a blow in King Henry
the eighth his time; brought him on all four in King Edward the sixth time;
gave him a deadly blow, in famous Queen, Elizabeth's days, and still more and
more does (and I hope will) his head and horns and heart perish; did not God
miraculously deliver us both in fire (that hellish powderplot, the devils
masterpiece) and in water (in 88.) Isa. 43. 2. Did he not do as much three
years ago when two Israclites were contending together, two sister Nations?
but I might in these be infinite, if I looked on these two years last past;
years (not as formerly of mercies, but) of miracles. Therefore consider.

2. Gods warnings to England, warned us by the Ministry as to Ninoveh, Jonah
3. 4. Warned us by others, all the World (almost) on fire round about us; nay
warned us by visible wonders; how did God warn Jerusalem ere its destruction;
and Germany ere its troubles, with many marvelous signs and prodigies (as you
see of late in print) and has he not done as much for us (and all these signs
have voices to warn us, Exodus 4. 8.) Was not that book, called the
preparation to the Cross, taken out of a fishes maw at the Commencement time
in Cambridge, (when many Ministers and others from all parts were met together,
a fair warning, for England to prepare for the Cross? what spoke those
extraordinary redoubled tides? Strong birth at Stone-house near Plymouth; the
exceeding strange thunders and lightning at Withcombe in Devon, Octobr. 21.
1638. At Anthony in Cornwall on Whitsunday, 1640. The several stories are in
print, so at Chidlington in Hartfordshire; at Wakefield in Yorkshire, and many
other warnings from Earth, Sea, Heaven, all, etc. Such as, Amos 4. 6, 7, 9. 10,
11, etc.

3. Consider bleeding Ireland, let that break our hearts, how many Husbands,
Wives, Childrens Throats, how many houses, Families, have our sins, there
cut, ruined, destroyed? I have heard of one that espying a Woman that cut his
Wife and childrens Throats, he was in such exreme passion and rage that he was
struck dumb; and no wonder; Oh think what we have done; if one from beyond
Sea send any Armor, or Ammunition, to ruin the loyal subjects and strength of
England, Oh how vexed and angry are we! Alas we have sent over our sins, the
worst Armor and Ammunition against poor Ireland, etc. But the glass is my
saithfull monitor.

4. Consider Englands grievous sins, let them Judge. 5. 8. Never was misery on
the Jews, but idolatry was one or the only Cause; or as the Jews spoke in
every calamity there was something of the golden Calfe.
melt us; (and now I am in a Sea) I will only heave up a drop or two.) 1.
Grievous Idolatry; a dividing sin, what caused God to divide the Kingdom of
Israil into two Kindomes twixt Solomon his Son and servant, but because
Solomon divided Gods worship twixt God and idols? See 1 Kings 11. 6. 7, 8. 11.
Oh that we should suffer those Cananites and Perizzites, of whom God has so by
fire and water warned us, still to be pricks in our sides, and themselves to be
snares to us Judge 2. 3. 2 Our great abuse, of long peace, Judge. 3. 30. Of
great plenty, we waxed fat and kicked, (as Israel) of great Gospel; Rogers the
first Martyr in Queen Mary's days told John Day (fellow Prisoner with him,
and he that afterward did print the Book of Martyrs) three strange things, 1.
Brother Day I shall burn at a Stake, and you be delivered, 2. Thou shall live
to see the Lady Elizabeth (now in Prison,) to be Queen of England, (both these
proved true) and, 3. Brother (said he) then tell my brethren in England,
unless they use the Gospel better then we have done, there lies a heavier
storm of vengeance over their heads then ever hung over ours; they had six
years Gospel in King Edward the sixrs days and (as he said) abused it (so
complained the exiles in Frank ford of that sin) and God sent them five
years fiery tribulation in Queen Mary's days; we have had since eighty four
years of much more light of the Gospel, Oh -- but I hasten to a third great
sin, viz. Contempt and abuse of Gods faithful Ministers and people, is it
not as in Elisha's days, that Men, Women, yea little Children, cry, come up
thou Roundhead, come up thou Roundhead (I should have said,) thou bald-Head,
2 Kings ^. 23. But take heed some she Bears, or visible marks of Gods Anger
seize not on thee and thine, as verse 24. So abuse of Gods Ministers, 2
Chronicles 36. 16. Christ's Members, Jewels, Apple of his Eye, etc. Add, 4.
Gur Sabbath breaking, and that with Sabbath breaking was a ru^ner of Germany
(as th^mselves confess) and sure things never went well in England since
Sabbathbreaking was tolerated and allowed.
authority, as 2 Chronicles 36. 11. So, 5. Not laying to heart the afflictions
of Joseph, Amos 6. 6. And many more; all these (this banning, damning, cursing,
swearing, whoredom, with which I am loath to defile the Air and abuse your
patience) should break our hearts.

5 Consider also Englands grievous rents and divisions, to help to rend our
hearts, behold not only a man of Israel and an Egyptian, but Israelites
coatending together; of all Gods judgments War seems the worst and sorest,
witness David's choice, 2 Samuel 24. 13, 14. therefore its usually mentioned the
first in the rank, Ezekiel. 6. 11. Jerem. 44. 12, 13. where Famine and Pestilence
are, they oftentimes hold out the sword; but where the sword goes, usually it
brings in both the other with it; but of all war, my Letany is, from Civil
War among our selves, good Lord deliver us: as being of all other 1. most
unprofitable, nothing got by fighting among our selves. 2. Most unchristian,
for men professing the same Religion, to quarrel. 3. The most unnatural,
father on one side, Son on the other side; Father against Son, Son
against Father; Brother against Brother. 4. Most dangerous, while we contend
together, all of us lie open to a common enemy, (never was any conquest of this
Land, but this way) 5. Most hurtful to others, while we contend, we make our
selves unhelpfull to bleeding Ireland and other Churches. 6. Most scandalous,
what will the heathen, what will our enemies say? Cornelius de lapide may
change his note on Isai. 11. Alas are not we a house divided, and a Kingdom
divided against our selves? If we bite and devour one another, shall we not
be devoured one of another? Luke 11. 17. Gal. 5 15. When God was wont to plague
his worst enemies, it was with sending the spirit of division one against
another, and so one ruining another, Judge. 7. 2 Chronicles. 20. Midianites,
Moabites, Ammonites; etc. Nay, 2. consider what great things lie now at stake,
not our Estates only, but Liberties, nay lives, (how many a gallant man
already slain? and many more in danger,) my his sacred Majesty's person is in
danger, the breath of our nostrills, etc. Lam. 4. 20. A certain man may draw a
bow at a venture, and as soon hit the King, as another man, 1 Kings 22. 34.
Nay danger hence to all the Protestant Churches under Heaven, nay Religion, the
Gospel it self, the Gospel, that precious Gospel, in danger to be removed
(though all world cannot ruin it) In the rising in the North in Queen Eliz.
days, the popish army came out of the North to Durham, Darnton, Tadcaster,
etc. And as they came, burnt Bibles; look at Shilo, at 7. churches of Asia,
Jerusalem, Egypt, Rome, etc. and let this break our hearts.

6 Consider again, this may break our hearts, that by our sins we should stop
God (as I may say) when he was so gloriously going on, in such a blessed work
of reformation; In the beginning of this Parliament how did the beautiful
Zerah of mercy and reformation, Genesis 38. 28, 29, 30. Break out with a precious
hand, full of blessings? but how have our sins brought forth the stormy
Pharez of troubles first? so in King Edward the sixth his days, there were as
fair beginnings of reformation (all things considered) as ever; but how did
sin stay the children when come to the birth; and that glorious Sun set under a
cloud? So in King of Swedens time, what mighty hopes? yet ere long extremly
nipt by our sins; so still; and who can yet say that the bitterness of death is
past? how have miseries grown on us of late? from differences in mind to paper
and quill-contention, from that to raising forces, from that to blows, to
blood? and from hence God knows whither; our sins may cause God to hiss for
the fly beyond the River, Isa. 7. 18. (but of this more then enough) oh let
this break our spirits!

7. Consider that if our hearts and Spirits were kindly broken, who knows what
a day may yet bring forth? its easy with our great and good God to bring all
things about, as in Ahashuerus and Esthers days; as Isaac from the Mount,
Peter from prison in the very nicke of time, when almost quite gone; Daniel.
and the three children, when past the help of man; yea, God loves to do thus,
that himself may alone have the glory, as in Gideons case, Judge. 7. 2, etc.
One of the three most glorious visions in the old Testament, (as the Rabbyes
speak) was, that Exodus 3. 23. where God showed upon Mount Horeb or Sinai, to
Moses (now 80. years old) a bush, NO tall Cedar, or high Tree, but a low
bush,) this bush signified the low condition of the people of Israel in Egypt:
the fire in the bush noted the fiery tribulations and persecutions they there
endured under Pharooh; yet because Christ (the Angel of the Covenant) was
there, therefore all Egypt could not consume that poor bush, nay that fire was
a means to hasten them the faster to the promised Land. Though we are gone
beyond man's, yet not beyond Gods help; who knows but God may now and hereby
be working some great and glorious mercy for his Church? if we had hearts fit
for the mercy, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. even broken spirits; sure we are that
Antichrist must down: in Gods Decree and the Churches faith he is down, as
good as down, already, Revel 18. 2. no wonder, he has the curse of God, the
sins of thousands lying heavy on him; thousands of thundering prayers
against him, and not one prayer in all the world for him; for all wickedmen,
swear they can, curse, banne, drink, (dam me) they can, but pray they cannot,
not truly, Psalm. 66. 8. Isa 66. 3. now he that is so without God, prayer,
promise, hope, etc. how can he stand? what is able to stand against the great
Cannons of Gods. peoples prayers? I am not a Prophet, nor son of a Prophet, I
confess I know not the times and the seasons, only give me leave to tell you
the judgment of others, both of our own and transmarine Divines, and I shall
leave you to your own opinions herein. M. Brightman (a man whom his worst
enemies cannot justly accuse either of impiety or ignorance, a man surely pious
and learned) in his notes on Canticle 6. and on Revel. 19, 4. says, that the
first calling of the Jews (that resurrection as it were from the dead, Romans
11. 15.) shall be about the year 1650. Now before the sixth Angel pour his
Vial upon the River Euphrates that those Kings of the East, the Jews, may
come in Revel. 16. 12. the fist Angel must first pour his Vial, upon the
seat of the beast, Revel. 16. 10, 11. Antichrist must first go down; to him
accords a great Divine of our own, and brings many Scriptures to prove it; (as
you see in print) so have many of late both of our own, and foreign Divines,
jumped on the same time. 2. Others add, that three prophetical days and a
half, Revel. 11. 9. that is) three years and a half, must Gods faithful
witnesses, his Zerubbabels and Joshua's, the faithful of God, suffer a great
persecution, just before Antichrist go down; now if this be a truth, then may
this great trouble fore-run a great mercy; God showed to Abraham a vision, Genesis
15. 17. after a smoaky furnace, comes a bright shining lamp; I cannot tell
whether so great a blessing be so nigh, as within 8 or 10 years, only Sun
shines swee^^est after a great shower.
this I am consident of, that Antichrist must down, Rev. 14. 6, 8. 2 These. 2.
8. that Christ will have a glorious Church, Romans 11. 12, 15. that God will
clear his Saints, Isa. 60. 13. but of the day and hour, or year, here I
stick. Here are great stirs, combustions, and bustlings, in England, Ireland,
etc. as ever were, and I can surely tell you what will be the end of all these
(though I be no Pophet) this namely will be the end, which is Isa. 3. 10, 11.
Let man and devil do their worst, the end shall be well to the righteous, and
woe to the wicked. (...) 6. 13, 18 26.
Oh! let us get and labor for broken hearts, that so these happy days may be
hastened: and now I epsy the shore, and its time I should; my time, and your
patience both expect it. Thus much therefore for the pot of Manna wherein I
have long been searching; I close up all with Aarons rod; and this rod in the
third use reproves those that like worse of their friends, wives, children,
servants, etc. because they are pricked Use 3.
in their hearts, and consciences, tender and broken; as Saul of Jonathan, Jobs
wife of Job, Nabal of Abigail, Artaxerxes of Nehemiah, etc. that say to them as
Balak (...) to Balaam (and its most hellish policy) Numb. 24. ^^ thy God has
hindered thee from honor.

2. Those that think their own estates naught because they have fears,
doubts, troubles, griefs, etc. alas we must all be Soldiers, and shall a
Soldier have ^o combat, troubles, etc.

3. them that have no care to keep their hearts soft and in a good temper
(having so many means that (...) once God has in some measure broke (...).

Q. How may we keep our hearts soft?

Ans. There are four things much talked of now adays, which in the sense they
are spoken I much understand not, viz. Malignant parties. 2. Posture of
defense. 3. Ordering of the Militia. 4. Trayning. But in a spiritual sense to
keep thy heart soft, take them thus:

1. Kill, and be daily opposing that malignant party, I mean thy lusts
(believe it, these are the worst malignants in the World) as men to keep the
Ice from freezing daily potter in it, so daily search thy heart for these
Malignants, and labor their death.

2. Get thy soul into a posture of defense, into the Rock Christ, the only
true defense, and safe refuge, run to and clasp more firmly upon him daily.

3. Order the Militia, get up thy spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6. daily more girded
to thee, labor to thrive in grace.

4. Train or exercise (but I mean) S. Paul's exercise daily, Acts 24. 16. herein
do I exercise my self, etc.

5. Though thou be overtaken with a sin lie not down in it, (that hardened
David exceedingly, his lying in sin) especially now, when Armies go out to
battle, Deuteronomy. 23. 9. when you lie down in sin you give place to the devil to
be your bedfellow, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27.

6. Keep Saints company, Heb. 10. 25, 26, 27.

7. Often ponder the afflictions and distresses of our brethren, as if we were
our selves in bonds, Heb. 13. 3. take not that liberty, merriment now, this
Christmasse, that otherwise lawfully thou mighest; see Vriahs practice, 2 Samuel
11. 11. so Nehemiah, though in great place, Kings Cup Bearer, Neh. 2. 3. If a
loving Wife had a Husband that lay panting at last gasp, would she feast and
make merry, and say, is it not lawful? sure its not then sit for her to do
so; if thy mother lay drawing her last breath, thou would with a sad heart
run for any help for her; and should we not for our mother England?

To conclude all, Seek out that old leaven, that darling right hand of thy
soul; let every one sweep before his own door, it will make all streets
cleaner; and then seek out thy family sin; and then the sins of the town and
place thou live in; and lastly, the Achans and Wedges of Gold in the Nation;
humble thy self, mourn for them, purge them out, who can tell but yet we may
see happy times? however broken hearts will bear and go through the worst
times with comfort.

Object. But these combustious and troubles give little hope of happy times.

Answ. Things are never worse to be liked; there was never any great good
brought about, but there was first great rubs lay in the way. When Luther set
upon a reformation, all the world was against Luther, and he against all the
world. When King Edw. 6. set upon the same work, there were diverse commotions
and rebellions in England; so it was ere the Jews came out of Egypt; ere they
rebuilt their Temple at Jerusalem; when Christ was going about the work of our
redemption, what opposition? But lest I should too long detain you, and hinder
your pressing business, I abruptly break off: The Lord give to you and me
broken hearts. Thus much therefore be said of that which we can never do too
much.

FINIS.

