THE FAMERS FAMED OR AN ANSWER, To two Seditious Pamphlets, the one Entitled
THE JUST MAN IN BONDS, the other A PEARL IN A DUNGHILL, written in the behalf
of that notorious Liar, and Libeller JOHN LILBURNE.

Also a full reply, with a confutation of certain objections devised by the
Traiterous Author of a Seditious and unparraled libell, Entitled A
REMONSTRANCE of many Thousand citizens, and other free borne people of England,
to their own House of COMMONS, etc.

Wherein the wickedness of the Authors, and their Abettors, the destructive
courses of the Sectaries, and their Adherors is amply discovered.

So that all (not wilfully blind) may clearly see, that they are men stirred
up by man's Enemy, the Devil, as to ruin themselves, so this poor Nation,
that yet lies Bedrid of her wounds lately received.

And ought to be avoided as Serpents, to be contemned as Abjects, and to be
delivered over to Satan, as Blasphemers and Reprobates.

Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the flesh, despise Dominion and
speak evil of Dignities, Jude ver. 8. But these speak evil of these things
which they know not, but what they know naturally, as bruit beasts, in those
things they corrupt themselves ver. 10. Omnium malorum Stultitia est Matter.
Cicero. Quid tam impium est quod mortalium Vulgus non admittat? Demosthenes.
Written by S. SHEPHERD.

London, Printed for John Hardesty, at the Sign of the blackspread Eagle in
Duke-Lane, 1646.

To The Right Honorable the house of Peers, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
YOu whose names are graven so deeply on the Bedrole of Fame, that the rust of
all devouring time, shall never be able to eat or diminists a Letter;
Adulation, and my nature are ods, and I have the least to answer for that, of
all my Crimes; yet it becomes the just to be thankful, and those that will not
honor the Instruments of Gods Glory, detract from their Maker. First,
therefore all thanks be rendered to your honors for your constant fidelity to
your Country, that you would not degenerate, but choose rather to be afflicted
with Gods people, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for aseason, that you
would be pleased to under go Callumnies, and the Traitors.
Brand of infamy; the subjects of this Kingdom cannot choose but mutually
join with me, as once the women in the dance, andsay, many Peers have done
worthy deeds for the good of the people, but ye have exceeded them all,
undergoing the frown of Majesty, which who so looks on sees a Basilisk, and
seldom escapes Death; venturing your Estates, wherein some men place their
Summum Bonum, and many of you your lives to purchase Freedom for a people,
altogether ungrateful (I say not so) but some men furnished with corrupted
minds, whom satan has filled with the spirit of Enmity, and Detraction, to
the grief of my soul, and of all the least virtuous, with their pens, like
so many sharpened Pikes, as Saul, once to David his Preserver, they stab at
their deliverers: men that are as unconstant as the wind, more foolish then
Claudius, more wicked then Stajus, who place their felicity in that to be
avoided City-racer Mutabilitie, some of whose seurrilous Empty Pamphlets,
coming to my hands, I conceived I was bound in honor to my Maker, and in
thankfulness to your Honors, to Reply to the said Pamphlets; for these
ravenous Fowls the People, are naturally inclined, with greediness to swallow
whole Gobbets of such carrion, though they surfeit themselves thereby, and are
often forced for it, to be let blood. Thus desiring that great God, who has
greatly assisted your Honors hithereto, to keep you for ever untouched by
your Enemies, I cease, and shall ever remain,

Your Honors most humble Servant. S. S.

THE FAMERS FAMED.
IF a Commander do faithful service for a space, and afterward revolteth and
fights against that cause which erst he maintained, must the memory of his
former Service hinder the course of Justice? surely no; if Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburne, sometime an obscure Apprentice in London, have formerly done Acts for
his Country, worthy acceptance, though it may be evidently proved, the maine
reason why he accepted of the Parliaments Service, was not so much out of an
affection he bare to the Parliament and their cause, as to protect himself
against his creditors Arrests, I say is he therefore to be excused, if he
degenerate, and become an open and professed Enemy to that state, whose cause,
he erst seemed so stiff^y to maintain?

Was there ever Papist, Malignant, Royalist, or Cavaleer did demean himself
so libellously, slanderously, contemptuously, and ungratefully to the
Parliament as this Lilburne has done? and indeed the man understands not
what he speaks, nor whereof he affirms, he has erred from the truth, and is
now turned unto vain Ianglings, not knowing the end of the Commandment is
love, 1 Timothy Chapter 1. Which commands him not to Rail on Dignities, and
speak evil of Governments; this is the man, and that, the first, that finds
fault, and proclaims it a breach of Magna Charta, which himself had yet never
Law enough to understand, because he was cited to come before Authority, before
he was acquainted with his Accuser, or accusation, whereas the meanest
capacities know, that there is nothing more usual then for Judges, Justices,
and all superior, or inferior Offices, or Courts of the Realm, upon credible
information, not only to Summon, but to Attach men by Constables, and other
Officers, to appear before them to answer such matters as shall be objected
against them; and this none ever deemed (Lilburne excepted) to be illegal, or
contrary to Magna Charta, or the Subjects Liberty; and shall not the
Parliament, the Supreamest of all Courts, claim and have the same Privilege,
that under and inferior Courts enjoy, this superbious, most egregious,
malapert, upstart Lilburne, whom Satan so often as he lists inciteth, and
prompteth, to compile seditious Pamphlets, destructive to the Peace of the
Kingdom, this man out of his private spleen to Colonel Edward King, a man
under whom once he served, wrote a scandalous Pamphlet wherein he taxes the
said King for a betrayer of the trust reposed in him by the Parliament, that
through his default, many Towns of worth became a prey to the Enemy, with
diverse other, which were notoriously known to be false and suborned; in the
same Pamphlet, he Rayleth against the Laws, terming them Norman Innovations,
with many other strange, and unparreleld speeches, all which he sent to Judge
Reeve, who himself, or some other for him, made a complaint to the Lords; who
Immediately summoned the Libeller before them; their warrant this

Die Mercurii, 10 June 16. 1646.
It is this day ordered by the Lords, in Parliament Assembled, that Leivtenant
Colonel Lilburne, shall forth with upon sight hereof, appear before the Lords
in Parliament; to answer such things, as he stands charged with before their
Lordships, concerning a Pamphlet, Entitled The just man's justification or a
Letter by way of Plea in Bar, and here of he shall not fail, as he will
answer the contrary at his peril.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

To the Gentleman usher attending the House, or his Deputy.
Lilburne having received this Warrant by the Officer, raged and after his
wonted manner, bewailed the breach of Magna Charta, and denied to appear; but
on better consideration he resolved to obey, and coming to Westminster, and
being brought to the Bar of the Lords House, he carried himself before them,
in a most contemptuous, and vile manner, and being demanded, by the Earl of
Manchester their speaker (who, caused Master Smith to draw forth his Libell,
whether or no, he did not leave that Pamphlet at Judge Reeves his House, for
the Judge himself; he would not deigne to answer to that, but with erected
Front, and like a wily Sophister, demanded, if they had any formal or legal
charge against him; if they had, he desired to see it, and then he would answer
to their question; to whom the Earl of Manchester said, Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburne, the Lords Command you to answer positively to the question; to whom
Lilburne replied, my Lord, the paper in Ma^ter Smiths hand is my answer to the
question and no other answer will I give you, whereupon he was Commanded to go
forth, upon the perusal of which paper full of reproachful speeches, and
lying vanities before unheard of, he was by the Honorable House of Lords,
again committed to Newgate, by virtue of this Order.

Die Iovis 11. June 1646.
It is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburne, shall stand committed, to the Prison of Newgate, for
exhibiting to this House a scandalous, and contemptious Paper it being
delivered by himself, at the Bar this day; and that the Keeper of the said
Prison shall keep himsafely, until the pleasure of this House be further
signified, and this to be a sufficient Warrant, on that behalf.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

To the Gentleman Usher of this House or his Deputy.
Since those that sit at the stern of Government, the Right Honorable Lords
Assembled in Parliament, cannot keep themselves from the obloquies, of such as
owe their lives unto them, for their care and watchfulness for their good, we
that are of low degree, ought not to account our condition deplorable, when we
are scandalized and contemned, when we see even our Magistrates, and chief
Rulers of the Kingdom, not only in talk, but even in Printed Pamphlets,
traduced by the seditious and vile slanderers, of whom one of our modern Poets
faith truly.

Where they desire to enter, there is no Fence;
No Ancient Title, no Inheritance
Can serve for Plea, for these men wrest the Law,
Keep Magistrates, and Officers in awe;
They pluck the Balance from fair Justice fist,
And make her Ministers do what they list.
But to the matter in hand, on the 22. of June 1646. the Lords sent an order,
to the Keeper of Newgate to bring Lilburne before them, now such was the
obstinacy and Rebellion; of this Such a despiser and contemner of authority as
himself was never known.
Lilburne, that he not only Railed afresh against the Lords, but keeping his
Chamber looked, utterly refused to obey the Order, whereupon the Officers brake
open his door and took the Libeller with them to Westminster, where being
arrived he was called into the House of Lords, and commanded to kneel at
their Bar, which Liburne, tho^ sometime mentionedst Scripture to confirm
thee in ill, could thou not then have thought of one place of Scripture,
where thou are commanded even by Chris himself, to give Honor, to whom Honor
is due: but thou and thy fellow Sectaries, agree with the Papist in this, in
that ye allow of the Scriptures no farther then they by you wrested will
maintain your Schism and Faction.
he utterly refused to do; after some urging, and his constant denial, the
Earl of Manchester demanded a reason, why he refused to kneel, to which our
Simplicius, answered, that he had learned both better Religion and manners then
to kneel to any humane, or mortal Power, how great soever, with many other
peremptory, and unbeseeming speeches, which none save Lilburne durst have
uttered, for which he was again returned to Newgate by a stricter Order then
before.

Die Martis, 23. Iunii 1646.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled that John Lilburne shall stand
committed close Prisoner, in the Prison of Newgate, and that he be not
permitted, to have Pen, Ink, or Paper; and none shall have access to him in
any kind, but his Keeper, until this Court do take further order.

John Brown Cler. Parl.
Exam. per me Rec,

Briscoe (Cler. de Newgate.)



To the Keeper of Newgate, Deputy, or Deputies.
During the Imprisonment of this transcendent Iyar and Libeller Lilburne, who
ought by the Ancient Laws of this Land to have his tongue cut out; for * this
it runs, that the Author and spreader See the Laws of King Al^ed Chap. 28.
See Bracton, 2. Tit. decri^ine l^s^ Ma^statis. ^ee Stamfords ^leas De co^nes l
2. ^l. 110.
of False Rumors among the people, had his tongue cut out if he redeemed it not
with the price of his head; that at the common * Law before and since Magna
Charta, it was High Treason, for any man to Assist, or give consent to any
thing tending to Sedition, in Realm or Army; which what more surely or
speedier canseth then Seditious Libells? of which whether Lilburne be guilty or
no, I appeal to all that have Read his Answer to nine Arguments, His Englands
Birthright, etc. I say during the Imprisonment of this Lilburne, without
License or name, there have come forth two Printed Pamphlets; the Authors
taking upon them to vindicate their Brother John Lilburne, throughout almost
their whole Pamphlets, vent nothing, but Railing Accusations, against the ever
honored House of Peers, the first whereof I intend first to answer, and after
God willing the other; I shall begin within his own words verbatim, as they
were by him published.

An Answer to a seditious Pamphlet, lately published in Print, entitled the
JUST MAN IN BONDS.
SInce this worthy Gentleman's case is Lilburn.
mine, and every man^, who though we be at liberty to day, may be in Newgate
tomorrow, if the Only (...) own and (...) compl^ces.
house of Lords so please, does it not equally and alike concern all the
people of England, to lay it to their heart and either fit both our minds, and
necks to Endure Siavery, or otherwise think of some speedy and effectual
means, to free our selves and our posterity therefrom?

Mark I beseech you how, (prophetically) the Pamphleter begins and fortelleth
his own dole, that though he be at liberty to day, he may be in prison to
morrow; and good reason Sir; for the doers and assisters are all one, and ought
be alike punished; yet though it may be and is your due, yet not every man's;
for I hope there will never be a general declaring; for then we might expect a
total destruction; therefore it is enough and one too many, that your self,
according as you seem to fear, commit such vile crimes, whereby you are made
capable of imprisonment; and whereas you as it were in scorn say, if the Lords
please, know Sir it is the pleasure of God the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, that such Achans as you and your brother Lilburne should be brought to
condign punishment, and therefore if the Lords should neglect so necessary a
duty, as is the punishing of such wretches, they would be guilty of heinous sin
before God, and be the occasioners of their own contempt by men; but see he
takes in hand, by way of insinuation, to cause the people to think themselves
vassaliz'd, because Justice is executed, and exhorts them to resolve to be
slaved, or to take some speedy course to free themselves; the malevolent, and
wicked spirit of the Author, under pretense of enlightening the eyes of the
subject, would put them out clean, for except the Lords stick to the Commons,
and the Commons to the Lords, there will never be peace or joy in England; but I
make no doubt but the subjects of this Kingdom respect more the glory of God
and their own welfare, then to give ear to this wicked incendiary. The
Pamphleter proceeds.

The power of the Lords is A proof simile.
like a shallow uneven water more in noise then substance; if we could
distinguish between what is theirs of right, and what by encroachment, we
should find that they have decked themselves with the Commoners Fe^thers,
which being reassumed, they would appear no better arrayed then other men,
even equal by Law, inferior in uprightness and honesty of conversation.

See here the ignorance of the Pamphleter, the power of the Lords, says he, is
like (...) and uneven Water, whereas the power of the Lords may be rather
resembled to a deep Sea, whose force (out that themselves graciously limit it
were able to sink and overwhelme the libeller Lilburne, and this lying
Pamphleter, with their accomplices, even to Abyss, they being in the nature of a
body Aristocraticall, and indeed the strongest prop the people have. But to
proceed, if faith he) we could distinguish; I but it being beyond your reach,
you show great simplicity to meddle with those things you know not, and it
appears you cannot distinguish by the ensuing words, we should find that they
b^ue decked themselves with the Com^oners feathers; very pretty, does the King
receive his Honor from the Subject, or the Subject from Him? surely all
Honors flow from Him the most Honored, and He advances and sets up; and
as he by God Reigns, so they by Him Rule; therefore you ignorantly err in
saying, That they are decked with borrowed Feathers. Again, whereas you say,
that if every Bird had one feather, they would appear no better arrayed then
other men, I answer, that who so goes about to unplume them, and instead of
Reverence does use Violence, sins against his own soul, by disobeying the
Commandment of God by the mouth of Paul, who writing to certain overseers of
the Church, charge them to put the people in mind to OBEY RULERS; nor would
they be equal with the Commons, were they stripped of all, for there is an
innate heroiek nature residing in all descending of Noble blood; so that they
affect nothing but that which is Noble and high; and for that you basely
allege, They would be inferior in honesty and uprightness of conversation,
it is a gross and manifest lie; the whole Kingdom may judge how faithfully,
valiantly and piously they have borne themselves, in going in and out before
the people, since this war; and by the past we may judge of the future. But see
more insolences.

We should find that they are but P^inted properties, Dagons that our
superstition and ignorance have erected, no natural Issues of the Laws, the
ex^ube^ences and Mushromes of Prerogative, the We^s of just G^vernment, putting
the body of the people to pain, as well as occasioning deformity; sons of
conquest they are and usurpation, not of choice and election, intruded upon us
by power; (not constituted by consent) etc.

The power of the Lords, as aforesaid; is essential, as deriving their power
from him who has it from God, and though it be very true that the Commons have
in them Ignorance and Superstition enough, yet their wisdom or true belief
could never have erected The first i^ stituted Lord
them, by reason that many headed Beast the Commons, seldom abide constant in
one Faith, and retain for the general little or no wisdom, save sufficient
perhaps to buy and sell and get gain. The Lords are constituted and ordained
by the Laws of our Land, which has forever been guided by King, Lords, and
Commons in Parliament assembled. They are so far from being the wens of just
government, or putting the people to pain, that they are the sovereign Balm,
and preserving Antodote thereof; example, the Earl of Essex, one of those
famous Peers whom you malign, who first sounded the depth of a dangerous Sea,
and gave notice of those whirlpooles which else perhaps might have swallowed
his successor, now a triumphant conqueror, they are not occasion of the least
deformity, but rather of luster and glory to the Commonwealth, appearing like
so many Ioshuahs with their Swords drawn, ready to lead the people forth,
against Gods enemies, or to govern them at home in peace and happiness. They
are not usurpers, for they claim not in the least respect any of the peoples
right, but what they have they enjoy, as being the sons of their glorious
Fathers, who merited more honor then was heaped on them, it being but a
Recompense in some nieasure for the good that through their means, as Gods
instruments, the people enjoyed; nor accepted they their honor at first
without consent of the people, for that which is not gainsaid, is assented to.

Lay to heart I beseech you, O you House of Commons, that neither your selves
nor children can plead any immunity or security from this oruelty of the House
of Lords, if now you be slack or negligent, but that you may justly expect, and
feel the smart thereof upon you and your prosperity, as well as we upon us and
ours, at least after you are dissolved, and dis^sissed from your Authorities;
is not this one of the main points for which ^^ have put your selves and us,
and so many of this Nation as stand for your defense, to the effusion of so
much blood, and multitude of estates?

Behold the libellers Masterpiece; here he goes about to raise discord
betwixt the Lords and Commons, persuading them because * they have justify
punished a seditious and infamous person, ^he Lords.
according to their duties, and the Laws of the Kingdom, that therefore the
Lords entrench on the liberties of the Commons, and intend to bring the
subjects of this Kingdom into bondage, the SECTARIES and their Abettors are so
enraged, that they have not in all things their swinge and sway, that they
could wish out of vengeance, the Kingdom were on fire, while they warmed
themselves by the light ont: and therefore they leave no projects unattempted,
no Falsities unsaid, to raise Discord and Division. And to make his argument
invincible, as he supposes, he insinuates that maine ground of this more then
unnatural War, was to abolish illegal and tyrannical power, which is most
true; but does it therefore follow, that we having cut the throat of
Innovation, should forsake the worship of God? or that' cause we have crushed
to pieces Aristocraticall or Tyrannical power, we should not now make use
either of Law or Justice? GOD FORBID.

If ye did intend to expose this Kingdom to the miseries of war, for no other
end, but that one kind of Arbitrary government, Star-obamber Chamber, and
High Commission power might be abolished, and others of that kind established
over us; why would ye not tell us, that we might have both spared our lives and
estates?

Now steeres the Pamphleter another course more irregular then before; now he
exclaimeth on the house of Commons, that they did not give advertisement; that
having pulled down one Arbitrary power, they would erect another; the rancorous
and evil mind of the Pamphleter, how many ways tries he to work contention
and confusion, because Lilburne is not countenanced in his pernicious ways, as
he has been formerly too too much? now they are netled to the purpose, and
they care not what they affirm; and therefore forsooth the House of Commons, '
cause they not opposed the House of Lords, in their legal trial and just
censure of Lilburne, are taxed; that though they have abolished one kind of
Arbitrary power, they are props of another: and therefore the traiterous
Pamphleter seems to lament, that they had not more timely notice, thereby to
have prevented the great effussion of blood, and loss of their estates. All
these questions and affirmations had not been thought on, had JOHN LILBURNE
been walking abroad.

But if ye would either free your selves from suspicion, or us of these just
fears, then show your selves such Worthies as do truly deserve the title, by
using this happy opportunity, which God has put into your hands, and making us
Free men, it being the maine cause for which we used, and entrusted you; and as
a present sign of your fidelity and magnanimity, let all your real intentions
in the general appear, by the exactnes and speediness of your delivery of
your own and his Countries saithfull servant JOHN LILBURNE, from prison with
all due reparations.

I told you before the cause of all this trouble in print was for Namely
Lilburnes b^ soundly ch^ sed for his orbitancy, his slande^ and lies, (...)
stir^ing up people both words and (...), to Re^^^lion against PARLI^MENT, (...)
God (...) preservers.
Lilburnes imprisonment, which here the Pamphleter plainly confesses, and
says, that if they will clear themselves of the fears, the Pamphleter and
his accomplices has, that then they should set at liberty Lieut. Col. LILBURNE,
And then all Acts for the good of the Subject are ratified and confirmed, and
then they shall truly deserve the title of Worthies, and be Worthies indeed.
Into what a further labyrinth of misery were poor England involved, if the
Parliament should allow and take the advice of these malevolent Idiots;
certainly, although we are greatly impoverished, and brought low, then we
should not fail to become the most wretched and abject people in the world;
which evil, God divert.

An answer to a seditious Pamphlet lately in print entitled, * A PEARL IN A
DVNGHILL. Written in Defense of that famous Libeller, ^
Li^ut. Col. LILBURNE.
SUre the Author of that Dunghill * piece before answered, was ^he just man
^onds.
the Author also of this scurrilous Pamphlet entitled (A Pearl in a Dunghill)
save that this is a little more finely spun then the other, He begins thus: ^o
be (...) in an ill se is wo^s^ ^n cower.


Although most States and Statesmen be of late turned upside down, like a
wheel^; yet this worthy, * valiant and public spirited Gentleman, unto whom
this Nation is as much bound to, at least, as unto any one, all things
considered, is the very same man both in principles and practice, Rom^ wa^
(...).
whom the Bishops so long imprisoned in the Fleet, by a most cruel and
barbarous censure, caused to be weary of his life; which censure they procured
in the Starchamber against him, and so he was whipped, gagged, and pinni^n'd, and
in his close imprisonment, almost famished, and murdered.

This, this is the man that thinks he indeed has proved, and that with one
Argument of Lilburnes quondam sufferings, that he has been faithful to God
and his Country to the death, in times past, and in the same steadfastness
remains to this day; now therefore that his Country may see and know how
deeply they stand engaged to the said Lilburne, let us search diligently, and
show,

First, the eminency of the party, the sufferer.

Secondly, the cause of his so suffering.

Thirdly, the quality of the pain suffered.

The discovery hereof I know he will exclaim against, and say, it is a breach
of MAGNA CHARTA, according to his wonted manner.

First then, for the eminency of his person, we must know, that it is even JOHN
LILBURNE, during his minority an Apprentice of London, and being of an
insinuating spirit, he ende^red himself and wan the love of some silly
Schismatics, who for his strange yet empty expressions, deemed him one
inspired. So that by that time he came out of his time, and had served his
apprentiship, who but Lilburne of note amongst the Sectaries, his approbation
desired, and his counsels followed in all things.

Secondly, the cause of his suffering, during the imprisonment of Doctor
Bastwicke by the rigorous censure of the Prelates, diverse persons affecting the
said Doctor, out of their love resorting to him; amongst the rest, one of them
took John Lilburne with him as his associate: after plenty of cheer Dr
Bastwick to solace his guests, read to them his merry A Book^ laying (...) the
pride, (...) leachery, (...) abominal (...) acts of the (...) ^^ts in (...)
Lettany, which highly pleased them all. Lilburne also hearing the said Lettany
read, and knowing that Whatsoever was written in defiance of that power, then
generally hated, would be very acceptable, he desired of Dr Bastwick to have a
copy of one of them, with which he would travel beyond Sea, and cause it to be
printed, not doubting to be enriched by it; the wind of this fancy
transported him over Sea, accompanied with a fellow whose fidelity he doubted
not; there he printed many Books, and by them got much money, selling them
even at what rates he pleased; afterward coming into England, bringing with
him many Books, hoping to have a new Mart, the fellow that accompanied him was
his betrayer, who gave information to the then William (...)
Archshop of Canterbury, both where Lilburne and his Libels were, who
immediately dispatched a Pursevant with plenary authority, who attached
Lilburne, and seized on his Books, which were all consumed with fire. So much
for the cause of his suffering.

Thirdly, for the quality of the pain suffered, it was no less then
pillorying, whipping, gagging, and to say truth most wicked abusing of his
person. Here I beseech the Reader to take notice, that not only this
Pamphleter, Lilburnes vindicator but himself also in all his seditious
Pamphlets makes it an argument infallible, because of his cruel handling by
the Bishops, to prove his extraordinary zeal to God, and his Country, when it
was his affection to attain riches, and the desire of gain that brought those
calamities upon him; for had he sat at home, and not transported himself
beyond the Seas to have printed that L^ttany, or if being there he had stayed;
or else, if coming over had left behind him those instruments of his
destruction, Dr Bastwicks Books, he had not now been reputed so famous a
sufferer for God, and his Country: but had remained, as he still is, in the
account of all wise and truly religious men, a * MECHANIC, FACTIOUS,
SLANDEROUS, LYING LIBELLER. ^LBURNS ARACTER


His Defender goes on,

And now if you will begin to think how a * man so faithful in all his ways,
should be so liable to trouble, as he has been, for he has been diverse Woe
unto ^e, says P^^phet, ^^ call bl^ck ^ite, and wh^^e (...).
times in Pur^ev^nts hands, and so committed by Committees, if you shall
consider how this Pearl comes to be cast upon this Dunghill, you will find
the faithfulness of his heart toward God, and all good people, the freeness
of his tongue, against all kind of injustice, or unworthiness, in whom soever,
is the only cause and no other.

The lying Pamphleter having before told you that the sufferings of Lilburne in
the Prelates days, was only for God, and his Country, which egregious and
monstrous lie I have already canvasd; now he proposes a Riddle, and asks how
it should come to pass, that a man so faithful in all his ways, etc. I
answer, giving my judgment what might be the reason thereof, perhaps one
reason might be, for that he the said Lilburne wrote and divulged a seandalous
Pamphlet, entitled, An answer to NINE ARGVMENTS, wherein he intolerably railes
against our Church, Ministers, Worship, Government, reporting them to be
Antichristian and Diabolical; or perhaps it might be for his seditious and
base Libell, entitled, MARTINS ECHO, or for his malicious and traiterous
Libell, entitled, ENGLANDS BIRTHRIGHT, with many other seditious and
scandalous Libels, for which he ought, though his punishment were then
mitigated, to have suffered condign punishment, and that after a severe manner,
by Statutes at Westminster, first made 3 Edward 1. c. 33. 2 R. 2. c. 5. 12,
etc. and Eliz. c. 7. it is enacted and streighly defended, upon grievous pain,
That from henceforth none shall be so hardy to contrive, speak, or set forth
any false news, lies, or tales, of Prelates, Earls, Dukes, Barons, Nobles, or
great men of the Realm, whereby debates, discords, or slanders may arise,
between the King and His People, and the Lords, Nobles, and Commons, whereof
great peril and mischief might come to all the Realm, and quick
destruction, if remedy were not provided: and he that shall offend herein,
shall be kept in prison until he has brought him forth in Court, that first
did speak and report the same, and if he cannot bring him forth, then He shall
be grievously punished according to the nature of the Offense, by the Council;
and all Justices of the Peace, throughout every Shire, City and Town
Corporate, are enabled to hear, examine, and determine the said causes, and
enjoined to put these Laws in the due execution, that from henceforth condign
punishment be not deserred from such, Offenders.

But now the Pamphleter explaineth his Riddle himself, and says, you find
the cause of his trouble, to be (the faithfulness of his heart) o Sir, you
injure him greatly to charge him with that The cause o^ Lilburns troubles.
whereof he is not the least conscious; but contrary the baseness and
treachery of his heart, against God, and his Rulers, BLASPHEMING the one, and
CALUMNIATING the other, the freeness of his tongue according to your own
phrase, in reviling his Lord the KING, of whom he ought not to think an evil
thought, is the cause that brought his former, and present calamities upon him,
and makes his name become odible to all virtuous; but let us traverse the
Pamphleter.

And if you seriously weigh things, you will confess, that it would grieve any
good man's heart, that Treachery, Cowardice, Cruelty, Plundering, and
Covetousness, have been very slenderly punished, and faithfulness so many
ways discouraged, and that it is a very sad thing, in a time so zealously
pretending REFORMATION, that any quiet people should be punished and reproached
for worshipping, and serving God A Dom^sti^^ Phrase.
according to their Conscience: and that TROUBLEHOUSE CONFORMITY, as much
cried up, as in the Bishops times.

All wise men will seriously weigh and consider things as they are, and as they
may be carried, that men in Authority may rule over the bodies of men, but not
over their minds, and therefore not able to prevent Treachery, Cowardice, or
Cruelty, the committers whereof often escape unpunisht contrary to their will,
which if so neglected, ought not to be charged on them; and again that it is
not always seasonable to punish crimes, though never so heinous, and that is
when the offenders are For so the cure may prove worse then the Di^^ease.
potent, able to withstand, and perhaps (Their Arm of Flesh considered)
overpower their Judges: but it is evident to all the world that since the
si^ting of this PARLIAMENT, they have not been p^rtial in the least regard,
witness the two The Father and the Son, ^ho both lost their heads on ^ower
Hill for betraying the ^ust was repoed in them.
HOTHAMS, and never was faithfulness better rewarded then by them who have on
the meanest subject bestowed honou^s, if found faithful, and have rewarded each
Officer fighting for them according to his Degree, and this is no sad thing in
a time of Reformation, but a glorious Animation to the Just: nor are the quiet
people punished or reproached, for serving God, those Disturbers of Sions
Peace, the Sectaries, are only opposed, their errors being opposite to God, and
destructive to the Peace of the Kingdom, who if they should be suffered, would
be an occasion of the inevitable Ruin and Destruction of this Nation; for as
long as there were diverse Sects, there would be Division, and a Kingdom
divided cannot stand: God himself has pronounced it, and that without which
God cannot be zealously served, nor the Commonwealth possibly preserved in
peace and tranquillity, which you contemptuously and wickedly call The Author
of the just man ^n bonds.
TROUBLE-HOUSE CONFORMITTE is cried up, for the Reasons aforesaid and no other.

The Imprisonment of Lilburn you must know, is a sore corrasive to the
Pamphleter, as erst to his Predecessor, and therefore he also will have a fling
at the House of Lords, thus:

And why presume ye, O ye Lords, thus against us, set forth your merit before
the people, and say for this good it is, that we will Reign over you?
Remember your selves; or shall we remember you? which of you before this
Parliament, minded any thing so much as your Pleasures, Plays, Masks,
Huntings, Feastings, Gamings, with the Appurtenances? If you owed any man
money, or abused any man, what Law was to be had against you, what Patents and
Projects did you suppress, or so much as move against, nay had not an hand in?
What fearful enemies were you to Ship Money, and to the proceedings of the
High Commission, Star Chamber and Council Board? indeed your goodness was
unexpressible, and undiscernible, before this Parliament.

The audacious and impudent Pamphleter, not considering the Lords Thou shall
^ot speak evil of the Ruler of ^y people.
commandment, charge the honorable House of Peers with an heap of known
falsities, he takes in hand to show, that before this Parliament began, they
were no other then persons giving themselves over wholly to pleasure, and that
they played Rex over the people, doing with them as they listed, that in stead
of suppressing, they caused to be extorted those unknown vast lones of money
levied by the term of Ship Money, that they were the upholders of those
tyrannizing Courts, the High Commi^^ion, the lively Effigies of the Spanish
Inquisition, Star Chamber, and Counsel board, etc. It is known to all men,
not wilfully blind; for there is a sort of men that see, and will not; such is
this our Pamphleter and his Accomplices, that the Lords in general, I mean
those now assembled in Parliament, were ere this Parliament was thought on, men
renowned through the world, men singularly virtuous, men fearing God and
eschewing evil: and what though they beheld Masks, do not all wise men know,
that a Moral Masque is profitable to see? and though to the unlearned, who may
refrain the sight of them, they seem Riddles, and Nulls, yet to the knowing,
who are able to explain the sense and meaning, and to crack the shell, they
find a sweet and pleasant kernel: and whereas you tax the use of Hawking,
Hunting, and such like Princely sports, it were a sin for them to refrain; but
to use them, no sin at all, the whole scope of their Intentions, using the said
Games, being for the Recreation of their bodies, by which they become lively,
and are more apt and able to serve their Maker, and to manage the Public
Affairs to which the Lord has called them.

And it is also very well known, that the Lords now Assembled in Parliament,
were the happy Instruments of procuring a grant for a Parliament; their
Inventions in so doing, wholly out of zeal toward God, and love to their
Country, that the worship of the one, then too much corrupted, might be
purified and refined, and the burdens under which the other groaned to be
taken off; and is this their Reward, o ye unstable, ungrateful, and giddy
Sectaries, whose tongues are set on fire of hell, to malign and vilify those
that are the most upright, and for whom ye ought to bless the Lord, as being,
part of those Instruments to get for you, with the hazard of their lives and
states, the worship of God, according to the purity thereof, that Liberty and
Freedom which your Forefathers have sighing wished for, but could never
attain? but oh the wickedness, wilfulness, and pride of heart that is in
some, that they rather then lose one jot of their new fancied Liberty, (indeed
a slavery, would they duly consider it) choose to be guilty, both of their own,
and an whole Nations fall; Besides, are there not Thousands, whose The Royal
party.
vanquished Persons live in hope, to see the second part of the destruction of
Germany acted in England. And that the hatred now betwixt the Independents and
Presbyterians, will prove as fatal, as whilome that bloody The occasion
whereof was two German Brethren, the one whereof mantained the Popes honor to
be above the Emperors, the other averred the Emperors dignity exceeded the
Popes; whereupon they fought, and the one slew the other. Their quarrel was
spread through out all Italy.
Diffention betwixt the Guelfes and Gibellines: the enormities that attend
DISSENSION, the most excellent Poet VIRGIL admirably describes, where he
makes Juno seake to Alecto. Aeneidos lib. 7. saying,

Tu potes unanimes armare in Praelia Fratres,
Atque odiis versare Domos, tu verbera tectis,
Funereasque infer faces; tibi nomina mill,
Mill nocendi Arts, Faecundum concute pectus,
Disjice compositam pacem, fere crimina Belli,
Arma velit poscatque, simul rapiatque juventus.
Englished.
Thou can beloved Brethren, force to jarre,
And overturne whole Families by War,
And cast from house to house, combustious fire,
Take thee a thousand shapes, false names acquire,
And thou a thousand Fallacies can use,
Then search thy full swollen breast, turn to abuse
Their Peace agreed on, sow tho^ seeds of Ill,
Their youths do long each others blood to spill, etc.
But we have yet more of the devils language, who no doubt Dictated to the
Pamphleter, as he has often done to Lilburne, and his accomplices, and it is
worth your observation that Satan by his Delusions makes them to be the
props, and stays of his now tottering Kingdom; for he perceives, and
gnasheth his teeth for ire, that the power of those, whose Innovations set up,
caused many thousands to fall, who ere they could recover themselves, were
plunged in the depth of Abyss; and that now the spirit of truth so prevails,
that Gods true worship is like to be erected, according to the original
purity; He now therefore, the power of Hell assisting him, tries all the
ways, to hinder and impede so glorious a work; he therefore has dispatched
his Agents abroad, giving them commission to enter into the hearts of all, void
of the Spirit of grace, and to cause them both by writing, and speaking to
calumniate, and as far as in them lies, make odible the persons of those who
are the chiefest Instruments of Gods glory; and then without doubt their
Persons hated, their Performances will not be acceptable, this will cause
contention, and, Divide and Impera, according to Machiavil, Divide, and
prevail. But thou that rulest Behemoth, who laughest at the strength of man,
put thy hook in his nostrills, and save thy people by thy strong Arm.

Now the Pamphleter cites an Adage comparatively.

It was wont to be said, when a thing was spoiled, that the Bishops foot had
been in it: and if the Lords mend not, it will be said so of them, and justly
too.

It was wont to be said (A Fools Bolt is soon shot.)

And, what other have the Lords ever been, then a Clog to the House of Commons,
in all their Proceedings? How many necessary things have they obstructed, how
many evil things promoted? what devices have they had of Prudentialls, and
expedients, to delay and pervert what is good; and subtle Policies to introduce
things evil?

It has ever been the custom of Libellers, and calumniators, when they
groundlesly slander, to cite things by the whole, not bringing proof of any one
thing: so here the lying Pamphleter taxes the Lords, and names not when,
where, or how they deserved; the reason you may guess, (he cannot) and indeed
envy itself cannot challenge the honored Lords of the least corruption; I
mean, in the way of hindering any one Act for the good of the Subject; nay
rather have they not, ere since the time of their fitting, and passing through
this fiery Furnace, as I may so say, of their opposing the Royal party, been
the Agents to procure many Orders for the good of the Subject? can any say that
they have held back, or refused to subscribe to any one paper tending to the
good of the Subject? and for their introducing of evil, which the Railing
Pamphleter taxes them of, the meanest capacity may perceive; and all Loyal
subjects will hiss at so impudent a Lie.

Now you must know the Pamphleter, in his own conceit having sufficiently
vindicated Lilburne; he flies high, and hyperbolically says,

Thou do well, o England, to give up thy first borne Lilburne, the son of thy
strength, and high Resolution for Freedom, If thou intendest to become a
Bondslave to either King, Lords, or any others; for he will never submit
either body or mind to any kind of slavery.

Lilburne in prison, hinc Dolor, hinc Lachrymae; and therefore to incite the
Commons, if it might be, to rise against his Judges, he makes them interessed
in his cause; Alas Sir this will not do, the dearly beloved inimitable
unparalled Libeller, must have the reward of his merits. While England will
sit still and see, not the Son of her Strength, but the Son of her Shame, and
Sorrow, brought to condign punishment; nor does she fear that thereby Her
bond^ge will be aggravated, knowing that such are the Bands that tie her hands
and feet, not suffering her to atchieve that which would prove to her
everlasting Benefit, and honor: and she knows right-well, that he that has
already submitted himself, and is become a Bond-slave to the devil, to put in
Act what ever he shall whisper to him, cannot be the Agent to procure her
Infranchisement, Liberty, she fits and beholds with joy the unequalled
proceedings of her two Houses of Parliament, and having the spirit of
discerning, lamenteth the errors, heresies, blasphemies of the time, taking
into consideration those A lively description of these times.
verses of the Poet, that,

Now for truths matters, there is much ado,
Some this, some that, some none of both wll have.
And yet they ali do restless Fortune woe
To yield to neither, yet do either crave
In worlds behalf, or Fleshes fixed thereto,
They all in show do seek the truth to save.
And all seem, to solicit Sions cause,
Which they would have confirmed by the Laws.
Some say they lie, that only truth do teach,
Some envy them that live by teaching so,
And at their lives and livings seem to reach,
Which they forgive, but will not so forgo:
"Some tongues defend the Truth which they doepreach,
"Whose Actions give her many a bitter blow:
"Some live as Dying, while they seek to live,
"And some Dye living, yet do most relieve.
Some Independent.
Liars do call carnal liberty,
The glorious liberty of Truths dear Sons.
And her they urge to prove that verity;
But Truth's betrayed by such untrusty ones,
That Sacrilege do guild with sanctity,
Yet for that look for high promotions.
"OF it is a world of mischief, when pretense,
"Does shroud a world of Inconvenience!
But whereas the Pamphleter says that Lilburn will never submit either body or
mind to slavery, he insinuates that some are slav'd: O the incorrigiblenesse
of some, if they may not do what, say what, attempt what they list, they cry
out they are vassaliz'd and trod on, Magna Charta is slighted, and the liberty
of the Subject infringed! But sure the time will come, that these men, that do
and say what they list, and should not, shall be forced to undergo what they
ought, and would not: and now the Pamphleter having railed sufficiently on the
Lords, whose innocence is above his calumnies, he insinuates with the
Commons, promising himself that, which were a wonder to see.

But certainly those Worthies in the House of Commons, that consider what the
people have done, and suffered for their liberties, will never suffer so foul
a deed: it cannot be, but they intend the uttermost Just freedom is so far as
is consistent with the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom: which prohibiteth
toleration of crimes under pretense of liberty.
of just Freedom to the people, and love those best that most know and affect
true Liberty, and are greatest opposers of exorbitant power, in whomsoever, and
consequently cannot, but instantly deliver all just men, and henceforth reduce
the Lords Condition, suitable to the Freedom of the People.

To fill up his measure of evil, he concludes his Pamphlet with confidence,
that the House of Commons will entrench upon the Privilege of the Lords, and
deliver him whom they have caged: but Sir, your hopes deceive you, for the
Honorable House of Commons will not but maintain, as they ought, the
Privilege of the House of Peers, even as they have hitherto, both Houses
having mutually and unanimously proceeded without the least perturbation. For
should those happy workmen disagree, that glorious and solid Fabric, which
with so much cost and pain has been erected, would not only be left
unfinished, but also would be in danger to be utterly demolished; But the
Highest divert so great a mischief, and let not o Lord our many and crying
sins pull down so heavy and fatal a judgment! The P^idiculous Pamphleter
proceeds in his madness, and holds it convenient the Lords should be
reduced: but his combustible matter I have so moistened, that it shall never be
able to take fire. The mouth of the just shall be fruitful in Wisdom, but
the tongue of the froward shall be cut out, Prove. chap. 10.

An answer to a Libell ENTITLED A Remonstrance of many thousand Citizens, and
other freeborn people of England, to their own House of Commons.
THis REMONST^ANCE was not penned by L^^burn, but whoever he be that penned the
same, * his Lilburne.
spirit was doubled upon him, and it may fitly be termed the master piece of
wickedness, and the very quintessence of baseness, the contents whereof is
able to infect the unsettled, and to cause the plague of Dissension to reign,
as hot as ever before: but I shall make known a sovereign Antidote, that if any
be already infected, they may by reading my lines, God willing, receive present
and perfect cure, and it will be a preservative also to prevent the further
spreading and increase thereof.

Hear the Libeller.
We are well assured, and ye cannot forget, that our choosing you to be^
Parliament Men, was to deliver us from all kind of bondage, and to preserve the
Commonwealth in Peace and Happiness, for effecting whereof, we possessed you
with the same power, that was in our selves, to have done the same, for we
might have done it our selves without you, if we bad thought so convenient,
choosing you as persons whom we thought fitly qualified, and faithful, for
avoiding some inconveniences.

What has bereft you of your former confidence, the wickedness of your own
spirits will not suffer you to participate of that good which is providing: the
men ye have chosen, have not failed to perform their duty in a Parliamentary
way: and God has so aided them, that they have outdone example: the bondage,
were it a bondage, you so sorely exclaim against, is taken off, and the peace
and happiness you seem to desire, there is great hopes to enjoy had it not
been for your own cursed Proceedings, Lyings, and Slandering the Authors of
your Good, you might have now been in better state then you are, and ye have
showed your selves unworthy of that Good, got and gaining for you, by your
continual Debates and Dangerous speeches, and as if you were weary of mercies
by threatening, That if you have not all, even to a tittle, that your erring
Fancies desire, you will by your own strength procure it. Now, whereas you
Boast, that had you thought it convenient, ye your selves could have
accomplished your wish. Vain men, though it be possible, you may be of Ability
sufficent to measu^e Cloth, and to keep a Book, your sums being vast, and
unknown, yet with BAKERS Aid you can substract and multiply, and give the
Summa totalis; yet to manage the Affairs of a Kingdom is too high for you, and
had not the HIGH COMMISSION COURT been suppressed till by you, we might still
have been cited before a Judge, bearing both Swords as before: it has always
been the custom of wicked and ungrateful men, such as your selves, the good
once attained, to slight the procurers thereof; did you want that you now have?
O how acceptable would the least of those mercies be, of which ye now surfeit!
and ye ought to know, that mercies abused are often by the Almighty turned
into scourges, for the smart of the wicked and ungrateful.

But, how ye have dealt with us, we shall now let you know, and (...)
let the Righteous GOD Judge betmixt you and us, the continual oppressors of
this Nation have been Kings which (...) so evident that you cannot deny it.

Did you as you ought, you would let them know, how they had dealt with you by
presenting your selves to them in all Humility, and acknowledge with all
Thankfulness, that They have under God been the preserve^^ both of your lives
and states: but ye are an unstable wavering-minded people, never contented in
one state; selfe-conceited you are, and lea^e so much upon that broken staff
of Reed, your wit, that it will be a means at length, even to pierce you
through; Rash you are, and your Ignorance sputting you on, ye affect Things
Inconvenient, and DESTRUCTIVE TO yours SELVES. And whereas you say the
continual oppresso^^s of this, Nation have been KINGS, I answer, you commit a
grievous sin, to aver ought contrary to your knowledge: if ye have Read
the Chronicles of this Kingdom you will find that the and (...)
Kings of this Isle, and that for the major part, have been nursing Fathers
and Mothers, under whose peaceable and happy Government, the people of this
Land have sat each man under his fig tree, praising God, and praying for
their King: If ye shall Ask what were the names of those KINGS, so good and
Gracious, I answer, before the Conquest many, as EDMUND, EDGAR, ATHELSTANE,
etc. Since the Conquest, Henry the third, Henry the fifth, Henry the seventh,
and his Son; Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, gracious * Queen Elizabeth,
King JAMES, with diverse others, whom ^egina. inarum.
for brevities sake I omit, some of Them having augmented the Bounds of their
Kingdom, striving to make Their Nation glorious and great; others have strove
to maintain what your forefathers have got, executing Justice and Judgment:
and in truth, never no Nation had more cause to boast, of the Valor, Piety,
and good Government of their Kings then the English Nation; nor has our DREAD
SOVEREIGN LORD KING CHARLES, been Inferior to His Pious Predeceslours in the
least respect, who for the space of 17 years, ere seduced by some pernicious
and vile A Spencers, Governed His People in Peace, and under Him They ^lluding
^he Father the Son, ^t Edward second so ^dly affect^^ that he ^ooke the ^insell
of Counsel^ts, and was ^lly Ruled their gid^ancies, to unspeak^ trouble ^
vexation ^he whole ^lme.
Enjoyed much Felicity, and so may again, this Prodigious and terrible storm
o're-blown; but let us return to the Libeller.

And yet ye cannot fight for our Liberties, but it must be in the name of KING
and PARLIAMENT, and He, that speaks of His cruelties, must be thrust out of
your House, your Preachers must pray for him, as He had not deserved to be
Excommunicated all Christian society, or, as if you, or They, thought that GOD
were a Respecter of Persons in Judgment.

The Honorable Hcuses of Parliament esteem it not a point of Liberty to
Fight the Kings Battles, and except His name; the Royal Party having
persuaded the King to Destructive courses, he, ruled by them, fought against
His PARLIAMENT; His Parliament, to maintain the Liberty of the Subject, their
own Rights and Privileges, and to Restore His Majesty to that honor and
state He was in, are seduced, fight against those their opposers; and is it not
convenient for Them then, He being the Head, they the Members, to have His name
mentioned, for whose honor They fight, as for Their own Rights?

Kings are but men, and have Their passions and failings as well as others: and
moreover, a great and weighty Burden lies on Their shoulders, which Subjects
do not conceive; and according to the Poet,

Crowns are but hives, where stinging cares do swarms,
Pompes but the whites, where at fell envy shoots,
Which are as Trees, whence grow their owners harm,
Harms are the fruit, Crowns, Flowers, and Kingdoms Root.
The Arm of flesh is but a feeble Arm,
And in such strong extremes it little Boots:
He knows not yet the Nature of a Crown,
That knows not Kings may be by strength o'ret hrowne.
And forasmuch as we are persuaded, that those evil Counselors were the
only cause and Fountain whence our sorrows have slowed, and that we know,
and have cause to believe, considering His Majesty's frequent and pithy
expressions, His hearty desire of Compliance with His Parliament, and of
settling a firm and wel-grounded Peace: Is it fit that any should speak
lightly, or Revile our Lord, whose after-Reigne, we hope, will prove more
glorious then H is former? Why should we Doubt, the Evil being taken away, but
H is Throne shall be established in Peace? Why should not the Ministers of God,
Nay, have they not ample Reason therefore, as they prayed once for H is
Conversion, now to give thanks for H is being Converted? And though God, its
true, be no Respecter of Persons in Judgment, it follows not that we should
imitate our Maker in that, for he commands by his Apostle, saying; FEAR GOD,
HONOR THE KING.

And have ye shook this Kingdom like an Earthquake, to produce no more then
this for us? Is it for this that ye have made so free use, and been bold with
our Estates? And do you, because of our Readiness to comply with you in All
Things, esteem us so sottish as to be contented: with such unworthy Returns
of our trust and love? No, it is high time to be plain with you: We ARE not,
SHALL not be so contented: We do expect in the first place, that you should
Declare and set forth KING CHARLES His wickedness openly before the world, and
withal, to show the Intolerable inconvenience of Kingly Government, from the
constant evil Practices of those of this Nation, and to Declare KING CHARLES
an enemy, and to publish your Resolution never to have any more, but to Acquit
us of so great a Charge and trouble for ever, and to convert the great Revenues
of the Crown to the public treasure, to make good the injuries and injustices
done hereofore, and of late by those that have possessed the same; and till
this he done, we shall not think our selves well Dealt withal in this
original of all oppressions, to wit, KINGS.

That this Nation has of late been sorely shaken it is most true; and had not
Gods mercy surpassed Englands Deserts, it had been shaken to pieces: but this
ungrateful Libeller Asks, (And is it for this?) for what your forefathers
would have sacrificed Their Lives with Joy: Had they but hoped Their Posterity
after Them should have gained those rare Immunities and Freedoms which your
selves now do, and are like to Enjoy; the Government by Prelates Abolisht, the
High Commission, Star Chamber, all Courts grinding the Faces of the poor
suppressed, the Fears of a Combination with Foreign States taken away, by the
Disposing of the Mil^tia into trusty hands, such as the Commons shall conside
in, with many other Remarkable privileges; and are ye so unthankful yet to
say (IS IT FOR THIS?) And whereas you menacing Boast, That you ARE not, nor
SHALL not be so contented, your Estate is to be Deplored, that you are so void
of. grace and Reason, than the Sword has yet a hope to be handled by you: and
is it not sufficient for you to Ruin your selves, but you must also seek the
Destruction of the whole Nation? For you propose, that King CHARLES should be
Proclaimed an Enemy; could we acquit our selves of our Oaths, and the Fidelity
we owe to our Sovereign, yet policy would per swade us to work more
Discreetly, (and not involve in a new war, a Nation almost Dispoyled) for we
must know, that the Princes of the Royal blood will not sit still and see
Themselves Robbed of their Birthright; neither comes, I am sure, so vile a
thought into the heart of any Member of Parliament, whose frequent expressions
have been, and still are, in all meekness and Humility, to desire the King,
the spirit of Disaffection abandoned, to Return to His Charge, and by Their
means, God assisting, become a greater, a more glorious and Potent Prince then
before; all wish I hope, to see effected, to the rejoicing of all Verru^us and
to the shame and consounding of countenance of all Malevolent wicked Sectaries,
that King and Subjects may Rejoice in each other, the one seeking nothing but
the others welfare, and all, that All Fears and Jealousies laid aside the
Subjects of this Kingdoms, each man following the works of his calling,
submitting themselves, as they are desired by S. Paul, and that for the Lords
sake, not denying to yield Caeser his lawful tribute, following the example of
their Savior, knowing, The more he has, the better he shall be enabled to
withstand his and their enemies: To this purpose, one of our modern Poets
says excellently;

For thine and mine, and mine and thine, are things,
Not for to be' twixt Subjects and their Kings;
Princes; like the Sun, should from the earth exhale
The wealth they raise therein, and let it fall
In every place, as they have cause, a share,
And not consume it like the wanton Heir;
Their full Exchequers must like Conduits be,
Open to all, to rich and poor like free:
And Subjects should, like Fields be full of Springs,
And naturally should fall toward their Kings:
The Common wealth should always be in motion,
Seas fall to Brooks, and Brooks should to the Ocean:
Such Royal, and such Loyal community,
Keep King and Subjects still in unity.
And whereas you desire the House of Commons to publish their Resolution, never
to have Kings more; what spirits of Debate fills your breasts, and with what
suries are you enraged, that you dare be so bold, to propose a matter of high
concernment. which if but for civil respects as aforesaid, ought not to be
hearkened to? your peremptorinesse ought to be punished severely, that
instigated by Satan, go about to disturb now our almost settled people, who
desire to live in subjection to God and their King, as they are bound by Oath
and Convenant; and till your rebellious and destructive desires are
accomplished, you threaten, that you shall not be contented; why then remain
in your obstinacy, until the rode that you have gathered, lash you severely,
while ye shall be reputed of all wise and loyal men, a sort of Traitors,
Blasphemers, and cursed persons.

But ye have listened to any counsels, rather then to the voice of us that
trusted you; why is it that ye have stopped the Press, but that ye would have
nothing but pleasing and ^lattering Discourses, and go on to make your selves
partakers of the Lordship over us, without hearing any thing to the contrary?

The Pamphlet swells more and more with Alluding the place where the Prophet
David, speaking of the wick^ sayings of h^ enemies, sai^^ The porson of Aspes
is und^ their ups.
poison and here it bursteeth forth, able to infect the air: have the House of
Commons hearkened to any counsels, but what given amongst themselves, the effect
and issue of their counsels and consulations, we see and ought to rejoice at;
but O, here is the cut that divides the very hearts of the Sectaries, the
Press is stopped, they cannot print Pamphlets, the contents whereof is more full
of lies then a Dog of ^leas; they cannot blaspheme God, and revile their
Sovereign in Print, as they would; and because the Commons (in Parliament)
have done this, to wit, SHUT UP THE PRESS: They have not hearkened to their
counsels, but go on to make themselves Lords over them; I^ SATAN CAST OUT
SATAN, HOW SHALL HIS KINGDOM STAND; see the simplicity of the Libeller: should
the COMMONS GO ABOUT TO ABRIDGE THE COMMONS LIBERTY? should they not thereby
limit themselves, and go about to procure their own bondage? Reason will
persuade all men the contrary; but let us still trace the Libeller, who now is
arrived at the height of impudency.

You have now sat full five years, which is four longer then we intended,
for we could c^use you but at most for one year; and now we wish you would
publish to the world the good you have done for us, the liberty ye have
brought us unto, if you could excuse your selves, as you use to do (it has
been a time of War) for when the war in the beginning might have been
prevented, if ye had drawn a little more blood from the right vein, and
might often ere this have been ended.

Now the House of Commons, as the Remonstrators promise in the Thus cal^g those
^eir Comissioners in ^arliament to (...) account, ^^w they since ^e beginning
(...) their Sessi^ to the pre^nt, have dis^arged their ^^^ties to the ^liver
sality the people.
title of their Libell, are called to an account, THE COURSE OF ORDER IS CLEAN
PERVERTED, WHEN THE SUBJECT SHALL CENSURE THE MAGISTRATE; yet such is the pride
and impudence of some, that they dare do it; see here, the House of Commons
are taxed, that they have sat five years, just four more then was intended:
why then it should seem, that these men thought at once to throw down, and
set up, to extirpate and Reform in one day, or at least in one year, as here
they seem to intimate; whereas it is and will be recorded, a wonder to
posterity, that so glorious a Reformation, being so strongly and fervently
opposed, should be gained, confirmed, and setting up, and in the space of six
years. But it is desired, they should publish to the world the good they have
done, the Liberty they have gained: Does not your consciences inform you, that
that is gained for you, which some years since ye durst not wish to attain;
and whereas you affirm, that if a right course at first had been taken the
war had e^e this bin ended, and you give your judgment, by what means it
might have been accomplished, viz. if a little blood more had bin drawn from
the right vein. At the beginning of this War blood was drawn, and too much
if it might have been saved with safety; and though DESPERATE WOUNDS ask a
DESPERATE CURE, yet to be too sanguine is not good; and if some were spared
that deserved death, LENITY shall be rewarded, if used with a good intent: but
I see your choler rages within you, that one was exempted, of which thing I
tremble to think.

For sake and utterly renounce all crafty and subtle intentions, hide not your
thoughts from us, and give us encouragement to be open-breasted unto you;
Proclaim beforehand what you intend to do, establishing any thing for the
future, and hear all things that can be spoken with or against the same.

Now is held forth in each hand full cups both of sweet water and bitter, first
the House of Commons is advised to renounce all crafty and subtle intentions; I
told you before, whatsoever they conclude on to the prejudice of the Subject,
they surely detract from themselves; and then insinuation is used, and the
utter ruin of Parliaments desired, to wit, when they wish the House not to
hide their thoughts from them, but to give them encouragement to be
open-breasted to them, meaning, that they should in all matters use their
advice; which thing, if assented to, what prejudice it would be, what
inconveniences would thereby be occasioned, let the Reader judge? And without
doubt the penner of this REMONSTRANCE was an ANABAPTIST, as may appear by the
ensuing words; Proclaim beforehand what ye intend to do, establishing any
thing for the future, and hear any thing that can be spoken with o^ against
the same: What hurly-burly would be amongst the multitude of Weavers and
Mechanics, sitting in counsel together, about State affairs, while they
argue pro and con; O madness! shall the supreme Council, Decree, Order, and
Ratify, and then come and desire your advice; Does not your folly shame you,
and your ignorance cause you to blush?

Now if you shall conscionably perform your trust, then we shall not doubt to
be made You know not wherein freedom co^sists.
Freemen, and become a Just, Plenteous, and Powerful Nation, all that is lost
will be forgotten; and we shall yet have cause to rejoice, in your Wisdoms
and Fidelities.

Ye are a people, that if a Fly fall in your dish, you will unadvisedly cast
away the whole mess of meat, though for hunger ye afterward pine: It is
apparent to all the world, that the PARLIAMENT have conscionably performed
their duty; now perform ye yours also, which is, first to give thanks to God
for his great mercies, and then to show your affection and hearty love to the
Instruments of his Glory: And whereas you say, that if your desires were
fulfilled, then being absolute Freemen, you should in time become a Just,
Plenteous; and powerful Nation: You intimate in saying (we) the desires of
the whole Nation, wherey your unparalleled presumption is manifest; How dare ye,
being but a part of a part, if a part at all, tax, direct, and advise the High
Court of Parliament? and not contented to express your ungratefulness to your
preservers, you would involve the whole Kingdom also in your Labyrinth of
errors; and for your own parts, had ye your wish in all things. it were
impossible thereby that ye should become plenteous, or potent; for if in a
time of trouble and calamity, when ye expected each day to be ruina^ed, ye
demeaned your selves wickedly against God and your Magistrates, would ye not
be far worse. having your wish, and living at ease? man's nature being more
apt to be * in^^ared by the fruits of Prosperity and joy, then by the Maris
ecelice temperiem ^rbincs tem^statesque com^endant, habe^ ^^s vices con^tio,
mortali^^ ^t adversa cundis, and versis secur^^ nascantur-^cultat utro-^mque
semina ^^eus and ple^mque bono^m and malo^m cause sub versa specie ^ent. Flin.
in (...) Trajan. Adversity.
frowns of * sorrow.

The Author of this Libell concludes like a Saint, having railed before like a
Furey, and for their more powerful efficacy, he uses the words of Samuel.

PROSCRIPT.
Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing:
to pray for you, but I would teach you the good, and the right way, only fear
the Lord and serve him in truth, with all your heart, consider what great
things he has done for you, but if ye still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both ye and your King.

But know Sir,

That the righteousness of the upright shall deliver them but transgressors
shall be taken in their own snare, PROVE. Imprimatur,

JOH. DOWNAME.


