Shaftsbury's GHOST TO DOCTOR OATS. IN A VISION, Concerning the Jesuits and
Lords in the Tower.
IT was about the time when the Tavern Doors were shut up, and all Mortals were
retired to their rest, save the Cl^b at the Devil. who were in a hot fit of
Wine and Argument, about the Election of a new King of Poland, when the Ghost
of the late King Tapsky came boulting through the Keyholes of my Chamber Door.

He seemed like the Emblem of Envy, his Hairs turned into Serpents, his Tap
into a Pump, spouting with Sulphur and corroded Poison, with a long Veil of
Hypocrisy Ermin'd and Spoted with Blood.

In this Gasly-sight he appeared by my Bedside, where after a strong debauch
of French Wine, and Italian Love; falling into a pleasant slumber, I began as
usually, to Dream of a Parliament, when thus the Ghost applied himself unto me.

Ghost. Thou Fool, thou flatters thy self with the hopes of a Parliament; thou
Pratest, and Talkest, and Dreamest of Parliaments, when they will make no more
for Thee, then thou have made for the Protestant Interest, since thou turned
Hypocrite, and put on the Salamanca Robes.

Astonished at the unexpected Spectre, in a bloody sweat and panick fear, I
crept under the smoking Blankets, least he came to Involve me and the Nation
in a new Plot, or with a Summons, to fetch me into the other World, when thus
he applied himself to me.

Fear not (Friend) thy time is not yet come, though thou escaped the late
Buttocking, thou shall Reign a while, though it be but short, we have use for
such necessary Instruments upon Earth, to bring our Projects to Perfection.

Thou know (Doctor) how many Journeys thou have made to the Tower, when I
was there, where we laid the foundation of all our Designs, and its but fit I
should make on Sally from Hell to give Thee thanks for the good Service thou
have done us. The Plot was well carried on at first, the Jesuits was a clever
Jobb, and we will Record Thee in our Eternal Rubricks. But for the Lords in the
Tower, I am afraid, in this long Respeit, they will weather the Point, and
outlive our Malice; but make use of the Artillery I gave thee, and thou may
be able yet, with thy stock of Impudence, to venture a Broadside amongst'em.

Oats. At this, methought, I began to assume fresh Courage, and finding the
Devil was not come to fetch me that very Instant, I began to argue with him as
formerly, and asked of him, if he were Dead, or Alive? or if Dead where he was
Disposed of, or what Reward he had found in the other World for all his
Indefatigable Pains and Policy, when thus, (methought) with a shril Voice, and
quivering Accent, he answered,

Ghost. From deepest Mansions of Hell, where Plots ar^ laid, and Plotters are
with us to be Rewarded; I come to tell Thee, That all thy Stratagems are
Defeated, thy Villainies Detected, and thy Politics undermined; thy Artillery
will be turned upon thy Self, blown up with the Army, which thy self so long
ago planted under ground. It Is true, I found the Fuel of a Plot, but thou with
thy boreas-Nose, and Blobber-Chaps, blew the Bellows, which kindled with a Cole
of pretended Zeal from the Altar, Increased it to such a hight, that some fell
a Sacrifice to thy fury; and what can thou expect but to fall a Sin-offering
for the Blood that has been spilt. Thou made a Bull for the destruction of
Mankind, and like Phalaris, must expect to Fry in the Flame.

Oats. You studied and contrived all.

Ghost. Thou forswore and ly'd.

Oats. Did not you persuade the People all was True, when there was no more in
it, than the prosecution of your own ungodly Ends?

Ghost. Did not thou, like a Counterfeit Villain, pretend to give out Blank
Commissions, which thy self, nor no man else, ever yet beheld, and persuaded
the People that there was a Popish Army ready to Invade the Land.

Oats. Did not you, like a little State-quack the Rables-Mountebank, give out
every day upon the Stage your two Dozes of Slavery and Popery, which made the
people run mad with mutiny and rebellion, to the forfeit of their Allegiance,
had not the wise Physician of the State found an Antidot to expel your Poison.

Ghost. A Curse on him that Betrayed the Cause.

Oats. A Curse on him that made me a Party, and then left me in the lurch. Pox
on your squinting Policy.

Ghost. Plague on your timorous Folly, why did thou not Prosecute the D.

Oats. Why did not you Exclude him?

Ghost. Why did thou not swear the K. and Q into the Plot, that there might
be none left to Dissolve us?

Oats. Why did not you mind your Hits, and follow the Joiner at Oxford; such
Promethian Rashness, aiming at the Sun, broke the Neck of a good Plot.

Ghost. 'Twas thy ill management thou Fool, for which thou shall be Haunted by
my Ghost, thy contradictory Narratives and sham Commissions; a Pox on your
Elliots, and little Don John's.

Oats. A Pox on your Exclusions, and Associations, your Liberty and Pro. perty,
your Seditious Speeches and Factious Cabals, were it not for these, we might
have brought our Projects to Perfection, and made a good harvest of it.

Ghost. The Gallows! what else can thou expect since I am gone. But that thou
may not shame the Devil at last by telling one Truth in thy Life, spoil all
with a mean Confession, and like a whineing Convert, repent thee of the noble
Mischiefs thou have done, hold up thy stiff Neck, let loose thy loud and
scandalous Tongue, throw up thy Copper Snout, and double hatch thy brazen Face
with the wash of Tinsel Loyalty, and pretended Religion; carry it on with the
same Impudence and Hypocrisy; tell the City their Liberties are lost with
their Charter, Preach Sedition to the People, and warn the Brethren that they
submit not to be brought under the Dominion of Popery and Slavery. Tell them
the Lord Mayor and present Sheriffs are Usurpers, and betrayers of the Rights
and Liberties of the Subject, and that you may impose it with more Credit upon
the people, stand fast to all you Have said or done. Say the Jesuits and
Stafford died justly for con^piring against the Kings Life, and that the Lords
in the Tower are guilty of the same; for this Cause make your frequent visi^s
thither, and view them well, and often, least you should mistake one for the
other, or forget the Crimes of which you accuse them.

Keep to the Church, but more the Conventicle, the Gown, but more the Cloak,
and let the Canonical Vest and Campaign Coat, do their Offices by turns, since
the Brethren love change, and will do any thing to encourage Faction at any
Rate.

Oats. Have I not changed, as often as the Camelion does its Color, with every
object that is before it? Have I not changed the City for the Court, the Court
for the City, Union for Faction, Religion for Sedition, and do I not change my
Religion every week with my Lodging? But I find all will not do, the Brethrens
Charity is grown cold, and I am left like the Camelion, to the open Air, and
for ought I see, am like to have no other Food.

Ghost. Thy last Change is near at hand, but that it be not at Tyburn, let the
next Change be like mine, for the fresh Air in some Foreign Land. It is full
time to do Penance, thou will make an excellent Pilgrim in Hungary, to put the
Malcontents against the Emperor, and the Turk against both.

Oats. I have not done here yet.

Ghost. Thou have done enough to make the City too hot for Thee, as well as the
Court, and it is Impudence beyond Reason, to presume to hold up thy head where
I durst not show my Face, forced to fly to save that old projecting Head, and
what can thou hope that has put all those projects in Execution.

Oat^. Though I have Impudence enough to brazen it out, I must confess since
you were gone, my hopes are turned into despair of making any more of it, and I
would willingly turn my self, out that I fear I have so bewitched the People
with my Lies and Perjuries, that I should hardly be believed if I speak Truth.

Ghost. That Torments me more then my Pains, least thou by turning Cat in Pan,
by some mean Discovery, or whineing Confession at the Gallows, thou should
betray me after Death, and confess who put thee upon it; for it is some
pleasure, even in Torments, to see that our malicious projects take their
wished effects.

Oats. They have done too long, would I was well rid on'em, and could well slip
my Neck out of this dangerous Collar.

Ghost. For that Cause, I would have thee by my Example fly in time; or if
thou dare venture to brazen it out; stick closs to what thou have asserted, and
the Instructions I gave thee. And hang, though it be with a lie in thy Mouth,
the Devil loves no Converts.

Oats. For that matter I do not fear to look the Devil in the Face at the last
Gasp. But I am afraid my Memory may fail me in some particulars, without your
assistance, and you know how necessary a good Memory is for one of my
Profession.

Ghost. I will by thy Genius, ready on all occasions at thy Elbow, thou shall
be Mahomet, and I thy Pidgeon, to prompt and instruct thee. I will stick to
thee even in Death, my Ghost shall never be at rest while I have left any
considerable Mischief unattempted, that is yet in thy power to accomplish.

Oats. This generous kindness and Correspondence renewed even after Death,
(...) me take com^assion of the trembling shade, offering him share of my Bed,
which (methought) he willingly accepted, laying himself in such a posture as
was most suitable for my present Fancy to work upon. He had no sooner laid
down, but imagined it had been my old Familiar whom I had often made use of on
that occasion. I fell in closs Embraces, like Aeneas, in Combat with a shadow,
but with the violent struggling I awaked, which troubled me when I found it was
but a Dream.

Imprimatur W: P:
Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His mo^^
Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1683.


