A RELATION, Or an ACCOUNT of the Imperial Court, By SACREDO, a Noble
Venetian-Senator.

Given in an Oration made by him to the Doge (or Duke) of VENICE, in the
Venetian Senate House, of what things happened during the last War of the
Emperor with the Turks, and during his Embassy to the Emperor, at his Return
out of Germany to Venice.

Done into English by T. G. Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, and G.
Wells at the Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

TO MY TRULY NOBLE, AND WORTHY FRIEND Capt. William Leg.
Honored Sir,
WHen I considered the Greatness of your Merit, and the suitable Character the
World gives you, I was in doubt with my self whether I should adventure to
dedicate this small Piece to you, had not I been well assured of its real worth.

Your liberal and ingenuous Education, refined by your being bred up to Arms,
and your Employment at Court, the two chief Schools of Experience (Advantages
which by your Industry you have to the utmost improved) makes you the only
Person I could at present think of as a fit Judge of it; and the only Person
(having born a Public Character abroad) that I could believe could imitate or
outdo our Author.

You, as well as our Sacredo, have laid Foundations adapted to a future
Greatness, and the excellent Qualifications and Perfections you are Master of,
have made you sufficiently known to be an expert Soldier, and a complete
Courtier, highly esteemed and beloved by all; so that when His Majesty shall
think fit to raise you to a higher Station, you will sit easy: For you will
have this Happiness added to the other you enjoy, to be Great, and not Envied.

The Freedom you have allowed me, made me give you some small Account of my
future Studies, and here you have the first Essay of it: And as you are pleased
to afford a Diversion to the present Course of them, by an extraordinary Favor
and Kindness to me, I shall endeavor to make up the Loss of Time by my future
Diligence. Yet can any one be said to lose his Time, who is in the happy
Occasion of an Example of so great Virtue, whose Care and Industry is so early,
that it seems to outstrip the quickness of his Master's Bounty?

All my aim in this my Dedication to you, is only as I have received great
already, and am still in the opportunity of receiving greater Obligations from
you; so I am in Gratitude and Duty bound publicly to own, and upon all
occasions show my self,

January 24, 1684/5 Honored Sir, Your most faithful and most obedient Servant,
Tho. Garfoote.

THE English Translator's PREFACE TO THE READER.
THIS small Piece was writ by that famous Minister of the Venetian State,
Sacredo, whose Abilities have raised him co that high Degree, that he bename
the present Duke of Vetice's Competitor. A Piece writ with that Care and
Curiosity, that the Remarks are like that of Julius Caesar's concerning the
fighting of the Ancient Gauls: Heyl. Corm. l. 1. p. 148.
Lasting and permanent, and an indelible Character fixed upon their Posterity,
and will continue as long as the Air they breath in, and the Earth they tread
on. The Remarks are suited to the probable Inconveniences that may attend for
the Future, as well as the time he wrote in; the Imperial Armies, that I dare
boldly say, the Imperial Officers need not have Recourse to a Council of War if
they do but read this Book: Or at least, it will very much facilitate the Work.
So as to give ready guesses at the true Reasons of the last Year's ill Success,
and how it came to pass, that that Great and Magnanimous Prince, the present
King of Poland, should appear Colossus-like, to bestride, not cross the
Niester, and lessen and eclipse the radiant and resplendent Glories of his
former Achievements.

Nor can we wonder the same Causes should produce the same Effects. We live, I
confess, in an intreaguing Age, and Policy, as well as all other Arts and
Sciences is soaring to its highest Pitch; and however blindfold and groping in
the Dark we may censure, repine and murmur at the Actions of great Princes
abroad, as our present Humors or Affections lead us, a true and lasting
Settlement of the Peace of Christendom, is a blessing rather to be wished than
hoped for; and we must wait Gods leisure e're it be effected.

And though we here in these Islands enjoy Peace, and have been preserved from
utter Ruin and Destruction by Miracle as well as His Majesty; when as we might
have been involved in as ill or worse Circumstances, than our
Neighbour-Nations, is all entirely owing, next under God, to his Majesty's
great Care, Prudence and Conduct.

The Misfortunes of the present Times, are the Products and natural Results of
the Miscarriages of an Age or two past. And it would a little sedate the Minds
of Men, if they would seriously look upon (with due Reverence and Esteem) the
great Goodness, and innate Clemency of His Majesty. That he never suffered
during His whole Reign over us (which God long continue amongst us) any to be
put to Death, but willful and malicious offenders; has spared many.

Many Acts of his Grace and Favor may be instanced in, not one of Injustice or
Oppression; and in all our foreign Characters of him, he is represented to us
as one inclinable to Mercy, the Glory as well as Delight of Mankind, far from
taking any delight in Blood; that when he might have scourged the Rebellion
here, he gently and mildly received his own, and without noise and tumult,
(except only the Acclamations of his Subjects, attended with good Wishes for
his Happiness, Health, Peace and Safety,) vouchsafed to Exercise his Regal
Authority amongst us, to the great Joy and Comfort of his People, and
condescended so far as to receive us under the Wing of His Royal Protection.

If an Otho for one compassionate Read Martial's witty Epigram upon Otho, lib.
6. Epig. 32.
Act could have the Praises and Encomiums of all the Writers of his time; what
ought His Majesty to have for a constant, and continued Exercise of it?

Were he ambitious, he might make Pretenses (as well as other Princes) abroad:
For I leave any English man, nay, the whole World to judge, what might not this
King of England do, whose Bravery in Feats of War is conspicuous, witness that
unfortunate Battle of Worcester, supported by that Heroic and Magnanimous
Prince his Brother, the Duke of York; and once more make the Name and Title
terrible abroad, as heretofore, in France. He is a Prince that is sufficiently
experienced in the Art of War, and has showed the World, that he knows how to
behave himself, both as a General by Land, or an Admiral by Sea. He is a Prince
fit for the English Nation, answerable to their great courage; and if we do but
call back to our Thoughts our late Army, we might believe we were capable of
doing great things still, having such a Prince as this to conduct and lead us
on.

Yet however, His Majesty having gained a lasting Reputation by his
extraordinary Goodness already, I shall not endeavor to alter His Majesty's
Thoughts; but leave him still to pursue his former Methods of Mercy: For I
really think, it is a much better Character, to be esteemed the Delight and
Darling of Mankind, than to be thought one that aims at the striking Terror
into the World; to be an Otho or a Titus, than to be a Nero or a Caligula; to
be the Preserver and Defender, than the Depopulator and Destroyer of Mankind.

A Prince that is ready to make us all happy, if we would. A Prince that
considers, and has Compassion upon the Infirmities, Weakness and Follies of
Mankind, considers the Heats and Animosities bred and grown up amongst us
during our late Civil Wars, not yet thoroughly worn out; considers how all the
Factions were again upon the Ferment, by reason of our late Confusions and
Disorders; Considers (I say) all this; and yet governs with a Moderation and
Justice commensurate and adaequate to the vast Greatness of his Soul.

Oh! how sweet and precious will his Name be upon the Records of Time: Then
shall the lasting Benefits he has done for England be demonstrated, and
appear, when the Malice of Evil Men against him, and Detraction shall cease and
be no more.

And however Prejudice or Education may sway with some of us, or we may be
biased and debauched by the sly and cunning Insinuations of wicked and
designing Men: Yet it is the Wisdom and Interest, as well as Duty of the
present Age, no longer to offend so great Goodness, least that the tired-out
patience of His Majesty (considering the infinite Injuries, and repeated
Affronts the Royal Family has received) may at last turn into Fury.

Did but Englishmen (I say) consider the Blessing they enjoy in this turmoiled
and perplexed Age of the World they live in, (having His Majesty to reign over
them) they would heartily pray to the Almighty to continue to him that Divine
Protection and Assistance as has hitherto accompanied him, to preserve him
from Danger, and that he may still go on, and prosper, and do all things as may
be for his own, and his Peoples Good.

Should I let my self loose, and expatiate upon this Subject, this would swell
to a Volume; but I forbear, and leave it to a Perinchef, or a Dryden, to
compose and frame a History and Character agreeable to so great, so good, and
so gracious a Prince.

As for these two excellent persons Dr. Perinchef and Mr. Dryden, (as I
mention) fit to undertake such a Work. The first's incomparable Panegyric upon
King Charles the First, will make him pass current. And as for Mr. Dryden, I
hear he has left of the Thoughts of Poetry, and intends to bend his Studies
toward the writing of English History. He has outdone the Poets of his Time;
and he may (for ought I know) out-doe, not only the Historians of this, but all
other Times. And I verily believe, he may probably acquit himself with a great
deal of Honor Credit and Reputation and sufficiently answer the Expectation
the World might have of one should undertake so great a Work.

And thus I proceed to give you some small Account further of this our
Sacredo's Book. It Is a small Historical Discourse upon what happened in the
Compass of two or three Years time, during the last War of the Emperor with the
Turks, and delivered by him in an Oration in the Venetian Senate; and certainly
it is not the least of the policies of this state thus to exact a solemn
Account of every one of their Ambassadors, of their Management during their
Embassies. It keeps their public Ministers abroad constantly upon Duty and
Thought, how to acquit themselves upon so solemn an Occasion. A Charge that
none but men of extraordinary parts can undertake and manage with Credit and
Reputation to themselves, and Satisfaction to the State: And in this they have
the Advantage of Kings, because they are by these means sure to have their
Business well done.

But even in this (by extraordinary Knowledge) has His Majesty outdone this
wise Senate, by his Choice of Men fitly qualified for that Employ, which have
added a Luster and Reputation to us all.

My Lord Shaftsbury (as to his Majesty's knowledge of men) once was pleased to
do him that Right, in his Speech to my Lord Clifford (when he took his Oath as
Treasurer) as to say, It Is a 5 December, 1672.
great Honor, much beyond even the place it self, that you are chosen to it by
this King, who, without Flattery, I may say is as great a Master in the
Knowledge of Men and Things, as this or any other Age has produced; and
whether he intended to flatter at the same time or no I cannot tell: I am sure
he found it experimentally true to his Cost, whilst ruffled with passion,
overwhelmed with prejudice, and buoyed up by a Faction (to say no worse) he
grew discontented.

Now (I say) if these eminent Men that have from time to time been sent abroad
Ambassadors, at their Return Home, were but to render an Account of their
Embassies, before that August Assembly of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council, their Orations would at least afford a more particular Account of His
Majesty's extraordinary Goodness.

Our Countryman, Mr. Rycaut, has certainly written well concerning the
Turkish Affairs and History; and even of this very time our Sacredo did. I
confess he has written very ingeniously, much like a Gentleman, and in Favor
of the Emperor's Interests; but he tells you likewise it is but by Guess,
Apprehension, not certain Knowledge; and therefore because in many things he
seems to contradict Mr. Rycaut, I leave it to the Consideration of the Reader,
whether he may not believe our Sacredo had some Advantage that Mr. Rycaut
wanted; and so probably may have written (as to these few particulars) more
agreeable to Truth.

This Historical Discourse (if I am not misinformed) was never printed in the
Language it was spoke; but by some means or other (got by some Frenchman)
translated and printed at Paris in the Year 1670: And why I should at this time
translate it, having been so long neglected by us English, who have of late
been but over busy Translators; you may possibly say, if it had been a very
curious piece, I certainly had been eased of this Trouble, either as to my self
or the World. But in answer to this I confidently affirm, that I value my self
for being the first man that has really found out the true worth of this
Author. But yet with so much Submission to the Public, that I leave it to you,
as to this particular, and as to all other things I shall write upon this
occasion that are the Reader to judge.

All that I shall add further to the Reader, is, That this Book will prove a
Book necessarily to be read to those that intend to understand any thing justly
aright, and as they ought to do, concerning the Turkish Affairs; and that it is
as it were the Standard to know the Measures of Things, as to the Truth of a
Writer of Turkish Affairs and History, of what is already past or to come.

THE French Bookseller TO THE READER.
IT IS hard to meet with a Relation more Curious, or more certain than this is:
It derives it self from too fair an Original to be ill received, and comes to
me from too pure Hands, to be suspected. Here you will find sincerity governed
by a great Understanding: But neither the one nor the other leaves any thing to
the Curiosity of the Reader to wish for, nor any thing to doubt of as to the
Truth of the History: by the Success of this first Relation, I shall be put
into a Condition to give the public many others to the same Effect, though
made by different Persons, and I shall let you see, that there are many
remarkable Events in these particular Pieces, either forgot or unknown to the
best sort of Authors, or dissembled by concerned or corrupted Writets.

SACREDO'S ORATION.
Most Serene Prince,
I Shall not enlarge my self to represent to your Serenity the Foreign and
Civil Wars, that Religion has caused in the Empire; and how these two Evils
have weakened so formidable a Power; neither shall I lose any time to enumerate
the diverse Jealousies of the Electors, and Princes of Germany, nor the bad
Condition they have reduced the Emperor to. A The beginning of the Emperor's
Character.
Prince in his own Nature very little capable to defend himself, His Subjects
or His Friends from the diverse enterprises of His Neighbors.

These particulars have been so exactly treated of by those that have writ
before me, that it would be too tedious to make a Rehearsal. I shall reduce my
self therefore to a succinct recital of those things that are newest, and less
known; and there are very few that have either escaped my Care or Curiosity:
For I have seen the Causes bred, and their Progress die; and by a very rare
Fortune in the time of one only Embassy, I have been a Witness and Spectator
of both War and Peace: Yet amongst so great a Number of things, I shall meddle
only with those that particularly reguard the Interests of your Serenity, in
Relation to your Territories that border on the Ottoman toward the Sea, and of
the Emperor toward the Land.

Since that the Ottoman Sect, by his continual Progresses, Victories and
Conquests gained over Asia, this triumphant Puissance, Progress of the Ottoman
Greatness.
not content with the Extent of its first Successes, turned its ambitious
Designs toward Europe. Solomon invaded Hungary; Selim, his A. D. 1529. vid.
Cluv. p. 593.
Successor the Kingdom of Cyprus; the one and the other A. D. 1547. vid. Cluv.
p. 615.
having for their Object the Ruin of these two Powers that were able to give a
Check Their Designs.
to their vast Ambition: The First, that of the House of Austria by Land; the
Second, that of this Republic by Sea.

It presently appeared, that A strict Alliance is the joint Interest of the
Empire and Republic of Venice.
to oppose so dreadful a Power, it were necessary to make a strict Alliance for
the common Defense between the Emperor and your Serenity, the more assuredly to
keep off the Invasions and Forces of the Ottomans, that every one knows have
sworn the Destruction of those two Empires.

The unhappy Differences of Christendom, facilitates to the Turks all those
sorts of Enterprises which in diverse places they have had prosperous Success.
They attack sometimes the Emperor, sometimes your Serenity, the one and the
other separately, and their Appetite comes in eating: They set upon diverse
Provinces, when passing from Conquest to Conquest, they by so much always
diminish the Forces of Christendom, and more and more assure to themselves the
Roots and Foundations of their Dominion.

Thus the greatest part of Hungary being invaded by Solomon the Second, the
Turks have prevailed, and extended very far their Conquests in Europe by Land.
In process of Time Selim gets possession of the Kingdom of Cyprus. Ibrahim
entered The Turks entered Candia, A. D. 1645. Cluver. p. 761. Mahom. 3. fell
into Transylvania, 1599. Cluv. p. 632
Candia, and Mahomet the Third Transylvania. These glorious Successes by Sea
and Land continuing as it were Link by Link, the Chain of their Conquests have
made appear, that their Designs are for an Universal Monarchy, and have made
the Christians afraid of their Irons and Slavery. In Effect, being Masters of
the Kingdom of Candia, Effects of the loss of Candia surrendered 27. Sep. 1669.
they will have the Sea open, and may carry their Ambition wheresoever they
will. Transylvania already by the Conquest of Warradin, and the Warradin
surrendered 6 Aug. 1660. Clu. p. 845.
establishing of Prince Ann. D. 1661. Flo. Hung. page 284.
Abafti, their Slave, is entirely submitted to them; and they keep in no less
Awe Hungary, by the taking Surrendered 26. Sep. 1663. Flo. Hung. p. 287. Clu.
p. 866.
Newhausel, and the several Bastions with which they have fortified it, and
aggrandiz'd the Suburbs; and it is easy to perceive where they would make the
Seat of War, could they but meet with a more happy Attack of Vienna, than that
which was attempted by Ann. D. 1529. Flo. Hun. p. 142.
Solomon in the Age past, there is nothing can happen of greater Importance to
be afraid of, and the loss of this The preservation of Vienna of great
importance to all Christendom.
Capital City would be fatal to all Christendom; and though it seems that the
Ottoman Empire has not at present such numerous Forces as at other times it
has had, because we do not now see an Army of three hundred thousand
Combatants, as was that of Solomon, when he first set foot in Hungary; or of
five hundred thousand, as was that of Amurath before Babylon. This does not
proceed from the Weakness of this Empire; it is far from being less puissant
than it was in those times; but is rather much more considerable, by all its
new Conquests, and by the Increase of the Number of Kingdoms and States, that
are subject to it. The present weakness Present State of the Turkish affairs.
is very apparent, and the Continuance of it very uncertain, and proceeds only
from Why their Forces are so much diminished.
the Disorder of the Head; but the Body has lost nothing of its Force, nor of
being in a good Condition, notwithstanding the Spirits are languishing, and the
Heart abated, so that the Motions of it are slower than ordinary; and that
Vivacity of the former Ottoman Monarchs appears almost extinct. And in short,
it seems, that since the Death of Amurath, there has not been a Sultan worthy
the Name of a Grand Seignior, nor of so great an Empire, or one that has been
either a warrior, or addicted to War. The Turks, as they have not increased,
or enlarged their Limits, so they have lost nothing: Their Languishing costs
their Empire nothing, and leaves them in a condition of re-taking their former
Vigor, as soon as they shall have a Prince that is a Warrior, and loves War;
and one that in Imitation of their Ancestors, shall seek for Glory in the Head
of his Armies, in the midst of Battles, and whose Example should inspire
Courage and Bravery in the Soldiers: So that the Languishing of this vast Body
proceeds from the Weakness of their Chief; but at the first Change this People
will soon re-take their former Force and Vigor.

The Turkish Militia is composed Of the Turkish Militia.
chiefly of Asiaticks and Europeans; the first are for the most part Cavalry;
the second are for the most part Musketeers, which they raise upon the
Frontiers, and have always their Arms ready, and are naturally more addicted to
War than the others.

However the essential Basis, and principal Cause of so many Victories obtained
by the Ottomans, has been the exact Observation of their Policy, and of their
Discipline; the Bravery of their Soldiers, and above all their Janissaries,
which are choice Troops, and a Body of people chosen, and of Courage. It is to
be observed, that the Turks use not to do as the Christian An oversight of the
Christian Officers in general.
Officers, who care no farther than to get the Number of Men they have
undertaken for: And for a little Gain content themselves with the first that
come, and list miserable Peasants, Beggars, new clothing them, and such as
they can meet with; so that neither the one, nor the other, have any Fitness or
Inclination for War; and do only endeavor to increase their Troops of all
sorts of indifferent people, for their own profit, more than the Service of
their Prince.

On the contrary the Turks The Turks way of Discipline.
choose out of the Children of the Christian Slaves, such whose Bodies are best
proportioned and strongest, which they carefully breed up in the Seraglio, to
the Love and Discipline of War, and conduct them to Arms as soon as they are
judged capable, and they afford the bravest and most expert Soldiers, and are
generally the Instruments of the greatest Successes, and Gainers of doubtful
Battles. It must also be avowed, that the blind Obedience of these Infidels
does not a little contribute to the prosperity of the State of their Affairs,
and their Combats; and are strangely profited by our Examples, Inventions and
Machines, and of diverse Instructions that the Renegades from time to time give
them, both as to what concerns Artillery, or artificial Fires; and as to Their
Improvement in Fireworks, and other Warlike Exercises.
what regards the ordering of Sieges, Marches, Camps, and other Exercises of
War: For without these the Ottomans would not have necessary Understanding. Of
which every one was entirely persuaded at the last Siege of Canisa, where The
Reason of the Christians Miscarriage at the last Siege of Canisa.
the Commanders readily making use of the Experience of Renegades, made a brave
and admirable Resistance, and baffled the Art of the most experienced
Christian-Engineers. That which is remarkable amongst the Turkish Armies, they
never want Provisions, let them be composed of never so great a Number; or
whatever happens to them, this Disorder befalls only the Christian Troops.

How often has it happened The Christians and Turks compared as to their
Provisions for the Soldiery.
to those of the Emperor? How often have they wanted Bread? How often have
their Armies been in a manner broken? The Turks know not what it is to have
such Disgraces; whether it be by their great Economy, or by their commendable
and natural Sobriety, they never want any thing: For if the Order and Care of
their Officers procure them abundance of provisions, the Soldier, by his
Sobriety, contributes much to their Duration; and with a Handful of Rice, and
dried Flesh, or beat into Powder only, without any other Beverage than that of
Fresh Water, he is satisfied, and sufficiently nourished. Not but that they
have Sherbet for people of Quality; but they can be without it, and make it
their Glory to abstain from it, for to make them appear more fit for War and
Fatigue. One cannot say so of the Christian Armies, much less of the German's,
who are always at their Meals, and as it were buried in Gluttony and
Drunkenness.

The Emperor entered into this war with the Turks with too great Censures upon
the Emperor's Proceedings in the beginning of the War.
an Affectation to avoid it: For if at the beginning, as soon as the Port had
framed a Design of invading Transylvania; and was not as yet fully resolved, if
the Emperor, I say, had made his Veterane Army, drawn out of many old Bodies
since the last Peace of the Empire, advance, he had constrained the Turks to
much more reasonable Conditions, because that the greatest part of them did
disapprove an open Breach with the Emperor. But his Majesty, following the
faint hearted and weak Counsels of his Favorite, appeared so soft in his
manner of Acting, and so intimidated with the bare appearances of a Rupture
that he confirmed the Vizier in his Design of making War, and pushed on so much
the more this Infidel, who was already too full of Hope, and almost assured of
good Success against so feeble a Prince; and in a time when all Christendom was
in Combustion and Disorder.

It will be equally superfluous as well as troublesome to represent the diverse
particularities to your Serenity, since that my Dispatches have punctually
informed you of the chief passages of what happened.

The Vizier entered the Emperors The Vizier falls into the Emperor's
Territories without resistance.
Territories with Fifty Thousand Foot, and Eight Thousand Horse. The first Year
he found no resistance; for the Germans shut themselves up in fortified places,
and quitted the Field; besides, the Tartars, without any Hinderance, and with a
great deal of Freedom, ran up and down the Country, and ruined chiefly Moravia;
and throwing of Arrows with lighted Matches tied to them upon the thatcht
Houses, The cruelty of the Tartars.
they burnt an infinite Number of Villages, and carried away Fifteen Thousand
Slaves, binding the little Children together, and laying them behind them upon
their Horses Backs. All was filled with Confusion and Disorder. Vienna in a
manner abandoned: Above seventy Thousand Inhabitants left it, and took away the
best of their Goods to save them, and to take refuge in places afar of, and
secure against this Irruption. A great Number of these people stayed at Lintz,
the ways were filled with people in despair, who were equally pressed with fear
and famine, remained without Force, and some times without Life, in the midst
of the Highways. The Ambassadors kept themselves in a readyness to follow the
Emperor to this City, in case the Turkish Army had advanced toward Vienna, the
only place of Refuge; but the Ordinary Slothfulness of his Imperial Majesty,
made him one of the last to retire, although all were filled with pannick fear,
and was the occasion that the Capital City was not entirely forsaken by its
Inhabitants.

At last a Courier put Courage Newhausel lost.
into the fainting, and perplexed Germans, by bringing the News of the Turkish
Armies march to Newhausel; this City, notwithstanding well provided with all
things necessary, yielded to the force of the Infidels. The Vizier spared
nothing of Bravery, or of Money; for he gave generously a hundred Rix Dollars a
Head to the Janissaries, that should fix upon a Breach the Turkish Standards,
hoping by his Liberalities, the more readily to become Master of the
Fortifications, and to be beforehand with Autumn; which standing upon a Moross,
would have rendered the Attack more difficult, and the Success much more
doubtful. The Rains hinder the further Progress of the Turks.


The advantages of this Campaign were notably retarded by the Protection Heaven
was pleased to afford the piety of the Emperor for to repair his and his
Ministers Negligence: It rained so abundantly that the ways were broken, so
that the Vizier was constrained to defer his progress, and to make a halt at
Buda, for at least Forty days, to have his Cannon drawn back. It is almost
certain, that if God gave a fair Game to the Turks at first, he at the same
time blinded them; and that if the Vizier, instead of attacking Newhausel, The
miserable condition of Vienna.
had advanced in sight of Vienna, he had found it without Provision, without
Soldiers, and without Inhabitants; filled with Despair, Diseases, and great
Necessities, open and exposed to his Army, and entirely submitted to his
Disposition, which he did not want being blamed for; and his Excuse was (says
he) I could never have imagined, that the Defense of a Capital City, and well
fortified, could possibly at the first and false Reports, have been so
negligently and suddenly abandoned.

At this time the Murmurs and Complaints against Count Portia.
Complaints broke out against the Ministry of Count Portia, who remained as one
asleep in so great a Noise, and in the midst of so many Alarms. To speak His
Character.
Truth, his Shoulders were not broad enough to bear so great a Burden: The
deplorable Loss of Newhausel ended this unfortunate Campaign, and gave some
Relaxation to the diverse Inquietudes, and unworthy dejections of the Emperor's
Spirit, reduced to look upon such a Loss as a Happiness to him, nor could have
any Hope or Assurance, but from the flattering Treasons of his Favorite, who
dissembled all things, and amused him by fair and vain Appearances, in such
sort, that two days before the Loss of Newhausel, I asked his Majesty if he had
good News; He answered me, That the Turks daily battered the place, but gained
not any Advantage.

The second Campaign of this The second Campaign begins with Loss to the
Imperialists.
War did not appear at its beginning more prosperous than the first, by reason
of the unfortunate Siege of Canisa, the taking of Fort Zerin by Assault, Fort
Zerin taken 1664.
with a Remarkable Loss of the Besieged. However the Victory obtained in
Hungary on the other Side the Danube, by Count Zouches, and yet farther, that
of Montecuculis's, at the River Raab, sweetn'd the End. But the known Loss of
Turkish Officers and Soldiers, and amongst others of Ismael Bassa, the Sultan's
Brother-in-law, Death of Ismael Bassa.
and General of the Cavalry, so much the more increased the Christians Joy;
which cut short the Progress of the Infidels. By this considerable Defeat, not
only the Misfortunes of the Emperor seemed to cease, but diverse Beams of a good
Fortune began to shine out: For, besides the Honor of the Victory, he had yet
the Advantage of a great Booty which the Imperialists got.

The Victory was thus obtained, Six Thousand Turks having rashly passed the
River, An Account of the Battle of Raab.
they were as soon set upon by the Christian Army, consisting of near Fifty
Thousand Men. The time was not long in their being all cut to pieces, or thrown
over, and drowned in the River. Yet these Wretches sold The Turkish Valor.
their Lives at a dear Rate, and far from yielding to Discretion, they defended
themselves, as much as they were able, with as much Courage as Valor; and
seemed in dying to out-brave their Conquerors; and all the Dead were found with
their Cymeters in their Hands; and they made Prisoner but one only Janizary
that lay fainting on the Ground through the number of his Wounds, who was sent
to the most Christian King, with many Ensigns taken from the Infidels by the
French. Certainly their Bravery contributed very much to this Victory, and as
to the Glory of the Success, if other Nations, who fought, ought to be
partakers of the Honor, the Decision of this Battle, which was a long time
doubtful, is due only to their valor, and they were well recompensed in the
Field; for the Officers and Soldiers enriched themselves with the Spoils from
the Dead Bodies upon the place, and the drowned, which they fished for. The
Turks, being (for the most part) Officers, or Commanders, were either richly
Armed or clad.

The Presumption of a certain Victory, had engaged the Bravest of the Turkish
Officers to this Rashness, and without any Consideration to pass the River, not
making any Reflection as to the Danger, or the Consequences of it. They could
not imagine that a Fear so great as the German's was, could be so easily
vanished; and that a People so astonished could so quickly take Courage, or
dare to make any Resistance; so that rushing on to a Triumph, before they were
assured of a Victory, they got on their best Habits, instead of arming
themselves with their best Arms: There An Account of the Booty.
was found Silver, Furniture for Horses with Silver-gilt Saddles embroidered,
Cymeters, set with Diamonds, Turbants garnished with precious Stones; and
particularly that of Ismael Bassa, adorned with a Feather, set on with a
Garniture of Diamonds of great price. This Disgrace a little abated their
Pride, and gave an Overture to Propositions of Peace. The Turkish Army already
fatigued with the relieving of Canisa, and the Cavalry wanting Forage, the
Canisa relieved, An. D. 1664.
Vizier was constrained to pull off the Leaves of the Woods that were nearest
him, to serve instead of Hay for the Subsistence of his Horse. As for him,
whether Business took him up, or that he was not a good Soldier, he stayed The
Behavior of the Vizier at this Battle.
on the other side the River during the whole Battle; and seemed rather to
observe as a Philosopher, than as a Warrior, the Misfortune and Rout of his
Army: For he did not make the least offer, as if he were willing to relieve
them, whether looking on it as a thing impossible, or choosing rather to undergo
the Disgrace than the Danger.

Moreover, of what Consequence soever the Loss was, he did not fail gaining
extremely The Death of Ismael a great Advantage to the Vizier.
by the Death of Ismael his Competitor, having no more to fear from him, who
had a great Heart and Merit: That which surprised him most, was the Valor of
the French, to see what a Slaughter they made, and what a Shock they gave the
Victory. However he more readily The Vizier harkens to a Peace.
lent his Ear to a Treaty of Peace, which was soon after concluded, and agreed
amongst the parties. I was so much the less surprised, because I foresaw it
beforehand. Having at large represented it to your Serenities by my
Dispatches, that this War his Majesty was necessitated, not advised to; and
therefore would be willing to accept the best Conditions of peace he could, and
endeavor the Restitution of Newhausel, a Frontier place, which secures not
only Hungary, but covers Moravia and Silesia, and his hereditary Countries, and
is only distant from Vienna a hundred Italian Miles. The Reasons that induced
the Emperor to a Peace.


The Reasons that led the Emperor to this Peace so imprudently and hastily, in
a Time when all parts of Christendom promised the Empire more Assistance than
ever, and the pride of the Turks so sensibly abated; and in short, when all
things did appear to make for the Christians; the Reasons, I say, were The
weakness of the House of Austria.
the Nonage of the King of Spain, and the Apprehension that the Germans had,
That through his Catholic Majesty's Fault, the House of Austria remained
feeble and troubled in Spain, either by Domestic Factions, or by the Diversion
in Portugal: And too much entangled in Germany, by reason of this War,
undertaken with Forces too unequal; besides, these Entanglements laid open the
passages for the King of France, to invade the Territories of the one and the
other Branch of Austria; and he might easily prevail over their Weakness; and
in Spite of them, both establish and secure his Power in their Countries. The
little Money the Emperor has, and the feeble and slow Succors of the Empire,
very much encouraged him to this Resolution: But Foreign The danger of
hazarding a Battle.
Considerations entirely determined the Council of the Emperor; for the great
Force of the Turkish Arms hindered the hazarding a Battle in the Heart of
Hungary; of which the ill Success would put all the States of the Empire into
evident Danger; besides, the natural Aversion between the Germans and
Hungarians daily gave some new Alarm. The Hungarians hatred to the Turks keeps
them in Subjection to the Emperor.


On the other hand, the Imperial Ministers were but too too justly persuaded,
that the Hungarians are not retained in their Duty and Obedience in respect to
the Emperor, but out of hatred to the Turks; not for Love of their Sovereign,
but Fear of their Enemies. These natutural preventions are the only Cautions
that keep in these unruly Creatures, and hinder them from undergoing the Yoke:
For this their giddy Frame of Spirit, is the Reason why the Germans do not
desire entirely to get the Kingdom of Hungary out of its Subjection to the
Ottomans, being of that Belief, that if this People should recover their former
Liberty, and were freed from the Fear of the Turks, they would infallibly
revolt from the Empire, nor would obey them any longer; and would in the end
choose a King of their own Nation, as they have done heretofore.

These Imaginations are so strong, and of that weight with them, that the
Austrians had much rather consent to the Loss of Newhausel, one of the Bulwarks
of their hereditary Countries, than insist upon the Restitution of that place,
which being, as it were, the Center of Hungary, would increase their Oppression
and Servitude. This considerable Loss was a Comfort The Emperor makes a Peace
blamed by all Chrystendom.
to them, because it would be a Grief to the Hungarians, and precipitated them
into a dishonorable Peace; blamed by all the World, and done in a time when
all Europe, being in peace, might send powerful Succors, and vigorously beat
back these Infidels.

The Hungarians, as they are The Peace prejudicial to the Hungarians.
most concerned, so they were most surprised; they had conceived some hope of
being able to break their Chains, and were in expectation of some sort of
Relief from a General Peace amongst Christians. They could never imagine, that
any one could acquiesce in a Treaty so disadvantageous, by which their Fetters
should be fastened, and their Slavery secured. Without doubt, no one knows how
enough to deplore their Misfortune: For they find themselves beset on all Hands
by the Turks; for they are tormented by their continual Courses, surprised
every Moment in their Vineyards and Villages, in such sort, that, let the peace
be what it will that is made, these unfortunate Hungarians do not cease having
War, being exposed to Incursions, to Reprisals, and to all other Hostilities;
so that they are obliged to have their Arms in their Hands, and be always on
their Guard, notwithstanding their Forces are unequal to their Enemies. They
were from Day to Day destroyed, and all to no purpose against a greater Force:
Also adding loss after loss, it is very Difficult to think they should long
delay an entire Submission; and the rather, because they are seated between two
powerful Enemies, the Turks, that would oppress them, and the Germans, that
would not defend them. And for this Reason, as well as that, they were not of
themselves capable of making War without an evident hazard of being ruined,
they found themselves constrained to dissemble their Misfortune, and to wait a
more favorable time for their Liberty, without Murmur, without Complaint,
through Fear of a more insufferable Slavery. And although this might be one
Reason to oblige the Germans to a peace, it was not the only one; the
unfortunate Loss of Transylvania was a second, and not less urgent.

This Province was the first The Invasion of Transylvania by the Turks, the
first Cause of this War.
Subject of the War, and occasioned rather by the ill Conduct of the Emperor's
Ministers, than by any ill Fortune of his own: For it was as it were abandoned;
Business was neglected; Sixteen Musters-pay due to the Soldiers; The Officers
ill used, and driven out of places, and constrained, as it were through Despair,
to treat with Abafti.

This * Prince had presently the Consent of the Port, and Abafti established
1661.
Orders to receive well the German Soldiers that fled to him for Refuge, and
give them their pay due from the Emperor, and so take in the places; were given
them in Custody, without giving them wherewithal to keep them. By this means,
without so much as drawing a Sword, the Emperor found himself despoiled of the
principal places delivered to him as a pledge of Fidelity by Kemin Janos, and
lost Clausemburg it self, that had been defended with so great Clausemburg, or
Claudiopolis taken 1662.
a Reputation the last Campaign, under the Conduct of Reffano, a Venetian.
There are some people that are apt to say, That Portia, out of Design,
neglected the Relief of these places, thinking to make the World believe, that
the Inhabitants and Garrisons were the only Authors of their Revolts, to remove
(by such Losses where he did not seem to contribute) all Subject of Complaint
and of War, that might arise concerning their preservation.

The loss of Transylvania will without doubt one day be lamentable to all
Christendom, The loss of Tranfilvania endangers all Christendom.
especially to Germany. This Province, which might pass for a powerful and vast
Kingdom, is fair, abundant, and enlarged with rich and fertile Plains,
surrounded with Hills, surmounting one another till by degrees they raise
themselves to steep and inaccessible Mountains, as if Providence with these
strong and natural Ramparts, were minded to defend them from the diverse
Irruptions of these Barbarians. It is filled with strong Castles, and Towns
well peopled: It is abounding in Mines; fertile in strong and brave Horses, and
there is nothing wanting that is necessary to the life of Man.

The Emperor has very much contributed to the Ruin of this Province by his
extraordinary Negligences, and abandoning the generous Ragotzkie. That brave
Man, though he was forsaken by the Emperor, and void of all Relief, continued to
defend his Estates with as much Prince Ragotzki's death, May 1660.
Glory as Courage: Nor had he yielded to his ill Fortune, had he been seconded
by the Princes, his Neighbors, concerned in the War. Notwithstanding his
Despair increased his Valor; for after he had slain one hundred and seventy one
Men with his own Hand, he was enclosed by the Enemy, and at last killed
Fighting. He inherited the Bravery His Character.
of his Father, who maintained himself in this Province in spite of the
Ottomans, on whom he had many Advantages, and won many signal Victories. The
Turks never gave over troubling him, and would have forced him to resign his
Principality, and do Homage to the Port; but neither their Commands nor Forces
could work against so valorous a Resistance. From hence it is that it came to
pass, that the Death of Father and Son, and the taking of Waradin, Waradin
surrendered to the Turks, 17 Aug. 1660.
afforded so great Joy to the Infidels, who have not only brought in Subjection
all the Princes, his Successors, but made his Subjects Slaves, and totally
dependant upon their Empire.

Varadin being the chief Key of Hungary, gives the Turks a free Entrance, and
secure Access, and renders their Dominion so absolute, and the Province so
subject, that the Emperor and Hungarians are apparently for ever excluded from
the Recovery of this Country, and its Liberty.

The Imperial Ministers took Colorable pretenses for a Peace.
great care to give plausible Motives for a Peace, and did endeavor to color
their Desires of extinguishing the Fire that was enkindled in Hungary; and by
consequence their weak Resistance in Transylvania. They published in their
Treaty, That they had maintained Abafti in the same Estate that his
predecessors were: But these Reports were spread farther than believed; and
they that had the least Understanding of these Affairs, were persuaded, that
notwithstanding all these Treaties, and the differences of the Provinces, this
Prince should not be better used by the Port, than those of Valachia and
Moldavia, who are The Condition of Christian Princes under the Turk.
under the entire and absolute Dominion of the Turks, and he not be able to
act, but as the Port would have him; and find himself not only deprived of his
Authority, but destitute of his Forces, and not in a Capacity to take Arms, as
his Predecessors had done, either to aggrandize or defend himself.

The Loss of this Province is The Loss of Transylvania fatal to the Christians
and advantageous to the Turks.
so considerable, that it will be fatal one day to Germany: For the Fury of the
Turks will not find any more a Defense to break their first Incursions. The
Emperor will not have any thing left to oppose their Inundation; and his
Country will be exposed to the first Fury of the Infidels. The Turks
themselves have gained this Advantage, that they can raise their Troops there,
which they were forced to send back into Asia after a Campaign. Now they can
begin a Campaign sooner, and retire into their Winter Quarters later; and by
reason that their Cavalry were constrained to wait the Growth and Maturity of
Forage; and the great Distance of places hindered their appearing in a Body
upon the Frontiers, before the beginning of August: Now they can do it in the
Month of June, and so their Irruption will be so much the more destructive, as
their Campaign will be the longer.

The last War has prepossessed the Christians with these unhappy Conjectures:
For the Turks durst not have taken the Field before the Season had covered the
Earth with necessary Forage for the Subsistence of their Cavalry, Horses of
Artillery and Baggage; and not coming to a Rendezvous till toward August, they
had not time enough to make any more than one Enterprise: But now having made a
Conquest of so spacious and fertile a Country, which they retain, they are in
a Condition to undertake all sorts of Enterprises, almost at all times; and it
is always in their power to hurt the Christians, and oblige them constantly to
be upon their Guard. Moreover, these vast and fruitful Fields of Hungary, so
easily lost to the Ottomans, have created a Desire in them to establish
themselves in so good a Country.

In like manner the Emperor's Enemies have found themselves posted commodiously
upon a Frontier, for the beginning of Sieges in good time, and so have it in
their power to profit themselves of all Seasons. On the other hand, the Emperor
depending upon the unsteady Resolutions of the several Dyets, and not being in
a Condition to receive but slow Succors, and Troops afar off, he will remain
exposed to the Mercy of his Enemies, and find a powerful Army upon him, capable
to undertake all things before that he is in a Condition to defend himself.

The Articles of Peace between the Emperor and the Turks have been sufficiently
handled in the last Dispatch of the Great Chancellor, who might have spared the
Circumstances of Count Serini's Death, which he supposes to be violent,
contrived, and of a premeditated Design; whereas it was merely casual, as I
have written to your Serenity. For the sole Ardor, which he had equally for
Count Serini's Death by a Wild Boar, 1664.
the Chase, as for the War was the true and only Cause of it. His great Courage
made him wilful, and stiffly to maintain a Fight with a wild Boar, already
wounded, and become furious by seven Wounds that it had received. The Count
being Rycaut's Hist. p. 176
thrown upon the Ground, and by many Strokes disabled from speaking one Word,
yet gave many Marks of his Reason and Piety; often smiting his Breast, he did
lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and made it appear that he died content, and a good
Christian.

He was a Cavalier of great His Character.
Birth, great Merit, and a sworn Enemy to the Turks: His Hatred to them was
hereditary, and common to his Family. Your Serenity knows very well what his
Grandfather did in Croatia, at the Siege of Zigeth, attacked by Solomon, at the
Head of an Army of two Hundred Thousand Men. That when Provision for Mouth and
War were absolutely wanting, Count Serini's Grandfather's brave defense of
Zigeth, 1566.
and the place open on all Sides, he would never hearken to a Composition; but
resolved rather to perish than treat; and becoming more fierce in the Extremity
he saw himself reduced to, he changed a generous Defense into a vigorous
Attack; for encouraging the weak, feeble and languishing Remnant of the
Garrison to follow him, he furiously threw himself upon his Enemies; and after
a thousand Exploits (worthy of eternal Memory) his Virtue fell, being oppressed
by mere Number; he gloriously died with his Cymeter in his Hand, and lost not
the place but with his Life.

The Valor of the Grandson His Character continued.
was not less eminent, though he finished his Life with less good Fortune. A
person of that Extraction and Desert; his frequent Attempts in great and
hazardous Occasions, not sparing himself in the most apparent Dangers, well
merited a more happy Destiny, and a more glorious Death. An Ambuscade, or a
Battle ought to have ended a Life so fair; and it was an unspeakable Loss, that
so brave a Man as he, who had devoted himself to the Fatigues of War, should be
destroyed in the pleasures of Peace; and that a Prince so formidable to so many
of the Infidels, his only Enemies, should be torn in pieces by one only fierce
Beast.

This Loss is so much the more Sereni's Name a Terror, and his Disgrace and
death a Joy to the Turks.
to be lamented by Christendom, be cause the very Name of this Hero was
sufficiently capable to strike a Terror into the Turks, and to repel their
most hardy Attempts: Yey, the very Disgrace of this Count Nicholas de Serini,
was looked upon by the Ottomans as one of their greatest good Fortunes; but his
Death caused so much Joy among them, that they made Bone-fires, and discharged
all the Cannons of Canisa.

The Hungarians on the other The Loss of Serini differently resented by the
Hungarians, and the Imperial Court, and why.
side were in extreme Grief; they perceived very well the Importance of so
great a Loss; they found themselves without a Head, without Counsel, and
without Protection; and were doubly afflicted to see the careless Concern of
the Cesarean Court for him, who rendered this Misfortune agreeable to the
Emperor's Ministers, which was regretted by the rest of his Subjects: For they
looked upon him as an Obstacle to Peace, a Fomenter of War, his natural Valor
an Enemy to Repose; and that his boiling Courage would never wave an Occasion
to kindle a War. However it was (for I cannot dissemble to your Serenity) his
Country has not only lost in his Person, a generous Defender of his Estates,
but a powerful Hinderance against the Inundations of the Infidels* A little
before this sad Adventure, being in Despair by the Peace which the Emperor had
concluded to so ill a purpose, and so much to his Disadvantage. Sereni's
generous Offer to the Venetians.
He himself proposed to me, That he would go a Voluntier to serve this
Republic with Six Thousand old Soldiers, every one of them a choice Man,
wherever you should have Occasion; and that he feared nothing so much as the
Rust of Repose, and the Debauchery of Idleness. In short, he wished for nothing
more, than to end his Days in an Occasion glorious to his Memory, and
profitable to Christendom.

Count Peter Serini succeeded his Brother in his Command. Count Peter Serini's
Character.
He is a brave Soldier, and great Captain; but not looked upon as a man so
great in Bravery as his Brother was.

Two Articles of this Peace, Secret Articles of Peace between the Emperor and
the Turk.
notwithstanding they were kept very secret, were nevertheless discovered, and
divulged amongst the Hungarians; and those that were men of the greatest
Interest among them, endeavored to penetrate into this Treaty, and did it
sooner than the Germans.

The First was, That the Emperor The first Article.
might freely chastise the Insolence of the Hungarians, and reduce them by all
sorts of ways to their Duty, without any Opposition from the Turks, or
Hinderance of the Resentments of the Imperial Court in punishing his Subjects.

The Second was, That the The second Article.
Emperor should not oppose the Turks, as to any Attempts they should make upon
Italy; but leave them a free passage through Friuli.

I took an extraordinary trouble upon me to dive into the truth of these
things, kept with so much Industry hid, and secret by the Germans, yet as
hastily published by the Hungarians. And if the first Article proved true, I
shall have but little trouble to persuade the world to believe the Second. All
things carried so likely a Semblance in themselves, as well as in my Opinion,
that I shall take but little Care to illustrate, although it was a great deal of
pain to me to believe them.

The Death of Prince Portia The death of Count Portia, a great Loss to the
States of Pisino.
was a great Loss and Misfortune to the Estates of Pisino (through which the
Tartars, when they had a mind, must pass toward Italy) as also to the Defense
and Guard of those strait and difficult Passes: For his Authority and
particular Interest secured them against diverse Hazards, procured them a great
Number of Soldiers to put them out of all Fear, and protected them against all
sort of incursions of their enemies. The County of Pisino, bought by the
Brother of the Prince of Ausburg, since the Death of Portia, found little
Support in his Successor, who had no small Share in the Councils of his
Imperial Majesty, though this new Count did do his Endeavor to divert all the
Disgraces from his own Lands, which the Necessity and Freedom of a passage (of
it self more difficult than one can well imagine) might bring upon them.

The Emperor, as well as his Subjects, will first feel this Damage: The great
Damage the Emperor is like to sustain.
For the Tartars (who make no Distinction between Friend and Foe, and whose
Cruelty treats all alike, and carry Disorder, Rapine and Bloodshed along with
them) might easily make him sensible of the Effects of their Barbarity and
Violence; and he knows no other way to hinder this Army from posting it self in
the Bowels of his own proper Territories, without great prejudice to himself,
of the Consequence whereof your Serenity cannot be ignorant.

The Electors, and Princes of Germany, The Dissatisfaction given the Electors
by this Peace, and their Reflections upon it.
remained ill content with a Peace so infamous to the Empire, and advantageous
to the Turk. They presently made it known, that their Dyets had been
unprofitably assembled; their Assistances superfluous, and their Levies unjust
for a Success so unworthy his Majesty, the Princes of the Empire, and the
Forces of Christendom: That the Emperor would primarily be hurt by so
disgraceful an Accommodation; That he had seemed already to implore, to no
purpose, a Succor that he had no occasion for; That the Grand Seignior would
agree to nothing, but under such hellish Conditions, as should oblige the
Emperor to give Instructions to his Minister at Constantinople, to consent to
any Proposals should be made to him, without which he could not possibly resume
any Treaty with the Port. As The Germans great Care in keeping the peace.
for the Germans, they would not, in Truth, give any Cause to the Turks, to
break the peace that had been concluded; but on the contrary would endeavor to
have it well rooted, and would suffer any thing in Reason that their Liberties
would permit, provided their Enemies would also as religiously keep themselves
within the Confines and Terms of their Treaty.

As to the Duration of this The Uncertainty of the duration of this peace.
Peace between these two great Empires, it depends upon the Contingencies of
future things, which are in the Hands of God, and of which Men know not how
with any certainty to judge. Yet I shall say, That the Confines are so
embarrassed, that it will be a very great wonder, if the Turks, when they are
rid of the War, which they have with your Serenity, do not then begin again to
fall out with the Emperor: For those two Princes know not how to live long
together in a good Understanding. The Turk will not continue long in the
Condition he finds himself; and every Sultan, by his Law, is obliged to
signalize himself by some Famous Conquest upon the Christians; and this very
man knows not how to dispense with himself without making a War, nor can find a
Country more proper, more commodious, more rich, (according to his
Apprehension) than that of the Empire. Moreover the Grand Seignior cannot meet
with any thing more to his Advantage: For his formidable Armies may better
subsist in the vast and fertile plains of the Empire, than in the starving
Deserts of Persia.

It will be the worst News The Venetians peace with the Turks hindered by the
Imperialists, and why.
that can possibly come to Vienna, that there is a peace concluded between your
Serenity and the Port, whenever it shall please God it shall be so.

Their Ministers are very well persuaded, That their peace will last as long as
the War with your Serenity; and your Diversions ceasing by Sea, the Insolence
of the Turks would begin on the Land. For this Reason it is, that the
Generosity of the Senate is praised at the Imperial Court; and they wish
nothing more ardently than the Continuation of your War. Hence they, with
Artifice, invent things to give Courage to your Serenity, to engage you to an
obstinate Defense, and hinder the slackening your Fatigue and Expense:
Sometimes they spread abroad a Report of an Enterprise which they do not so
much as dream of; sometimes of a Disorder among the Turks, against all
Appearance of Truth, and of other such like things, all to persuade you to
lengthen out the War, and lay aside all thoughts of peace. It is not a pure and
frank Courtesy that they suffer you to raise Recruits in Germany, and make
Levies of Troops for the Relief of your Empire; but true and visible Reason of
State, which prevails always in the Deliberation of Princes, and is the only
Rule they follow. For after all, there is none but looks upon the Misfortune of
another as an Happiness to himself, when he is to receive Advantage by it;
although at the same time there is no man would set Fire to his Neighbor's
House for fear it should burn his own. I can say without Dread of abusing you,
and assure your Serenity, that Panagiriti had private Orders to give out at
Constantinople, That it was not for the Dignity of the Sultan to make peace
with this The Imperial Minister disswades the Turk from a Peace with the
Venetians.
Republic, until they were disingaged by some Conquest, that would answer the
Reputation of their Arms.

All the Treaties managed by Monsieur the Grand Chancellor, are but new
Engagements to a Second Expense; and the Intreagues of the Imperialists are
renewed, and augmented every day; which do so much the more increase, as they
seem to be under a Mis-apprehension at the Port. For since the Rupture, by
their Negotiations, either private or public, they always seem easy and
willing to satisfy the Ottoman Court; notwithstanding the late Advantages of
the Cesarean Armies, the great Number of their Troops, and the Success of their
Auxiliaries: For fear that your Serenity should prevent their peace by yours,
and leave them for want of a Diversion, to the full and total Fury of the
Turkish Forces. A peace, such as your Serenities are able to make with the
Port, would prove the greatest Disgrace can happen to the House of Austria. The
last Year the Grand Chancellor proposed a Treaty between your Serenity and the
Turks; and because it did not take Effect, the Cesarean Court seemed to be
uneasy, and testified a great deal of Trouble and Concern at it. The Imperial
Ministers at the same time that were near the Vizier, were commanded by express
and re-iterated Orders, sent by many Couriers, to hinder the progress of these
Negotiations, and remonstrate to the Port, That a peace was much more
advantageous, and honorable to the Turks with the Emperor, than with your
Excellencies; and all the Advices from Spain were all along for concluding a
peace, and making an Accommodation: Nay, to offer considerable Sums; and if
things came to extremity, to buy it with their Money, if they could not obtain
it by Spain advises the Emperor to a peace with the Turks.
their Negotiations: So far were they pressed by Spain, to make a Peace, and
hinder a War.

During sometime before, and after the Rupture, there was nothing but Couriers
running to and fro, going to, and coming from Constantinople, with continual
projects of peace. It is true enough that the Germans had sufficiently
experimented, That to persuade the Turks, their Arms would do much better than
their Letters; the Sword than their subtle Devices; their Blows than their
remonstrances; a brisk and bloody War more than the most able Negotiations. In
short, there were many Artifices employed, before the rupture, to avoid this
Rock and Shock of Arms; and so many Expeditions made to Constantinople, to
sweeten their Spirits, that produced an Effect quite contrary, and augmented
the pride of the Ottomans, and created in them a Misunderstanding.

As to the Forces of the Imperialists, it is true, they did appear feeble and
intimidated; and more than once their Troops retired into Transylvania, and
visibly avoided fighting; but when the Turks saw that the Germans were awakened
from their Lethargy, and in a Condition and Humor of Defense; and did behave
themselves with so great Resolution at the Siege of Canisa; and after Canisa
besieged by Count Serini, May 1. and the Turks defeated by Montecuculis, Aug.
3. 1664. Rycaut's Hist. page 150, 168.
so well beat them at the Battle, near the River of Raab, they began to lend an
Ear to diverse propositions of the Imperialists, to hearken voluntarily to the
several Envoys from them; and their Fierceness being much abated, they became
more sweet and tractable in a Moment, making no longer pretenses to Comorra or
Jawarin, which before they declared they would.

I proceed now to the Correspondencies the Emperor holds with the Princes of
Europe.

The Swedes were possessed with The State of the Emperor's Affairs as to Sweden.
Enmities of old against the Empire; but it seems have forgot their Bitterness
and Prejudices, because the Germans (by bringing an unexpected Succor and
Assistance to the Poles) made the Danes lose the Opportunity the Civil Wars of
Poland gave them. Many brave Actions past on one Side and the other: Denmark
joined to the Emperor to oppose the Swedish Invasion: This was one brave and
glorious Action. As to the other, the Germans themselves complained, and blamed
this indiscreet Generosity of the Emperor, who preferred the Relief of Poland
before his own Defense, and divided his Troops in favor of that Kingdom, which
if united, had not been sufficient to oppose the Force of the Swede or Turk.

However it was that Poland Poland.
undertook a Guarranty against the Incursions of the Swedes, yet it fell under
another Tyranny, and found it self constrained to obey a Woman, who knew how to
dispose all things, even her Husband himself, under her power. This Prince was
so much the more complaisant to his Wife, because of his Hopes of having
Children by her. The Queen's Desire for a Successor of her own Family being too
apparent, the Emperor began to oppose it; and fearing lest that Empire should
fall into the Hands of the French (a Nation suspected and feared) he redoubled
his Negotiations, conversed with his Allies, fomented the last Troubles, to
make a Counterpoise to the Queen's Designs; and at present he himself maintains
Lubomirski, the Grand Marshal of Poland, in ill Intelligence with the Court, on
purpose to oppose the Kindness the Queen has for her Nation and Family.

As to the protestant Princes Brandenburgh.
of the Empire, and especially Brandenburgh, the Emperor relies upon him for
Necessity, rather than for Friendship's sake: For since that Ferdinand the
Second, with the formidable Army of Wallestein, struck such a Fear into all
Germany, the most part of the Electors of the Empire have remained firm to
France, and had rather depend upon an uncertain Relief of Strangers, than to a
natural Dominion, which might prove too absolute; which was the sole Cause of
the Confederation of the Rhine, so much against the Emperor's Mind, and has
augmented extremely the Fear and Jealousy he has of the prosperity of France.

This Kingdom, since the peace, France.
has employed it self in nothing but the Increase of its Treasures, and quietly
observes, for its part, the Storms of other men's Vessels, and waits with more
patience than good Will the Shipwracks of the House of Austria. So as this
first Jealousy has very much contributed to the concluding a peace with the
Turks.

The Court of Germany earnestly Spain.
wishes to find out some way or other in Spain, for hindering of the War with
Portugal, by telling the Catholic King, That he is by it at the Expense of the
greatest part of his Revenues. The Emperor being united to this King by Blood,
and by Interest, has always a very strict Alliance with him; but because that
Prince Portia would not owe his Favor to any thing but Fortune, he never would
have any Regard to the Spaniards in his Master's Court; and profiting himself
by the Example of the Marquess de Machera, the last Ambassador of Spain to the
Emperor, who had a very great Interest otherways, he hindered all Freedom of
their Councils, and weakened them, both as to the Reasons, and the Importance
of them.

The Imperialists are but indifferently The Pope.
satisfied with the Pope because his Holiness has not suitably relieved the
Emperor (by reason of Cardinal Carassa, his Nuntio) in his most pressing
Necessities, having not laid out in all above eight hundred thousand
Rix-dollars; a great part of which Sum was exacted from the Tithes of the
States of Austria; so that he owes nothing to his Serenity, but the permission
of levying it; and it is as it were but drawn out of his own Fund, and Blood
let out of his own Veins. His Holiness has not the same Zeal for the Emperor as
his Predecessors, especially Paul the Fifth, who, upon the like Conjuncture,
maintained an Army in Germany, and sacrificed the Health and Life of his
Nephew, who died at Canisa.

Savoy takes part with France, Savoy.
not by Choice, but Necessity: For the Neighborhood of his Estates, takes away
his Liberty of separating either as to War, or Intrigue.

Florence, Although he be Neuter, Florence.
has a greater Kindness for the House of Austria; and his Grandeur and Ambition
terminates in the quiet Increase of their Correspondence.

The Duke of Modena is a Modena.
Frenchman rather by Alliance with Cardinal Mazarine, than by Inclination;
and, without doubt, would be very weakly united to France, were it not that he
is so much engaged to its first Minister.

The Spaniards pay the Garrison Mantua.
of Cazal, for Fear rather than good Will, lest the State of the Duke of
Mantua's Affairs should oblige him, as he was wont, to return to France; and
the Germans are persuaded, that he would, if the Empress, his Sister, who can
do any thing with him, had not broke off this Intrigue, and kept this Prince
firm to them.

The Quality of the Emperor Germany.
not having any Revenue annexed and settled upon this Dignity, his great and
august Station carries nothing at all of profit; and all the Advantage consists
in the Majesty of so magnificent a Title, and the Glory of so fair a Rank.
Germany of it self abounds more with Provisions than Money, and affords the
Emperor a Revenue very uncertain, and unequal, which amounts not to above six
Millions of Florins. His Hereditary Austria, etc.
Estates are abundantly fertile, and an Army of Fourscore Thousand Men might
subsist, and be provided for in his Country, without any Disturbance, and all
of them distributed into Good Quarters in his respective Provinces, according
to ancient Custom. The power, notwithstanding of the Emperor is not answerable
to his Dignity, nor to so elevated a Degree.

His Majesty is about twenty The German Emperor his further Character.
five Years of Age: A Prince pious, good, and of a Sanguine Complexion; but not
altogether so Robust, or Watchful, as those of his Family. He is subject to
some Infirmities, especially of his Feet. His Subjects wish he were as much a
Warrior, as he is devout and religious; and that he would appear in the Head
of an Army against his Competitors, almost of the same Age, the King of France,
and the Sultan of Constantinople. He is an excellent Churchman, and takes very
great pleasure in Music. He wants not Spirit or Vivacity; but has a great
Distrust of himself. The Cares of his Estate overcharge and press him down.
Repose best pleases him; and in short, he loves his Favorites better than his
Affairs.

The House of Austria is reduced to a very few Successors. He of Spain is yet
very young, weak and infirm. The Archduke of Inspruc is not yet married. The
Emperor was promised in Marriage the Eldest Infanta of Spain; but she was
afterward given to the King of France. Now he is amused with the Hopes of the
Second, which he awaits with Impatience, Delay and Trouble.

The Empress Leonora has The Character of the Empress Leonora.
gained the Esteem of all the Court. She lives with a great deal of Splendour
and Generosity. She knows how to persuade the Emperor to carry himself
uprightly, and carefully to preserve himself; which she effects with an
admirable Conduct. She diverts her self with the Conversation of Ladies, and
loves people of Spirit and Vivacity. She has two Arch-Dutchesses, one of
excellent Beauty, and both of them designed for Royal Alliances. During my Stay
in this Court, two Archdukes, Leopold and Charles, to 1663, 1664.
the general Grief of all, departed this Life: The first was Uncle, and the
second Brother to the Emperor. This last was a Archduke Charles's Character.
very good Prince, pious, brave, and extremely obliging to those who were his
Creatures. A person of excellent Morals, great Spirit, whose Wisdom surpassed
his Years. Both the one and the other died of such Infirmities as were unknown
to the Physicians, who, by their Ignorance, more destroyed their Constitutions,
than by their Remedies relieved their Indispositions.

Prince Portia, who a few days Prince Portia his Character.
since ended his, was Major-Domo-Major, and primier Minister to the Emperor. He
came to this high Degree by mere good Fortune, and the only and ardent
Affection of his Master. He was the Governor of his Youth, and had the
Reputation of a perfectly good and upright Cavalier. I found him very well
inclined to your Serenity; but he did not appear to me to be a person fit to
undergo the Charge of public Government, and total Direction of Affairs. He
neither knew how to deal well with his Friends, nor to do ill to his Enemies.
He was incapable of himself to take any firm Resolution, nor would he give any
entire Belief to any of his greatest Confidents. He carried all things to
Extremity; could not tell how to moderate his unreasonable Transports, nor to
pass by, or sustain just Resentments. He was naturally idle, slow and
irresolute. He tried all sorts of means to avoid the War with the Ottomans, and
forgot nothing that might put an end to it after it was declared. He perceived
very well, that he was not born for great Affairs, and that his Ministry was
above his Port and Strength; that he was far from being able to acquit himself
as he ought in so great a Number of Accidents as happened every day. His Memory
was as unfaithful to his Thoughts as his Business: For once he forgot, and left
upon his Table one of his most important Dispatches; and so exposed the most
mysterious Secrets of State to his Valets de Chamber, and other indiscreet
persons: But though he was negligent in public Affairs, he always minded his
private Concerns, and applied himself entirely to the Divertisement of his
Master, and rendering his own Family great by an Accumulation of Honors and
Riches. His posterity seem not to answer either his Spirit, or Fortune, and
promise nothing that is capable to uphold so many Accessions as they have
received during his Favor. He himself, with all his Ingenuity, was neither
feared nor loved; for he knew not how to do good or ill; neither encouraging
Merit and Services by Rewards, nor punishing of Crimes in those that were
guilty. One may say, his Soul was insensible and slothful, not capable of
acknowledging a Kindness, or resenting an Injury. In short, he abandoned all
Reins of Government, to keep the whole Empire in Repose and Idleness.

The Emperor has disposed of this Charge of Major-Domo-Major; but has not yet
made choice of a Favorite for his pleasures, or a Minister for his Affairs. If
he could give himself the glorious Trouble of Reigning alone, it would be his
own Happiness and Honor; and for the Benefit of his Subjects, who sigh at the
Remembrance of his last Favorite, dread lest a worse should succeed him; and
tremble afresh through Fear of being exposed to the Capricio's, Interests and
Covetousness of such a sort of Tyrants. The other principal Ministers of the
Emperor, are, the Prince of Ausburg, who being enflamed Prince of Ausburg's
Character.
with Ambition, knows no other Cure of his Malady, but an Advancement to the
Rank, and Favor of Prince Portia; and looks upon no Remedies proper for his
restless and aspiring Spirit, but the good Esteem of the Emperor, and a
Promotion to such a Ministry. His great Qualifications make him haughty; and
the more of Merit he can pretend unto, renders him the more proud and insolent.
In a word, he has very good Qualities, could he but love himself with as much
Justice, as he hates Strangers without Reason.

Prince Lewis is the present Character of Prince Lewis.
Major-Domo-Major. He has a great Vivacity of Spirit, a large Understanding,
and long Experience in Court Affairs. He jeers all the World, and is eternally
mixing his Jests with the most serious Matters; so that he concludes nothing,
but is always hurried into diverse Extravagancies.

Don Hanibal de Gonzago has Don Hanibal de Gonzago*
entered upon the Charge of first President of the Council of War. He is a
Soldier, discreet, rational, more stout than ambitious; and knows the best of
any man what Advantages the Turks have over the Christians. He seems extremely
kind in his Intentions for this Republic, and is a Favorer of all Italians.

The Sieur Intendant of the Sieur Intendant of the Finances, or Lord Treasurer.
Finances, is a Man of Estate (as becomes one in his Charge.) He was the more
willing to consent to a Peace, as more profitable to himself than a War: For he
well knew he might have Liberty to lay up that in a Calm, which of necessity he
must lay out during a Storm. Since this Accommodation he enjoys a full and
quiet Abundance; and has gained such an Interest in the Emperor, that he
leaves him so much the more willingly to advantage himself, as he is assured
that he can lose nothing. Hereby he is always sure of a party in the Court,
where he knows so well how to set a value upon his late Losses; that the
Emperor is very well satisfied, that he should make to himself a real and
substantial Gain.

I had for my Secretary Monsieur The Author's Secretary Paul Resio.
Paul Resio, who was not wanting in his Diligence suitable to the Occasion, nor
in his Care of writing to your Serenity, as the Importance of Matters required.
His Exactness and Fidelity cannot be too much esteemed. In short, he has forgot
nothing that concerned your Service, or his Employment. He is not one that aims
at his own Interest; for his accidental Charges have been extraordinary; his
Expenses unknown and unheard of; yet such as were necessary and profitable; all
which undoubtedly deserve to be considered by your Serenity.

As for my self, Most Serene An Account of the Author and his Embassy.
Prince (for I have but a little more to say) None of your Serenities Ministers
abroad, were ever put upon an Embassy more full of Trouble than that I have met
with: For I found nothing but intricate Questions, Conjunctures not heard of,
and Difficulties almost unsurmountable. When the Emperor resolved to unite with
this Republic; and your Answers, contrary to his Desire, were too long
delayed, then was I looked upon with an Eye full of Disdain; and he was pleased
to tell me in one Fit of his Railery, That I was only at Vienna to send joyful
News to your Serenity of such a Diversion as you desired: For he imagined, that
the Intentions of your Serenity were merely to gain Advantage by their Wars,
and put them to lay the Foundations of that peace which you purposed to
conclude. I forgot not timely to inform your Serenity of all the obscure and
secret Negotiations which the Imperialists held with the Ottomans; of all the
progress of their Treaties, as also the Success of their Arms, without any
regard of mine, to the Expense I was to be at, as is evident by the frequent
Couriers, and several Dispatches I sent. I had always the good Fortune to keep
a Correspondence in all the Frontier places, and spared no Cost or Labor to
gain the quickest, and most certain Advice of all things that past. I
punctually transmitted to your Serenity, the authentic Copies of the Missives
of the Resident at Constantinople; and was not wanting to let him know all the
distinct Particularities and Discoveries of the first projects, when they were
but as yet in Idea.

Being satisfied in my own Conscience, your Serenity will permit me to flatter
my self so far as to say, That I have surpassed my self in my own proper
Strength, having with Address eluded, or overthrown the most unhappy
Conjectures; and if I have had the good Fortune to serve your Serenity
according to your Desires, I have over and above satisfied my own; and cannot
believe it to be in my power to frame any thing to my self that could be more
sweet and glorious.

In the midst of these difficult Troubles, Heaven was pleased to afford me the
continued Affections of the Court, and its Ministers, who were so much the more
favorable to me, as they did believe, that I held no Correspondence with the
Hungarians, or Count Serini. I knew very well how to take my Times, and manage
my Opportunities, so as to be freed of all Suspicion and Jealousy. I have
found my self surrounded with so many pressing Troubles, as necessarily called
not only for my utmost Philosophy; but even Constancy it self, to master and
overcome. My Assignments The hardships he endured in his Embassy, by the
Incursions of the Tartars.
totally failed, and so I fell into an extreme Want of all Necessaries, through
my extraordinary Expenses, occasioned by the Disorders of the War, the Dearness
of Commodities, and general scarcity of all things, which almost amounted to a
Famine. I will not dissemble with your Serenity at all: During the Incursions
of the Tartars, I was reduced to the last Extremity, not knowing whom to follow
in so general a Flight, nor with whom to stay in such an Universal
Consternation: For the whole Country seemed to me to be totally abandoned.
However it was, I accommodated my self to the Juncture of Time, and Will of
God, with a full Resignation to Divine Providence, and an entire Submission to
the Orders of your Serenity, having left in Germany, my Goods, my Health, and
almost Life it self.

It is true, the Emperor, before The Presents made him by the Emperor, and
Empress.
my Departure, Regaled me with a Diamond, and the Empress with a Gallantry of
Plate. Those Presents were to me so much the more precious, because I could
easily observe the Court did take some part in this Liberality; and seemed, as
it were, willing to confirm, and approve the same by the Testimonies of their
Joys.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THE beginning of the Emperor's Character Page 2 The Progress of the Ottomans
Greatness: their Designs 3 A strict Alliance is the joint Interest of the
Empire and Republic of Venice 4 The Turks enter Candia, and take it; the
Effects thereof 5 Waradin and Newhausel, when surrendered 6 The Preservation of
Vienna of great Importance to all Christendom ibid. Present State of the
Turkish Affairs, and why their Forces are so much diminished 7 Of the Turkish
Militia 9 An oversight of the Christian Officers in general 10 The Turks way of
Discipline 11 The Turks Improvement in Fireworks, and other Warlike Exercises
12 The Reason of the Christians Miscarriage at the Siege of Canisa ibid. The
Christians and Turks compared as to their Provisions for the Soldiery 13
Censures upon the Emperor's Proceedings in the beginning of the War 14 The
Vizier falls into the Emperor's Territories without Resistance 16 The cruelty
of the Tartars ibid. Newhausel lost. 18 The Raines hinder the further Progress
of the Turks ibid. The Miserable Condition of Vienna 19 Complaints against
Count Portia 20 His Character ibid. The second Compagne begins with loss to the
Imperialists 21 Fort Zerin taken ibid. Death of Ismael Bassa, with an account
of the Battle of Raab 22 The Turkish Valor 23 An account of the Booty, and the
relief of Canisa 25 The Behavior of the Vizier at this Battle, and his gain by
the Death of Ismael 26 The Vizier hearkens to Peace, with the reasons that
induced the Emperor to it 27 The Weakness of the House of Austria 28 The danger
of hazarding a Battle 29 The Hungarians hatred to the Turks, keeps them in
Subjection to the Emperor ibid. The Emperor makes a Peace; blamed by all
Christendom 31 The Peace prejudicial to the Hungarians ib. The Invasion of
Transylvania by the Turks, the first Cause of this War 34 Abafti established;
when ibid. Clausemburg, when taken 35 The loss of Transylvania endangers all
Christendom 36 Prince Ragotzki's Death, and Character 37 Colorable pretenses
for a Peace 39 The Condition of the Christian Princes under the Turks ibid. The
Conquest of Transylvania how advantageous to the Turks 40 Count Serini's Death,
and Character 44 Count Serini's Grandfather's brave defense of Zigeth 45 Count
Serini's Character continued 46 Count Serini's Name a Terror, and his Disgrace
and death a joy to the Turks 47 Count Serini's Death differently resented by
the Hungarians and Imperialists ibid. Count Serini's Generous offer to the
Venetians 48 Count Peter Serini's Character 49 Secret Articles of Peace between
the Emperor and Turks ibid. Death of Count Portia, a loss to Pisino 51 The
Duration of the Peace uncertain 55 Imperialists hinder the Venetians Peace with
the Turks 57 Imperialists dissuade the Turks from a Peace with the Venetians 59
Spain advises the Emperor to a Peace with the Turks 61 Canisa besieged by Count
Serini 63 State of the Emperors Affairs with Sweden ibid. Poland. Brandenburgh
65, 66 France, and Spain 67 The Pope, Savoy. 68 69 Florence, Modena, Mantua 70
Germany, Austria, etc. 71 The German Emperor his farther Character 72 Character
of the Empress Leonora 74 Death and Character of Archduke Charles ibid
Character of Prince Portia 75 Character of the Prince of Ausburg 79 Character
of Prince Lewis, and Don Hannibal de Gonzaga 80 Sieur Intendant of the
Finances, or the Lord High Treasurer. 81 The Author's Secretary, Paul Resio 82
An account of the Author and his Embassy 83 The hardships he endured 86 The
presents made him by the Emperor and Empress 87



