Samuel in Sackcloth: OR, A SERMON Assaying to restrain Our Bitter Animosities,
And commending a Spirit of MODERATION, and a Right Constitution of SOUL and
Behavior toward Our BRETHREN.

Upon 1 SAMUEL 15. 35.

By S. S.

If ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your Pride,

Jeremiah 13. 17. Hearken unto me ( you men of England) that God may hearken,
unto you,

Judges 9. 7. LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North-door. 1660.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon flanked by the English lion and Tudor
rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other
TO THE WORSHIPFUL, AND HIS Honored Friend, John Swynfen, of Swynfen in the
COUNTY of STAFFORD, Esquire The Author wishes all Grace and Peace.
SIR,
WHen I had long seen, and sighed for that bitter and violent spirit which has
acted the body of our Nation, and the several Members thereof (according as
their interest was advanced) it pleased God to direct me to the sight of
gracious Samuel, whose holy and sober spirit (acting upon the greatest
disadvantages) did much affect me; And I could not but express to my
Congregation how much: And when I saw the whole Nation as much need healing, as
my own poor flock, I did command my more timorous disposition, to adventure my
conceptions to the view of all that shall have leisure to peruse them; knowing
that the healing of one Ulcer in the heart of any man, would abundantly
recompense the wounds that I may probably have procured to my own Name: not
caring my self to undergo any censure, if I might possibly cure the distemper
of censoriousnesse in any. Standing upon this bold resolution, to offer this
unworthy mite to the world, your undeserved love to, and care of me; your
known worth shining out to all, in the rays of piety, prudence, and learning;
and above all, that singular sobriety, moderation, and good composedness of
soul, which I have always admired in you, challenged the Patronage of it. I
profess without the least mixture of flattery or falsehood, that I know not any
man, whose name might more justly be prefixed to a Sermon of this nature. And,
as I pray you to accept of this poor oblation, so I heartily pray God to give
us more such spirits as yours, who may be able, not to comprize men and
manners, persons and opinions, in one and the same detestation. Sir, I humbly
beg your pardon, not daring further, save to profess my self

Your most affectionate and obliged Servant, S. S.
Jan. 9. 1659.
TO THE Christian Reader.
Reader,
I Have often, and sadly observed the strange fires, and extravagant heats which
have raged in this our Nation, to the mutual incensing, I had almost said
consuming, of one another: Men are become Men-eaters, (...). Gal. 5. 15.
if I may be allowed to speak after the Apostles rate. Is there any man of so
few eyes, any eyes of so little sight, that have not observed that our many
strange changes, have been attended with as strange behaviors? He that is
above, thinking it the just prerogative of his place, to trample upon him that
is under; and the other, when he gets up, thinking it but a piece of justice,
to do the like by him. For my own part, I do not wonder, that God keeps our
affairs from settling long to the contentment of any one interest, when a man,
nay, any man (much more then, he that sees much more than all men) sees the
barbarous insultings, unbounded animosities, and unchristian behaviors, which
those that lay as great claim to civility, manners, moderation, sobriety, as
any, have been found guilty of. Even those that pretend highly to an healing
spirit, themselves appear to have much of distempered affections in them; and
instead of mollifying, have inflamed the wounds of their brethren. Those that
preach, and pray for moderation, when their interest begins to smart, will not
stick to revile them that have lanc'd it; and when it begins to be their turn,
will not boggle to magnify their mouths as wide as Edom. Obad. v. 12.
Now if the most upright be thus sharp, thus censorious, supercilious, bitter,
immoderate, insolent, actum est de spiritu vere Evangelico, where shall we
hope to find Christian Moderation? If these heats proceed from the green
Trees, what fires may we expect from the dry? Can God no sooner have set us on
horse back, but we must ride over all that is in our way? no sooner have
raised us out of the dirt, but we must throw our brethren into it, and make
stepping-stones of our fellow creatures? O Barbarism, which there is not in the
nature of a Lion to parallel! Is it enough to make a man Corpora magnanimo
satis est prostrasse leoni.
guilty, that nature has stopped his mouth, so that he cannot prove the
contrary? Enough to prove a tenent erroneous, because he that holds it has
lost his best Argument? Is that come to pass which Bathsheba feared; that not
to be great must be interpreted to be an Offender? 1 King. 1. 21.
I know we have almost undone our selves by mutual wars, and that those wars
have been fomented (if not created) by mutual heats, and burnings: And I fear
we shall never soder together kindly, unless the conqueror and the conquered
agree mutually, the one to lay aside his pride and petulancy, and the other his
malice and malignity; which I wish they may do, before fire come out from
Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and from the men of Shechem, and
devour Abimelech.

Whilst I meditated, to my great grief, of these extravagancies, providence put
into my hands the Chronicle, (I might say the Miracle) of Samuels Moderation;
which, finding it to contain an excellent president, I preached to them,
amongst whom I earnestly desire to propagate such a spirit: And being pressed
with the sense of the great want of it elsewhere (every where) I have
emboldened my self to adventure what I preached, to public view, assuring my
self to meet with that censoriousness about it, which in it I have labored to
meet with. Whether it may please any that read it, or be put in practice by
any that are pleased with it, I know not. The former I am not solicitous about,
not much caring though that do displease some, which was not studied to please
any; and wherein I have not alluded to any one interest, which I sought to
humor above other. The latter I humbly commit to God, whose honor I humbly
desire mainly to design, praying him to work a spirit like unto that, which was
in Christ Jesus, in thee, and me, and to give us fewer Saul's that shall need
to be mourned for, and more Samuels to mourn for those that we have in this
our Israel.

Jan. 9. 1659.
Samuel in Sackcloth; OR, A Sermon assaying to restrain our bitter Animosities,
and commending a spirit of Moderation, and a right constitution of soul, and
behavior toward our Brethren.
1 SAMUEL 15. 35. And Samuel came no more to see Saul till the day of his
death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the Lord repented that he had
made Saul King over Israel. (...) -- Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul. --
THis Chapter presents us with the lively draught of a good Subject, and a
faithful Minister, appearing both with an excellent luster, in one Samuel;
concerning whom I cannot but note, and commend one thing by the way; And that
is his remarkable, and indeed admirable humility, in letting go the Scepter out
of his hands, and standing still whilst God stripped him of the Political
Government; and afterward he behaved himself with as much quietness and
faithfulness, as though he had lost nothing, or did not at all resent his
loss. It appears that he sat not in the Throne of Israel, to keep himself
warm, to please his own ambitious spirit, but to do the work of God, and serve
the necessities of the people: for when God had provided himself otherways, he
willingly resigned, and became as though he had never sitten there.

In the Chapter, we have this Samuel the Prophet and Servant of the Lord
sending Saul his anointed King of an Errand. 2 Saul going upon this Errand; but
failing in the execution of it; in sparing what God had determined to the
sword. 3 Samuel reproving and threatening Saul for his disobedience. 4 Saul
repenting and worshipping God. 5 Samuel executing what Saul had left undone. 6
Samuel and Saul parting, in the two last verses. Then Samuel went to Ramah, and
Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul. And Samuel came no more to see
Saul, until the day of his death: Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul; And the
Lord repented that he had made Saul King over Israel.

Samuel went no more to visit Saul, until the day of his death; i. e. he went
no more on purpose to instruct him, counsel him, or advise him (for he
afterward saw him accidentally at Naioth in Ramah, chap. 19. 24.) whilst he
lived. Until the day of his death, i, e. never, the day of his death being
reckoned into the number of his days.

That Gods Ministers may prudentially absent themselves from the houses of
wicked and disobedient persons, discountenance them, and show strangeness
toward them, that they may be ashamed of their evil ways, and repent, and
return to God. Thus the Apostle exhorts the godly Thessalenians to estrange
themselves from the disobedient, that they might be ashamed, 2 These. 3. 14.
And Samuel here would not be familiar with him, from whom God had estranged
himself; he refused to turn again with him to worship, verse. 26. he visited
him no more, verse. ult. Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his
death -- Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

In which words observe 1 An Action, Mourned. 2 The Agent, Samuel. 3 The
Object, Saul. 4 The Modification of the Action, expressed in the word
[Nevertheless] Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.


Before I discourse particularly of the parts of the Text, I must necessarily
answer a Question, upon the Answer to which the whole following discourse must
depend, viz.

Quest. Whether Samuel did well or ill in mourning for Saul?

Answ. To which I answer, He did well in it.

chap. 16. 1. And the Lord said to Samuel, how long will thou mourn for Saul?
Will God forbid the doing of that which is well done?

Answ. 1 It is unquestionably lawful to mourn for others; Nay, it is a duty so
to do, Romans 12. 15. Weep with them that weep. God would not have his people
walk by the Rule of the Stoics, who condemned all kind of affection and
sympathy: He who is a God of bowels, would not have his people to be without
all bowels of compassion. Nay, it is lawful to mourn over the wicked, the
enemies of God; as appears in the example of holy David, Psalm. 35. 13, 14. As
for me, when they were sick (meaning the wicked, as appears by the 11, and 12,
verses) My clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, I bowed
down heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother. And the Learned Ravanellus
(in voce Luctus) saying, that we ought to mourn for the miseries of others,
commends this of Samuel for an example, who mourned for Saul, as it is in my
Text: -- Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

Answ. 2 God does not absolutely forbid Samuel's mourning for Saul, but his
immoderation, his excess; He does not say, why do thou mourn for Saul, but
how long will thou mourn for him? It appears by this, that God had long
suffered Samuel to mourn; but now he thought he had mourned enough, therefore
he takes him off, How long will thou mourn for Saul? God would not indeed have
us exceed in our mourning, so as thereby to make our spirits unfit for the
duties of our callings. Especially Samuel must take heed of this excess, who
was the Priest and Prophet of the Lord, and a public person, upon the right
frame of whose spirit much did depend. And therefore (if we observe it) God
seems to take him off from mourning, that he might be fit to go about his
work, chap. 16. 1. Fill thine horn with Oil, go, I will send thee, etc. And
happily this might be one reason, why God forbade the Priests, especially the
High Priests, to make any mourning for the dead, as some Annotators do hint,
upon Levit. 21. 1, 2, 3. Samuel is not forbidden here to mourn, but to mourn
long: He went to his house, and mourned: But he must not make his house an
house of mourning, he must not dwell in sorrow, How long will thou mourn for
Saul?

Answ. 3 God does in some particular cases forbid the doing of things that are
otherwise lawful, the performance of things that are in themselves duties. He
does not only forbid many things which are in themselves indifferent, as 1
King. 13. 17. Act. 15. 29. But it is also his prerogative to dispense with his
own commands, and to forbid (upon occasion) the performance of Moral duties. As
for example, prayer is a duty, nay the Apostle exhorts, that prayer and
intercession be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. And yet in a particular case
God forbids the Prophet to pray for the people, Jer. 7. 16. 11. 14. and 14. 11.
The like prohibition he gives Moses, Exodus 32. 10. To repay what is borrowed,
is a moral duty, Romans 13. 8. Owe no man any thing, etc. And yet upon occasion
God dispenses with this duty, and commands the Israelites to borrow Jewels of
the Egyptians, and not to restore them, Exodus 3. 22. Not that we may dispense
with our duties at our own pleasure, but God has the prerogative to give
dispensations. And therefore Jeremiah did pray for the people till God forbade
him: The Israelites durst not to have spoiled the Egyptians, but that God bade
them; And Samuel here mourned for Saul, till God discharged him, saying, How
long will thou mourn for Saul?

So that notwithstanding God did afterward prohibit Samuel to mourn for Saul,
yet we may safely conclude, that till then, he did well to mourn for him.
Therefore in my discourse I shall look upon Samuel as performing a duty in so
doing, and shall propound him as a pattern for us, that we may go and do
likewise. Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

1 Let us consider the Agent, Samuel. And we may consider him under these
notions.

1 Samuel, an holy, gracious man, a man full of the Spirit of God, mourned.
Some new lights, men pretending to a great Gospel Spirit, preach nothing but
privileges, practice nothing but joy and spiritual rejoicing, saying, It is
for low spirits, weak, puny Christians to lie mourning, and weeping, and
filling their souls with heaviness. But holy Samuel here was either yet below
their spirits (which I cannot think he was) or beside their mind; And so indeed
he was, for he mourned for Saul. He was beside their mind, and I doubt they
besides themselves: For I am sure our Savior pronounces a blessing upon
Gospel-mourners, Mat. 5. 4. And I also know, that the most gracious spirits,
have been ever the most tender, and sympathizing, and most mournful over the
sins, and sufferings of others. Moses the familiar friend of God, who was
faithful in all his house, though of a great and gracious spirit, mourned over
the stiff-necked, hardhearted, and rebellious Israelites. Josiah was a man of
singular piety, and yet of singular tenderness. Elijah was a man full of the
Spirit of the Lord, and yet full of complaints for the Idolatry and
backslidings of the people, 1 King. 19. 10. David was a man after Gods own
heart, and yet much in tears, Psalm. 119. 28. 136, etc. Jeremiah was a man that
found grace in the eyes of God, a man much of Gods mind, and he was one of a
mournful spirit: He wrings his hands, and fqueezes his eyes, nay, and drains
his very soul too for tears, all up and down his Prophecy, especially, chap.
4. 19. 9. 1, 2. 13. 17. Nay, he mourns bitterly for the desolation of Moab, a
rebellious, uncircumcised people, Jer. 48. 31, 32. Paul a man of a
Gospel Spirit, and otherwise of a great and undaunted spirit, thinks, that
mourning for the sinful and impenitent, was a duty suitable enough to his
spirit, 2 Cor. 12. ult. We may learn from the example of holy Samuel mourning
for Saul, that mourning is not an exercise unbecoming the most gracious spirits.

2 Samuel a man mighty in prayer, mourned for Saul. He was so mighty in prayer
with God, that when God would express a man prevalent in prayer, he uses
Samuels name, to signify him by, Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet could not my mind be toward this people. Yet Samuel did not
improve his interest at the Throne of grace against Saul, did not implore God
for his ruin, but betook himself to his tears; Samuel mourned for Saul. Moses,
when he was slighted and set at naught by the people, and threatened also, yet
did not pray for their ruin, but for their relief rather, Exodus 17. 4. Such a
spirit was holy David of, as you may see in his behavior upon occasion of
Shimei's cursing, 2 Samuel 16. 10. This was the spirit of holy Stephen, who was
so full of the Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 60. Instead of putting up imprecations of
wrath against them, he deprecates the wrath that might justly have fallen upon
them, saying, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. This spirit was in our
blessed Savior, Mat. 26. 53, 54. Luke 23. 34. and 9. 54, 55. And this spirit
he commends to all his, Mat. 5. 44. True indeed, sometimes we find the
servants of God ready to pray against their enemies, in Scripture; But then it
was either out of weakness, as the two Disciples, Luke 9. 54. or being acted by
an extraordinary, prophetical spirit, as Elijah, 2 King. 1. and David oft-times
in the Psalms; or in passion, as Jer. 20. 15, 16. But you shall never hear any
such thing from them, unless they were besides themselves (in passion) and so
they must not be imitated, or above themselves (extraordinarily* acted) and so
we cannot imitate them. But alas, how few such spirits, how little such
moderation is to be found amongst us! If many hot spirits had as much strength
with God, and interest in the Throne of grace, as Samuel had, we should
quickly have fire upon our heads; whereas Samuel, who was greater in power and
might, improved not his might against Saul, but mourned for him. Nay, it is
most sad of all, to hear Gods people groaning in prayer one against another;
Insomuch that if the wise God, were not merciful to them in denying their
prayers sometimes, they would set the world on fire; whereas they ought rather
to mourn for one another, as Samuel here, who was otherwise strong in prayer
even to a Proverb.

3 Samuel a man as much hating Readiness manners, as any man, yet mourned for his
condition. It is a hard thing to be displeased at a man's manners, and yet nor
to hate his person, nor to rejoice in the evil that befalls him. Commonly when
we are displeased with a man's actings, we are proportionably pleased with his
sufferings. To distinguish between a man's conditions, and his condition, so as
to abbor the one, and yet to commiserate the other, is a great art; and such a
one as David may seem sometimes not to have very well learnt, when he rejoiced
in the death of churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 39. Unless we choose rather to say,
that David rejoiced, not that Nabal was dead, but that he did not kill him,
which yet does not seem to be all. However at any other time he shows himself
an artist in this art to the life, as may appear to him that reads, Psalm. 35.
11, 12, 13, 14. Oh admirable soul! oh wonderful self-denying frame of spirit!
ready to dye for thine enemy that is sick? go in sackcloth for the affliction
of an unkind adversary? Oh blessed soul! every one will admire thee, but who
can imitate thee? oh labor we all to be ashamed of our selves, that one and
the same hatred is so apt to comprehend the man with the manners; and for the
future to imitate holy David, who although he was offended at a persecuting
Saul, yet lamented a dying Saul; and good Samuel, who although he rejected 2 Samuel 1. 17.
a sinning Saul, verse. 26. yet mourned for a rejected Saul, verse. 35. --
Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

So much for the Agent, Samuel, and what may be gathered from him.

2 The Action, Mourned, Samuel mourned for Saul.

1 We may observe that he did not rejoice in Saul's rejection, much less in
his sin, but mourned for him. It is the unkind and sinful property of many men
to make themselves merry with others misery, to rejoice in their ruin, and to
be made lightsome by their heaviness; whereby they add weight to their burden,
affliction to their bonds, and bitterness to their wormwood. This David is
studious to prevent, 2 Samuel 1. 20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. Thus did not holy Samuel, this did not
compassionate David, as you saw in Psalm. 35. 13, 14. Thus do not you; Rejoice
not in the evil that befalls any: Although you are offended with his sinful
life, yet rejoice not at his sad death; although you like him not standing, yet
pity him falling, mourn for his fall: Although you be troubled at his manners,
yet delight not in his troubles. But this I touched upon before. Therefore

2 Samuel did not insult ever Saul, but mourned for him. It is the manner of
many ignoble, unchristian, and impotent spirits, to trample upon a man when God
has him down, to tread upon him whom providence has laid low: Thus did the
Philistines insult over captive Sampson, Judge. 16. 25. Call for Sampson, and let
him make us sport. Thus did Edom to Jacob in the day of Jerusalem's visitation,
Psalm. 137. 7. Obad. verse. 12. Thus God knew that the enemies of Israel would
do, if he should scatter his people into corners, Deuteronomy. 32. 27. But thus did
not Samuel here: He looked not on the day of Saul, he behaved not himself
proudly, he magnified not his mouth against him; But Samuel mourned for Saul.
Has God made our enemies to stoop to us? let us not tread upon them; has he
conquered them? let not us triumph imperiously, and insult over them: But
rather, the more God humbles a man by afflicting him, the more let us humble
our selves for his affliction, as David did, Psalm. 35. 13. and as Samuel did
here, Samuel mourned for Saul. He did not insult over him, he did not taunt
and reproach him, as the most malicious Jews did our blessed Savior, hanging
upon the cross, (Mat. 27. 41, etc.) who fed their greedy eyes with his
sufferings, and their revengeful natures with his blood, but he mourned for
Saul. Go we and do likewise.

3 He did not blaze and divulge his miscarriages, but bewailed them. Oh
gracious spirit, and far different from that of cursed Ham, who saw his Fathers
nakedness, and went and told his two brethren without, Genesis 9. 22. But Samuel
when he saw that God had stripped Saul of his royal Robes, and made him naked,
took another way; He went home to his house, and mourned for him. It is much
the sin of this generation, even censoriousness, and that constant proneness,
which we see in all men almost, to proclaim, divulge, and depredicate the
infirmities, and blaze the failings of others, especially Ministers, and men of
public place. Instead of relieving a brother that is overtaken with a fault
(according to the Apostles counsel, Gal. 6. 1.) we are apt to report his
faults, and tell our brethren without, to make him vile, to story out his
infirmities, instead of restoring him. As for Ministers, you are not ignorant
how precious the ointment of their good names ought to be, and of what
concernment it is that their credits should be preserved entire and spotless;
you cannot be ignorant, how tender the Apostle commands men to be of the
same, charging Timothy not to receive an accusation against an Elder, but
before two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19. which tenderness it appears that
Constantine was largely endued withal, who would have thrown his own royal
Robe over an adulterous Bishop, if he had seen him in the evil act. And as for
Magistrates, and men of secular dignity, Solomon charges to use them with a
singular tenderness, Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy
conscience: And the Apostle Peter, in that he makes this a character of the
most desperate presumption, to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10. They are
not afraid to speak evil of dignities. But alas, the impudence of this
generation, and their presumption, is such, that if a brother be overtaken in
a fault, all the world must know it: Men do not only receive, but even raise
and report accusations against Elders; and speak most virulently, and
ignominiously of the Rulers of the people. To this evil and impudent
generation, I only say, that the Lord will certainly execute judgment upon
them; and even cause them to eat those hard speeches, which they speak against
him. For they that speak reproachfully of Gods Vicegerents, and Ambassadors, do
reproach God himself, whose representative they are. Learn we all to have a
singular tenderness toward all men; tell not their faults abroad with Ham, but
go home and mourn over them with holy Samuel. -- Nevertheless Samuel mourned
for Saul.

4 He did not stir up sedition, nor raise an insurrection against Saul, but
mourned for him. Although he carried himself sinfully, and managed his people
foolishly, yet discontented Samuel stirred not up his own spleen, nor the
peoples rage against him, but went home and mourned for him. Of such a King,
says learned Cartwright, are those words, Eccles. 10. 20. to be understood,
as though one should say (in allusion to the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 18.) not only
of the good and gentle, but also of the froward, and foolish. Samuel at this
time knew that God had in his decree rejected Saul from being King; and also
that Samuel was a man of mighty power and interest in the Israelitish hearts;
And upon these accounts he had a great advantage to have made an insurrection,
and a fair pretense at hand, wherewithal to cover and excuse it, when he had
done: Yet a David sometimes spared him, so Samuel here pitied him, Samuel
mourned for Saul.

This may at least teach us to use a singular tenderness to the persons, and
powers of constituted Magistrates, and to take heed how we vilify the one, or
weaken the other, (...), lest happily we be found to fight against God, as
Gamaliel said in another case; but rather to mourn over them with Samuel --
Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

So much for the Action, and the considerables in it.

3 The Object of this mourning. Who was it that this Samuel thus mourned for?
he mourned for Saul, Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul. Now we may consider
Saul under these notions amongst others.

1 Saul a King, Samuel mourned for King Saul. Saul was the anointed of God,
the rightful King of Israel, chosen by Gods appointment and direction. And
although Samuel was at first against the office of a King, yet when God had
appointed a King over them, and settled him amongst them, he was a loyal
subject, a faithful counselor, so as no man more, nor indeed like him. The
best men are the best for any purpose; the best in every relation; the best
Kings, the best subjects, the best Masters, the best servants, the best every
thing. Samuel here had still a secret respect for Gods anointed, --
Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul. Consider what was said under the last
particular.

2 Saul an enemy. In probability Saul was by this time become Samuels enemy.
There is a passage in the fourth verse of the 26th. chapter, that may seem to
strengthen this conjecture. When Samuel came to Bethlehem, it is said, that the
Elders of the Town trembled at his coming, and said, come thou peaceably?
whereupon the Dutch Annotations suppose, that the Bethlehemites heard that Saul
was provoked against Samuel, because he had pronounced him a man rejected of
God, and therefore thought that Samuel had fled from Saul. It seems to appear
also that Samuel suspected him, that he had no great confidence in his
friendship, by the second verse of the same chapter. And indeed, if we
consider the carnal ambitious, revengeful frame of Readiness spirit, we may
justly conclude, that it was almost impossible that he should be any other
than an enemy to Samuel. Yet Samuel mourned for this Saul, this enemy. And so
did David for them that persecuted and spoiled him, Psa. 35. Our blessed
Savior, who wept over persecuting Jerusalem, and bewailed it with
ingeminations, does set us a copy to write after; that we also should pray for
them that persecute us, bewail the sins and sufferings of. them that hate us;
Their sins we must bewail, because they entrench upon the honor of God, and
endanger their own souls, which ought to be dear unto us: Their sufferings we
must bewail out of Christian and brotherly compassion, as Samuel did here. --
Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

3 Saul a wicked man, a disobedient man: Samuel mourned for this Saul; nay,
because Saul was this, therefore he mourned for him. Do ye see a wicked,
profane, and sinful wretch? some will be ready to laugh at him, others to
neglect him, some perhaps in an over-hot zeal to curse him. Oh but do you
admonish him, labor to reform him, pray for him: If all this prove
ineffectual, yet pity him, mourn over him. Is the Name of the great God
dishonored, his commandments broken, his ways despised? is the precious soul
of thy brother endangered, and he ready to go to Hell headlong? Oh who can
choose but mourn, who would not be a Samuel here? A wicked man is the greatest,
the fittest object of pity in the world, and that upon the account of his
wickedness. The profaneness of beggars had more need of pity, than their
wants; their Ignorance and Atheism cries louder for our prayers and tears, than
their poverty for our alms. When Jeremiah thought of the afflictions of the
Jews, he calls to his eyes, Jer. 9. 1. But when he thought of their
obstinacy, and perverseness, he calls to his soul for tears, Jer. 13. 17. When
he speaks of their captivity, his eye ran down with tears: But when he
thought of their impiety, his soul wept in secret, as you may see him, as it
were purposely, varying the phrase in that place. But when sin and misery meet
together in a man, then let the eyes and the soul conspire together to bewail
him. When Saul has rejected the Commandments of God, and God has rejected
Saul too, then Samuel goes home, and mews up himself in mourning, -- Samuel
mourned for Saul.

To this I might add also, that Samuel mourned for Saul, who succeeded him in
the Government of the Nation, even his own eyes looking on. Men are usually apt
to be glad of the rejection of a competitor, of one that stands between them
and preferment, of one whose election was their exclusion: But so did not
Samuel here; which also commends in him, and commends to us a self-denying,
humble, gracious disposition of mind. Thus much for the Object, Saul, and what
may be considered in him.

Lastly, Let us consider the Modification of the Action, expressed in the word
[Nevertheless] which does necessarily suppose something: For being a
Conjunction Redditive, it must have one Adversative or more.

1 Although Samuel and his Counsel was rejected of Saul, Nevertheless Samuel
mourned for Saul. Samuel had been at much pains with Saul, to instruct him in
his duty, to counsel him in his affairs, to reprove him for his faults, and
behaved himself in all things as though he had been his guardian; And yet
found no success of his pains; his instructions were not followed, his counsel
was disobeyed, his reproofs despised, and all his endeavors made
unsuccesseful. And yet this Samuel thus rejected, mourned for Saul, which does
commend in him an excellent spirit of patience and lenity, and reproves the
impatience and spleenishness of the most in the world, who think if they be at
pains to fore-warn, counsel, or reprove their brother, and he do not hearken
to them, they have sufficiently discharged their duty, they need do no more. Of
this mind was not holy Samuel; he though that after he had done this, and
more than this, it was his duty to mourn for Saul. The good example of this
good man, may exhort us all to do the like; especially it may teach Gods
Ministers their duty, after all discouragements, and contempts that they meet
with in the world, from obstinate and unthankful persons. Are their people
froward, dull, careless, ignorant, idle? Is their counsel scorned, their
reproofs slighted, their words made wind of, all their importunate pains, and
incessant prayers unsuccesseful? why yet something remains to be done, and
that is all they can do, even to mourn for them. See the resolution of the
tenderhearted Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 13. 17. If ye will not hear; what then?
will he curse them, revenge himself upon them? No. But will he not at least
desist, leave them, cast off all further care of them? No. What then? why, My
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride. Oh that men had betaken
themselves to their eyes, to their preces and lachrymae, to the wringing of
their hands, when they betook themselves to the arming of their hands to
revenge themselves upon their brethren; our intestine confusions had yet been
to begin, whereas now they are not at an end, and God knows when they will be:
If we had shed as much tears, as we have done blood, we had not had so much
guilt abiding upon us, nor so much misery amongst us, and it had been a
Sacrifice the more pleasing to God of the two. And as for Ministers, if they
preach well, pray well, exhort well, reprove well, yet if they do not mourn
well too, they have not discharged their duty well; not so well as Samuel did
here, -- Nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul.

2 Although Saul and his authority was rejected of God, yet Samuel mourned for
Saul. Many men when they see God has cast a man down, are ready to cast him
off too, and all care of him, all thoughts of him; persecute and take him, for
God has forsaken him. If a Viper do but stick upon a man's hand, if God shall
banish him, impoverish him, or any way afflict him, they conclude him to be a
murderer (with the Barbarians, Act. 28. 4.) or an hypocrite (with Job's
friends, Job 4. 7. and 8. 6.) they pass sentence upon him presently, and never
look more after him. But be it so, that God has indeed rejected and cast off
a person, or a people, yet the gracious soul cannot choose but be affected,
afflicted with it, and pity them. A good man, a right Samuel, is so much a
friend to Gods justice, that he cannot but approve Gods sentence passing upon
man; and yet he is so full of bowels, that he cannot but lament the execution
of it upon his brother, as Samuel did here, -- Nevertheless Samuel mourned for
Saul.

3 Although Samuel went not to see Saul, yet Samuel mourned for Saul. Samuel
out of prudence absented himself from Saul; But yet out of piety and pity he
mourned for Saul. Discretion may sometimes persuade us to some discouraging
strangeness toward wicked men, yet compassion will not suffer the godly man to
estrange his bowels from them; Samuel mourned for Saul; Samuel would not bestow
his eyes to see Saul, but he would employ them to weep over him. The like
sweet mixture of these two eminent graces, discretion, and compassion, we may
see in David not suffering Absalom to see him, 2 Samuel 13.
and yet full of bowels toward him, as we see here in Samuel not going to see
Saul, but yet lamenting him; the one seeming to imitate the other; oh that we
could imitate either! All love does not consist in frequent visits: For as I
may be visited, and yet hated, so I may be neglected, and yet pitied. And
they are better friends, that stay at home, and mourn for you, than they that
visit you, to corrupt, and ensnare you. Every man will be prone enough to be
a stranger to a man in anger, even malice it self will take the first part of
the verse, will be a Samuel there: but withal he mourned for him, whom he
had no more any reason to visit; Oh that we were all Samuels here! Thus you
see the Modification of the action. Although God had rejected Saul, and Samuel
had rejected Saul, and Saul had rejected both God and Samuel, Nevertheless
Samuel mourned for Saul.

Having all along mixed doctrine and application, (I pray God it may prove more
successefully, than it is methodically) nothing remains further, but that
(which I commit to God to work) we all go, and do likewise.

FINIS.

