A GOOD CONSCIENCE THE Strongest Hold.

A Treatise of Conscience, handling

The Nature Acts Offices Use
of Conscience. The Description Qualifications Properties Several sorts
of good Conscience. The Excellency Necessity Utility Happiness
of such a Conscience. The Marks to know Motives to get Means to keep
it.


By JOHN SHEFFEILD, Minister of Swythins LONDON.

Acts 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward men.

Discamus in terra, quorum scientia perseveret in Caelo.

Hierom. ad Paul. Scientia inflat, charitas aedificat; Conscientia vero maxima
cum Religione est aedificanda.

Ames. LONDON, Printed by J. B. for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND at the BALL in Paul's
Churchyard. 1650.

To the Right Honorable, EDMUND Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Sheffeild of
Butterwike.
Right Honorable,
IT was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavyer Emperor of Germany, Hujusmodi
comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent, such goods are worth
getting and owning, as will not sink, or wash away if a shipwreck happen, but
will wade and swim out with us.

A meditation never more needful to be studied and practiced, then in such
Naufragious times as these, wherein we have seen the Greatest States in the
world, the Greatest Families in those States, and the Greatest Persons in those
Families to have suffered the most fatal and Tragical shipwracks.

The winds and Sea were never more high and rough, nor the ship more Tossed;
the earth never more rent with Earthquakes, nor the world less settled. What is
to be done? There is a Fort that stands firm when the earth is Removed.
There is an Arc that swims aloft when the whole world is drowned, and the
highest mountains thrown into the midst of the Sea: This Fort is Faith; This
Arc is Conscience.

These are the goods to be gotten and made store of in these days: These make
one truly rich, and safe and happy. All other goods whatsoever without a man be
they Inheritances of houses, lands and honors are but bare Movables,
uncertain and unconsiderable Movables, one may have them, but he cannot say
how long he shall hold them. These whosoever has shall hold. Other goods are put
into the worlds Inventory (these never) which therefore says (but falsely) such
a one dyed rich, for he dyed worth so many thousands, valuing the man by his
estate. They are mistaken. They might say so much he had, or at most he lived
worth so much, but when he died he might die worse then nothing, what is the
state to the soul? One living Dog is better then many dead Lions.

But Faith and good Conscience are the only goods to be put in the Christians
Inventory, the man that had them we may say he died rich, dyed rich though he
lived poor, and which is best of all, his riches he carried with him. He lived
and dyed (...) rich toward Lu. 12. 21.
God, for such a one dies worth as much as both Christ is worth and heaven is
worth; as Christ for Grace, as heaven for Glory; as Christ for Promise and
security, as heaven for performance and satisfaction: For good Conscience
departs (not dies) possessed of them both. And it is infinitely more for one to
be able to say one of these two is mine, then to say a thousand mines of gold
are mine. He that has these has all, Rev. 21. 7. He shall inherit all things,
for God will be his God, he shall be his son: And as long as God has any thing
to give he shall not want.

A good Conscience then, if had and kept, all is safe, all depends upon it,
Grace and Comfort here, Glory and Bliss hereafter But this if lost or
neglected, all goes to wrack, and is but loss and dung, and worse, if worse
may be, and the man a lost man for ever. Take this, take all, as one said well,
Toll Caelum, Toll animam; so I may add, Toll Christum, Toll Caelum; Toll
Fidem, Toll Christum; Toll Conscientiam, Toll Fidem: Yea, Toll
Conscientiam; Toll omnia. Take away Heaven, said he, and take my Soul too; so
say I, Take away Christ, take away Heaven; take away Faith, and take away
Christ; and take away Conscience, you take away Faith; yea take away
Conscience, and you make short work, and take away all. For what were my Soul
worth if it were not for He ^^n? what were Heaven worth if it were not for
Christ's what were Christ worth to me if it were not for Faith? and what were
all Faith worth if it were not for Conscience? Therefore as dying Gardener said
truly, Open that window once, assert Justification, and deny merit, and
farewell all together, farewell Popish Religion: So say I, Assert Liberty and
deny Conscience, open that window once, and farewell all together, farewell all
true Religion: Yea take but away part of Conscience, and you take away all;
take but away one syllable, and what is simple science good for without Con? to
show that it is not science but Conscience that makes the Christian; and no
Conscience but that which is entire and kept whole that makes the happy
Christian.

Your Lordship is descended of Noble and truly Honorable Progenitors, highly
Honored for their Greatness; highly Beloved for their Goodness; their
Goodness shining eminently in the discoveries of their Religion, Loyalty,
Valor, and Activenesse to serve their Country in the greatest perils. They
were to Truth Patrons, to Religion Ornaments, to Peace Champions, fighting her
Battles (when she was in danger) both by sea and land; and to their Country
Dear and Cordial Patriots; some of them not loving their lives to the Death,
have sacrificed them to the service of their Country. Their persons through the
luster of their Virtues and Heroic actions shone out in their higher and
greater Orbs, while they lived; and their precious Names and memory (though
themselves withdrawn) leaving a splendour and brightness behind (as the Sun
when set) continue immortalized in our English History and Chronicles to all
Posterity.

Your Lordship is the head of a great Family, and the highest Branch of a
numerous name, all whose sheaves do willingly bow to your Lordships sheaf, as
gladly and willingly as Joseph's Brethren did to him, accounting themselves
Honored not so much in your Lordships Honor, as Honourablenesse, and
honoring you not so much for your Great and Honer est honorantis,
Honorabilitas honorati.
High Birth, as Greater and Higher worth and aprroved sincerity in these trying
times.

My Lord, Hold fast that you have received: secure your Faith, and you secure
your soul: Secure your Conscience, and you secure your Honor, yea your Crown.
Then you shall not be shaken Rev. 3. 11.
with any shakings, nor afraid of any amazement.

That your Lordship may do worthily in Ephratah, and your name and Family be
famous in Israel, as it is all the aim and ambition of this ensuing Treatise;
so it is and shall be the Prayer of the Author, who craving your Lordships
pardon for this boldness and Prolixity, and a favorable acceptance and
perusal of this homely Treatise, shall continue to efflagitate and importune
God, that as he has made you high in Place and Honor and Dignity: So you may
be made much more high in Name, and Praise, and Grace, and Glory.

Your Lordships humble servant in every Christian service. Jo: SHEFFEILD.

To the Conscientious Reader.
CHristian and Conscientious Reader, for such I desire to find, at least to
leave thee: the World is now full of Books, so full that it cannot contain all
that is written, and of how many may it be said, that they do but proclaim the
vanity of the Writer, and procure weariness, if not vexation to the Reader?

As for the subject and matter of this Discourse, it cannot but receive thy
Approbation. Howsoever the homely and plain language in it, the unelegancy and
untakingness of the composure and composer in this now so knowing, but more
censorious Age, may cause it to be laid aside with neglect by some who as in
hearing they hear not Sermons but names, so in reading use not to read
Treatises but Titles. O my Lord, I am not Eloquent, Vir verb^rum. Ex. 4. 10.
but of a slow Speech, and of a slow Tongue; yet if the Lord say I will go with
thee, and be with thy mouth, and with this Rod and Pen in thy Hand, how much
may a stammerring and discouraged Moses undertake and go through with?

Jerome said he did diligere Christum in Augustino, Love Austin the better for
Christ's sake; our times invert it, and we do only diligere Augustinum in
Christo, we love Christ the better for St. Austins sake, and it may be, should
not like Christ at all if it were not in Austins mouth and parts. The preaching
of Christ in a crucified style, now is accounted foolishness, as heretofore in
a crucified state.

But as of all Divinity it may be said, Ornari res tanta nega^, contenta
doceri; so especially a discourse of Conscience needs least the dress of
humane Ornaments, requires most the strength of Divine Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit.

It is a subject wherein many of eminent worth have traveled, some more
anciently, many more of latter times, and among our selves: All which will have
their deserved praise in the Churches of Christ unto succeeding Ages. And yet
it were much to be wished, that either more were written in these days by
those who are (...), and of more leisure and abilities, or that what is already
written were more read, studied, perused and practiced.

As for me, although I cannot but be so far at least Conscious to my own
weaknesses and insufficiencies as to say with Gideon, Is not my thousand the
least in the Tribe? and is not some others Gleanings better than my whole
Vintage? yet having expected that some of more days, and name, and parts
should have spoken in Abners language to Joab, calling for a Cessation, 2 Samuel
2. 26.
or a Retreat, How long shall it be ere thou bid the People return from
pursuing their Brethren? that our Swords of Contention may he beaten into
Plough-shares of more use and fruitfulness for the Lords field; and our Spears
of difference into Pruning Hooks, to prune and dress the Lords Vineyard, least
all practical Divinity be eaten up of controversal, which being exhaled first
from more specious utrums, shortly congeales into more gross and dubious
neutrums, and at last dissolves into irreligious nihilums, and settles in
skepticism at last, or foulest Atheism; and fearing least our small Coal or
Spark which is yet remaining, our sacred Coal of Israel (of Religion, Faith,
and good Conscience) should be quite put out, which to me seems to be struck
at, and in great danger: I have with Craesus Son who had never spoken before,
till he saw his Fathers life in that danger, broken that silence, and broke out
from that privacy which I could gladly have enjoyed. But if Religion be in
danger, as clearly it is, I concluded that if Dumb men should not cry out, the
very stones would cry out against them.

Conscience is the Book of Books, the ancientest piece of Scripture in the
World, the first Tables of Gods own hewing, and Handwriting in the heart of
man, for whose sake all other Books since, yea, the Scripture was after
purposely written to Comment upon it. Unicuique suus liber Conscientia, and
propter hunc libellum, omnes alii libri inventi sunt, if Bernard say true.

This is thy Book, which thou must be well versed in, or all thy other reading
will be unprofitable. To study other Books may make thee a Scholar, but to
study this makes thee a Christian.

Conscience is a little Map or volume of Divinity, there is more of God to be
seen in Conscience than in any other piece. It is the rarest piece that God
ever made. Of all Creatures there is more of God to be seen in Man than in
them all, in Man most in the Soul, in the Soul most in the Conscience. This
smells more of God (says one) than the Heavens, the Sun, the Stars, or all
the glorious things of the Earth, Gold, precious Stones, Rubies, or the
sweetest Herbs, Roses, or Lillyes.

Conscience is the Art of Arts, and Science of Sciences, which every one of
whatsoever Degree, Quality, Science is of absolute necessity bound to be
skilled and exercised in, A Book it is, which neither the Learned when it is
delivered to him with this Charge, Read this I pray, may refuse and put away,
as he, Esa. 29. 11, 12. and say I cannot, for it is sealed, It is an open Book:
Or when to the unlearned with the same Charge, Read this now, he may not say, I
cannot, for I am not Book-learned, It is ^n easy Book, the Lay-mans Book, or
Primmer: Multae sunt Scientiae hominum, sed nulla melior illa, qua homo
cognoscit seipsum; Many Sciences there are, but none like that whereby a man
knows himself.

The Tree of Knowledge has often proved to the sons of men the Tree of Evil;
the fruit though delightful to the eye, and pleasant to the taste, often
proving bitter Apples of contention; God has justly hedged it in, and set an
Angel to keep man from approaching it. But the Tree of Conscience is ever the
Tree of Life, his fruit is meat, his leaves medicine, and his very shade
comfort^ble. And truly if a man have but so much Knowledge, as to get and keep
a good Conscience, though he can never attain to those high Speculations which
the world admires, it is enough. I would have you, says the Apostle to the To.
16. 19.
Romans, as simple to evil, as wise to good. And our Savior to those of
Thyatira, whose parts could not reach the bottom of those strange and deep
notions which they called (...), depths; though depths of Satan, counting their
doctrines of licentiousness depths, and the old plain sincerity and
conscientiousnesse but shallows and simplicities, I will lay upon you no other
burden, but what you have already hold fast till I come. Rev. 2. 24, 25.


The truth is, Heaven and Glory are not for the learned Scribe, and the
Scholler-like Disputant, for Seraphical parts, and Serpentine pates; but for
the poor and simple, the Babes and children who attend the knowledge of God and
Conscience, and are Ignoramusses in the Worlds Sciences and grand Mysteries. He
that receives not the Kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter
therein.

These times of ours have been too fruitful in disputes and controversies; in
dealing with which as there is no end, so in the end no satisfaction at all, or
benefit: To which therefore that of the wise man may be applied, Better is the
End than the Beginning, though Both are Vanity; and better than them both is a
total abstinence from them, and an harmless nescience of them. But how barren
are we, and unfruitful in the right knowledge of God, and faith in Jesus
Christ, and that conscientiousnesse which does adorn the Christian. Never was
there more Knowledge in the World, and never less; Never so many Saints, never
so few; Never so much of Conscience in the world, and never so little;
Notionall Knowledge never more, Substantial and Obedientiall never less;
Titular Saints never so many, their number as the sand of the Sea, their nature
as the stones, or mire in the streets; Real Saints never so few, their nature
as the Stars in the Sky, but their number less than of the most precious
Stones and Rubies, fewer than the gates of Jerusalem, or the precious Stones in
Aarons Breast Plate, for each Tribe one; Never so much of Conscience heard,
never so little of it seen; Every man propounding doubtful Queries about it,
but one plain man in a family, or two in a Tribe, busying themselves about the
exercise of it. But as Austin very excellently said of the Poor Gardener, who
has an excellent Fruit-tree in his Orchyard, whereof he is the undoubted
Owner, he gathers and eats the Fruit, he tastes the sweetness, this man, says
he, has much more benefit by this Tree, though he be a mean Scholar, can
neither write or read, nor can he tell you the name of his Tree in Greek or
Latin, nor does he know any thing of the Antiquity of it, or the Original
root whence it came; He is no such Artist as to take the height of it, nor
ever busied he himself to measure the compass and thickness of his Tree,
much less to tell the Twigs and number the Apples on it; But he is sure he is
the owner of it, and it is all his, with all Appurtenances: He looks to the
fencing, pruning, dressing, dunging of his Tree, and gathering of the fruit: He
I say, has far more good by this Tree, than he that can learnedly in any
language discourse of it, and tell you the Physical nature of the fruit, and
can exactly tell you his Age, Descent, and to an Inch give you his Thickness,
and Height, and tell you how many Twigs and Leaves there are upon it, and how
much fruit to an Apple, but all this while it is none of his.

So surely he is much the happier man, who though he fall short in matter of
parts, yet is he the man that looks to his Conscience, and minds that.

Conscience is the sum of the whole matter, it is the Totum Dei, and the
Totum Hominis too. First it is the Totum Dei, the whole charge of God, and his
chief Agent. Conscience next to the Son, and Spirit, and Word of God, is
invested with the greatest Authority, and by Divine Institution his Head is
lifted above all his Fellows, and his Throne as Jehoiakims in the day of his
Enlargement above all other Thrones and earthly Judicatories. It is Gods
greatest Officer and Vicegerent, set by him to be (as it were) thy Angel,
Keeper, Monitor, Remembrancer, King, Prophet, Witness, Examiner, Judge, yea,
thy lower Heaven. Submit to Conscience, it must command thee: Be ruled by it,
it will not wrong thee: Be not shie of it, it will not betray or deceive thee.
Again, I say Beware of it, provoke it not (as the Lord said of his Angel) Obey
his voice, for he will not spare thee: If thou slight or fly it, it is as the
Angel in the way against Balaam, to resist thee with a sword in his hand: It
will be an Adversary to thee, and an Informer against thee, an Accuser,
Witness, Judge, Jailer, Tormentor, a Worm, Rack, Dungeon to thee, yea, thy
upper Hell.

Secondly, Conscience is totum Hominis, It is the worlds great Charge: Art thou
a Minister? All that thou have to do, is only to look well to Conscience.
Tota cura animarum absolvitur in sola cura Conscientiarum? Art thou a
Christian? this is thy Charge, like his 1 King. 20. 39. Look well to this, see
thy eye be never off it: Let it not break loose and make escape from thee, thy
life shall go for it if it do.

To call Conscience a Grace is too little, it is as Hegai the Kings
Chamberlain, the Est. 2. 3.
Keeper of all the Royal Virgins (those daughters of Beauty) to whose charge
they were committed, he was to Minister to them all necessaryes, he to furnish
them with Vestments, and Odours to purify them. Conscience is the Keeper of
the Graces, in whose Chamber they ly, and from whose hand they receive whatever
is requisite, that they may be fit to appear in the presence of the King of
Heaven.

To call Conscience a Duty is too little, it is the Sum and Epitome of all
duty; it is not a Star, but a Constellation of many stars. It is like the via
lactea in the Heavens, all beset with stars; it is like the Gates and Streets
of the new Jerusalem, Re. 21. 21.
the one all Pearls, the other all Gold.

In a word, what ever thou art, and what ever is thy work, Conscience must be
thy Charge and thy work. Art thou a Merchant? this is the Pearl thou must Trade
and lay out for. Art thou a Mariner? Conscience is the Ship thou must sail in;
and except thou abide in this ship (as Paul said to his Companions) thou can
not be saved.

Art thou a Soldier, a Garrison Soldier? Conscience is thy Fort to fly to,
which thou must manfully defend and make good. A Field-Souldier? Conscience
must be thy Word; if the enemy get this from thee, and thou once fight against
Conscience, thou shall be certainly routed and ruined.

Art thou a Husbandman? this thy field to till, and Garden to dress. A
Tradesman? this must be thy Shop to work in, and attend upon. A Chapman? this
thy weight and measure to buy and sell by.

Art thou a Scholar? Conscience must be thy Library, at least thy Vade mecum.
A Divine? this must be thy Text, or Doctrine, at least thy Application must be
to Conscience. Art thou a Lawyer? Conscience must be thy Principal Client,
whose cause if thou will plead, thou shall have double fees; but if thou be of
Counsel against he^* or by thy opposition, silence, craft, or negligence, she
be cast and overthrown, thou shall never be able to stand in the Judgment,
but be disabled pleading before the Lord Chief Justice at that Upper Bench.

Art thou a Physician? Conscience must be thy Patient, whom thou must attend
most; be sure to keep her out of a Lethargy and a Consumption, to which
diseases she is naturally, most inclined; if this Die under thy hand, and
miscarry, thou art an undone man, and all thy skill and practice nothing worth,

If thou be a Rich man, Conscience will furnish thee with Baggs which wax not
old, of Treasure that will not waste. If Poor, it will furnish thee with a
Cruse and Barrel that will not fail. If thou have a good Conscience, it will be
a staff to support thee: If an evil, it will turn in to a Serpent to sting
thee. If thou art an Israelite, it is the Red Sea, fear not to go into it, it
will secure thee; if an Egyptian, thou art drowned if thou go into it.

If thou be a woman Conscience is thy Glass into which thou must look, and by
which thou must dress thy self, says Bernard, that thou may please Christ
thy Spouse.

If a Maid, this thy attire. If a Bride, this thy Ornament. If a Mother, this
thy Child, which thou must nurse thy self (not put out of doors as Moses Mother
did him, for any danger or benefit.) Take heed of starving and overlaying thy
Conscience. Thou must be as tender of this as of thy only Child, for it more
concerns thee.

Whosoever thou art, I have two things more to beg, the one for thee, that what
is here all along spoken of Conscience, may be also spoken effectually to thy
Conscience, and tend to the clarifying and fortifying, to the purifying,
pacifying, and preserving of thy Conscience, and the other from thee, that thou will join in thy prayers and endeavors, that the Lords banished may be
brought home; that banished Conscience may be restored to his liberty, and that
deposed Conscience may be Re-in-throned in his full power, and sovereign
authority commanding in the heart and lives of all professors and Christians,
that while Conscience reigns, the peace of God which passes all onderstanding
may (...) bear rule in our hearts and minds. So I remit thee to the Conscience
of God, and commit thee to the (...). 1 Pe. 2. 19
God of Conscience, that thou may live full of Conscience, so dye full of
comfort, and rise full of glory. So prays he, who is

The meanest servant of thy Faith and Conscience. J. S.

THE CONTENTS.
THe sum and scope of the Epistle to Timothy -- is the Ministers duty. page 1.
The sum of the Text, the Ministers greatest charge. p. 2. -- 11. The words
opened, observations raised. p. 3, 4, etc. The maine point of Doctrine
Propounded. p. 11. Expounded. p. 12. Confirmed. p. 13, 14

CHAP. I.
What Conscience is, showed two ways. p. 15. 1. By opening the word
Conscience. p. 15. Conscience is more then a bare and single knowledge. ibid.
Conscience implies a fourfold knowledge with God. p. 16. with self. p. 17.
with others. p. 18. with things themselves. p. 20.
Four Corollaries and Deductions. p. 22. 2. What the thing Conscience is
described. p. 24.
CHAP. II.
Two kinds of Conscience Evil. Good.
A two fold evil Conscience Quiet. Troubled.

A double goodness in Conscience, of Sincerity. Security.
p. 26. The full definition of a good Conscience, viz. when 1. It is rightly
Purified. 2. Rightly Pacified. 3. And does ^egularly perform all his offices
ibid When Conscience is rightly purified p. 27. Three things Conscience must
be purified from Ignorance. p. 27. Error. p. 28. Hardness. p. 31
Three things Conscience is purified by. The Word. of Christ. The Blood. of
Christ. The Spirit. of Christ.
p. 33.
CHAP. III.
Of the Conscience rightly pacified. p. 37. Three things Conscience must be
pacified from. The reign of sin. p. 37. The rage of Satan. p. 39. The wrath of
God. p. 41.
Three things Conscience is pacified by. The Word. p. 42. The Blood. p. 43. The
spirit of Christ. p. 44.

CHAP. IV.
The Offices of Conscience. p. 45. Conscience has a fourfold Office
Ministerial, or Prophetical. Regal or Magistratuall. Testimonial, or of a
witness. Judicial, or of a Judge.
p. 46. To which is added a fifth Office, viz. Registeriall, Wherein Conscience
is a Minister. p. 46. Wherein Conscience is a King. p. 48. Wherein Conscience
is a witness. p. 49. Wherein Conscience is a Judge: p. 51. Wherein Conscience
is a Register. p. 52.
Five Corollaryes. p. 54.
CHAP. V.
Ten particular sorts of good Conscience propounded. First of the Conscience of
Faith ibid p. 60.
CHAP. VI.
Of the Conscience of Purity p. 66
CHAP. VII.
Of the Conscience of Sincerity. p. 72. Ten notes of Sincerity p. 75.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Inoffensive Conscience. p. 93 Inoffensivenesse twofold. Not taking Not
giving
Offense. p. 93. 1. Inoffensiveness in not giving offense, respects either God
or Man. ibid. What is it to be inoffensive before God. p. 94. How any can be
said so to be inoffensive. ibid. Four marks of this inoffensivenesse. p. 95.
Offense not to be given to men. Others Godly p. 97. or Those without. p. 105.
Our selves. p. 107.
Six cautions given to prevent offense giving. p. 98. Six rules prescribed to
avoid offense giving. p. 102. 2. Inoffensivenesse in not taking offense from
God. p. 109. The Godly. p. 110. The wicked. p. 111.

CHAP. IX.
Of the well sighted Conscience. p. 112.
CHAP. X.
Of the well spoken Conscience. p. 115. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Opened. The answer or
interrogation of a good Conscience. p. 115. 116.
CHAP. XI.
Of the honest dealing Conscience. p. 120. Seven notes of an honest Conscience.
p. 124.
CHAP. XII.
Of the tender Conscience. p. 129. A double tenderness of Conscience. Sinful
and diseased. Lawful and Sound.
p. 132. Five kinds of diseased and faulty tenderness. p. 132. 133 Right
tenderness respects. 1. God. 2. Others. 3. Our selves.
p. 140. 1. Tenderness in respect of God, seen in six things. p. 141. 2. In
respect of Men. 1. To all Godly in general. 2 Weaker ones among them
especially. 3 To all men whatsoever. 4. To those who are related to us,
principally.
p. 151. and Sequ. 3. In respect of our selves, this tenderness seen in 14.
Notes. p. 157. and Sequ.
CHAP. XIII.
Of the passive, or suffering Conscience. p. 181. Four sorts of sinful and
uncomfortable sufferings. p. 187. Six marks of honorable and conscientious
suffering. p. 189.
CHAP. XIV.
Of the Conscience of Charity. p. 194. Charity twofold External or civil
Ecclesiastical or christian.
p. 195.
1. External charity respects The Poor. The Neighbor. Our Enemy.

To the poor is to be showed charity of beneficence. p. 196 To the Neighbor, a
charity of benevolence. p. 199. To an Enemy, the charity of forgiveness. p.
200. 2. Ecclesiastical or Christian charity the more excellent. p. 201. In
what it is to be showed. p. 202. The great and doleful want of it in these
times. p. 206.
CHAP. XV.
The reasons of the point. p. 212. Three general heads of reasons, whereof the
first is taken from the excellency of good Conscience, and showed in five
particulars. p. 213.
CHAP. XVI.
The second reason from the danger and mischief of an evil Conscience. p. 225.
This set out in four Particulars. p. 225. 226.
CHAP. XVII.
The third reason from the difficulty of getting and keeping a good Conscience,
and escaping an evil. p. 232. This made plain in three particulars. p. 233
CHAP. XVIII.
The application of the Doctrine. p. 237 A sevenfold application propounded
ibid. First by way of information ibid. This information looks two ways. 1.
To discover errors. 2. To assert Duties and Truths.
1. Error discovered, that to preach Conscience and press duty, is legal
preaching. p. 238. 239. 240. 2. That Conscience is a snare, not security. p.
243.
Third mistake, of such who judge their conscience good when it is yet but a
natural conscience. p. 244. Natural conscience may have some good in it, yet
cannot be called a good conscience. p. 244. What good may be in natural
conscience, showed in 8. particulars. p. 244. 245. What is wanting in natural
conscience, to make it truly good, showed in four particulars. p. 246. 247.
Fourth mistake. To judge conscience therefore good, because quiet. p. 247.
Four quiet consciences, and never an one of them good. p. 248. 1. The ignorant
man's conscience. p. 248. 2. The unawakened conscience. p. 249. 250. 251. 3. The
deluded conscience. p. 252. 253. 254. 4. The hardened conscience. p. 255. A
six-fold hardness of heart or conscience. p. 255. 1. Natural hardness. p.
255. 256. 2. Voluntary and attracted. p. 256. Eleven steps to hell discovered.
p. 256 257. 3. Judicial hardening by Impostors and Seducers. p. 259 4.
Ministerial hardening by Ministers and Ordinances. p. 259. 260. 5. Divine
hardening by God himself. ibid. 6. Satanicall by the prevailing efficacy of
Satan. p. 261. 5th. Mistake of such who judge conscience, therefore, good,
because troubled. p. 263. Three notes of an ill troubled conscience. p. 264.
Six notes of a good troubled conscience. p. 271 A sixth Mistake, to judge
erroneous conscience, a good conscience. p. 273. Seven common and ordinary
notes of an erroneous conscience. p. 274. A seventh mistake, to judge
scrupulous Conscience, a good Conscience. p. 278. The eighth mistake to judge
the conscience of, and for liberty, a good conscience. p. 280. Sinful liberty
of conscience branded, and decyphered. p. 281. Right liberty of conscience
asserted. p. 282. Set out in five particulars. p. 283.
CHAP. XIX.
The other part of the use of information to assert Truths p. 285. 1. That good
conscience is the Christians greatest charge. ibid. 2. To look after
conscience in self and others, the ministers greatest charge. p. 286. 3.
Conscience decaying is the decay of State. p. 290. 4. Conscience decaying,
grace decays. p. 292. 5. Tolleration not to be granted to all sorts of
consciences. p. 293. 6. Whence the world is so poisoned with corrupt Doctrines,
and blasphemous errors. p. 249. 7. Whence many have lost former peace and
comfort. ibid. 8. Whence many come to dye Tragically and dispairingly. p. 296.
9. Whence men come to commit the sin against the Holy Ghost. p 298.
CHAP. XX.
The use of Lamentation p. 299. The general want of conscience lamented. ibid.
The general loss of conscience more lamented. p. 303.
CHAP. XXI.
The use of reproof. p. 309. Want of conscience reproved. ibid. Want of
conscience the greatest want: p. 313. Loss of conscience reproved. p. 314.
Loss of conscience the greatest loss. p. 315.
CHAP. XXII.
The use of terror to four sorts of men. p. 317. 1. Such as are regardlesse of
conscience. ibid 2. Such as have an accusing and gnawing conscience. 318. 3.
Such as have a stupefied and feared conscience. p. 320 4. Such as are falling
into the consumption of conscience p. 321.
CHAP. XXIII.
The comfort and happiness of such, whose care is to get and keep a good
conscience. p. 323.
CHAP. XXIV.
The use of examination. p. 327.
CHAP. XXV.
The use of exhortation. p. 333. 1. By way of Dehortation. ibid. 1. By way of
Adhortation to All Christians. Ministers chiefly. p. 334. This exhortation
backed with Motives. persuading. p. 335. Means. directing. p. 349.
Motives to persuade, four. p. 345. etc. Means directing, twofold
principal. Subservient.
p. 349. Principal means two The blood. The spirit.
p. 350. Subservient means 13. whereof. 6. prescribe what is to be had and
done. 7. what is to be avoided. p. 352. 1. Means to get and keep good
conscience, faith. 353. Threefold faith necessary for a good conscience.
Justifying for the heart. p. 354. Orthodox for the judgment. 355 particular
warranting faith for our particular actions. p. 356.
2d. Means To exercise and renew repentance. p. 357. Repentance a Gospel
duty. ibid 3d. means, To attend the Hints and Items given by Christ and his
Spirit. p. 360. 4. To attend and observe the hints and motions of our own
Spirit. p. 361. 5. To confer our conscience with Scripture. p. 365. 6. The last
means to be used, Prayer. p. 366. 2. The evils to be avoided are seven. p.
370. 1. Beware of the smallest sin allowed. ibid. 2. Of one sinful Act
deliberately committed. p. 373 3. Beware of living under a loose, cold,
freezing ministry, or an unsound ministry. p. 375. 4. Take heed of an ill
companion. p. 381. 5. In things doubtful forbear to Act, or choose the safer
part. p. 382. 6. Shun worldly mindedness. p. 383. 7. Beware of erroneousness of
conscience. p. 385 2. The other part of the exhortation concerns ministers
especially. p. 387.
Ministers have a double charge given them, concerning conscience. 1.
Personal. 2. Doctrinall.

His personal charge is, that he be a man Exemplary, a man of conscience. ibid
Here 1. A particular encouragement to younger Timothyes. p. 389. 2. An Item to
Hymenaeus. p. 390. His Doctrinall charge is, that he be aman for Conscience,
in all his ministry applying himself to the conscience of his hearers. p.
396.
A Good Conscience THE Strongest Hold.
1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith, and a good Conscience, which some having put away
concerning Faith have made Shipwreck.
THese two Epistles to Timothy, and that to Titus, may well be called the
Ministers Directory, made up of Canons clearly and undubitately Apostolical,
Directing the Minister how to Govern himself and how to Guide his People.

The Ministers charge is looked upon by all as the greatest; and the Apostle,
who best knew what it was does not spare to lay it home to him, and to give it
him to the full.

Each Minister has a double charge. The one ad extra, concerning others. The
other ad intra, which concerns himself. Both are 1 Timothy 4. 16.
summed up in those few words. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed to thy self and to thy
Doctrine.

And you may see the Apostle through this Epistle does frequently inculcate
both, and does straightly charge both upon his Conscience, As for that part of
his charge ad extra you may see it pressed upon him. Chap. 1. ver. 3. 4. and
Chapter 5. ver. 21. Chap. 6. 13, 17, 20. Strict charges all, and so in the
second Epistle Passim. Whereby it appears that the Minister, besides those
things concerning himself, stands charged with the care of the whole Churches
business, for what concerns both Persons, and Doctrines, and Truths and
Errors, and Opinions, and Practices.

Then for that other part. That ad intra, for what concerns himself, and his
own Personal Demeanor. He has his Directions Chapter, 4. 12, Be thou an
example of the Believers in word, and in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit,
in Faith and Purity. And Chap. 6. 11, 12. But thou, O man of God fly these
things, and follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience,
Meekness. Fight the Good Fight of Faith, etc.

The Text is part of a Charge, as you see, v. 18. Yea it is a compendious sum
of his whole double charge Tam ad intraquam ad extra, Both as to himself and
to his Doctrine.

Verse 18. A straight charge is laid upon Timothy, This charge I commit to
thee, that thou war a good warfare.] the Ministers employment is no other then
a warfare, neither better nor worse, A warfare no better. A good warefare, no
worse.

This weighty charge is carried home and Pursued. 1. With the affections of a
Father. 2. With the arguments of an Apostle. 1. With the affections of a Father
-- Son Timothy] 2. With the arguments of an Apostle.


Here are two arguments urged.

1. The first is more Comfortable and respects Timothy himself, according to
the Prophecies which went before of thee] There were some in those days who
had the gift of Prophecy, and could foretell things to come, some such had
given out great hopes of Timothy when he was young, and of his
instrumentallnesse to the Church, when he should come to be put in employment.
Now gracious and hopeful young men (in the Ministry especially) must see to
it, that what hopes, expectations and good opinions others have had of them,
and what Prayers, Promises, and Engagements have been made for them, may be
all made good (not void) by them in the whole course of their life. Therefore
Timothy, thou must war a good warfare.

2, The other argument is more sad: But respects others who had fearfully
miscarryed, He instanceth in two, viz. Hymeneus and Alexander, It is the same
Hymeneus spoken of 2 Timothy 2. 17. There joined with Philetus, (always
unhappy in his company), and Alexander the same (in all Probability) with That
Alexander, Act. 19. 33. lived at Ephesus, this also did, therefore Timothy
residing Pastor at Ephesus is warned of him 2 Timothy 4. 15.
him mentioned. Acts, 19. 33. There you find him in his best, but mentioned
also, 2 Timothy, 4. 14, 15. There a man much altered a deadly enemy to Paul and
his Doctrine, for whom before he had so much appeared a friend and Champion,
both were formerly fair Professors, but now degenerated into foul Apostates,
both of forward and (then hopeful) Disciples now flown so high as to become
too forward (but Dangerous) Teachers even denying common received Doctrines, as
for instance; that Article of our faith concerning the Resurrection. 2 Timothy 2.
17, 18, And broaching new, loose and pernicious Doctrines, whereby they blew up
the 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.
faith of such as hearkened to them. 2 Timothy, 2. 18.

Whose black foul and Tragic story is here compendiously set down in two
verses, 19, 20. and holds forth four remarkable passages as touching them.
Being the four steps to their utter ruin and eternal predition. The two
first of which set out their sin^e, the two last their punishment. Their sin
is set out First in the Original and beginning of it, They put away good
Conscience] the worst beginning, a quo Principio provenit omne malum.

2. In the Perfection and Conclusion of it. They came at last to Blasphem. The
worst end and conclusion that could be.

Here is nothing but sin in these 2 passages, and sin upon sin.

In the two remaining there is nothing but judgment, judgment upon sin, and
judgment upon judgment, a double judgment upon their double sin. The one
Divine and secret for their secret sin, they had put away good Conscience.
And they are shattered and ship-wracked in their faith, for their punishment.
They having repudiated Conscience, and given her a bill of divorce, presently
commit Adultery with prodigious Errors and Opinions. The late English
Annotation upon the place is very good. " That God does punish men for giving
raines to a licentious course of life, against the dictates of their own
Consciences. By taking away the light of his Spirit from them, that in the
midst of their course they should lose their most precious spiritual
Merchandise, and be drowned in Error and Heresy, after the manner of those,
who in a Sea Tempest suffer shipwreck.

The other judgment that befell them was Humane, and Open for their open sin
in publishing Blasphemous assertions. It was the judgment of the Church
watching over their Members, who observing some to become so Putrid and
infectious, as to endanger the whole body of the joining Congregation, deliver
these over judicially in a way of Church Censures to Satan. They are now cut
off by excommunication which is the plain meaning of that Phrase, delivered up
to Sathan] which Phrase is also used. 1 Cor. 5. 5.

Here you see their sin and punishment. They put away, and reprobate
Conscience. They never thrive after in their soul, either for Grace or Peace,
for Knowledge or Comfort. They become reprobate concerning the Faith. They
excommunicate Conscience out of themselves, and themselves are excommunicated
out of the Church. They first deliver up Faith and good Conscience to Satan
voluntarily; And are now by the Church Officers delivered up to Satan
judicially. The end of which Church censure is set down in these words; That
they may learn not to Blaspheme] that is to say, that they may, if God see
good to give Repentance, recover themselves out of the 2 Timothy- 2. 26. Ne impune
ferant suas blasphemias sed ut suo malo discant quid sit blasphemare. Beza.
snare of the Devil, or otherwise that they may be restrained; that others may
not be leavened and infected, and consequently the like blasphemies for the
future may be prevented.

Where by the way as we go along, the Gleaner may fill his hand with some
Observations before we come to the standing Shock, where he that binds
Sheaves may fill his Bosom,

1. How dangerous it is for professed Christians to grow wanton in matters of
Faith and careless of their Conscience.

2. How dangerous is it to the Church, and Alexander was a Coppersmith it is
certain, whatsoever Trade the other was of,
how ominously fatal is it to the undertakers themselves when private
Mechanickes do presumptuously invade the Ministry, and become public
Preachers.

3. There is no dividing between Faith and a good Conscience, leave Orthodox
Faith, and farewell good Conscience, or let go good Conscience, and you have
seen the last of Faith, it sinkes, it shipwracks,

4. How true is that of 2 Timothy 3. 13. That evil men and Seducers (...) wax
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, seldom staying when they begin
to shrink from their former sincerity and strictness, till they arrive at the
highest of impiety, going from sin to sin, and from Error to Error, till by
the just judgment of God they are given over to become open Blasphemers and
outrageous Persecutors.

5. Every vicious and infectious Teacher, and every bold Broacher of Doctrines
corrupting and staining the simplicity of the Faith, and every Member of a
corrupt and dissolute Conscience are not to be Tolerated and permitted in a
new Testament Church, but all such are deservedly excommunicated the Church,
who have once excommunicated Conscience; and they justly suffer in being
delivered up to Satan who have wickedly sinned in delivering Doctrines of
Satan. No liberty here you see for every kind of Conscience.

6. Yet are not visible and open censures but for visible and open sins, not
for Errors in judgment concealed, but published, not for want Public
declarantur pertinere ad regnum Satanae, quippe qui non pertineant ad regnum
Christi Piscator*
of faith, but for opposing it,

7 Excommunication (Clave non errante) is a solemn, and dreadfully operative
Ordinance, a shutting out of Heaven, a shutting up in Hell him who is justly
cast out of the Churches fellow^hip, by that censure. He is delivered up to
Satan.

8 The end of Excommunication, and all Church censures is not to serve to the
destruction 2 Cor. 10. 8 and 13. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 5.
of the Censured, or Private revenge of the Censurers, but to edification
only; That the offender may be terrified, and reclaimed, The Traditi sunt ad
emendandum, non ad perdendum. Sedul. in locum.
flesh destroyed, that the soul may be saved; and that others may be warned,
and so the infection stayed: That they may learn not to blaspheme, Vt
Castigatione hac adducti desinant falsum suum dogma spargere Piscator.

But none of these do I intend to stand upon, though I shall have occasion to
meet with them in prosecuting the intended Doctrine.

To the words Holding Faith and a good Conscience, etc.

Holding] (...) i. e. (...) Piscator. It signifies properly Having; and so
translated, 1 Pet. 1 Pet 3. 16.
3. 16. (...) -Having a good Conscience, here Holding. To have and to hold in
our English speaking, are usually put together; It is not enough once to have,
or for some while to have Had, unless we ever have and hold them.

Faith] Either take it first for that which we call Grace-faith, Fides qua
creditur, That he should Hold, Act, Maintain, Exercise the grace of saving,
and lively Faith. Or Secondly, for the Doctrine of Faith, Fides qua creditur,
In which sense it is used, Chap. 3. 9. and 4. 1. Tit. 1. 13. Jud. v. 3. And
Expositors do generally understand it so here, that Timothy should 1 Timothy 3. 9.
and 4. 1. Tit. 1. 13. ^ud. v. 3.
hold the whol^some form of sound words, and still retain the old received
Faith in Orthodox Doctrine, for the grace of saving Faith will not be long kept
in the heart, unless we keep the Doctrine of sound faith, and principles in
the head.

And a good Conscience.] Conscience, you seldom 1 Timothy 3. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 16.
Acts 23. 1. Heb. 13. 19
see it without an Epethite; and this usually is his Epethite Good Conscience,
so in many places Cap. 3. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 16. Acts 23. 1. Heb. 13. 19. Faith had
no Epethite of Good; you do not Ordinarily see other Graces called Good; as
good Love, good Repentance, Zeal, Hope, Patience, or the like; But ever good
Conscience. The other graces are commonly Nemo tam perditus est, ut sit omni
conscientia plane expers Ames.
good, or few have them, but those that are good; But Conscience is a thing
which all have, though a good Conscience but few; therefore get and hold a good
Conscience, or have none at all.

Which some having put away] (...) -qua repulsa. (...) de. trudo, depello,
arceo ab (...) trudo, pello. Act, 7. 27. and 39
Beza. Expulsa, Piscator. quam Repellentes, Vulgar Transl. thrusling it away.
This word is used Acts 7. 27. He that did his Neighbor wrong (...), trust
Moses away as a busy body, and an intruding intermedler; so did these thrust
away Conscience as if it had been a troublesome usurper over them; So after Act
7. 39. The rebelling Israelites thrust him from them (...) They would cast off,
and eashiere Moses, no more receive his Dictates, nor obey his directions, but
would set up another Captain whom they would follow, or lead rather into
Egypt. Thus did these in the Text cashiere, and throw off conscience from his
be trusted employment, and would follow their own swinge. This word is used
also Romans 11. 1. 2. Has God cast away To. 11. 1. 2
his people, (...) and v. 2. He answers (...).

God has not cast away, or reprobated his people whom he foreknew; But these
did reprobate Conscience, and would make it a cast away, as not to be retained
in times of Gospel Light and liberty; So that in this place the Translation is
with the softest, and more gentle it is here, then in any other place, when it
is rendered, they put away good Conscience] It might have been read, they
thrust off, threw away, cashiered, disclaimed, and even reprobated it.

Concerning faith made Shipwrack] Fide Vacui facti sunt, They were emptied and
eased of their faith Syriack transl. Their souls are Shipwrack'd their Faith,
and Grace Ship-wrack'd, aleak being sprung in Conscience the Vessel, they lost
all they had, and saved not the use, Comfort, Confidence, Joy, or feeling of
former Faith and believing; Nor did they preserve their former simplicity and
integrity of judgment, in matter of Doctrine and Truth; But as Conscience was
reprobated to their judgment, their judgment is now wholly reprobate
concerning the Faith.

Now the words being opened, you see they are a Magazine or Panoply of Armor,
and Ammunition to furnish Timothy, and each good Minister, yea every Christian
with the most necessary and useful arms, both to war that good warfare, v.
18. And to prevent this evil shipwreck, v. 19. Timothy thy charge is, that
thou war a good warfare; thy duty is to get, keep, use two weapons especially,
Faith, and a good Conscience; get both or neither, faith in the one hand, good
Conscience in the other; thou have many enemies to resist and fight with, thou
must use both hands, not faith alone, without good Conscience, nor good
conscience alone without Faith; Both make thee compleately armed, and will make
thee more then a Conqueror; But hold them fast, throw down neither, but should
thy weapons be beaten through violence of persecution to thy head, never suffer
them through cowardice to be beaten out of thy hands.

The latter especially he gives charge about, viz. a good conscience; without
this, if thou should be all faith, all faith cannot save thee, nor save it
self, without this second, good conscience; But faith either stands or swims
with a good Conscience, or falls and sinkes with a bad Conscience. Hence the
point intended is:

In the most Perilous tempests of corrupt and dangerous Obs.
times, wherein we often see others losing their Lives, their Graces, their
Comforts, their former Peace, their future hopes, that our selves may not
eternally miscarry, and loose all we have on earth for Grace, and comfort; and
all we look for in heaven, for glory and happiness; Our continual care must be
to get and keep, to have and hold faith and a good conscience.

If thou lose not these two, thou shall never have cause to complain of losing
times, keep these, they will keep thee.

In times of common Naufrage, and Shipwreck, when we see abroad Church-wracks,
State-wracks, Faith-wracks, Truth-wracks; take heed then of the worst
Shipwreck of all at home, Conscience-wrack.

Our life here is set out by a double Metaphor. 1. Of a warfaring condition, v.
18. 2. Of a Seafaring condition, v. 19.

Is our life a warfare; These are our principal weapons, Faith and good
Conscience, if faith be the Shield, good Conscience is the Brestplate of
Righteousness, Ephe. 6. 14. or the golden Ephesians. 6. 14. 16.
Girdle of truth and sincerity, v. 16.

Is our condition a Land fight? and not of a single combat, but of common
interest; These two, Faith, and a good Conscience, are the two strong holds we
must secure our selves in, and hold out to the last drop of blood, and gasp of
life; These two like Jonathan 1 Samuel 14. 13.
and his armor bearer will disco mfit an host of Enemies, and carry all
before them, and break through the most insuperable difficulties, 1 Pet. 3. 16.
Having a good conscience 1 Pet. 3. 16
(says the Apostle) that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers,
they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ, q.
d. Though they encampe against you, beset your houses, shoot their arrows, and
bullets, bitter words, and as bad deeds; yea should they discharge their
murdering Pieces upon you, and think by firing and storming to carry all
before them, stand you your ground, quit your selves like men, retire you like
the Cony to this Rock, like the Bird to this Hill, your Brazen walls of Faith
which indeed (without any Hyperbole as Jerichoes walls) reach up to heaven; and
that Adamantine Inworke of a good Conscience founded on a Rock, no Gates or
engines of Hell shall prevail against; But they shall be ashamed when they
behold your good and unblameable conversation; They shall draw off with
dishonor and infamy as Abimeleck, when he attempted to fire the Tower of
Thebez, to which they fled for safety, a woman threw a Jud. 9. 51. 52.
piece of a Millstone upon his head, and sent him packing. These indeed shall
never be ashamed Ps. 127. 5.
when they speak with any Enemies in the Gate.

Is our life a Seafaring condition? A good Conscience is the Arc, not like
that wherein Moses was exposed to drowning and danger, Ex. 2. 3.
an Arc of Bulrushes, daubed with slime, and pitch; But like that of Noah,
Pitched Genesis 6. 14. Et Seq.
within and without with pitch, made by Gods own direction, wherein thou may
adventure as he did the whole world, both Church and State, thereinto God bad
him enter, therein God shut him, and kept him safe, it preserved that second
Adam, and all the reserve of the Creation from that universal Deluge. A window
it had in the top, to let in the light of Heaven, not the lest Crevise below to
let in a drop of water to endanger it, It did shoot off all the Showers that
fell downwards, and all the Floods that raged upwards. The like figure whereunto
even Baptism does now save us (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, 1
Pet. 3. 20 21.
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, 1 Peter 3. 20. 21.

Is our Life a Sea Fight? These two, Faith, and good Conscience, are our men of
war, which we must never yield up to any Enemy, but choose rather to perish,
and sink in defending them, and maintaining our Trust. See what Trophies a
Christian brings home by making good these two, above all Trophies of honor, a
Conqueror can get from a spoiled Enemy, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is
this, 2 Cor. 1. 12
the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world, but more abundantly to you-wards. It had been now an ill time with
the Apostle, his sufferings did abound, v. 5. He was pressed above measure, and
above humane strength, Even to despair of life, yet even under the sentence
and stroke of death, He had consolations abounding as much as his afflictions,
and joys running over above measure, if afflictions above measure. And all
from this Magazine and Treasury of a good Conscience.

In pursuit of this point. I shall first show The five particulars to be
handled.
what Conscience is.

2 What this good Conscience is.

3. Give the particular kinds and sorts of good Consciences.

4. Give the reasons of the point and duty.

5. Deduce the inferences arising hence by way of Application.

CHAP. I. Chap. 1.
What Conscience is? What conscience is.

TO the first; What conscience is. This I shall show in two particulars: 1.
Explaining what the word Conscience signifies. 2. What the thing Conscience is.

1. What the word conscience signifies. Notatio nominis praemittenda notationi
Rei. (...)] The word in Greek, and (Conscientia) in Latin, and (Conscience)
in English, are all compound words, and signify a knowing together; and imply
two things: 1. Some competent measure of knowledge, or there can be no
conscience. Hence the word, so translated 1 Cor. 4. 4. (...). I know Nullius
rei mihi conscius sum. Beza So. Nil conscire sibi Horat.
nothing by my self. Prove. 8. 12. Wisdom says, Ego sapientia cum Prudentia
cohabito, I Wisdom dwell with Prudence. So Ego Conscientia cum scientia, I
Conscience dwell with knowledge.

2. It implies a knowing together, not a common, single, abstracted, Theoretick
knowledge, but a double, or multiplied knowledge it must be. Hence the learned
say Conscientia est Aqninas Ri vet and alij.
cum alijs scientia,.

In this sense it intends a fourfold knowledge.

Conscire. 1. cum Deo to know together. 1. with God. 2. cum seipsis 2. with our
selves 3. cum alijs 3. with others. 4. cum rebus ipsis 4. with things
themselves.

In all which Idem est conscire, and consentire, The Conscientious man is ever
a Consentientious man.

1. Cum Deo scire, Conscience is first to know Conscientia est notitia vel
sensus internus judicij proprij vel alieni praecipue Dei de nostris been vel
male factis. Paraeus in To. 13.
together, or consent together with God; whence commonly Divines say,
Conscientia is cum deo scientia; When we have the same Idaea, apprehension, and
esteem of things in our mind, that is in Gods, when we allow, or disallow,
think, speak, do according to the rule of Gods word; when we are not swayed
by man's judgment, or the wisdom of the world; But what God commends is
approved, what God commands is obeyed, what he promises is believed, what
he threatens is avoided, what ever God propounds is regarded and received;
this is conscience, when we light our Candle at the Lamps of the Sanctuary.
Hence we say, Vox conscientiae is vox dei. The voice of a right enlightened
Conscience, is the voice of God, so says Solomon, Pr^v. 20. 27. The spirit of
a man is the Candle of the Lord, Lumen ex ipsius Prove. 20. 27.
lumine, lighted at his Word; then searching the inner parts of the Belly, and
the secrets of the heart, and is become a discoverer of the secret thoughts,
nothing being hid from the view of these two heart-searchers. What is
Conscience other then the hewing and squaring our Tables according to the
Tables delivered to us from the hand of God? Mr. Buroughs, Moses self
denial, p. 39
" As it is reported of Boleslaus King of Poland, who used to wear the Picture
of his Father in a plate of Gold hanging about his neck, and whenever he was
to do, or speak any thing of importance he would take his Picture and kissing
it say; Dear Father I wish I may not do any thing remissely unworthy of thy
name etc. So Conscience still has a remembrance of God before his eyes, and
when any thing is to be done, says, Lord, Col. 1. 10.
Give me to walk worthy of God to all Pleasing, fruitful in every good work.
This is to have our works to be wrought in God. Jo. 3. 21. And as in the sight
of God, 2 Cor. 2. ult.

2 Conscire is cum seipso scire aut consentire, Conscience is the knowing of a
man with himself. Cor quando se novit appellatur conscientia, quando praeter
se alia scientia. Bern.
Conscience makes an identity in the same man throughout. Hence it is that
Bernard often calls Conscientia Cordis Scientia, When the head and heart are
agreed. Knowledge in the head alone, is barely Science, often so falsely called.
Knowledge in the heart too, is then Conscience rightly so called. In this
respect I may say, Ecl. 10. 2
Let thy right hand know, whatsoever thy left hand does. Thy heart must lie at
thy right hand, yea and lie near thy mouth too: That is to say, to Weigh,
Try, Examine, Observe, Order all that thy mouth speaks, or hand acts, or
thought intends. Caleb spoke as it was in his heart, Joshu. 14. 7. And in the
next verse, he says, I fully followed the Lord. Here is nothing but Conscience
in both these expressions, His heart followed the Lord, there is cum Deo Scire;
And he fully followed his heart. There is cum seipso scire, Psalm. 15. 2. The
Godly man speaks his Conscience, he speaks the truth in his heart. So the
Apostle To. 9. 1. I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not, (there is cum Deo
scientia) My conscience also bearing me witness in the holy Ghost. (There is
the other Cordis Scientia) There is conscience when these two meet; happy is
the man who condemns not himself (in his heart) for what he allows, and
approves in practice, Hic murus ahaeneus esto Nil conscire sibi -- That little
quantity of Air, which we breath in at our nostrils, which goes into the man,
even to the heart, and which thereafter is breathed out thence again, is more
to a man, (it is indeed his life) then all the three regions of Air, which
fill up that vast space between Earth and Heaven. However Philosophers conceive
there is purer Air, in the highest Region. Certainly that lesser proportion
of Knowledge of Divine truths, which we take down, and suck into the heart,
and after draw out and deliver thence, is more to a Christians life and
Comfort, then all your ref^ned speculations, even of the third and highest
Region.

3. Conscire cum alijs, To know together with others, and consent with them.
This is Conscience, to put our Souls into their Souls Job. 16. 4.
stead as Job speaks. Then to do to others, as we would they should do to
us. Mat. 7. 12. To know the heart of a stranger, Ex. 23. 9. that thou do not
oppress him, Cognoscit justus Animam (...) jumenti sui, Prove. 12. 10. The
righteous man is Arias Montan. Conscientia est notitia and sensus internus
judicij proprij and alieni. etc. Paraeus ubi supra
merciful to his Beast, Because he considers the heart and condition of the
poor dumb Creature with Sympathy; much more does he know and consider the case
of the poor, of the oppressed in the Gate, of the Orphan, of the widow, when
as Job said of himself, Job. 31. 18. they were still with him, either in his
presence to releeve and support them, or in his Bowels to commiscrate and
condole with them. The conscientious man says, who is weak, and I am not
weak? who offended, and I burn not? How can I wound my Brothers conscience,
and sin against him, but I wound my 2 Cor. 11. 29. 1 Cor. 8. 12
self, and sin against Christ?

O what a worthy speech was that of Hadrian, a heathen Emp. Emperatorem Erga
unum Cent. Mag. Cent. 2. Cap. 3.
quemque debere esse talem, qualem si privatus esset sibi vellet esse
imperatorem. The Emperor should so carry himself to every private person, as
he would desire, were he in that poor man's case, the Emperor should deal
with him. This is to approve our selves to every good man's conscience in the
sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. This is cum alijs scire. Be ye as I am, I am as you
are, Gal. 4. 12. This is to provide things honest, Not only in our own sight,
or in Gods Bernard, lib. 2. de consc.
sight in seeret, but openly in the sight of all men. Felix conscientia, nec
sibi in aliquo conscia, nec proprium veretur judicium, nec alienum de se,
Bernard. That is, The sound conscience fears no censure from himself, or from
any other man. He does ever examine himself, and his own actions, and is not
afraid that any other man should examine them, and know all his heart, and his
manner of Dealings.

(...) Jo. 7. 24. By outward appearance, Vulgar opinion, worlds These. 5. 21
4 Cum rebus ipsis conscire aut consentire. To judge of things not, esteem or
custom, but to judge righteous judgment Conscience is to try all things,
holding fast only what is good; to weigh all in the Balance of the Sanctuary.
Such a one was upright Caleb in all respects; he did. 1. cum deo scire, he
fully followed the Lord, 2. cum seipso scire he spoke as it was in his heart,
and so here he did cum rebus ipsis scire, he made his report, as he found
things were indeed. But here the un^ust Steward showed his dishonesty, who to
get a new master, or friend, cozened his old Master, and altered his Books,
brought in a false account, for one sum of 100. he set down fourscore, for
another he set down fifty; here was neither honesty nor Conscience.

In all these four considerations, Conscience may be called the godly man's
Counterpane, answering and conforming to four other Patterns. 1. Gods mind.
2. Our own. 3. Other men's. 4. And to things themselves. And it is the constant
and continual practice of that Art lately spoken of, (if there be at least any
such invention) viz. Of writing several Copies at once, with one and the same
hand. Conscience is resembled in nothing better, then in that vision, Ezekiel. 1.
5. 10. Where were four living Creatures all alike; each having four several
faces; all went every one the same way, v. 12. They had one uniforme motion,
and were acted by one and the same spirit; Or to the four wheels, v. 16. That
were of one likeness, yet had four distinct faces, each of them; And all
four were of one form and appeareance, yet were so involved, that they seemed
to be a Wheel in a Wheel; all had one motion, and one spirit, went together,
stopped together, rose up together, and staid together; for the living spirit was
in these Wheels. You will observe this most lively and clearly in a good
conscience. Gods mind is the first Copy and Prototype, my conscience must be
the exact counterpane (...) or Antitype of the mind and will of God; Then my
words, actions and Dealings with others, must be commensurate unto, and the
counterpane of my own conscience; Lastly my actions, Dealings and conscience
too must be cut even with things themselves. As the ten Curtains of the
Tabernacle were all of one measure, and did one meet with the other, and were
coupled together, Exodus 26. 1, 2. 3. Or as the ten Bases in Solomon's Temple, 1.
Kings 7. 37. They had all one casting, one measure, and one size. So is
conscience in these his fourefold acts.

The man then whom we seek, is he whose judgment is conform to truth; his
conscience conforming to his judgment; then his will stooping to his
conscience; his affections, bowing to such a will; his expressions auswering
his affections, and his actions suiting with his expressions. This is the man
of conscience, whose works are wrought in God.

Hence flow four Corollaries. 4 Corollaries.


Corol. 1. Not to act according to Gods mind, and the nature of the things
themselves, argues an erroneous conscience.

Corol. 2. Not to act according to a man's own mind, and others mind, argues
a very corrupt conscience.

Corol. 3. To conceive and judge according to all four, is the right
intellectual conscience, and un-erring conscience.

Corol. 4. To act according to such a fourefold judgment, is the right
practical, and unoffensive conscience.

In sum thus it is: The good Christian must be competently scientious, and
grounded in principles of knowledge; then the understandingly scientious must
be cordially conscientious. The cordially conscientious must be universally
con-sentientious; and the thus scientious, con-scientiou and con-sentientious
Christian is made up of unanimity, and uniformity.

1. Uniformity in his apprehensions with God, himself, others, and things
themselves in their own nature.

2. Uniformity in his actions, when his thoughts, words, actions, dealings, are
of the same measure, stamp and fashion with his mind, and his mind with Gods
mind, etc. This man has now no more an heart, and an heart, or one heart, and
another hand; but one heart, one hand, and one way. Eusebius. Lib. 6. cap. 2
says of Origin; This was the Testimony given of him; As he taught so he lived
As he lived so he taught. So should it be Vt vixit, dixit, ut dix it, vixit.
the Christians Motto; As he meant he spoke, As he spoke he did; and as he
spoke and did, so he meant and thought. It was the honor of our Savior, that
his doing and teaching went together, Act. 1. 1. And that he was alike mighty
in words and deeds, Luke 24. 19.

The good conscience then remember is a multiplied knowledge, and fourfold, it
is like a Quadripartite instrument, containing four Copies of the same tenor,
and inscription, every of which must exactly answer the other, as their
counterpane.

And the man of conscience is like a perfect square quadrangular Building,
whose length and breadth, and height, and depth are all alike and uniforme. Such
it is observed, were the three holiest pieces and places of worship in the old
Testament, viz. The Sanctum Sanctorum 1 King. 6 20. Ezekiel 41. 4. compared with 2 Chronicles. 3. 8.
in Moses Tabernacle, and in Solomon's, and Ezekiels Temples; and also in the
holy City mentioned in the new Testament, that were all uniforme; Their height,
and breadth, and length were equal, Revel. 21. 16.

So must it be with the true Christian, the living and spiritual temples, and
Cities for God to dwell and walk in. They must be apiece, their length,
breadth, height and depth are equal. Their science must be no longer then
their 1 Cor. 6. 16.
conscience, their conscience no larger then their science, their words no
higher then their actions, their actions no lower then their words; And this is
conscience. And thus much to show what the word (Conscience) does import and
signify.

The second thing I have to do, is to show what the thing (Conscience) is,
having opened Ames de consc lib 1. cap. 1. conscientia est judicium hominis de
seipso pro ut subijcitur judicio dei.
what the word imports; sundry Definitions are given of it by sundry men, and
each may be good. It is says, Dr. Ames, The judgment of a man, concerning
himself, and his own ways, in reference and subordination to the judgment
of God. It is the Soul recoyling on it self, say others more briefly. Ward.
Dyke.

I shall not trouble my self to debate whether Scot. Bon. Dur.
Conscience be an Habit, as many of the Schoolmen affirm. Or whether a
faculty or power, as reverend Mr. Perkins, judicious Rutherford disp. against
pretended liberty of cons. cap. 1 Ames de consc. lib. 1. cap. 1
Rutherfurd, and diverse of the Schoolmen determine. Or whether an act only, as
acute Dr. Ames contendeth. Nor shall I with any curiosity at all discourse of
it. Origin had an odd fancy, (as he had many an other) that it was another
spirit in the soul. But somewhat is in it, for as I said before, it is as a
wheel in a wheel, a wheel full of eyes, a wheel full of motion, a wheel full
of spirit of life; And as all the sight is contracted in the apple of the eye,
so I may say is conscience as much as con-knowledge, or knowledge contracted
and epitomized, and conscience as it were the apple of the souls eye.

I shall describe it thus, Conscience is the souls acting, and reflecting on
it self, and on all a man's own actions. This is consciences work, these are
his Bounds; what have thou to do with another man's Conscience, in this sense,
or what 1 Cor. 10. 29
has he to do with thine? A man stands or falls to his own conscience,
That stands or falls to his own Master, and only to him. To. 14. 4.
Humility, Patience, Meekness, Compassion, Justice, Righteousness, Chastity,
etc. extend to others; my charity may and must relieve others, knowledge may
and must inform and benefit others; But consciences work is to make every man
his own keeper.

CHAP. II. What a good Conscience is.
NOw I am next to show what a good Conscience is.

For there are two kinds of consciences. 1 Evil conscience Heb. 10 22. 2 Good,
1 Timothy 1. 19. This of which I speak.
The evil conscience is mainly twofold. mala turbata. an ill Troubled mala
Pacata. or Quiet.

Or as Dr. Ames more clearly, viti se mala and moleste mala. So is there a
double good conscience. bona turbata. Felix conscientia in qua obviarunt sibi
verritas, and misercordia, in qua osculatae sunt pax and justi cia Bern. de
int. do.
good troubled Bona pacata. or good quiet.

And to a right good conscience, there must a double goodness concur to the
constituting of it. 1. A goodness or sincerity. 2. A goodness of security; It
must be hon ste bona, and Pacate bona. Ames. Or more plainly, it must be
Purificate bona, and Pacate bona. And here I shall give you a full def^nition
of a perfect good conscience, when it has both these goodnesses in it. The
good conscience what it is.


That is the good conscience which is rightly purified; and rightly pacified by
the word, and blood and spirit of Christ; regularly performing all his Offices
to which it is designed.

First, I call it the Conscience purified: Here is the first and principal
part of Consciences goodness, though yet for the present it have not peace:
Peace alone without purity makes not the Conscience good at all: as purity
alone without peace makes not a perfect well Conscience.

Conscientia aedifieanda sed, prius mundanda, said Bernard well, Conscience is
to be edified, but first to be purified. As the wisdom that comes Security
without sincerity, is not security but stupidity. Jam. 3. 17.
from above, is first pure, then peaceable: So Consciences first goodness
stands in purity, then in peace. The first goodness of the eye, is the
clearness of sight. It is but an inferior goodness, to say, it is not
inflamed, or bloodshotten: nor do we call it good at all, if it want its sight:
So neither is Conscience good at all, though it rage not, be not inflamed, or
bloodshotten, if it want his purity. All negative goodness is but a poor and
heggerly goodness.

Now that conscience may be rightly purified, there are three things which it
must be purified from, and three things which it must be purified by. These
things conscience must be purified from.


The things it must be purified from, are ignorance, error, hardness, or
natural deadness.


First, it must be purified from ignorance. The conscience void of knowledge,
is a conscience void of goodness. Rutherfurd. The blind From ignorance, Mat.
6. 23. Mat. 5. 13
man's conscience is ever an ill conscience: his light is darkness, how great
then is that darkness? His salt unsavory, what then shall season him?
Conscience in the best unregenerate Luke 8. 16
person, is as a light whelmed under a bushel, or thrust under a bed, gives
but a dim light, and reaches not far. In things between man and man it can
discern more clearly and like those nightbirds which can with their weak Ex.
18. 19.
eyes see where better eyes sometimes see not; a Jethro herein may be able to
advise a Moses: But in the Things of God he is little skilled, (...) blind,
and cannot see afar off. What a night-bird was Doctor Nicodemus, in conceiving
of the necessity, nature, and manner 2 Pet. 1. 9.
of regeneration? Hence it is that the Scripture calls the natural man's wisdom
foolishness with God, (as Gods wisdom is accounted foolishness with him,) It
is enmity to God, it is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be. 1
Cor. 2. 14 Romans 8. 7
The ignorant man's judgment therefore is no judgment, his peace no sound
peace; his hopes, no safe hopes; for his thoughts are not Gods thoughts. nor
his ways Gods ways. Tit. 1. 15, To the unbeleeving and unpure is nothing
pure, because their very mind and conscience is defiled. Good Conscience must
therefore first be purified from ignorance.

Secondly, it must be purified from error. The From error
erroneous conscience is ever a desperate and dangerous conscience. It is the
pestilence that walks in darkness. Erroneous conscience Ps. 91. 6.
makes strange work in the world, but worse in the Church. Look what swine are
to garden-beds, or a wild Boar to a Vineyard, or wild beasts to Vines, or
young Foxes to grapes; that is erroneous conscience to Churches, to Doctrines,
to Truths, to Graces, and to Duties. It overturns all. Erroneous Conscience
engaged Herod under opinion of piety, to destroy a holy man, to save a wicked
oath, and gratify a clamourous woman, Matthew. 14. 9. for his oaths sake the
king commanded John Baptists head to be given her. Others Jerem. 44. 16. make
no scruple to make void Gods Commands, because they must make good their own
vows. This is the Horse that rusheth headlong into the battle, impatient of all
restraints: Puts men often upon dangerous ways, and designs,, yet they say
not once, what have I done? Jer. 8. 6. but suppose their ways are right ways,
and often they think they do God the greatest service, when they do the Church
the greatest disservice. Oh the gross mistakes of erring conscience! It
embraces a blear-eyed Leah, instead of an imagined Rachel: It climbes the Tree
of Knowledge, and cuts down the Tree of Life. It takes and chooses a Barabbas,
but renounceth and condemns Christ Jesus. It Mar. 7. 8. 11. 12.
will make a Pharisee set more by an old Tradi^ion, then a divine Precept: and
a Pharisees di^ciple Acts 16. 9. Gal. 1. 13. 14. Psalm. 3. 6. Mat. 23. 15
look more after the Corban, then his du^y to his aged and indigent Parents.
This set Paul blindfold to persecute and blaspheme Christ, only that he might
show his zeal to God. This makes others compass both sea and land, to make one
their Proselyte, who when all is done, is but a double child of hell.

Oh the woeful work erroneous Conscience has made in all Times, in the past
Ages of the Church! And this my story of iniquity works hitherto, and is
still working more mischief, amidst our sad and dismal distractions. This is
one part of the spiritual wickedness (...),
in heavenly things, or places, Ephesians 6. 12, 13. Against which must be taken
the whole armor of God. This like Saul has slain his thousands, not of
Philistines, but Israelites. This like that wood which in a bloody day,
devoured more by erring, disordering, and intangling them, then the sword
devoured, 2 Samuel 18. 8
This destroys more then ignorance, or superstition, or profaneness. This lets
go Scripture duties, upon more credit given to Revelations. Upon this mistake,
a true Prophet once, contrary to express commands of God, gave up his faith,
obedience, and withal his conscience, upon a report of a later revelation, and
an Angelical apparition, to the old Prophets bare, but false asseveration, of
a newer and cleerer light, 1. King. 13. 18. I am also a prophet as thou art,
and an angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back with
thee to eat bread, and drink water: but he lied unto him. This above all other
is the evil conscience intended in this place. It was nothing but erring
conscience at first, that caused Hymenaeus and Alexander, to relinquish their
former Profession, and having put pure conscience out of doors, they come to
make a fearful shipwreck of their faith totally, and o^ their souls finally.
Enlightened conscience fears, and departs from evil, this fool rages, and
is confident, Prove. 14. 16. Englightened conscience has his eyes open, and
sees the angel in the way; erroneous conscience like the seduced false
Prophet, rusheth forward into the midst of danger. Erroneous conscience, is he
whose deceived heart turns him aside, who feeds on ashes, as the Prophet
says, Esaias 44. 20. has a lie in his right hand, so that he cannot deliver his
soul. This is he whose plague is in his head, Levit. 13. 44. This is the man
whom ye may bray in a mortar, with a pestell among wheat, yet will not his
folly depart from him, Prove. 27. 22. There is more hope of a fool, then of this
man, because he is wiser commonly in his own conceit, then seven men that can
render a reason, Prove. 26. 12, 16.

Erroneous conscience is the eye that puts darkness for light, and light for
darkness. It is the mouth that puts bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. It
is the traveller that leaves the ancient paths, and the good way, to walk in
new ways, ways not of Gods casting up, and Scriptures chalking out, Jer. 18.
15

A good Conscience must therefore be purified from Error.

Thirdly, It must be purified from natural From deadness or hardness
deadness, or hardness, which is as bad a disease as either ignorance, or
error: So that although thou may escape the fear of ignorance, by the
instructions of Wisdom; and-the snare of error, by the light of the Gospel,
yet if thou be taken in the Pit of deadness, and natural hardness, thou art
never the nearer, thou have not yet a good conscience, Heb. 9. 14. The
conscience must be purged from dead works, that it may serve the living God. A
dead conscience is not for a living God. One may be a knowing hypocrite, or an
orthodox nonconvert; but what is he nearer to salvation, while in this
deadness? There is a generation pure in their own eyes, yet not cleansed Pro.
30. 12
as to conscience, from their own deadness. God I thank thee, I am no Papist
(say they) no Anabaptist, Antinomian, Sectary. I am a catholic Christian; I am
an old Protestant, but an unsanctified Christian: and the common carnal
Protestant is no better then they. He is blind and cannot see afar off, and
forgets that he is not yet cleansed from his old sins, 2. Pet. 1. 9. Except you
be regenerate, and raised from natural deadness, you cannot see the kingdom
of God. All that are not seducers, as Jesuits, false Teachers; or seduced, as
common Papists, Antinomians, Libertines, Anti-scripturists, profane Atheists,
and Socinians, are not therefore necessarily saved. There is a plague in the
heart, that every one must see and bewail, and get cured of, or else it is as
pernicious to the 1 Kin. 8. 38
soul, and sends more certainly to hell, then any plague or leprosy in the
head, Levit. 13. 44. We call not that Arm, or Leg good, which is only not
bruised, wounded, out of joint, when it is benumbed, or paralytick: It has no
pain indeed, but what use is there of it? So what though conscience be not
bruised, raging, and tormenting, and out of joint by error, if it be benumbed,
stupefied, or dead? There is no use of such a conscience. Conscience must
therefore be purged from deadness.

Secondly, There be three things which Conscience must be Purified by, which
are. 1 The Three things conscience is purified by 1. The word of Christ.
word. 2. Blood. 3. Spirit of Christ.

First, The word of Christ is the Great heart Searcher, and Conscience
Purifier, Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is quick and Powerful, -- and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, etc This is the Fan with
which Christ does purge his Floor, Canscience. John 15. 3. Now are you clean
through the word which I have spoken to you, says Christ to his Disciples, and
for them he prays, Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
that sanctifying truth. This removes those before named discases of conscience.
1. This is that which removes ignorance, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp to
my feet, and a light to my paths. What can the best eye see without a light of
Sun, or candle? What can we know concerning God and his will, without his word?
This written word is a more sure discovery of the mind of God then all
apparitions, or the most famous particular revelations, 2 Pet. 1. 19. To which
we must take heed, and have recourse, as to a light shining in a dark place.
This gives knowledge to the simple, Psalm. 119. 130. This is sufficient to
remove all ignorance and uncertainty in divine things. 2. This rectifies
error; being as a voice behind us, Esaias 30. 21. Thine ear shall hear a word
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right
hand, and when ye turn to the left. This ends all controversies, Esaias 8. 26. To
the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. This resolves all doubts. How is it written
in the law? how read thou? Luke 10. 26. 3. This removes deadness of
conscience, and hardness. Is not this word an hammer to soften the heart? and
is not this the immortal seed by which we Jer. 23. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 23 Psalm. 119.
25.
are begotten again? Therefore David finding his conscience in a dead frame,
prayed; My soul cleaves to the dust, quicken me according to thy word. Again
verse 50. It is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has quickened me. So
verse 93. I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened
me. The word is the first thing by which conscience is purified, and set right.
This makes the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 17.

Secondly, By the blood of Christ is the conscience 2. By the blood of Christ.
further purified; we must not rest in the word alone, without this blood,
which cleanses both the book of Conscience, and is sprinkled on the book of
Scripture, to give virtue to it, Heb. 9. 14. Shall not the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? This is it that purges
the defiled, and guilty conscience from all his diseases, and filthiness.
Christ's spittle opened the eyes of two blind men once. His blood opens the
eye of Mark 8. 23 Joh. 9. 6.
blind conscience ever. This is the blood of sprinckling, which alone purifies
the heart from an evil conscience, Heb. 10. 22. So that the soul may now draw
nigh to God, with boldness and much assurance. Other blood, and observances
Read the 9. and 10. chap. to the Hebr.
might serve to make an Israelite under the Law legally pure, as to the flesh;
Only this blood of Christ, typified by the purification water, the hyssop,
scarlet, blood of bulls and goats, can make a Christian Evangelically pure
before God, and Internally in the court of Conscience. The book, and people,
and all things pertaining to the Tabernacle, were consecrated with blood, Heb.
9. 22. And almost all things by the Law were purged with blood: And without
shedding of blood there is no remission: To teach us what is more plainly
expressed, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from
all sin. Wash me, O Lord, with this hyss^p, and I shall Psalm. 51. 7.
be clean: Purge me with this blood, and I shall be whiter then the snow.

Thirdly, Conscience is purged by the Sperit 3 By the spirit of Christ.
of Christ, together with the word, and blood: without there be a concurrence
of all three, the work is not done: not the word alone without the blood and
spirit, can effect it; no^ the blood, without the word and spirit; nor yet the
spirit without both the former. The word is sprinkled on the Conscience to
inform, satisfy and purify it: The blood of Christ is sprinkled on the word
(as Exodus 24. 8. compared with Heb. 9. 20.) which it was not sufficient to have
read, but sprinkled with the blood of the Covenant, to give virtue to it. And
the blood it self must be applied by the spirit, that the virtue of it may be
brought home to the conscience. The blood of Christ without the spirit, is no
better then his flesh without the spirit. The flesh profits nothing, It is the
Spirit that quickens. The principal Jo. 6. 63.
part of the work of purifying Conscience belongs to the Spirit. It was that
eternal Spirit whereby Christ offered his Blood, Heb. 9. 14. which did commend
our conscience to God: And this Spirit applying the blood offered does commend
and seal Gods Covenant to our Consciences. Thus the spirit heals those three
diseases; It properly removes Ignorance, being the Spirit of Illumination, Ephesians.
1. 17, This rectifyes Error, being the spirit of Truth, Joh 14. 17. This
removes Deadness, being the spirit of life, Romans 8. 2. This is the great
Purifyer, this the Refiners fire, this the Fullers soape, Malach 3. 2. whereby
Christ does refine and purify the sons of Jacob. This the Spirit of Judgment
and Spirit of burning, wherewith God has promised to wash away the filth of
the daughter of Zion, Esaias 4. 4.

CHAP. III. Of the Conscience rightly pacifyed. Conscience rightly pacified.

II. A Right pacifyed Conscience.] This is the second property, and part of the
good Conscience laid down in the Definition. Purity indeed is the more
excellent kind of goodness, it being essential to the very being of good
Conscience. Peace is but an additional, and a secondary part of that goodness,
and conduces more to the been esse, then to the bare esse of good conscience;
It is a spiritual good, but of a temporary nature, not standing, and
immovable. Peace is so far good, as that the Conscience is not perfectly well
without it; but right Peace it must be, or it is not good at all, which that it
may enjoy, There are three things which Conscience must be 1. Pacifyed from. 2.
Pacifyed by.


Three things it must be pacified from
1. The three things Conscience must be pacifyed from are 1. The Reign of Sin.
2. The rage of Satan. 3. The displeasure of God.


1 It must be at peace from the dominion of sin. So long as Adonijah Reigns,
Solomon is in danger; while Sin is in his Power and Throne, 1 From the reign
of sin.
Conscience cannot be in safety. Our Peace therefore which we should seek, is
not such a Peace as we are born unto, or are possessed of while the strong man
is Armed; but is a recovered Peace, regained by deposing the Usurper. Like
Isreal's Peace after the seditious commotion 2 Samuel 20. 22.
was quietly settled when Shebahs head was off. No peace to conscience, while a
Sheba up in Arms. There is a Peace indeed, when Sin and Satan are strongly
armed and keep the house, Luke 11. 21. This is no good Peace, this is the peace
of a sleepy, not an awakened conscience: No war so miserable as Pax est sed
Bello pax ea deterior.
such a peace, when the soul is at ease in it self, at peace with Sin, at peace
with Satan, at agreement with Hell; but at war and enmity with God. Conscientia
pacate optima, may be vitiose pessima. In tali pace amaritudo mea amarissima as
Bernard. or Ad pacem advenit Amara mihi Amaritudo, as Junius reads that of
Hezekiah in Is. 38. 17. Woe to these that ^laugh now, they shall lament; Woe to
them that are at ease Luke 6. 25
in Zion, and put far from them the evil day, when they cause violence to draw
near. If he add drunkenness to thirst, and walk in the imaginaon Am 6. 1. 3.
of his heart, and bless himself, saying, I have peace, and I shall have peace,
God will not spare such a one, but his anger and jealousy Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19.
shall smoke against that man. It is the case of the godly oftentimes to cry
fear, fear, where no fear and danger is; And the wicked usually cry peace,
peace, where no safety and peace is. Thus yet do many sleep, and live and die
in peace, when Jonah-like there Jonah 1. 4, 5.
is the greatest storm of Divine Displeasure pursuing them, and the Destroyer
is ready to swallow them up. They slumber and sleep, but their judgment all
the while lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. For there 2 Pet. 2.
3.
is no Peace from God to the wicked, Isa. 57. ult.

2 It is pacifyed from the rage of Satan. After 2. From the rage of Satan.
conscience has been delivered from the paws of the ravening Bear, the reign
of sin; It must next seek to be delivered from the jaws of the roaring Lion,
the rage of Satan: This latter is usually more terrible, the former more
dangerous. When Sin is dethroned, the first and greatest woe is past: When
Adonijah flies, Solomon presently succeeds, and is established 1 Kin 1. 50.
in the throne. Sin once put to flight, the King of Peace reigns in the throne
of Conscience. This is that happy peace and security promised to the Believer
Mat. 16. 18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. This is the sum of that other promise, Romans 16. 20. The
God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, showing manifestly,
our securest peace is when God does not only restrain, but ruin Satan, not
bind, but bruise him, not chain him up, but tread him down. The like Prayer, 1
These. 5. 23. The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly.

This peace from Satan's rage, the godly man may for so me time want, who yet
has a good and pure conscience. Such a want may stand with a perfect good
conscience, though not with a perfectly well conscience. Conscientia honest
bona, may be moleste mala. Ames.

The Philistines often rushed upon Sampson, and gave him many alarums, he
still Judge. 16. 9. 12. and 15. 14
came off with honor, and victory; They come ^ut one way, and fly seven ways.
The trouble was his, the loss was theirs. Yet thus is many a poor believer
often encountered, some for longer time, some for shorter, some even al their
life time, are kept in bondage, through Heb. 2. 15.
fear of death, and him that has the power of Death, the Devil. They mourn,
they fear, they pray, they cry, they are weary with waiting for the salvation
of God, When will the redeemer come out of Zion? When Romans 11. 26 Mal. 4. 2.
will the Angel of the Covenant of peace come with Healing under his wings?
Paul had not this Peace sometimes, 2 Cor. 7. 5. we had no rest, but were
troubled on every s^de, without were fightings, within were fears; yet at
another time could say, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Thanks be to God who always causes us
to Triumph in Christ. And Romans 8. 31, 33. ad finem. If God be for us, who can
be against us? What shall separate us from the love of God? shall Tribulation,
or Distress, or Persecution, or Temptation etc. Nay in all these things we are
more then Conquerers through him that has loved us, yea I am persuaded that
neither the Temptation, nor the Tempter, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Life, nor Death, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any Creature shall be
able to separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ our Lord. In this
condition Conscience says to the Soul Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, for
the Lord has been Beneficial unto Psalm. 116. 7
thee. This is that Peace which Christ has Purchased and Bequeathed to the
Believer; Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give to you. Jo. 14. 27.
b. e. not Peace only with God, and with self, and with men in midst of a
Raging, unquiet world, but Peace in Despite of Hell Gates, and Satan's Darts.
Of this Peace we may say as Gideon of his Altar, Judge. 6. 34, Jehovah Shalom,
the Lord is God of this Peace, or this Peace is the Peace of God.

Thirdly, The third thing Conscience From the displeasure of God.
Rightly Pacified is at Peace, and Delivered from, is the Displeasure of God.
This is the Highest Step of Solomon's throne, the best part of our Peace, above
both the former, when we can say being justified by faith we have Peace with
God through Jesus Christ. Romans 5. 1. This a blessed Peace, when not with man,
or self, or sin, or Satan, but with God Reconciled through Christ. This that
Peace Christ promised, which the world cannot Give, Nor Devil take away, Jo.
14. 27. The peace of which the Apostle speaks so magnificently; calling it,
Phil, 4. 7. the Peace of God which (...), praesidio erit Beza.
passes all understanding, which shall guard, and engarison your hearts and
minds through Jesus Christ, This Guards the Soul and Conscience from all the
fears and assaults of Law, sin, guilt, death, hell, and Satan. In this
condition the Soul lies down in Peace, and rises in Peace, and says to the
Godly ^ustified Person in Solomon's words, Eccle. 9. 7. Go thy way, eat thy
Bread with joy, Psalm. 3. 5. and 4. 8.
and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy works.

Secondly, There are 3 things which Conscience must be Pacified by, and those
the Conscience is pacified by 3 things
same three by which before it was Purified (what ever tendes to Purity, Tendes
to Peace) viz. 1. The word. 2. The blood. 3. The Spirit of Christ.

First, By the word of Christ Conscience is Pacified, and restored to Peace.
The word By the word of Christ.
especially the Gospel is therefore called the word of Peace, Tidings of Peace,
Gospel of Peace, Word and ministry of Reconciliation. Act. 10. 36 To. 10. 15.
2 Cor. 5. 18


The Gospel is the Instrumentum Pacis Christianae, Gods Proclamation; and our
Charter of Peace containing the largest concessions of Grace. It is an Act of
Oblivion Passed in Heaven, God not imputing our sins to us, and further
giving us an Act of Indemnity against all charges, and impeachments of law
sin, Conscience or Satan. This word we must produce for our security. It is
by the Mar. 4. 39. 41. Job. 34 29 Jer. 20. 9.
word of Christ, that the winds and storms are laid in the conscience, and a
calm made. Christ utttereth his voice, and the wilderness of Kadesh does
tremble; when he speaks terror, who can give peace? His word is as fire in the
Bones. He sends his word, the Snow is scattered like woll; Its like morsels,
who can stand before his cold? There is a winter, and trembling in the
conscience. But he sends Psalm. 147. 17. 18.
forth his word again, and melts them. All the mighty works wrought upon
the soul, are by means of the word of Christ. By this word, Act. 10. 36.
Christ comes to the Mar. 4 50 Luke 24. 38
soul, Preaching Peace. He says, why are ye fearful; oh ye of little faith?
why are ye troubled? why do thoughts arise in your heart? By his word he coms
into the sad solitary soul, as Jo. 20. 19.
he did to the Disciples. all doors being shut, and says, Peace be unto you.
Yea ordinarily (that you may wait on the word for tidings of Peace) The Peace
which Christ does create, is the fruit of the lips of his Ministers, Isa. 57.
19. I create the fruit of the lips, Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and
to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him. The Ministers Feet
bring Peace, by Preaching the word of Peace, Isa. 52. 7. And the feet of
Believers are said to be shod with Peace, to walk in ways of Peace, through
the preparation and Ephesians. 6. 15
preaching of the Gospel of Peace. When the minister comes to a place, or
people Preaching Peace, if there be a Son, and Heir of Peace there, his Peace
shall remain upon that Person, Luke 10. 6.

2. By the Blood of Christ. This is the Procuring cause of all our Peace, Col.
1. 20. Having By the blood of Christ.
made Peace by the blood of his Cross. The Peace of our Conscience is the mere
issue of that blessed Personal Treaty made between the Father and the Son in
behalf of undone and Ruined man; the blood of Christ being the whole price of
it, and all the satisfaction to be made, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25. "For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God: Being justified freely by his
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood; to declare his righteousness
for the remission of all sins past, etc. The blood of the Paschall Lamb upon
the door post was the peace and security of Israel against the destroyer; Exo.
12. 23
and the blood of Christ upon the soul is the consciences security alone,
against all remaining guilt and corruption of sin, rage of Satan, and danger of
Gods displeasure. This blood gives the soul all boldness to enter into Heb.
10. 19
the holiest, by a new and living way, and gives us assurance before God.

3. By the Spirit of Christ] This is the Procreating 3. By the spirit of Christ.
and Producing cause of Peace in us, as the blood of Christ was the Procuring
cause of Peace for us. For this reason, Christ and the Holy Ghost are called by
one and the same name, because their end and business is the same, to procure
Peace to the soul. Christ is an Advocate or Paraclete, 1 John 2. 1. The holy
Ghost is an Advocate or Paraclete, Joh 14. 16. The word is the same in the
Original: But here is the difference, Christ is our Advocate, the holy Ghost
is Gods Advocate: Christ is our Advocate with the Father, procuring peace: the
holy Ghost is an Advocate or Paraclete from the Father producing peace. Christ
is our Advocate to God, prevailing with him for granting peace: The Spirit is
Gods Advocate Jo. 15. 26 and 14. 16, 26 Genesis 8. 11
to us prevailing with us to entertain peace: This is the Dove with the Olive
branch, which goes and returns till the waters are assuaged, dry land appear,
and danger be over.

This applies the word and promise which proclaims our peace; this applies the
blood of Christ which procures our peace; this has the last hand, and
consummating stroke in our peace making. Therefore this joy and peace of
conscience is denominated from the Spirit, joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.
The fruit of the Spirit is joy, Peace, Gal. 5. 22.

CHAP. IV. The Offices of Conscience.
III. IN our definition of a good conscience, Chap 4. The Offices of conscience.
I said it was that conscience which being purifyed and pacified, does
regularly perform all his Offices.]

Conscience is absolutely the greatest Officer under Heaven, and is without
contradiction the greatest Representative in all the world, it is Gods
immediate Vicegerent, has a delegation from God: Whence we commonly say, vox
Conscientiae, vox Dei. The voice of God is in the voice of Conscience. And the
Acts of Conscience are the Acts of God; what conscience does bind or loose on
earth in foro suo, God does ratify in heaven in foro suo, 1 John 3. 20, 21. So
that what the Canonists impudently and blasphemously assert of the Pope, we may
in a safe and modest sense apply to conscience.

Deus and Papa (say they) unum habent Consistorium; a bold and impious saying.
Deus and conscientia unum habent Consistorium. A true saying. God and the Pope
have but one Consistory or Judicatory, say they: God and Conscience, say we,
Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of man is the candle of the Lord.

Pluralist respectu Officiorum non Beneficiorum. Conscience has four Offices.
Now conscience is a Licensed and allowed Pluralist, has four distinct
Offices. 1. Prophetical, or Ministerial. 2. Regal or Magistratual. 3.
Testimonial, or witness bearing. 4. Judicial, or sentence passing.


Consciences Ministerial Office.
1. Consciences first office is Ministerial or Prophetical, that is, to do
the Office of a Minister, Watchman or Seer, to give warning from God, from whom
it has his Commission, Ordination, and Station, all Jure Divino: To warn,
inform, direct, reprove, admonish, charge; See you refuse not him that speaks
within you. This is your Domestic Chaplain, to whom (as Jotham said to the men
of Shechem) you must hearken, that God may hearken Judge. 9. 7.
unto you. We dislike that a Minister should be dumb in his charge, or a
Watchman should sleep on the Sentery; take heed of maintaining a Conscience, or
silencing a speaking conscience: In Libera Civitate Linguas liberas esse
oportet, Augustus was wont to say. Say thou, among Freemen conscience should
have his freedom preserved, at least as to his own charge. Give thy conscience
all freedom to inform, propound, yea reprove and smite. This Liberty of
Conscience none will question, all will contend for: There is some other
Liberty of Conscience the world cries out for; I dare not plead for that: But
give conscience leave to be bold with thee; it will give thee boldness another
day, that thou shall assure thy heart before God. We called it Tyrannical, and
Antichristian dealing when the Prelates outed, suspended, and deprived the
godly and faithful Ministers for delivering Gods mind, and rebuking the sins
of their wicked hearers sometimes: Take heed thou tread not in their steps, to
interdict, and silence thy own conscience; this is more to be hearkened to in
many cases, then any Divine, or Minister whatsoever; this is the mouth of the
Lord, the Candle of the Lord, searching and discovering Pro. 20. 27.
the secrets and inward things of the belly: We say conscience in some cases is
above all witnesses, a thousand witnesses; it is a thousand Preachers too: God
says to conscience as he Conscientia mill Ministri.
did to Moses once, Exodus 7. 1. See I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and
Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet: Conscience shall be to me in stead of a
mouth, says God, and to thee in stead of God, as Moses was to Aaron, Exo. 4.
16.

Consciences second office is Regal, or Magistratuall, 2. Consciences Regal
office.
a higher office then the former. Conscience has a commanding, and legislative
power to bind even kings in chains, and nobles with fetters of iron. He is thy
Perpetuus Dictator, whose dictares are Laws; They were a law to themselves,
Romans 2. 14. This king may neither be deposed, nor resisted, but ever informed,
counseled, and treated with, and then ever obeyed as Gods vicegerent.
Whosoever cast off the imperial commands of conscience, God says to them as
he did to Samuel concerning Israel, 1 Samuel 8. 7. They have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. God gives to
conscience a large Commission, and says to it, as to Eliakim in the day of his
investiture in his office, I will clothe thee with a new robe, and commit the
government into thy hand; The key of the house of David will I lay on thy
shoulders; Thou shall shut, and none shall open; thou shall open, and none
shall shut, Isay 22. 21, 22. What conscience peremptorily commands, or forbids,
is more to a godly man, then what Kings, or States command. And the religious
man resolves Conscientia mill Reges, mill Leges.
rather to disobey any unjust commands of Kings or States, and fall under any
displeasure of men, then to go against the dictates of his own rightly informed
conscience. We are not careful, O King, to answer thee in this Dan. 3. 16.
matter, said they to Nebuchadnezzar, although they heard his express
commands, and saw the fiery furnace before them. Julian the Apostate forbad the
Christians to sing Psalms; Risui ei catui furias suas esse intellexit. Magd.
cent. 4. cap. 3.
the very women, and virgins did purposely sing the louder, when the Emperor
was to go by their doors, that he saw his wrath was by them derided: And those
Psalms they picked out that condemned his Idols, as that Psalm, 135 ver. 15.
16, 18.

Conscience rides in the second Charet, and is Genesis 41. 40 43. 44.
solo Deo minor, and soli Deo secunda. Without thee (says God to conscience,
as Pharaoh once to Joseph) shall no man lift up his hand or foot: Only in the
Throne will I be greater then thou. Conscience has a kingly, or magistratuall
power, but must not exercise an Arbitrary power. It must be it self at his beck
who is in the Throne: Of whose subordination to God, and his written Word, and
Law, we shall speak afterward in his proper place.

His third office is Testimonial, or to bear Consciences Testimonial Office.
witness, Romans 2. 14, 15. The Gentiles who had not the Law in Tables of stone
as had the Jews, had the Law written in their hearts, which did show it self in
this work of Conscience, Their consciences also bearing witness, Romans 2. 14.
15.
etc. This is the witness in a man's self, a greater testimony then that of
John. This is the Epistle of Christ written in the heart. Our rejoicing is
this, The testimony of our conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. A testimony and
certificate which Gods Spirit does attest to, and consent with, Romans 9. 1. My
conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost. In the mouth of these two
great witnesses the state of a Christian is established. For the Spirit it self
witnesses with our spirit, that we are the Romans 8. 16
sons of God, Romans 8. 16. This testimony of conscience is above a thousand
witnesses, be it Conscientia mill testes.
for thee, or against thee, 1 Job. 3. 19, 20, 21. Turpe quid acturus, te sine
test time.

Take heed wheresoever thou art, what thou do; Conscience will out with all
the secret passages it has observed. It is like Joseph among his brethren, who
carried home their ill report to their father, and made them much anger. Thou
never sinnest without a spy, or Genesis 37. 2.
an observer, and informer. Do therefore as was said of Mr. Latimer, who being
examined in private, spoke more freely, till he overheard one behind the
Hangings (whom he saw not present) to take in writing what he said; then he
spoke more warily. Take heed what thou do remotis arbitris. Curse not the
King, no not in thy thought (conscience. the margin reads it, scientia Arias
Mont. conscientia, Junius) Nor the rich in thy bedchamber, for a bird of the
air shall carry the voice, and tha^ which has wings shall tell the matter,
Eccles. 10* 20. Thine own conscience may be that bird Elisha did relate what
was in agitation at the 2 Kin. 6. 12
King of Syrias Councell-table, yea what passed in his Bedchamber. Such an
observing witness has every one continually with him, do he good, or evil.

Conscience is a witness, and is like one of those two famous witnesses spoken
of, Revel. 11. 3. who prophesied in sackcloth, despised, and opposed by the men
of the world, as the great Rev. 11 3. 5. 6 etc.
heart troubler, and worlds tormenter; they rejoiced, made merry, and sent
gifts when they were slain; these brought all plagues from heaven among men,
and could shut up Heaven it self, fire came out of their mouth; yet kill this
if thou dare, and keep it down if thou can, it will rise again after a few
days, stand upon his feet; the sight thereof will terrify and dismay thee, but
thou shall know it will go up to Heaven, there to accuse and condemn thee.

4. The fourth Office of conscience is Judicial Conscienecs judicial Office.
and Judge-like] It does pass sentence on thee, and read thy doom: Hence men
are said to be convicted of their own Consciences, Joh. 8. 9. Some are said to
be self condemned, Tit. 3. 11. Happy is he that condemns not himself, Romans
14. 22. If our heart, that is, our conscience, condemn us, God is greater then
our hearts, to condemn us further; But if our heart condemn us not, then have
we confidence toward God, 1 John 3. 20, 21. Consciences sentence is the
forerunner of the last judgment. Praejudicium Divini judicii, as Joseph
interpreted the two prisoners dreams, Pharaoh made it good. Hic crucem sceleris
precium tulit, alter honores.

Genesis 41. 13. It came to pass, says the Butler to Pharaoh, as he interpreted
to us so it was; me he restored to mine office, him he hanged: Joseph is then
said to hang the one, and restore the other, because he foretold it so, and it
fell out accordingly; so conscience is said to absolve and condemn, because
according to the sentence of this lower Court and Judicatory of conscience,
usually is the last sentence of that highest Court in Heaven. If my conscience
Job. 31. 35. 36.
clear me, let my adversary write a Book, and Libell against me, I shall wear
it as a Isa. 50. 8.
Crown: my witness is at hand, and he is near 1 Samuel 2. 25
that justifies me: But if my conscience Libell against me, who shall
Apologize for me? If a Quamquam humana sub tersugiem judicia, judicium propriae
conscientiae fugere non valeo. Bernard.
man sin against another, the Judge shall judge them, but if a man be condemned
by himself, who shall be his Dayes-man? I may fly man's judgment seat, or stop
the Judges mouth: but I cannot escape the Bar, nor stop the mouth of my own
conscience.

-- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur,
Improba quamvis Gratia fallacis Praetoris vicerit Vrnam.
Juven. Sat. 13.
I might add to these four named Offices of Consciences registeriall office.
conscience a fifth, his Registerial Office; for conscience is the great
Register, and Recorder of Vbicunque vado, conscientia mea ^^e non deserit sed
prae s^ns ad s^s^it, and quicquid facio scribit. Bernard.
the world: It is to every man his private Notary, or Secretary, keeping notes,
or records of all his Acts, and Deeds. Hence it has his name Synteresis given
it. Conscience has the Pen of a ready writer, and takes in short hand and in
an illegible character from thy mouth as fast as thou speak, yea from thy
heart what thou contrivest; consciences writing, at present is not legible; as
that which is written with the juice of a Lemmon is not to be read by
Daylight, but against the fire by night you may read it; so consciences
writing will be read by fire light of distress, or in that day when Heaven and
earth are on fire, then shall this book be opened, and the Cipher be
discovered. Conscience is the poorest man's Historiographer, who has no
Chronicler to write his Story. Every man's Acts both first and last are written
in the Apocryphal Book of conscience: The sin of Judah is written with the pen
of iron, and with the point of a Diamond; it is graven upon the Table of their
heart, Jer. 17. 1. It is not the lot of every mean man to have his Acts and
memory perpetuated; it is the honor of Kings, and sometimes of some other more
eminent persons; of David it is said, 1 Chro. 29. 29. Now the rest of the Acts
of David the King first and last, behold they are written in the Book of Samuel
the Seer, and in the book of Nathan the Prophet, and in the Book of Gad the
Seer. But of every man of whatsoever quality, it may be said, the rest of his
Acts though they be not mentioned in the book of the Chronicles of the Kings,
yet first and last they are all written in the book of the Chronicles of
conscience by Syneidesis the Seer, and Synteresis the Recorder. Now to draw to
a conclusion, conscience I said was then a good conscience when it does
discharge all his forenamed Offices. A Magistrate, a Minister, a Judge, a
Witness, is then good, when each of them is good in his proper place and
function; and indeed that every one is in truth, which he is in discharge of
his particular Calling: Then is conscience good when it does officiate well,
and does the part of a Minister, of a Magistrate, of a Witness, and of a Judge.

In these four tespects, I may say of conscience, Ipsa indicat, ipsa imperat,
ipsa observat, ipsa judicat, as Bernard excellently, Ipsa testis, ipsa judex,
ipsa tortor, ipsa carcer. Ipsa accusat, Lib. de. consc cap. 9.
ipsa judicat, ipsa punit, ipsa damnat.

A good conscience is a good Minister, a good Magistrate, a good Witness, a
good Judge, the best of friends; but an ill conscience is an observer of thee,
will be an informer against thee, and both thine adversary, and accuser, and
witness, and Judge and Jailer, and Executioner, and Tormentor too, the worst of
enemies.

Hence flow five Corollaries, or conclusions.

Corollary 1. Conscience is to perform his two first Offices, viz. of a
Minister to inform and direct, and of a King to command and prescribe before a
work is to be done, or when in fieri. Conscience should call in Understanding
and Faith to advise with; and herein imitate God, who Genesis 1. 26. intending to
Create Man, propounds his Action, propounds his End, and propounds his Model:
Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness, and let them have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle,
and over all the earth etc. So should we say, Let me upon deliberation do such
an Act after such a manner, to such an end. This is to Act according to
conscience, and consequently according to God.

Corollary 2. When a work or action is already done, In facto esse, conscience
is to discharge his two last Offices of a witness, and of a Judge, to accuse or
excuse, to approve or reprove, and so to pass sentence. Thus did God after
every days work finished, he reviewed his work, and saw with much content and
fullness of approbation, it was good; And at last, Genesis 1. 31. God saw every
thing that he had made, and behold it was very good: So should we review all
our actions before we pass from them to new businesses. Let thine eyes look
right on, and let thine eyelids look strait before thee; Ponder the path of
thy feet, and let all thy ways be established, Prove. 4. 25, 26. There you have
these two rules, in the well learning and practicing, whereof lies the chiefest
business of Practical conscience.

Coroll. 3. When a man goes wilfully against the two first Acts, or Offices of
Conscience; viz. Ministerall and Regal; he commits the highest sin, and draws
on the greatest guilt. Maxima violatio Conscientiae maximum peccatum. Ames.
What made the sin of the lapsed Angels unpardonable? but because they went
against a full and clear light of a fully informed conscience, and divinely
irradiated understanding: Their sin had many ingredients of that sin against
the holy Ghost in it, being committed against clear light, much received grace,
with full consent of will, having much of malice in it; therefore no wonder it
became unpardonable. And whence is it that the sin against the holy Ghost, is
that sin unto death, has no more sacrifice for it, but becomes eternally
unpardonable, but because it is ever perpetrated and committed in despite of 1
Jo. 5. 16. Heb. 10. 26.
conscience, against his most clear and strongest convictions, and against the
most peremptory checks, and dissenting restraints of the awakened and
enlightened conscience? Nothing heightens sin so fast; conscience may say, If I
had not come unto you, you had no sin: If I had not done my Office faithfully,
you had some cloak for your sin, which now you have not. This makes sins of
knowing men, greater then of ignorant: Englands sin greater then the Jndies,
Judas's perfidiousnesse worse then Saul's persecutions. The one did it
ignorantly, and therefore obtained mercy. The other had no cloak for his sin;
Christ gave him warning by the sop, all took notice; 1 Timothy 1. 13
he replied upon consciences enforcing, Is it I? And he therefore died a son of
perdition, because he lived and persisted a son of conviction: This is the
servant who shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. To him that knows
to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4. 17.

Corollary 4. When a man lies under the lash of conscience, in respect of his
two last offices, viz. testimonial, and judicial, he lies under the greatest
misery. Maximus angor conscientiae Dr. Ames. Mar. 9. 44.
maxima poena. Then the worm never dying devours him; the fire ever burning
(the fire not blown) takes hold of him; Cains mark is Job. 20. 26.
upon him; His punishment is greater then he can bear. This is the first woe,
and the hell on earth: for Revel. 1. 18. there is a hell before death, and
Revel. 20. 14. an hell before the lake of fire.

How fearful was Herod's case, to be given up to worms to eat him alive?
Infinitely more dreadful to be given up to this worm of conscience to be eaten
up both alive, and dead. How doleful a sight is it to see a wolf, or a
Cancer, on the woman's tender breast, ever gnawing, and stinging, never cured!
But a worse wolf is the gnawing, and accusing conscience. No fits of convulsion
so tearing, and pulling, and racking, as convulsion fits of conscience; no
ulcer in the bladder, or bowels so painful as the exulcerated conscience.

See this in Judas, now brought to a sight of his sin, and sense of his misery,
he is like Isa. 57. 20.
the raging sea that cannot rest; Out he cries, I have sinned, take your money,
it has damned me; from person to person, from place to place he goes, but his
hell he carries with him; from the terror and sting of conscience he cannot
run; To death he says, Fall on me; to hell, bury me, so I may be hid from
sight of conscience; he strangles himself, because he could not strangle
conscience; into hell he leapes, not longer able to abide himself; and indeed,
if there were any place in hell, where this Apollyon of destroying conscience
came not, into it would all the damned get to case themselves. Hell were not
hell, if raging conscience ruled not there; if this worm could ever die, that
fire might then be quenched. Judas hung himself, to ease himself: but then was
death and hell cast into the lake of fire, Revel. 20. 14. He at first brake the
neck of conscience, that at last brake his neck; he had strangled good
conscience, an ill conscience strangled him; and being dead, all his bowels
fell out of his body, because all his conscience fell out of his bowels while
he was alive.

To conclude this Corollary: The wrack of Mat. 15. 11 Subijciatur corpus in
paena, in jeiunijs macere^ur, verber ibus lanietur, equuleo disiendatur, gladio
trucidetur, crucis supplicio affligatur, secura erit conscientia. Bern. de int.
dom. c. 22. Pro. 18. 14.
good conscience is the saddest shipwreck for poena damni, it is the greatest
loss; And the rack of an ill conscience is the sharpest rack for poena sensus,
it is the greatest pain. Not all from without does so defile a man, as that
from within; nor all from without does so torment a man, as that from within.
All the winds blustering abroad about our ears, pain us not; but a little
wind enclosed in the bowels, how much does it torment, and put the body into
the extremest pains? All troubles from without are easily undergone, if
conscience be sound: But the wounded spirit who can bear? He shall flee from
the iron weapon, and the Bow of steel shall stricke him through; It is drawn,
and comes forth of his body; The glistering sword comes out of his Gall;
Terrors are upon him. All darkness is hid in his secret places. (h. e. he has
an Epitome of all the woes and miseries of Hell in his soul) a fire not blown
shall consume him, as Zophar excellently Allegorizeth; Job. 20. 24. 25. 26.

Coroll. 5. When conscience has done all these four Offices faithfully, and
then gives Peace, This is the right peace of conscience. This is the Son of
Peace, upon which the peace Luke 10. 6.
of God, and the peace of the Minister ever comes.

Thus have you seen what a good conscience is. h. e. when it is purified, and
when it is pacified; purified from Ignorance, Error, deadness; pacified from
the reign of sin, the rage of Satan, and displeasure of God; both purified*
and pacified by the word; blood, and spirit of Christ; And after all doing his
fourfold Office in due time and place, of a Minister, of a King, of a
Witness, and of a Judge. And thus much of good conscience in general.

CHAP. V. Of several good Consciences in particular, and first of the
Conscience in which Faith is.
HAving hitherto treated of the good conscience in general, we shall now
descend to speak of some Particulars, and give you in the several sorts, and
best kinds of good consciences, that are to be found in all the Sciptures
commended to us, that when you see such an one, you may know a good conscience
again, and say there goes a good conscience. Ten particulars I shall recommend
to you, and after speak somewhat to Ten good consciences laid down in scripture
each of them. Their names are, 1. The conscience of Faith. 2. Of Purity. 3. Of
Sincerity. 4. The Vnoffensive conscience. 5. The well-sighted conscience. 6.
The well-spoken conscience. 7. The Honest-handed conscience. 8. The Tender
conscience. 9. The Passive or Hardy conscience. 10. The conscience of Charity.

The first and most excellent conscience, is that in the Text, the good
conscience of faith. The conscience of Faith.
This only makes a good conscience; Nor can all the other nine make it such
without this. It is impossible that any thing, or person should be good, and
please God without faith Heb. 11. 6. Precious faith makes the conscience of
great price. It is therefore very observable, that in three places of this
Epistle, The Apostle joins faith and the good conscience together, viz. cap.
1. v. 5. and v. 19. and cap. 3. 9. Indeed they cannot be parted. The life of
faith is ever bound up in the life and bundle of good conscience. There is no
good faith, where not good conscience; nor yet good conscience, where true
faith wanting; where you see the one, look and you shall find the other.
These two are like the Churches two breasts Cant. 7. 3. compared to two young
Roes that are twins, that are bred and fed, and grow, and thrive, and decay,
and live, and dye together. The best Gold, and this Bdellyum of a good
conscience is no where to be found, but in the Havilah of Faith. Faith it is
which purifyes the Genesis 2. 12.
heart, Act. 15. 9. and mends the conscience; The Tree of Life only grows in
Paradise; good conscience only in Faiths Garden. Faith is the grace and
sheafe, To which all other graces and sheafs must bow, and do their obeisance:
This casts her crown at the feet of Christ, therefore they all set their crowns
on the head of this. Faith mends, and commends every thing; Faith gives being,
denomination, and acceptance to every Gospel Graee, and comfort, and duty. No
love without Faith, Gal. 5. 6. Phil. v. 5. No obedience but obedience of Faith;
Romans 1. 5. and 16. 26. No Repentance without Faith, Mar. 1. 15. so faith and
patience. Heb. 6. 12. Faith and hope, 1 Pe. 1. 21. No joy but joy of Faith,
Phil. 1. 25. No works but works of Faith, 1 These. 1. 3. No duties without
faith. The prayer of Faith, Iam. 5. 15. Hearing of Faith, Gal. 3. 2. No life
but the life of Faith, Gal. 2, 20. This is the salt that seasons every
sacrifice. So look first for Faith when thou imaginest thou have a good
conscience. Let us draw near, says the Apostle, Heb. 10. 22. with a true
heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an ill
conscience, etc. No true heart, no assurance, nay no Faith where no good
conscience yet. Nor good conscience to be looked for, where Faith is not first
to be found. Among the Heathen Sages and Philosophers you may read good
Sentences, hear good expressions, find some good Actions, but no good
consciences, because without Christ, and without Faith: Among a thousand
Civilized, moral persons not one good conscience, because no Faith. For it is
the Apostles Rule, Tit. 1. 15. To the unbeleeving and impure is nothing pure,
but even their mind and conscience is defiled. None were found among the
ordinary sons of men, men of better tempers, sweeter natures, lovely and
praiseworthy Deportments, for Personal and Heroic virtues; for sundry
memorable sayings, and generous actions, then were Titus, Trajan; Hadrian;
Antoninus Pius, Antoninus Verus his Brother; yea Valerian, and that so much
detested Julian; yet nothing of good conscience in any of them, all strangers
to the knowledge and Theory of it. All Enemies to the Practice and Power of it.
All Persecutors of the truth in their several times and reigns. Titus is
called Amor and deliciae generis humani. Trajanus alioqui civiliter bonus, and
laudatus princeps, ob justitiam and humanitatem adeo clarus, ut postea laetae
acclamationis quoties Crearetur Caesar praebuerit formulam; sis faelicior
Augusto, Melior Trajano; dixisse fertur praefecto praetorij gladium ei tradens,
Hoc Ense contra hosts utere si justa mandavero; contra me, si me videris
injuste agere, etc. Hadrianus ingenio excelluit, omnium doctrimarum
capacissimus -- Dixisse fertur, Imperatorem erga unumquemque debere esse talem,
qualem si privatus esset, sibi vellet esse imperatorem; at in Regu^ Christi
nullas portas regi gloriae aperuit, sed inter milites est qui Christum
crucifigunt, Cent. Magd. Cent. 2. cap. 3. De persecut. sub Traiano, and
Hadriano. Antoninus Pius, solitus est dicere, se malle unum civem servare quam
mill hosts Occidere. M. Antoninus Verus, ingenio and eruditione valuit,
Philosophi nomen adeptus est. A Philosophiae studijs, nec imperij negocijs nec
Bellicis occupationibus unquam se avocari, aut distr^hi passus est -- ex illis
optimus imperator formatus, multa in Remp. Romans contulit praeclarissima merita.
Talem se omnibus praestitit, ut ab omnibus amatetur -- At quo in suos
commodior, eo in Christianos gravior hic Antoninus. Cent. Magd. cent. 2. cap.
3. Valerian a most bloody, and Raging perecutor was princeps laudatus, de quo
scribit Trebellius, cum senatus authoritate Censor crearetur, in
senatusconsulto has fuisse voces, Valeriant vita censura est; ille de omnibus
judicet, qui est omnibus melior. Ille de senatu judicet, qui nullum habet
erimen -- ille cui nihil potest obijci de vita nostra sententiam ferat -- hunc
censorem omnes accipimus hunc omnes imitari volumus. cent. 3. cap. 3. Julian
equal to any of them, scientia Philosophia and Graecarum litterarum in eo
magna fuit. I^ studijs tanta assiduitate usus est, ut semnum defraudans suum
totas noctes interdum, illis daret -- similis Tito existimatus, bellorum
successibus Trajano comparatus clementia Antonino Pio, moderatione M. Aurelio
Antonino litteratum scientia magnis Philosophis. Magd. Cent. 4 Cap. 3.


Hold faith and a good conscience, says the Text: Hold the mystery of faIth in
a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Good conscience is the Ring, faith the Gemme
and Jewel, enriching and adorning this Ring; Good conscience is the Cabinet,
faith the Pearl locked up in it. Good conscience the Ship, faith the
Merchandise; that the Field, this the Treasure hid in it; faith the Apples of
Gold, this the Pictures or Tables of Silver, in which it is set; Faith is the
Christians eye, good conscience is the Christians eyelid; with the eyelid men
cannot see at all; no sight at all in conscience where faith is not; nor can
the best eye see long without the eyelid to cover, and defend, and guard it
from dust, and other injuries; faith, without conscience keeping it, will soon
decay. Faith is the wise virgins Lamp, good conscience is the Oil that feeds
it; or make faith the Oil, good conscience is the Vessel that contains it;
what can the Lamp do without Oil, or Oil without a Vessel? So what is Faith
without good conscience, or this without that?

But to conclude this correlation and agreement between faith and conscience,
or the relation and pre-eminence of faith to conscience, with that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 8, 9. 11, 12. speaking of the relation between man and
wife, made to be meet helpers each for other: So is faith to conscience, so is
Genesis 2. 18.
conscience to be to faith; it is not good nor safe for either to be alone. The
man is the glory of God, the woman is the glory of the man, says he, ver. 7.
So say I, faith sets the Crown on Christ's head, is his glory; good
conscience sets the crown on faiths head, is faiths glory. For though there be
two great preheminences which faith has above Conscience, the same that the
man has above the woman: 1. That the man is not of the woman, but the woman of
the man,] hoc est, taken out of man; so faith is not out of conscience, but
conscience out of faith. 2. Neither was the man created for the woman, but the
woman for the man] Nor was faith created for consciences use, but conscience
for faiths. Yet he concludes, v. 11. Nevertheless neither is the man without
the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord] So neither is faith
without good conscience, nor can good conscience be without faith in the Lord:
For the Relation is Reciprocal, and the dependence and benefit mutual, ver.
12. For as the woman is of the man, so is the man also by the woman; but all
things originarily and primarily of God] So also here it is, as good conscience
is of faith, so faith is by good conscience; but both of God for mutual
comfort, and delight. And from this couple the Church is propagated and
increased to this day. These two as Leah and Rachel, build up the house of
Israel; faith bearing children to the Church on good consciences knees, and
good conscience bringing up those children, which faith has borne at her
breasts; as Ruth brought forth children for the comfort of Naomi, and Naomi
brought up those children for the ease of Ruth. Hold Faith, and you are sure of
a good Conscience.

CHAP. VI. Of a pure Conscience.
THe second good conscience is the Pure The Conscience of purity.
Conscience] The fine Linen, clean and white, Rev. 19. 8. is the
righteousness of Saints, and the Lambs wifes ornament. The pure, clean, and
undesiled conscience, is the inherent and internal righteousness of the
Saints, and the Ornament of the Christian. Of this good conscience the Apostle
speaks often to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 5. The pure heart, and good conscience,
and faith unfeigned, put together; and 3. 9. Holding the mystery of faith in a
pure conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. I serve God from my forefathers with a pure
conscience. The former goodness of conscience by means of faith, makes the
conscience good before God, the justified conscience. This of purity makes it
good before men, the sanctified and renewed conscience; that was by the blood
of Christ; this is by the Spirit and Grace of Christ. Of this we have spoken
somewhat already, chap. 2. therefore shall need to say the less here; Blessed
are these pure in heart, they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. And 1 John 3. 3. He
that has this hope of seeing God as he is, must purify himself as God is
pure. God is a God of pure eyes, and cannot. Good conscience is of Hab. 1. 13.
pure eyes, and must not behold iniquity. Great are the comforts, benefits, and
privileges of this pure conscience; and high are the promises made to it. With
whom will God show himself pure, but to and with the pure? And to the froward
he will show himself Psalm. 18. 26. Lev. 26. 23, 24.
as froward. To them that walk contrary to him, he will walk contrary to them;
Who is he that shall ascend the hill of the Lord? Or who shall stand in his
holy place? He that has the clean Psalm 24. 3, 4, 5.
hands, and the pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity -- This
is the man who shall receive the Blessing of the Lord, and righteousness from
the God of his salvation. In the pure water thy face may be seen, which cannot
in muddy water. In a pure conscience Gods face is to be seen, no where else in
earth; and by none in heaven, but by the pure in heart. This is the Mountain
of transfiguration, where Mar. 9. 1, 2.
alone the Kingdom of God is seen coming with power. This is the only Isle
Patmos, where Rev. 1.
are the Revelations and Visions of the Son of man: Here is Gods Book with
seven Seals unsealed. This is the Sanctum Sanctorum (beyond that in Solomon's
Temple, all overlaid with pure Gold) in which God does dwell, sit upon a
Mercy-Seat, and make known his mind; giving answers whenever consulted with,
and enquired after herein.

The pure conscience is the Heart after Gods heart, who is all for pureness,
he loves Righteousness, and hates all uncleanness. No Sacrifice in which
was any Blemish or Spot Psalm. 11. 7. and 45. 7.
was to be offered; no Sacrifice with Leaven; no Priests son might come near
to Officiate, Lev. 1. 3, 10 Lev. 2. 11. Lev. 21. 18.
in whom was any blemish; no High Priest presume to sacrifice in any legal
uncleanness on him. But his standing Rule is, I will be sanctified in them
that draw near to me. Lev. 10 3.
None were to come in to the Persian King, but such as were first purified, and
had passed through twelve whole months in a course of purification, Esth. 2.
12. What manner of persons ought they to be then, that shall come before God,
either to wait on the Ministry, or to partake of Ordinances? And what measure
of Purification should we come addressed withal? Now this Purification is that
of Conscience especially, Heb. 9. 14. and 10, 22. Therefore wash thy heart, O
Jerusalem, that thou J^r ^. 14. Mat. 23. 26.
may be saved; Let not vain thoughts lodge in thee, Purge the inside of the
cup, and platter, O Pharisee, that thy outside may be clean also.

But in these days there is much of Liberty, little of Purity of Conscience.
Shall we call them pure with the bag of deceitful weights? and with the wicked
Balances? as the Prophet Micah says, Micah 6 10, 11. Are there yet the
Treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure
which is abominable, and shall these be counted pure?

There is a Generation indeed pure in their own eyes, who are yet not washed
from their filthiness: There is such a Generation, O how lofty are their eyes!
and their eyelids lifted up, Prove. 30. 12, 13. speaking too lively of such a
generation as ours is. Shall we say such have any thing of conscience or grace
in them, who can live loosely, speak scurrilously, and scoff at purity,
holiness, strictness, and all piety? Where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear, if only the pure in heart are blessed?

Take heed then of all impurity, and defilement by any allowed sin;
whatsoever weakneth Purity, wastes Peace; Conscience is the Temple of God;
whosoever defiles this 1 Cor. 3. 17
Temple, destroys it ((...) the word is) and him will God destroy. The cra^^
^r flaw in the Bell, not so much lesseneth the soundness, as marreth the sound
of the Bell.

How few good Consciences are there then in these impure and licentious days
to be found, when purity and strictness is exploded as a badge of a carnal,
legal, abject, and low spirit? and boldness, looseness, frollicknesse,
accounted Gospell-like walking, and the only proof of our Redemption, and the
best Plerophory! But know, the grace of God teaches us another Lesson, It Tit.
2. 12, 13.
teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. The righteous God loves
righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7. And with the pure God the Holy One of Israel,
nothing is approved but purity: This is his Image, this his Superscription:
Nothing but this is Gods, and to be rendered to God. The Kings Coin has his
Image within, as well as his Superscription without the Ring; the Christian
must have his Image within, or it is in vain to subscribe our selves, and to
be surnamed by the Es. 41. 5.
name of Israel. The right faith of the Gospel is purifying faith, Acts 15. 9.
Gospel hope is purifying hope, 1 John 3. 3, True love pure love, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
Our Religion must be pure, Jam. 1. 27. Hearts pure, Jam. 4. 8. Minds pure, 2
Pet. 3. 1. Ways pure, Psalm. 119. 1. Hands pure, Psalm. 24. 4. Prayer pure, Job
16. 7. Incense pure, Malac. 1. 11. Indeed all must be pure.

King Solo^^^ had not a Vessel in either of his houses, that at Jerusalem, or
that of the Forest of Lebanon, but was all of pure Gold, he would be served in
no other, 1 Kin. 10. 21. God will have no other Vessel in either of his
Houses, that of Jerusalem, the Church Triumphant, or this Countrey-house (as I
may call it) in the Forest of Lebanon, the Church Militant, but what is of
pure Gold, of beaten, tried, and refined Gold: Silver was nothing esteemed in
the days of Solomon: Civility and external Morality is too mean for God, too
base to enter Heaven.

The Kings Coin, I said before, has his Image on it; it has first his Image
on the one side, and then the Kings Arms, or the Kingdoms Arms on the other.
Such is the right Christian, he has this Image and Effigies of God, Purity and
Righteousness stamped on the one side of his conscience, and the Kings Arms,
or the Kingdom of Heavens Arms on the other, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
The Kingdom of God, says the Apostle, (or if I may so call them, the Effigies
and Arms of the Kingdom) is Righteousness and Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 14. 17.

It is observed that the floor of Solomon's 1 Ki. 6. 30.
Temple was overlaid with Gold, both within and without, that is to say, both
the Sanctum Sanctorum, and the Atrium sacerdotum; the Court of the Priests, as
it is called, 2 Chronicles. 4. 9. Although the Great Court called the Atrium Populi
were not so: So it is the mind and will of God, that not only those holy
glorified Saints that are within the Veil of the Sanctum Sanctorum, and the
Church Triumphant; but all those within his true Church, distinguished from the
world, should have the same purity and holiness, although not the same
measure. Purity is the floor and paving of both Militant and Triumphant Church.

CHAP. VII. Of the sincere Conscience
NExt to pure conscience comes the sincere, being much alike, often taken
promiscuously one for the other; but though they may never be divided and
parted, may thus be distinguished: Pure is opposed to what is filthy, defiled,
unclean, profane, impure; Sincere Purity and integrity how they differ.
is opposed to false, deceitful, counterfeit, hypocritical, imaginary. Every
sincere man is really pure, and endeavors so to be found; but every
pure-seeming person is not sincere, nor does intend so to be. Sincerity is the
glory of purity, and of conscience, and of every person, grace, or action. It
must be sincere faith if any, 1 Timothy 1. 5. (...) faith unfaigned. Sincere love
if any. 1. to Christ, Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace to all them that love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, (...). 2. If to men, Romans 12. 9. Let love be without dissimulation,
(...). Good Hezekiah whatever he did, he did in his integrity, and with all his
heart, and so he prospered, 2 Chronicles. 31. 21.

The sincere is ever a good conscience; no sooner sincere, but presently good;
no longer good, then can be called sincere. Sincerity is the soundness,
health, and right constitution of conscience. Sincerity here is all our Genesis 6.
9. Job 1. 1.
perfection; Noah, Job, and others were called perfect in their generations,
only because upright and sincere: Sincerity is Earths highest perfection; we
cannot go higher: Innocence was Paradises, purity is Heavens. Of this
conscience Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world,
etc. In which words four things are very remarkable: 1. What is the best
temper and complexion of conscience. 2. What the clearest marks and best
proofs to evidence it. 3. What is the worst disease, and most destructive
enemy to it. 4. What is the fruit and benefit of it.

1. The temper of the best conscience is the (...).
godly sincerity, or as the words are, The sincerity of God] in all our
conversings with men.

2. The clearest marks of this sincerity are naked and downright simplicity,
simplicity of God] as it is called; and the grace of God]

3. The most common, but dangerous enemy to conscience, which is ever the bane
and death of sincerity, is fleshly wisdom [in sincerity, not in fleshly
wisdome] the more of that, the less of this: Not in fleshly wisdom, but by
the grace of God; nothing so opposite to Gods grace, as humane and carnal
wisdom, if the one increases, the other ever decreaseth.

4. But the fourth thing is the benefit of such a constitution, and freedom
from this distemper, which is above all expression. It maintains the soul in
a plight of rejoicing, and in a state of glory, as it were amidst many
pressures, when the outward man was ouerburdened, sentenced to death, and
despairing of life, and of all outward relief, verse. 8. We were pressed out
of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life; but we had
the sentence of death in our selves etc. yet there as in another place, 2 Cor.
6. 10. he says, As sorrowing, yet always rejoicing; As dying, yet behold we
live. Blessed be a good God, and well fare a good conscience for it: It makes
such an alteration, that like the night stars, when all day light is off the
Heaven, Quasi (...), Leigh. Crit. Sacr. (...) Illae res proprie dicuntur, quae
suum duntaxat nativum colorem, praesertim album retinent nullo alio admisto, ut
lilia, lana candida; farina sincera est, quae non est fermento corrupta. Zanch.
then do these appear; so the good of this conscience is most seen in such a
sad plight; when I am most full of sorrow, then most full of joy; when nearest
to death, then have I most of life; when having nothing, I possess all things.
Oh the Cordials sincere conscience feeds the afflicted soul with!

The Greek word [(...)] translated Sincerity, 1 Cor. 5. 8. and 2 Cor. 1. 12.
is a very elegant and most significant word, signifying that trial that is
made of things by the Sunlight; as the Eagle is said by Aristotle and Pliny, to
bring her young unto the full sight of the Sun, to try whether they be
generous and legitimate, or spurious; those that can with open eye endure the
light thereof, she owneth; those which wink she rejects. Or as a Chapman
opens Wares, to see what deceit or flaw is in them, B. Andrews.

The Latin word [Sincerus] signifies that which is without all mixture, as Mel
sine Cera, honey without any wax or dross, bread without Mar. 14. 3.
leaven, wool undyed; sincere milk ((...) 1 Pet. 2. 2.) which has no
mixture, nothing but milk; like that precious Spikenard in the Alabaster Box
(...), pure, and natural Nard. Jerome. Theophilus, Euthemius, a (...) deducunt,
ut quae sit fidelis, germana, Pura, minimeque vitiata.

Which sincerity of conscience, if you desire Notes of sincerity.
to know it, try it by these notes.

1. It makes a man abhor all guile and fraud, and renounce the hidden things of
dishonesty, and cast off the cloak of craftiness, makes a man like Jacob in
his time, a plain downright, or upright man; or like Nathaniel, a right-bred
Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile; such was Paul and his fellow Apostles,
2 Corinthians 2. 17. We are not as many, that corrupt and compound the Word of
God according to our hearers fancy, or our own advantage, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, and in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. So 2
Cor. 4. 2. We walk not in craftiness, or handle the word of God deceitfully.
Where is sincerity, there is an Identity ever and a samenesse between heart,
tongue, and hand, between outside and inside; what he seems, he is, what he
promises he performs, as was said before of Origin, Vt Docuit vixit, He
taught and lived, alike. vixit and ut Docuit, and lived and taught

Micaiah showed his sincerity, when he resolved not to concur in the Agreement
of the Prophets, to please their Sovereign Lord the King: But what the Lord
says unto me, as the Lord lives, that will I speak, 1 King. 22. 14. And
Caleb his sincerity, when he resolved not to betray his trust, and promote the
Agreement of the People, as did his corrupt fellow Representatives, who voted
according to the fickcle minds of their Sovereign Lord the People. But as for
me, says he, I spoke as it was in my heart, Josh. 14. 7. And I fully followed
the Lord, verse. 8. Sincerity abhorres equally both fear and flattery, and
declines alike unnecessary opposition and unwarrantable compliance.

The sincere man's heart, yea and path too, is like the street of the new
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 21. The street of the City was pure gold, as it were
transparent glass. Purity is the glory of Gold: Perspicuity and
Transparentnesse of Glass; both are the glory of the sincere man, who is both
Glass and Gold: Transparent Glass; you may see through him, he is all one
without and within; and Pure Gold, that the more you see into him, the more you
see his worth.

2. Sincerity being all to the light, as was Joh. 3. 20. He that does truth,
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought
in God, they are cast in a right mold, and are of the right make: Therefore as
of sincerity, and as of God, and as in the sight of God, are put together, 2
Cor. 2. 17. He that is such, ownes nothing but what will endure the Sun: To
God he says often, Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins, and my
heart, Psalm. 26. 2. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Thus
dare not an unsound heart say. So Peter, Lord, thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee, Joh. 21. 16, 17. To the most searching Ministry he
says, Teach me, and I will hold my tongue, and cause me to understand wherein
I have erred, Job 6. 24. To every discerning man's conscience, he offers to
approve himself in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. Let the righteous smite me,
it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, I shall not take it ill. Yea,
he is the man who can be tried by God and his Country; Ye are witnesses, and
God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we have had our conversation
in the world, said the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians 2. 10. Yea he says to his most
observing adversary, Let him write a Book against me; I shall be able to
answer all charges, and wipe off all aspersions, said Job in the assurance of a
sincere conscience, Job 31. 35.

Wary Jacob would make sure work beforehand, if ever he should have his
dealings called in question, that he should never be touched in his sincerity:
So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come
before thy face, Genesis 30. 33. And this made him so confident when he was
pursued, and charged with the plunder of Labans Gods. Search all my stuff,
discern what is thine, spare not; what have thou found among all my
household stuff? Set it before my brethren, and thy brethren, I ask no favor.
Oh the boldness and bravenesse of sincerity! Nec Proprium veretur judicium de
se nec alienum, Bernard. Joseph's brethren were so brought up by their Father
Jacob, to hate all fraud and falsehood, that knowing their own integrity, they
offered themselves and their Sacks to any search or examination; Behold, say
they, the money which was in our sacks mouths we brought again; how then
should we steal out of our Lords house, silver or gold? Genesis 44. 9.


3. The sincere man is semper and ubique idem, 3. Note.
still one and the same, alone or in company; Leave him to himself, he is all
one as if you look on: He is as the clarified honey, clear to the bottom; he
is like the twelve Gates of the holy City, Rev. 21. 21. each Gate was of one
piece, and that of pearl, one solid and entire rich pearl, it was not
artificially made and joined together, but one natural rich pearl: Such is
the sincere man, all of a piece, nothing but one solid pearl. The Arc was
pitched within with the same pitch which it was pitched without withal; such
is the sincere man, within and without alike, inside and outside all one: Yea
he is rather better then he shows; as the Kings daughter, whose outside might
sometimes be sackcloth, yet was all glorious within, and her inward ga^ments of
wrought gold. Or as the Temple outwardly Psalm. 45. 13
nothing but wood and stone to be seen; inwardly all rich, and beautified,
especially the Sanctum Sanctorum (when the Veil was drawn) was all Gold; The
very 1 Ki. 6. 30.
floor as well as the roof, 1 King. 6. 30. was over-laid with Gold.

Such a one again if you leave him to himself, he will be just and faithful,
for he is a law to himself. When Jacob had received the Corn from Egypt, and
his money returned, he sent back the money which he might have concealed; but
where had been his conscience then? and where had been his integrity? Take the
money with you again, peradventure it Genesis 43. 12.
was an oversight and mistake in them, when they parted with their commodity,
not to demand your money; but it would be a gross oversight, and foul mistake
in me, to take their goods without a valuable consideration; Let my
righteousness answer for me with whomsoever I have to deal.

4. The sincere man may have diverse failings, 4. Note.
and be subject to diverse temptations; yet does he never allow himself in any
known evil; therefore is he called perfect in respect of his aim, intention,
and purpose of mind. 2 King. 20 3. I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight, said gracious Hezekiah: My heart was perfect,
though my ways were not perfect: I can say with comfort, my desires were
perfect, though I cannot say in truth, all my doings were perfect. The sincere
man lives not after the world, though he lives in the world; he wars not
after the flesh, though he walk in the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 3. But he resists
every known evil, and rejects every known error; he purifieth himself as
God is pure. God sees all the 1 Jo. 3. 3.
evil that is in the world, and in hell, in men, and in Devils, yet is he not
polluted with any, but abhors it all: So a good man sees much evil in
others, and keeps himself pure; he sees many evil imaginations cast in, and
evil inclinations stirring in himself, but he approves none of them; but
purges himself (that is) he has a stirring principle of grace will work out
any sin. As a living Fountain, if you cast mud into it, will not rest till it
has purged it self; or as new wine, or beer, that has life and strength in
it, when thick and troubled, yet by degrees works it self clear, and pure.
A puddle does not so, but was dirty and thick before, and if you cast any dirt
or filth in it, there it lies, and makes it worse.

Jacobs Sons had money put into all their Genesis 42. 28, 35. Genesis 44. 12.
sacks at one time, and a Cup put into Benjamins sack at another time: but they
took not the one or the other, and when they came to know of it, they approved
of neither. A sincere heart is best known by what it allows or disallows: What
I do, I allow not. Romans 7. 16, 17. For what I would, that I do not, but the
evil which I would not, that I do. You may find a sincere man doing an evil,
never shall you find him loving an evil, justifying, or defending any evil,
this destroys sincerity. Sin and sincerity may stand together, but not love of
sin, and sincerity.

5. The sincere man holds on his course, and he that has clean hands shall
be stronger, and stronger, Job. 17. 9. The vessel of gold wears brighter and
brighter, by use to the last; The gilded Cup wears paler and paler, till all
the gilding is gone. This man alters not with weather and times, and success,
or any wearing you put him to; but like the green Bay Tree, keeps green all
winter. Times may alter, he alters not. He sets his watch only by the Sun,
whereas an other sets his by the parish Clock, or his neighbors watch. He
orders his conversation by Rule, not Example, by Rule, not Opinion, men and
opinions vary every day; But Consciences Rule is the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man's wit and parts, are
as the flower of the Field; The man with ereth, and his opinion fades, but the
word of God indureth for ever. The dead fish 1 Pet. 1. 22 24
ever swims down the stream, the living can, and does swim against the
stream; Therefore sincerity is best seen, in times when Satan is let loose,
in places where Satan has Rev. 2. 13.
his Throne, where there are few encouragements from present times, or persons
to persist in a godly way; but many discouragements. Nicodemus showed his
sincerity in sticking close to a condemned Christ. Jo. 7. 51. Joseph of
Arimathea, his love and sincerity to a crucified Christ, a forsaken Christ, a
naked Jo. 19. 38.
Christ, stripped by the Soldiers of all he had. This is smcerity; it is
nothing to cry Hosanna to a trymphing Christ; To say good master to a healing
Christ. So to love the truth, as well when it must live on us, as when we can
live upon it; This is the love of truth, this is the truth of love. And this is
sincerity; But the hypocrite and unsound person will study the Postures and
Genius of the times, and will know his company; and so he reserves, or declares
himself, as he sees occasion; with the holy he can be holy, and with the
filthy, filthy. Such a one is like the Amphibia in nature, he can live in
diverse elements. He can pronounce both Shibboleth, and Sibboleth; he can sweat
both God, and Malchom, and divide himself Jud. 12. 6. Zeph. 1. 5. Mat. 6. 24
too between God and Mammon, and indeed is all this while nothing else but a
Meteor, or blazing star, which glitters, and blazeth while the Nutritive
matter feeds it; that wasted, it vanishes, and is seen no more. But the
true and sincere conscience is like your fixed star, which keeps his
station, and moves still Orderly, Constantly, Regularly, and Uniformly in his
own Orb. Whereas all unsound men are like the Rack of the Clouds, which is
not moved by any Interne principle, or any certain rule at all, but is hurryed
back-ward and forward, by the uncertain conduct of the winds. It is observed
in the Revelation, those who were marked with Rev. 7. 3. Rev. 14.
Gods mark, had the seal or mark in their forehead; those of Antichrists
party had it in the forehead sometime to proclaim it; in their hand sometimes
to conceal it. The sincere man must be a constant, and certain man.

6. Universality is ever a certain Note of sincerity. The Papists make it
falsely a Note of the true Church: But we rightly make it a certain note of
the true Christian. Zachary and Elizabeth were therefore counted righteous
before God, and blameless before men, in that they walked in all the
Ordinances of God, Luke 1. 6. and Heb. 13. 18. The Apostle asserteth the
sincerity of his honesty by this mark, we trust we have a good or honest
conscience. ((...)) because we desire in all things to live honestly, (...),
etc. The good man must like Moses, have his two hands filled with the Deuteronomy. 9.
15.
two tables respecting both God and man; God in each duty of Piety, Man in each
duty of honesty, mercy, justice, charity. Daniel could Apologize for himself,
that before God innocence was found in him, and before the King no hurt Dan. 6.
2^
could be charged on him. Universality, and indifferency to all sorts of
persons in all places, at all times, in all duties, shows a man sincere. To be
partial in the Law. Mal. 2. 9. is to corrupt the Law. To make conscience of
one duty, and not of another, is to make no conscience of the one, or other; to
fly on sin, and not another is rightly to fly no sin. To make our
Phylacteries broad, and our charity Mat. 23. 5. Mat. 23. 23
narrow, foul Pharisaisme; to Tithe mint, and Cummin, and neglect mercy,
judgment, and faith, Romans 2. 22.
is gross hypocrisy. To abhor Idols, and commit sacrilege, is the prophanest
impiety.

7. This man carries himself ever as before God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. In sincerity,
as of God, in the sight of God: He says with David, Psalm. 16. 8. I have set
the Lord always before me, and I set my self always before him; His eye is ever
upon me, my eye is often upon him, so that he calls the place where he is, as
Hagar her well, Beer-la-hai-roi, Genesis 16. 14. that is the well of him that
lives and sees me; she gives the reason, I have seen him that sees me. The
sincere man writes over every room, Gods sees me, Gods eye and his hand follow
me, Psalm. 139. 10. When you cast your eye on a well drawn Picture, which way
soever you turn it seems to have his eye still upon you, and follow you; so it
is with a godly man, he observes as Peter did, the eye of Christ finding him
out in a corner: Went not my heart with thee? says the Lord to him; and he to
God, If I should forget the Covenant of God, and Psa. 44. 21.
lift up my hands to a strange God, shall not God search this out, he tries
the reins and secrets of the heart. See said Laban, No man sees, but Genesis 31.
50.
God sees, and is a witness between thee and me: Therefore he called the place
of the Covenant-making Mizpeh, the Lord watches and observes; thus the
sincere man carries an awful apprehension of Gods presence with him still, as
that Kings Son carried an effigies of his father with him, and says, whatever
I do I must do it heartily as to the Lord, and not to men; Col. 3, 23.
And every place to such a one, is either a Bethell, or a Penuell: He can say,
I have seen God in this place, face to face, and my life is preserved, Genesis 32.
30. Or else at least, God is in this place though I was not aware, Genesis 28. 16.

8. Note, The sincere man is known by this, consults with his duty more then
with commodity, and resolves against sin more then against any danger. He
always postposeth humane danger to Divine displeasure, and undervalueth all
losses to the loss of Gods favor and his own Peace. How can they believe who
will hazard rather a casting out of Heaven by God, then out of the Synagogue by
men? Joh. 12. 42. How do they believe, who love the praise of men, and seek not
the honor that comes of God only? Joh. 5. 40. How do they believe in
sincerity, who love the uppermost seats in Synagogues and highest Offices in
the State, and greetings in the Markets or Courts ((...)) who will rise with
Christ, if they may, and follow him with a Bag as Judas, but are resolved not
to fall with Christ and follow him with a Cross? Sincerity says, Let Christ be
magnified, though I bevilified: Let him be omnified, though I be nullified: If
my fall be his rising, what shall I be loser?

Let integrity, and uprightness preserve me, Psalm. 25. 21. or let me perish;
let them bail me, or let me go to prison, says the upright man.

9. Note of sincerity is, That such a one cannot fleshly wisdom, or worldly
policy. Sincerity was never cut out for a Time-serving Politician, 2 Cor. 1.
12. In sincerity and simplicity of God, not in fleshly wisdom says the
Apostle: They are so opposite that the one does shake and lessen the other; the
more simplicity, the less policy; and the more of juggling and designs, the less
you see of this sincerity. In simplicitate fides said Hilary. Where there is so
much of the Serpent, there is nothing of the Spirit, because none of the Doves
simplicity. Simplicity is the sincerity, and sincerity all the policy of a
conscientious man. It was never a good world with Christians, since they
forsook the waters of Siloah that run softly, and Es. 8. 6.
left this old simplicity to study depths and stratagems of policy: This
Serpent has devoured all our rods of strength. Worldly wisdom is the bane of
Grace, and Conscience; and Religion has never thriven well since Christians
would become Students in Politics; Rev. 8. 11.
This wormwood star has fallen into all our Ponds, and Springs, but has
imbittered and corrupted all our waters, turning them into wormwood, and has
marred Professers, Profession, Parliament, Army, Covenant, Reformation, all:
That we in Ezekiels bitterness, Ez. 2. 14.
and heat of Spirit, may take up Bernards lamentation, and say, " Vae
generationi huic a fermento Pharisaeorum, quod est hypocrisis, si tamen
hypocrisis dici debet, quae jam latere prae abundantia non valet, and prae
impudentia non quaerit. Serpit body antiqua tabes per Bern. super Cant. Sermon.
33.
omne corpus Ecclesiae, and quo latius, eo desperatius: eoque periculosius, quo
interius, etc.

St. Paul wishes a Christian no more wisdom then may make him honest and
sincere, Romans 16. 19. I would have you wise unto that which is good, but simple
concerning evil: The worldly wise like best that reading of Arias Montanus,
Prove. 8. 12. Ego sapientia cum astutia habitavi; but the godly like rather, Ego
conscientia cum simplicitate, I wisdom dwell Pro. 8. 12.
with prudence, and I Conscience with simplicity; not with worldly craftiness,
(...): The worlds simplicity is Gods sincerity; as the worlds wisdom (...) is
with God but folly. (...). Callidus qui dexteritate ingenii valet ad quidlibet
agendum versipellis, veteratorius, ut Callidus a callendo, quod omnis
gener^dolos calleat. Mr. Leigh.


When Jacobs sons and the Shechemites sought to out-vye and over reach each
other in wyles of policy, they both shut out sincerity. After that distaste
given, they came to terms of amity seemingly, a Personal Treaty there was,
many complements passed, and fair Religious pretenses were held forth. Jacobs
sons pretended much to conscience, they might not inter-marry with
uncircumcised persons; but intended rapine, murder, revenge, and so possessed
themselves of their houses and estates. The Shechemites again held them as fair
with pretenses of love, desire to incorporate and unite, and to turn to their
Religion, but intended only the enriching, and advantaging themselves. Here was
craft and policy on both sides, sincerity on neither, it prospered accordingly:
The Shechemites (which was the shame and mischief of it) were overwitted by the
sons of Jacob, and were put to the sword while they were sore; they gaping
after others states lost their own first, and their lives withal: Jacobs sons
carrying home the plunder, meet at home with their Fathers curse: You have made
Religion stink, said the sincere and plain-hearted old man; You have made me
weak, stained my glory, made Genesis 34. 30
me to be abhorred; Cursed be that wrath, it was cruel; cursed be such policy,
it is Hellish: Into such secrets, let not my soul come: It is a notable saying
of Bildad, Job 18. 7. The counsel of the wicked shall cast him down, or cast
him out; it casts him out of all, out of credit, out of trust, out of state,
out of office, out of comfort, out of grace, and out of Heaven at last. Lu^her
was wont to say, There were three things that would destroy Religion, and
remove the Gospel. 1. Forgetfulness of the benefits received by the Gospel. 2.
General security which is so much prevailing. 3. Worldly wisdom, Sapientia
mundi quae vult omnia redigere in ordinem, and publicam tranquillitatem impiis
consiliis mederi, which must overrule all, and prefer public safety before
sincerity.

Lastly, would you know your own sincerity? observe this rule, and you cannot
mistake: principle you Act from? 2. What the rule you Act by? 3. What the end
you Act to, and aim at? The sincere Christian makes God his Alpha and Omega,
his Beginning and End and middle, his first and last, and all; says of him,
through him, and for him are all things, to him be all glory, Romans 11. 36.

1. Mind what is the Original and principle Mat. 6. 1. 2, 5.
you move from. A Pharisee may pray, but not for devotion, but ostentation;
therefore it must be in the corner of the streets, not in a corner of the
house; he may give an alms, but not without a Trumpet blown; another does the
one in Faith out of Piety, the other out of charity; some preach Christ purely,
and sincerely out of love to gain souls to Christ; some also preach out of envy
and strife, Phil. 1. 15 16.
to make a stir in the Church, and gain applause and get hearers to themselves,
and to pull on more affliction to Paul's bands, that is to create more contempt
to the Ministry under sufficient contempt already. Saul confessed I 1 Samuel 15.
24. 2 Samuel 12. 13. Mar. 1. 24, 25. Mat. 16. 16 17.
have sinned, but it was forced, it was feigned: David cried out I have sinned,
it was free, not forced; it was true, not feigned; he was accepted, pardoned
and loosed; Saul was rejected, cast off, and bound; Satan says to Christ, Thou
art the Son of God, and is rebuked as accursed; Peter says the same, and is
commended, and proclaimed blessed.

2. Observe what is the rule you constantly walk by; The godly make the Word
and Commandment of God their Rule. So Josiah, 2 King. 22. 2. He did what was
right in the figbt of the Lord, walked in all the ways of David his Father, and
turned not aside to the right hand, or to the left. Come commodity or
discommodity, he keeps on his way; the sun may be as soon diverted in his
course, as he willingly deviate from his Rule; but an unsound man still casts
an eye on his own interest, and therefore follows not God fully, and the word
exactly, but with a salvo ever and a reserve. Thus it is said of three Kings of
Judah succeeding each other, they all did what was right in the sight of the
Lord, yet never a good one among them. Jotham did what was right in the sight
of the Lord, as did Vzziah his father, 2 Chronicles. 27. 2. Vzziah did the like, did
what was right in the sight of the Lord according to all that Amaziah his
father did, 2 Chr. 26. 4. And look now what Amaziah the Grandfather was; he
did what was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2
Chr. 25. 2.

Jehu did well a great while, but at last fell off, Howbeit he took not heed to
walk in the law of the Lord with all his heart, he departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam, 2 King. 10. 31. Jeroboam himself went along with God while their
way lay together, but when the way parted, and Gods honor lay one way, his
imaginary honor and security lay another, he then discovers himself, and takes
his leave of God, and will rather forgo all his interest in God and Heaven, and
eternity, then hazard his interest in the Crown. He sins, and made all Israel
sin. When you see two men traveling together, and a Spaniell following, you
know not whose he is till they part; then he leaves the one, and follows his
master alone; it was for his masters sake he went at all with the other; no
trial while our way, and Gods lie together, their parting tryes our sincerity.

3. Observe the end you aim at; God is the Christians end, and his glory his
aim; the hypocrite makes himself his own end, and so Zach. 7. 5. 6
himself his own God; He eats to himself, drinks to himself, fasteth to
himself, and still has that property of the empty vine, he bears fruit to
himself, Hos. 10. 1. You never find an hypocrite without a design, what ever
his actions are; he has a design as his end, and himself is the ultimate and
great design.

The sincere man is the man who is engaged to no design in the world but one,
h. e. Gods honor, and here you find him intent, sedulous, and immovable, and
he is still tender of any dis-service done to God, as those officious
informers, Ezra 4. 14. were of their masters; and upon the same account, we
have our maintenance (say they) from the Kings palace; are salted with the salt
of the palace, the Original has it; therefore it is not meet for us to see the
Kings dishonor, therefore we have sent to certify the King. We are the Kings
creatures, say they, eat the Kings salt, have our salary from the King,
therefore we must be true to our trust. Much more says the godly heart, I have
my dependence wholly on God, I am thy very Creature, the work of thy hands, I
am salted with the salt of the Sanctuary, I eat the Lords bread, wear his given
clothes, breath in his air, dwell in his Tenement, he gives me lodging,
living, breath, being, and all I have, I must be true to his interest, I must
not be silent at, or unsensible of his dishonor. All mine are thine said our
Savior, and thine are mine. Any hypocrite will say and make good the latter,
all thine are mine; all will consent to Joh. 17. 10
take away Tuum, but sincerity takes away Meum not Tuum between God and him.
All mine is Gods, says he, as to subordinate all to him, improve all for him.
All Gods is mine, as to be solicitous for his things as for my own, yea above
my own; not his are mine to be subservient and subordinate to my ends, as the
hypocrite says, Da mihi fallere, Lord let me make use of thy Name and Honor,
and Cause, and Interest, and Servants and Scriptures to build my own house, and
so attain my own ends. But, says he, all mine is thine, Lord serve thy self of
me and mine; all my parts, studies, interests, abilities, designs, ayms are
for thee, and for thy service.

Thus in all your actions if you would have comfort in them, you must consider
with what conscience you do them; so much of conscience as is in your actions,
so much of comfort; and so much of sincerity, so much of conscience; and so
much regard to your principles, to your rule, to your end, so much you may
conclude of sincerity. And so much of this most excellent conscience: the
conscience of sincerity.

CHAP. VIII. Of the inoffensive Conscience. Of the inoffensive conscience
(...), Tum active, tum passive potest significare, (...) ut nec ipsi
scandalizent quempiam, nec scandalizentur a quopiam. Paraens in 1 Cor. 10. 32.
In eandem sententiam Eras. Cor. a Lap. tam inoffensus, qua^ non offendens. Bez.
passive Phi. 1. 10. active, 1 Cor. 10. 32

THe fourth good Conscience we are to speak of, is the inoffensive conscience;
of which the Apostle showed how much reckoning he made, when he said, Act. 24.
16. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward man. This is a conscience necessary to be sought,
especially in these times.

This inoffensiveness is twofold, implying that we avoid 1. Giving any offense.
2. Taking any offense.


1. The inoffensive conscience must avoid giving offense, for this is always
evil and sinful; though offense be often taken without sin, yet never given
without sin. Our Savior took offense at Peter, Mat. 16. 23. Thus God is
offended every day; When it is only our fault to give the offense, but Gods
holiness and perfection to take the offense.

This giving offense may be either To God, or To man.
Act. 24. 16.

1. We must chiefly take heed of giving offense to God. This is the principal
care of a conscientious person, I exercise my self to have 1. Inoffensive
conscience gives no offense to God.
always a conscience void of offense to God. What were it if we did so carry our
selves that all men should speak well of us, and that we were as much in the
worlds books for amiablenes and in offensiveness, as ever were Titus or Trajan
or any other? yet we begin at the wrong end, if we did not study more to be
without offense before God. It is meet to be said to God, I have borne
chastisement, I will not offend, said Elihu, Job 34. 31, 32. That which I see
not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

Object. But who can say he lives without offence-giving to God? For in many
things we sin all, Jam. 3. 2. Who knows how often he does offend? etc. Psalm. 19.

Answ. None lives indeed without sin, yet some are without offense. Because 1.
This inoffensive person striveth to prevent offenses, he keeps himself, he
takes up purposes, Psalm. 17. 3. 1 Jo. 5. 18.
I am purposed that my mouth shall not offend, said David. He has integrity in
his purposes ever, although he may fall short in performances sometimes.

2. He is counted inoffensive, because for what is past, what was an offense to
God, is now an offense to him; if in any thing God was displeased with him
before, he is now displeased with himself for it: what was a burden to God
before, is now his burden, Ephraim was ashamed and confounded, Jer. 31. 19. Job
did abhor himself, Job 42. 6. The truly penitent do ever loath themselves, Eze.
6. 9. and 36. 31. Now when our sin begins to be matter of offense to us, it
cease to be matter of offense to God; when it becomes the object of our
indignation 2 Cor. 7. 11. it is no more matter of provocation to God. In this
respect the penitent is accounted without offense.

3. When for time to come he is careful to break off his sin by Repentance,
and says as before, Job 34. 31, 32. I will offend no more; that which I see
not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. This is the
highest inoffensiveness we can here attain unto, Job 40. 4. 5. Behold I am
vile, says Job to God, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth; Once have I spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed
no further. When a man has thoroughly smarted with godly sorrow for sin, and
says I will venture no further for a world; what fruit have I now of all my
former vile ways but shame? I will turn from all my sins, and become a new man;
this man is accounted a non-offender, To. 6. 21
all his sins shall be no more so much as mentioned to him; But he shall live
in his righteousness wherein he now walks, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22.

4. He is said to live without offense to God, who resolves rather to offend
all the world (passively) then to offend God actively. If they be offended, let
them be offended, says he: If they take offense, it is their sin, not mine, so
that God be not offended. Am I to persuade men or God? said the Apostle, Gal.
1. 10. Or must I seek to please men? If I yet pleased men, I should not be the
servant of Christ: Inoffensive Conscience says, I would, if I could, please
both God and man, I would not offend either; I would please all, offend none by
my good will. But if it must be so, whether it be better in the sight of God to
please God or man, whether worse to offend God or man, judge ye. All the
Prophetical, Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Histories are full of examples in
this kind. A godly man can readily resolve what is to be done in this case.
Moses feared not the wrath of King Pharaoh; nor the three Children the wrath of
King Nebuchadnezzar. Heb 11. Dan. 3. 16. Act. 4. 19.
We are not to seek of an Answer in this matter O King, thy Idol will we not
worship; we may not incur Gods displeasure, to escape yours. Nor may we disobey
God, said Peter, that we may not displease you. They resigned the dignities and
offices they had, as Moses, Benevolus to Justina, Caracciolus. They refused the
highest honors, Jovinian the Impertall Crown; they endured the burning Iron
grate, the Iron chain, Iron gridyron etc. that God might not be offended. 2.
Inoffensive conscience gives no offense to man.


2. We must take heed of giving offense to man, God is only offended one way,
viz. as we cause him to take offense, for he is (...), not to be tempted with
evil, as he tempts no man to evil, Jam 1. 13. But man may be offended two
ways: First and most dangerously when we cause him to commit an offense. 2.
When we cause him to take an offense: In the one of these we tempt him, in
Plane Diabolicum est, quando quis intendit proximi Ruinam quod peccatum vix
cadit in quenquam praeter Diabolum, Ames de cons. l. 5. c. 11.
the other we try him; in both we offend him; and in either of these acts men
do the Devils work: By the former he is stumbled, by the latter made weak;
but by both offended; therefore these three are joined together, To. 14. 21. It
is good to do nothing whereby thy brother may be stumbled, or offended, or made
weak.

In respect of men offence-giving must be avoided 1 To others, whether godly,
or those without.
2 Our selves.


1. To others, we must take heed we do nothing whereby we should cause them to
offend 1 Samuel 2. 24. 1 Kin 14. 16. 1 Kin. 21. 25
by sinning; thus did Elies sons cause the Lords people to transgress; thus did
Jeroboam cause all Israel to sin, and Ahab made them sin worse, and Jezabel
made this wicked Ahab so bad by stirring him up and setting him on; thus do the
wicked Prophets offend, who strengthen the hands of the wicked, that none does
return from his wickedness, Jer. 23. 14. This is to be Factors for Hell, and
Agitators for Satan. These carry the blood of others souls on their heads to
Hell, being not only partakers of other men's sins but Authors; Therefore they
shall receive the greater condemnation: This is the highest kind of scandal;
Woe to him by whom this offense does come. Hence it is that a scandal is by
some thus defined, Scandalum est dictum, aut factum, quo alius redditur
deterior: Luke 17. 1. Paraeus in 1 Cor. 8. 9.
It is that evil said or done by which another is made worse. And Tertullian
excellently to the same purpose, Scandalum est non bonae rei sed malae
exemplum, aedificans ad delictum. Benae res neminm scandalizant, nisi malam
mentem. A scandal is the acting of some evil (not of good) whereby another may
be imboldened, or encouraged to the like evil. Good actions cannot (says he)
scandalize any but those who are very bad.

1. To the godly we must give no offense, 1. Not to the godly.
whether he be stronger or weaker: Take heed says our Savior, you offend not
one of these little ones; for it were better that a millstone were Mat. 18. 6.
10.
hanged about thy neck, and that thou should be drowned in the depth of the
Sea, then that thou should offend one of the least of those that believe in
Christ, either by causing him to sin, or to grieve.

To that end 1. Some Cautions may be given: 2. Some rules are to be observed.

Caution 1. That thou do not cause thy brother to offend, lay not a stumbling
block of iniquity before his face, by going about to abate his fervor, lessen
his zeal, and unloose his strictness in duties, and stop his forwardness in an
obedientiall way; thus was Peter a mighty offense to Christ, Mat. 16. 22. and
called Satan for his labor, (for it is his work to persuade the declining of
hard and necessary duties when he had in his carnal reason, and fleshly
friendship dissuaded his master from going up to Jerusalem to suffer.

2. Take next that Caution of the Apostle, Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the
faith, receive you, but not to doubtful disputations; Take heed of such
opinions or questions as tend to janglings, and do no other good; let it be thy
wisdom to receive, that is, cherish and encourage, and instruct him in those
things wherein the Kingdom of God does consist, and not to puzzle his Faith (as
the manner of many is) by abstruse and intricate notions, or to perplex his
mind with doubtful Queries, or to unsettle his obedience by unseasonable
objections. If this excellent Caution of the Apostle was well observed, there
were hopes (as Paraeus says upon the place) that this age of the Church might
see peace and union again, and that these sad diseases that rage in this
Disputative Age (as he there calls it) might all be cured or cut off; His words
are, Plus proficit placida institutio, prudens monitio, fraterna correctio,
quam subtilis disceptatio, acris contentio, acerba insectatio: Argutae igitur
disputationes, intempestivae disceptationes, rixae, contentiones, (...) tanquam
pestes Ecclesiae cavendae sunt etc. In his enim nihil est aedificationis, quia
nihil charitatis multum, offendiculi, and perturbationis, quia plurimum
acerbitatis, and malitiae. Haec pestis si hoc disputatu^iente seculo curari aut
tolli possit, pacem Ecclesiae sperare liceret. One good reproof, says he, one
wise admonition, one friendly persuasion, were worth all these questions and
disputes etc. Take away these perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
you take away the Pests of the Church, and the great troublers of Israel.

3. That we do not take upon us to judge our brother, or set him at naught if
differing in some things from us, Romans 14. 10. whereby thou should without
other reasons given in to convince him, force him over to thee, and so cause
him to sin, or by thy petulancy and superciliousness force him over from thee,
and so cause him to be grieved; in both he is offended. This caution was never
more necessary, nor less practiced.

The 4. Caution is that of the Apostle, Romans please our selves, when we should
more judiciously study to please others, nor too imperiously lay our burden
upon the neck of others, when we should more charitably take his upon ours:
that so we might bear one another burdens, and then fulfill the Law of Christ.
We that are sirong ought to bea^ the infirmities of the weak, and not to please
our selves: Let every one of us, please his neighbor Gal. 6. 2.
for his good to edification; says the Apostle.

5. That we make not too bold with our liberty, through indiscretion,
immoderateness, Cor. 8. 9, 10. Take heed least by any means this liberty of
yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak; for if any man see thee
which have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the conscience
of him which is weak, be imboldened to eat those things which are offered unto
Idols? Consider we must who look on, and what interpretation may be made of
our actions, and what hurt may be done by our example; least as Tertullian
said, we do aedificare in Exitium, or as others say, aedificare in Gehennam. If
Peter lead not right, Barnabas may unawares follow into a dangerous way of
dissimulation, Gal. 2. 13.

6. Take heed of being regardlesse of other men's Censures and Opinions of us,
and Offence-taking be offended, let them be offended. This is to be cruel to
our selves, to our Brethren, yea to Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 12. When you sin against
your Brethren, and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ. Rather
say with the Apostle, Who is weak, 2 Cor. 11. 29
and I am not weak, or sick? and say, Who is offended (through my default) and
I burn not, as with grief and horror? It is not a slight or single, but a
great and double, yea treble sin, says Pareus, 1 Cor. 8. 12. when we so
slight and grieve our Brother. Tria mala cumulat, says he. And Chrysostom
shows how such sin against Christ in a threefold respect: Vno modo quod quae
servis fiunt, Christus pro in se factis imput at; qui v^s spernit, me spernit;
Altero quod in Corpus ejus saeviunt qui membra percutiunt; Saul, Saul, quid
me persequeris.? Tertio quod opus Christi quod propria morte absolvit, ij
propria ambitione destruunt, unde ne cibi causa destrue opus Christi inquit
Apostolus. 1. They sin against Christ, says he, because Christ does reckon as
done to himself, whatsoever is done to any servant of his, according to that,
He which despises you, despises me. 2. Because they offer violence to his
body, who hurt any of his members, according to that, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And 3. Because those destroy that for which Christ died;
according to that, For meat destroy not the work of God, Romans 14 20.

2. To prevent giving of offense, certain Rules are to be given, as first:

1. Consider ever what is expedient, as well as know what once is lawful, 1
Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23. All things are lawful, but all things are not
expedient.

2. Consider not only what is lawful, 2 Rules to be observed.
but what may edify or offend; that which is good and lawful in its own
nature, being inconsiderably done, may be offensive: All things are lawful,
but all edify not, 1 Cor. 10. 23. Let all things be done to edification, 1
Cor. 14. 26.

3. The Apostle gives a third Rule to avoid offence-giving, 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let
no man seek his own, but every one another wealth. This golden Rule well
observed, would make us happy, and our times happy, at once freeing the Church
from many calamities, and our selves from much guilt in matter of offenses.

4. A fourth Rulo is laid down in the same Chapter, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none
offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God. q.
d. With whomsoever you have to do, labor to be inoffensive; That your
Conversation may please whom your Profession does displease. Call no man common
or unclean; lose no man, harden no man. Give none offense to the Jew] There
was an old partition wall up between the Jew and the Gospel; some hot spirit
of our time would have said, Let them go, they are legal, superstitious,
stubborn, heretical, no hope of them; why should I regard them? But the
Apostle would give no offense to the worst Jew. Nor to the Gentile] There
seemed to be a Gulf fixed, no hope of their coming over from their dumb Idols;
The Gentiles, they are Idolatrous, Profane, Dogs, etc. Why should I seek them?
But give no offense to the Gentiles. Nor to the Church of God] Whom thou
think wise, meek, strong, able to pass by an offense, make not too bold
with them neither.

5. Study how far thou art to go to please thy brother, which is a great duty.
The Apostle Col. 1. 10. prays for the Colossians, That they might walk worthy
of the Lord, in all pleasing, as if no carriage were worthy of the Gospel, but
of the plancid and yielding Spirit. And he exhottes, Romans 15. 2. Let every man
please his neighbor, for his good to edification. And to persuade to the
practice of a point, to which we are naturally so opposite, as thinking it
below a Christian and zealous spirit, an argument rather of an abject and
servile spirit. He makes this duty more commendable, by Isa. 42. 1. 2 Mat. 12.
18
setting down some examples: 1. The Example of Christ, Romans 15. 3. For even
Christ Jesus pleased not himself; He did not strive, nor cry, nor dissent, nor
divide. It is therefore no disparagement to you, whosoever you are. 2. He
propounds his own example, 1 Cor. 10. 33. and shows his compliance so far as
we would be apt to mis-interpret the like in another, Even as I please all men,
in all things. Here are two alls, both of which go very far; strive to imitate
him: Yet with these two reservations, That thou be not such a man-pleaser as
cease to be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. viz. 1. The one negative, I
please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit. As if some should
say, Paul, you are a Politician, and you know how to insinuate into men's good
opinions, you lose nothing by that. Nay, says Paul, I have no design in the
earth in it; I look not after outward profit and commodity; I look higher.
Therefore he adds the second Positive Reserve, That they may be saved. q. d. I
please no man by soothing him in his evil way; I comply not with men, so as
that they be strengthened in their sins: But my course is with all, so to
seek to save them, as that also I may please them; and so to seek to please
them, as that also I may save them; but if I cannot both please and save them,
I shall then study rather to save them, though I do not please them, then to
please them, if I may not save them. Oh that we had many such examples in these
times! So 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20* 21, 22, 23. the same Apostle tells us how much he
studied to be made all things to all men, that he might by all fair means save
some; for by foul means of violence we shall save none, but lose all. By this
art the Gospel was first propagated; by this plain, inoffensive, amiable, and
winning carriage, very Gentiles were overcome to the embracing of the Truth.
But our self-pleasing has undone all. How much need have we to pray for the
Christians of our times, as Paul did for the Philippians, Phil. 1. 9, 10. That
your love may abound in knowledge, and in all judgment, that ye may approve
things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offense to the
day of Christ.

6 Rule. If thou would sometimes not give offense, thou must be willing to
depart with thy own right, Mat. 15. 27. Notwithstanding that the children are
free, yet least we should offend them, said our Savior, go thou to the sea,
and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first comes up, and when thou
have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money; that give unto them
for me and thee.

2. Not to the wicked, or to those that are without, must we give any occasion
of offense; 2 We must not give offense to wicked men.
but remember that rule, Colos. 4. 5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are
without. Lay not a stumbling block before the face of the blind. The Believing
servant must be obedient, and faithful not only to the Believing Master, and
the gentle, but to the unbeleeving and froward, that the Gospel be not
blasphemed: 1 Timothy 6. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 1.
The godly woman must labor to have her modest and gracious carriage toward a
froward and irreligious husband; speak more to his conscience, then the Word
has done to the worst of men that seek occasion; we must labor to take away
all occasion, 1 Having a good Conscience, and your conversation benest among
the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may be
ashamed 1 Pet. 2. 12 and 3. 16.
when they falsely accuse your good conversation; yea, not that only, but that
they may glorify God in the day of visitation. Thus did Daniel demean
himself, that though so many eyes were upon him, they could fasten nothing upon
him to charge him with, Dan. 6. 4.

Obj. When the Disciples informed Christ Ponere scandulum infirmis in rebus
medijs est peccatu sed pharisaei^ non sunt infirmis sed malitiosi calamnia
huic, pertinaces nebulanes -- jubet dominus ne decorum scandalo sint solliciti.
Par
of the Pharisees offense taken at his Doctrine, he seemed to neglect it, Let
them alone, Mat. 15. 12. 14. q. d. If they be offended, let them be offended.

Ans. It is to no end to be troubled if wicked, stubborn men take offense when
none is given; they sin, we sin not; woe to the world because of offense taken;
its impossible but an ^ffending world should be apt to be offended. To lay a
stumbling block before the weak is evil; but the Pharisees here (says
Paraeus) were malicious calumniators, and sinned of pertinacious perverseness;
therefore no heed to be taken of them.

2. We are to distinguish of the matter whence an offense is taken; an
indifferent action we may forbear to prevent offence-taking, but a necessary
duty is not to be omitted, or truth to be suppressed, to avoid all the worlds
offenses: Let thy eye and actions be good, although their eye and
interpretation be evil. Nihil boni aut liciti est omittendum propter scandalum
acceptum hominum Pharisaico ingenio praeditorum. Ames de cons. 1. 5. c. 11. And
learned Camero, Scandalum quod oritur ex rebus per se bonis and necessariis non
licet evitare, quia non est faciendum malum ut eveniat bonum. Et postea, Itaque
ut maxim tumultuetur mundus, tamen omnia, etiam extrema quaeque subeunda sunt
ut stet illibat a Dei gloria. Vide plura in Jo. Came. Praelect in Mat. 18. v. 7.

2. We must take heed that we do not offend 2 Not offend our selves.
our selves; man is bound to study selfe-preservation. If thy eye offend thee,
pluck it out, Mat. 13. 9. As there is one kind of base and unworthy self-love,
self-seeking, self-pleasing, self-preferring, self-fearing, etc. so there is
also another noble and religious, and most necessary self-love, self-pleasing,
and self-preferring, viz. when I more regard what my conscience calls for, that
I may satisfy my duty, and keep in with my self, rather then to gratify a
thousand requests. But my self-pleasing must never be to the prejudice of
another: This is the worst disease of all, in these worst of times. Christ came
to set a man at variance with father and mother, but never with himself. Next
to the favor of God, labor to continue in thy own favor and good opinion;
Let not thy own heart reproach thee within, whose tongue soever may abroad.
Take heed of going over-far in a way of serving men; heap not coals of fire on
thy head, to do any man a kindness; better offend all the world then thy own
self. Gods servants have found it an easy matter to do or suffer any thing; to
forgo, or undergo every thing, so they might not offend self, and have
Conscience distasted. Flavianus Clemens, a Favorite in Domitians Court, had so
much interest in the Emperors esteem, that he conferred highest Honors upon
him, and intended to make his Son his Successor in the Empire; but blessed
Flavianus rather then he would give offense to his conscience in the matter of
his Religion, was content to bear the turning of the Emperors great love into
extreme hatred, so as he hated him to death, and oppressed his whole house.
Theodoret reports of Hormisda a Nobleman in Persia, who because he would not
wound his conscience in conforming to the Religion of the Court, was put into
ragged clothes, deprived of all his Honors, and set to keep Camels: After a
long time, the King seeing him in that base condition, and calling to mind his
former estate, pitied him, brought him to the Palace, and causes him to be
clothed like a Nobleman again, and then persuades him to deny Christ. He
presently rends his ^^lken clothes, and ^ays, If for these you think to have me
deny my Faith, take them again; and so with scorn he was cast out. It was a
high expression of Zuinglius, Quas non oportet mortes prae-eligere, quod non
supplicium potius far, imo in quam profundam inferni abyssum non intrare quam
contra conscientiam atttestari?

2. The other part of inoffensiveness is that 2. We must not be forward to take
offense.
we be not apt to take offense. This is that (...), Romans 1. 29. translated
malignity, which Aristotle defines a taking of every thing in the worst sense.
A Nabal-like disposition, 1 Samuel 25. 17. Morum asperitatem ac difficultatem
sonat. Erasmus.

There is as much danger often of taking offense unjustly, as of giving, as

1. From God, who can never give any: yet Christ pronounces Mat. 11. 6. him a
blessed 1. From God.
man that should not by one means or other, be offended in him: Therefore is
Christ called in the worlds-sense lapis offendiculi, a stone of stumbling and
rock of offense, Romans 9. 33. yea all the disciples were at once offended at
him, Mat. 26. 31. Some have taken offense at his person, Isa. 52. 12. and 53.
3. Some at his doctrine; Mat. 15. 12. Some at his Parents, Mat. 13. 54, 57.
Some at his Disciples and followers, Mar. 2. 16. Some at his life, Mat. 11. 19.
Some at his death, yea, almost all at the ignominy of his death and cross, 1
Cor. 1. 23. But we preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling block, and
to the Greeks foolishness; To both unsavory; yet all these offenses were taken
without cause, none without sin.

2. From Gods way; when the stony ground 2. From Gods way.
has received the seed, it springs up immediately, but not having root or
moisture is scorched with the heat of the sun, Mat. 13. 21. Such are those
hearers who at first receive the Word with joy and much forwardness, but when
they see the Lion in the way and Tribulations arise, they are offended at the
way, and the gospel and at Christ himself; and are like that impotent and
passionate widow who was content to entertain the Prophet when she and her son
might live upon him; but when her son was dead, she was offended with the
Prophet; What have I to do with thee, oh thou man of God? Art thou come to call
my sin to remembrance, and slay my son? 1 King. 17. 18.

3. From Gods people, and their weakness, 3. From Gods people.
so far as either to condemn their persons, or dislike their profession. Woe to
the world because of offenses on both hands, Mat. 18. 5. Giving too much just
occasion of offense to the godly, and again taking too much occasion of offense
(but unjustly) at the godly; it is impossible but offenses will come from some
hands, but woes a thousand to him from whose hand they come meritoriously; and
as many woes again to him that takes such an offense at a particular person,
or at a particular miscarriage in one person, to reject and condemn a whole
profession.

True godliness makes a man apt to take all in good part, 1 Cor. 13. 5. It
thinks no evil, it suspecteth nothing, but believes all things; it makes a
man more severe to himself, and more charitable to others. With himself he may
be displeased, with another he is unwilling to be displeased; to him self he is
just and impartial; to others more mild and indulgent.

4. Lastly, we must take heed of offence-taking 4. From the world.
from an ill world: Because all men speak evil of the way of God and forsake
it, must we be offended? Say not a confederacy to all them to whom this people
shall say a confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid, but
sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread, Isa. 8. 12, 13.

Thus much of the inoffensive Conscience.

CHAP. IX. Of the wel-sighted Conscience.
THe quick sighted Conscience is ever a Of the wel-sighted conscience
good Conscience, and one necessary qualification which good conscience cannot
want. Conscience's whole work is circumspection, and therefore must have eyes
in every place running to and fro. Mat. 6. 23. Men's lumine Spiritus Sancti
gubernata facit omnes actiones nostras lucidas and Deo placentes. Men's coeca
nec illustrat^ lumine verbi; nec gubernata Spiritu Dei hominem ducit in avios
errores, scelera, omnesque actiones ejus deturpat. Parae. in Mat. 6. 22.


Hence some have said, Conscientia totus oculus, Conscience is all eye. If this
eye be single the whole man is full of light; if this eye be darkness, all is
darkness.

A good conscience must be like Ezekiels wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 18. Or like the
creatures before the throne, Rev. 4. 6. 8. that were full of eyes round about,
full of eyes before, and full of eyes behind, and especially full of eyes
within: Thus must good conscience be qualified, it must be full of eyes before,
behind, and within. Before to view and oversee actions to be done: behind to
review, and overlook actions already done; especially it must be full of eyes
within, to make a privy search in the inwards of the belly, as Solomon's
expression is. Conscience is to take account of the inward motives from which
actions are undertaken, of the inward intentions and affections with which they
are undertaken, and of the inward ayms and true ends for which they are
undertaken. Vt nemo in sese tentat descendere, nemo!

And further very observable it is, that Persius Sat. 4.
those wheels spoken of Ezekiel. 1. 19, 20. were as admirable for their motion, as
for their eyes; they moved after a divine mover; as the spirit moved they
moved; whether the spirit went they went; when the spirit rose up, they arose;
when the spirit stood they stood, but they never returned or went backward.
Conscience must not be all sight, no motion; or all for speculation, nothing
for action. Again those creatures before the Throne, are not more to be admired
for their abilities, then imitated in their practice, and employment; they had
many eyes, and they had many wings, Rev. 4. 8. Each had six wings; they were
full of eyes, and full of praises, not only much in contemplation, but as much
in adoration: They rest not day, nor night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. What was it but a monstrous image,
that in Nebuchadnezzars vision, Dan. 2. 32, 33. Whose head was fine gold, his
legs iron, and his feet base Iron and clay? They are monstrous Christians who
have such heads of gold for Science, but feet of clay for practice: all
knowledge, no action, all contemplation, no conversation.

The Pharisees were full of eyes without, Sed praecedenti spectatur manticae
tergo. Pers.
had none within, full of eyes before, had none behind, Non viderunt id
manticae quod in tergo ^rat. They could censure other actions, not see their
own; they had heads of gold, feet of clay; could speak excellently, and do as
badly. They say and do not, Mat. 23. 3. What they teach, that do ye; what they
practice, that shun. These does our Savior after all their knowledge, and
learning, and talk and tongue, call fools, and blind fools again and again.
All this knowledge is but as a candle Mat. 23. 17 19. 24.
in their hand to light them to Hell, that they may not go thither in the dark.
These go to Hell, as Bernard says, with a great deal of Sinite sapientes hu^us
saeculi alta sapientes, and terram lingentes sapienter descendere in infernum.
Ber. de vit. Sol.
discretion, and go a wise and learned way thither. These keep the key of
Knowledge, but mean not to go into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves; but the
key of Conscience the poor, and simple and unlearned ones in the world get, and
press after the Kingdom of God, and enter in. Surgunt indocti, et rapiunt
Regnum Coelorum, and nos cum doctrinis nostris sine cord, ecce ubi volutamur
in carne and sanguine. Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 8. The Publicane and Harlot,
conscienciously humbled, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before the Pharisee
elated with his greater knowledge. And the illiterate Christian is able to read
his name in the book of Life, and his Duty in the Book of Conscience, when the
most literate Scribe, and Learned Scholar can do neither.

CHAP. X. Of the well spoken Conscience.
Of the well. spoken conscience.
THe well-spoken Conscience is that which can make the Soul a good Answer, or
upon just Occasion can make fit Demands, and put forth his Queres. This is that
good Conscience, or rather Property of it which Peter commends so much,
resembling it to Noah's Arc, and says of it, that it saves us. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
The like figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us, not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but (...). The answer of a good Conscience
toward God.

Which word (...) signifies as well or rather an Interrogation, then an Answer;
Stipulstio. Some think the Apostle does allude to that Practice of Demands
made in Baptism, Credis, Credo? which Practice though very Ancient, yet may be
questioned whether so Ancient.

Our Translators have chosen rather to render (...) an Answer. And in this
sense it tells us what conscience has to do.

First, It makes a good and ready Answer to God; It is ever as quick of Speech
as it is of Sight, or of Hearing; when God says Seek ye my face, my heart
says David talkd of it and went up and down with it. Thy face Lord I will
seek. Psalm. 27. 8. It is written of me that I should do thy will, Psalm. 40.
8. Conscience replies, thy will O my God is my will. Thy law is in my heart, I
am content to do it. Conscience goes often into Habukuks watch Hab. 2. 1.
Tower, and watches listening what the Lord has to say, and studieth what to
answer when he is spoken unto. Speak Lord says Conscience, for thy servant
hears; yea Conscience is 1 Samuel 3. 10.
ready to ask, and listen, Lord what wilt tb^u have me to do? As Augustine
often, da quod Act. 9. 6.
jubes, et jube quod vis. Lord give what thou command, and give what Command
thou will. Loquere Magister bone, libenter te audio, et cum adversaris mihi, et
cum irasceris audio te. Cyprian.

Secondly, It makes a good answer (...), for God according to that Precept, 2
or 3 verses before. 1 Pet, 3. 15, 16. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts,
and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a Reason of
the hope, that is in you with meekness and reverence having a good
Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil dooers they may be
ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ. So that with S.
Peter it is a matter of Conscience, and a mark of a good Conscience, to be
ready to yield an account of our Spiritual state when it is required of us.
Nicodemus thought he was bound in Conscience to stand up and make an Answer for
Christ, when he was unjustly condemned in the Consistory, being never heard and
never summoned. Does our Law condemnn any man says he, before it hear him,
and know what he does? Good Conscience cannot be silent Jo. 7. 51
and fit still without an answer when any cause of God is in hand. A good
Conscience thinks it is the heaviest crime that can be laid Blasphemiam ingerit
religioni quam colit qui^quod confitetur ante omnes non impleverit. Cyprian.
to any man's charge to be silent for God. Let them call me Adulterer, Theife
etc. or what they please said Luther, so that I may not be charged with wicked
silence in the cause of God.

Thirdly, Good Conscience makes many a good answer fot ones self, when under
the greatest cloud of Censures and Suspicions, or under the Aspersions of all
Obloquies. To. 9. 1. I speak the truth says the Apostle, and lie not, my
Conscience also is my witness, This the same Apostle glories in in another
place; we are as deceivers say you, but yet True men says 2 Cor. 6. 8. 9.
Conscience. As unknown say you, well enough known says Conscience. Conscience
makes the best Certificate and gives the best Testimony to any man that he can
have, with which Certificate he may confidently travel and pass the whole
world over, yea at last with this he shall not fear to enter Heaven, conducted
thither by a guard of Angels.

Fourthly, When any business of greatest consequence is under consideration,
Conscience puts the best answer into thy mouth, and will readily resolve what
is to be done. Enquire-still at Consciences mouth, and say as Paul to Philemon,
without thy advice will I do nothing; consult not in such cases with flesh and
blood, with safety and policy, but with conscience and duty, and the answer is
ready, Phil. v. 19* Habes spacium trium dierum in quo deliberes velisne Romam
reverti aut aliquem locum quo traducaris eligere. cui ille, trium dierum vel
etiam mensium spacium rationem non immutat, quare mittas me licet quo velis.
Magd. Cent. 4. c. 3.
we need not crave time; As Liberius a Godly and Orthodox Bishop of Rome, when
convented before Constantius an Arrian Emperor, and charged there with
stubbornes, for partaking with Athanasius, answered most freely before the
Emperor; at last when after all fair persuasions and sharp threats, he found
him persisting in his former resolutions, he gave him then three days time to
consider of it, whither then to return to his Bishopric at home, or to be
banished, or to set down what he would make choice of: He answers, O Emperor,
send me whither thou will, three days or three months are all one to me;
Truth and reason do not change with time. So into banishment he was sent. If
men would in their straites, when they know not what to resolve upon, cast
their lot into the lap of Conscience, they should have a more certain, easy
and compendious resolution, then by consulting with flesh and blood, and
reading (sometimes) many discourses. Cathedram habet in conscientia, qui corda
docet. Conscience should be made Doctor of the Chair, It is the most sound
Divinity Reader, and oftentimes the most satisfying Casuist in the world, and
the best resolver of all our doubts.

Secondly, (...) signifies rather an Interrogation or demand, as Beza says
well upon the place, though our translation render it (...) pro respondere, and
testificari vix putem satis apt usurpari posse Beza 1 Pet. 3. 21 Jud. 13. 12.
an answer. Conscience has many questions to put, and it is still the nature
of conscientious men to be enquiring, as Manoahs wife, when she had the Angel
to resolve her, now tell us, how shall we order the Child? What shall we do
unto him? All that came unto John, wrought upon by his ministry, came with
this question Luke 3. 10, 12, 14. The most proper, and pertinent question, And
what shall we do? What shall we do? said the Publicans, and People, and
Soldiers: So is conscience still inquisitive, desiring to go upon safe
grounds. It inquires at the mouth of God. 1. By Prayer, as David, Lord shall I
go? 1 Samuel 30. 8 Joh. 34. 32. Luke 10. 26 Isa. 8. 20.
as Job, That which I see not, teach thou me. 2. By the word, How is it
written? How read thou? is consciences question; And to the Law and
Testimony, is consciences resolution. 3. Conscience enquires at the Priests
lips, and seeks the law at his mouth. Mal. 2. 7. Comes unto him for private
Conference, and satisfaction. 4. Conscience puts cases in writing, and
propounds his doubts and scruples, and desires resolution; As the Corinthians
had written to Paul, in a certain case which did much perplex them, desiring
his resolution, 1 Cor. 7. 1. Lastly, Conscience has many questions to put home
to a man's self; He must commune with his own heart, and cause his spirit to
make a diligent search in himself, as the Psalmist says, he sometimes did.
Psalm. 77. 6.

From whence it is that you see still young Converts, they have many questions
to make, and cases to put; they dare not walk at a venture (as the word is,
Levit. 26. 21, 23, 27.) for that is indeed to walk contrary to God, as it
there rendered.

CHAP. XI. Of the honest dealing Conscience.
GOod Conscience must not only be Good Of the honest dealing conscience.
at seeing, and good at saying, but as good at doing; therefore I add after
the well-sighted, and well spoken Conscience, The well-dealing. This which we
call the honest Conscience, a conscience of absolute necessity in a Christian.
so much of honesty before men, so much of good Conscience before God; want
common honesty; and all that is left, is but hypocrisy. Say not this is
morallity, and it is to be found among Heathens; It is Divinity also, and must
be found among Christians; religion teaches to honor it, though not to rest
in it. And the Christians care must be not to despise it, but exceed it. Of
this good conscience Paul glories, while he says, Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us;
for we trust we have a good Conscience in all things, willing to live honestly.
To live honestly in all things, is an honor to an Apostle, and an undeniable
argument of a good Conscience. Visibility and Universality are Popish marks of
a right Church; but they are Protestant marks of a good Conscience, and a right
Christian. We have a good Conscience.] The word translated Good ((...))
signifies also honest; of this the adverb ((...)) is derived, translated
honestly. It might as well have been read, We have an honest Conscience, (and)
in all things desirous to live honestly: where all good Conscience is to be
seen, Act. 23. 1. there all Honesty is to be seen. So 1 Pet. 3. 16. Peter
exhorts to this Good Conscience. Having a good Conscience, that whereas they
speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed when they falsely
accuse your good Conversation. A good Conversation without will proclaim to all
the world a good Conscience within. And a good Conscience ever binds us to our
good behavior toward men. The Apostles Rule is Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever are lovely, and whatsoever
of good report, those seek and do, as well as whatsoever things are true, are
pure, are holy. And 2 Cor. 8. 21. Providing things honest not only in the
sight of God, but in the sight of all men. Good Conscience must have Jacobs
hands as well as Jacobs voice, must as well deal fairly as speak fairly. Good
Conscience must look to a Thread, and to a Shoolatchet, as Abraham did. And
must be able Genesis 14. 23.
to say in the sight of all the world, as Moses Number. 16. 15
and Samuel, Testify against me, whose ox, or whose ass have I taken? whose
gold, or silver, or apparel have I purloined, or coveted? 1 Samuel 12. 3 Act. 20.
23 2 Cor. 7. 2.
whom have I defrauded, or whom have I circumvented in bargaining? The good
ground in the Parable which makes best use of the Word, is expounded by our
Savior to be the good and honest heart, Luke 8. 15. And the man who is to be
admitted into Gods holy place, must be such an one as has clean hands and a
pure heart, Psalm. 24. 4. Godliness and honesty are joined together, 1 Timothy 2.
2. as being inseparable. The life of Godliness is bound up in the bundle of
Honesty. They are mother and daughter, as Naomi and Ruth, and cannot part
company. Where Ruth 1. 16, 17.
thou go, I will go, says Ruth, where thou dwell, I will dwell, where
thou die, I will die, and be buried with thee, Thy God is my God; so these
go together, stay together, live together, die together; for they both serve
one and the same God. Piety without Honesty is but seeming Piety, and really
Pharisaical Hypocrisy; and all Honesty without true Piety is but
Semi-honestie, and at best but Philosophical, and Paganish morality. Each of
them parted make but half of a man. Both together make a complete Christian.

The Good Conscience must ever consider what may stand with Honesty. When
carnal Reason and worldly Policy bid thee run with Gehazi, and say, This thou
may do, and that thou may get, here is an Opportunity, neglect it not;
Good Conscience says to them as Abner to Asahel, Turn aside from following
me, for how shall I then hold up 2 Samuel 2. 22.
my head before Joab? How shall I answer this another day? Therefore no more
Gain then what will stand with Godliness. What I may take with Honesty, that I
will take; what I can keep with Honesty, that I will keep; what is offered
upon Terms of dishonestie, I may not, I will not receive; what is received in
way of dishonestie, I must and I will restore, as did Zacheus. Better Salvation
should Luke 19. 8.
come to my house when I am restoring, then damnation to my soul, and a curse
into my house, and upon my Posterity, when I am receiving. God shake every man
out of his house and estate that restores not what is injuriously gotten,
says Nehemiah: and good Neh. 5. 13.
Conscience says Amen to it. It shall never be said of me, says the
conscientious man, that sin, or Satan, or fraud, or rapine, or usurie, or
briberie has made me rich: for the fire of God shall consume the Tabernacles
of briberie, says Eliphaz, Job 15. 34. And the Congregation of hypocrites
shall be desolate. But he that walks in righteousness, and speaks in
uprightness, he that despises the gain of Oppressions, and shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, (viz. he that is every way a just, an
honest, and a plain dealing man,) he shall dwell on High, his Place of defense
shall be the munition of Rocks: Bread shall be given him, his waters shall
be sure. Isai. 33. 15, 16.

But besides what has been said, you may know an honest Conscience by these
Notes.

1. He has engraven in his heart this Maxim, I must be a Law to my self. h.
e. though Romans 2. 14.
there were no humane Law to force me to reason, and duty; no magistrate to awe
me, no minister to reprove, no shame for ill done, no praise for good done; yet
must I live conform to the old Law written in the heart of man. This man needs
not his neighbor to call on him, saying, know the Lord, do Heb. 8. 11 Intimus
magister.
justice, etc. For he is so taught of an inward monitor abiding in his heart.
In this regard it is said, The Law is not written for the righteous, 1 Timothy 1.
9. For if other men were as honest as he, there needed not so many Laws, and a
few Magistrates would be sufficient.

2. This is his Oracle, Whatsoever you would others should do to you, do you
the same to them, Mat. 7. 12. Which is the Epitome of the Law and prophets, and
is the voice both of Scripture, and Nature.

This, Lactantius says, is the very root and foundation of all equity. And
Jerome to a Epitome Diu. Instit. Cap. 3.
good woman, commends this saying, as the breviary or abridgement of all
righteousness, to be written on her heart as a compendious Commonitory, quasi
ad compendiosum locum quoddam Commonitorium illa tibi evangelij eligenda
sententia est, and superscribenda cordi Jerome ad Celantia.
tuo, quae ad totius justitiae Breviarium pro fertur ore Dominco quaecunque
volueritis, ut faciant vobis. homines -- haec tibi quasi speculum quoddam
paratum, and ad manum semper positum qualitatem tuae voluntatis ostendat etc.

Therefore says Paraeus upon the place, Par. in Mat. 7. 12.
Christ would make every honest man his own rule and law, in his dealings with
his neighbor. Would I like it well that others should suspect, envy, censure
me with their tongue when I am absent; or abuse, deride scorn, and make jests
of me, to my face; or would I be content that they should overreach, defraud,
and oppress me in their actions? then let me do the like to them, otherwise
not.

3. You may be bold to take his word, and trust him; He cannot deceive, though
he may be deceived, Errare potest, non fallere. His word is as his Bond, his
Bond is as his Oath, and his Oath is as his Soul. By any of these you have him
bound, and bound in Spirit: And let him go whether he will, he has his Keeper
with him. He makes Conscience of what he promises; because his promise came
from a Purpose of performance. He reckons of his day debt, promise to thee,
when thou little think of him. He holds nothing to consist with his honor,
which does not with honesty, whence the ancients derived honor and honesty, on
from the other.

Honest Regulus, the glory of the Romans being let go (when a prisoner of
war) upon his Parell, or word passed to return, if a Peace were not agreed
between his Nation, and the Carthaginians, made good his promise, although he
knew it were as much as his life were worth; Fides data est servanda etiam
hosti. When the honest man has past his word, he says, quod dixi, dixi, what
I have said, I have said, as Pilate after his writing said, quod scripsi,
scripsi, what I have said, or written shall stand.

4. You need not fear to take his money, his wares, his weight, or his measure;
All are current, and warrantable. His money current, and weight as Abraham's
and Jeremie's was. Genesis 23. 16 Jer. 32. 9.
He clips not his Shekel. His weight is down weight, his measure full measure.
His Ephah, Omer, and Shekel are all Standard-proof. He knows nothing more
abomination to the Lord then a false balance, Prove. 11. 1.

5. This man as you may take his word, or his money, his weight and measure; so
you may take his accounts, he will be faithful and punctual in all his
reckonings, disbursements and receipts wherein you entrust him; He will not
set down Laid out more, or Received less then the truth is. As those honest
workmen in Jehojada's days that repaired the House of the Lord, laid out
according to their Trust as far as was needful for Repairs, and brought in the
Remainder; and it is said, 2 Kin. 12. 15. etc. That they did not so much as
reckon with them, for they dealt so faithfully. Here is a commendation for a
public officer, or a private servant, he brings in no false bills, but will
be as true in his trust, and accounts, as if you had your eye always on him;
you need not so much as question 2 Ki. 22. 7.
his reckoning, whereas such a dishonest servant as that was spoken of Luke 16.
6, 7. must be looked after, or he will wrong the Public to augment his
Private, and will not fear to empoverish his master, or deceive his best friend
to enrich himself.

6. This man ever respects not a Person, so much as a Cause. The Cause of the
stranger, poor, fatherless, or widow is more to him, then the face of the rich,
or the Letter of the mighty. He says with Levi, to his father, and to Deuteronomy.
33. ^
his mother, I have not known you, nor did he acknowledge his brethren, nor
knew his children, because they kept thy Word.

He is the man whom the Ancients were wont to Emblem with a Pair of Balances
in one hand, a Sword in the other, and both his eyes shut, To dispense to all
Justice distributive, or commutative indifferently, without respect of persons.
Tros, Tyriusve -- All is one. I am Debtor, says he, to Jew, and Gentile, to
do what is honest, though engaged to neither. In all matters in difference he
inclines to that party where Reason, not Interest, swaies him; Amicus Plato,
Amicus Socrates, but magis Amica veritas. This man is my friend, and that man
is my kinsman, but good Conscience is my best friend, and truth my nearest
kinswoman.

7. This man will sooner suffer any prejudice himself, then prejudice his
neighbor. He swears to his own hurt and damage, but changes not. No
Prejudice valuable to the wronging Psalm. 15. 4.
of his Neighbors exspectation, and his own Conscience. It was a famous speech
of that noble Pomper when in a time of a great dearth at Rome, he was chosen
Curator Annonae, and had now made great provision of Corn for the relief of his
Citizens, being ready to set forward, there arose a storm, the Pilot persuaded
him to stay, because of the danger; It matters not, says he, hoist up sail,
put out to Sea, it is necessary for us to (...).
sail, to live is not necessary. To stay and reserve our selves is less
agreeable with our honor, then to go and releeve our country is agreeable to
our duty.

CHAP. XII. The tender Conscience.
THe next good Conscience is the tender The Tender Conscience.
Conscience; a disposition which the world calls Niceness, Simpleness,
Peevishness, Timorousness, Scrupulousness, and what not? But it is the Right
Temper ever of the gracious heart, it is that heart of flesh promised in the
New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 25. and is that new Divine Nature wrought in the New
Creature, when once the old heart of stone is taken out; it is that Tremulous
and Contrite Spirit in which God delights to dwell, Isai. 57. 15. next to the
Company of an Angel, or a glorified Saint. Thus says the High and lofty One,
that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name Isa. 66. 1, 2.
is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones. This was that gracious disposition for which
Josiah was praised and spared, Because thy heart was tender, and thou have
humbled thy self, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, etc. and
have rent thy clothes, and wept before me, behold, I will gather thee unto thy
fathers in peace, and thine eyes shall not see the evil which I will bring upon
this place, says the Lord, 2 King. 22. 19, 20.

This was that self-smiting that was still observed in David's heart, which
showed him to be of a right tender Conscience. When he had done a very small
injury to his deadly enemy Saul (the Lords Anointed) not touching his life,
but his lap, not cutting his Throat, but his Coat, his Heart smote him much;
he wished it had been to do again, he would not then have done it, 1 Samuel 24.
5. and 2 Samuel 24. 10. when he had committed that other sin of pride in
numbering the people, His heart smote him again, he cries out I have sinned
greatly, I have done very foolishly: This is that tenderness in converted
Ephraim, Jer. 31. 19. who smote on his thigh, when sensible of his sinful
miscarriage, and in the penitent Publican, who smote himself on his breast,
Luke 18. 13. A gracious and blessed frame of heart it is.

But opposite hereunto is that temper of the wicked, and graceless heart, which
the Scripture brands with many ignominious names. The Heart of Stone, Ezekiel. 36.
26. The heart of Adamant, Zech. 7. 12. The Brawny, dedolent Conscience, Ephesians. 4.
19. The spirit of slumber, or Lethargy, Romans 11. 8. Eyes without sight, set in
the head. The whores forehead, Jer. 3. 3. The stiff neck, iron sinew and brow
of brass, Isai. 48. 4. The seared Conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2. Greediness of sin,
Ephesians. 4. 19. Isai. 56. 11. The Enlarged, Capacious, Grave-like, or Hell-like
conscience, which is as an Open sepulcher, receiving all that comes near it,
entertaineth the most stinking carcass, Hab. 2. 5.
and is not sensible, or offended; A whole man at one morsel, and is not
satisfied. He is as Hell, says the Prophet, that cannot be filled, Prove. 1.
12.
or as the daughter of the hors-leach, crying unsatiably Give, give, yet never
says, Enough; can swallow a whole house, yea, it may be a widows house, yet
can make a Long Prayer after all; But has no remorse before, nor makes any
Restitution after. This rusheth furiously into the Battle, cries Aha at sin,
as the Job 39. 25.
horse at danger. This Conscience could drink up Jordan, is as impenetrable as
Leviathan, which esteems iron as straw, brass as rotten wood, when sharp
stones are under him, he plays upon them. He laughes at the shaking of the
spear, his heart is a^ the nether millstone, Job 41. Per totum. This has made
a Covenant with Death, and is at agreement with Hell; He regards neither one
nor other, nor fears either God or man; But eats the bread of wickedness,
and drinks the wine of violence, whose sleep is less that night, when he has
done no mischief in the day, Prove. 4. 16, 17. No surer note of one going to
hell in all the world, then this temper. This is Satan's flesh-brand, or the
mark of Cain, as there is no one surer note of the state and truth of Grace,
then tenderness of Conscience wheresoever it is found.

These are past knowledge, Psalm. 14. 4. Past shame, Jer. 8. 12. Past feeling,
Ephesians. 4. 19. Past sorrow, Romans 2. 5. yea, Past fear, Psalm. 36. 1. and at last
after these many steps to Hell, come to be Lamech-like, Genesis 4. 24. Past hope
in this life, Jer. 2. 25. And past Recovery, or past salvation in the next.

To prevent this, labor after tenderness of Conscience, which is that, that
does make and keep, and manifest a good Christian.

A twofold tenderness.
But here I must distinguish of tenderness; it is twofold; one Culpable,
faulty, and diseased. Laudable necessary, and from soundnes.


There is a tenderness of body sometimes, which proceeds from Soreness,
sickness, infirmity. As there is a lively sen^ibleness proceeding from health,
and a right constitution; So there is a faulty and vicious tenderness, and
imbecility of spirit, which is five-fold. There are five tender Consciences
thus, A faulty tenderness of Conscience.
and never an one of them good.

1. When one is so tender, that he cannot endure to be touched with a reproof.
This is a tenderness indeed, but an unsound and discased tenderness; not so
tender but that he dare adventure on a sin, but he must not be told of his
sin; The man who has a byle, when you touch him, says, gently I pray, it is
tender, when indeed it is sore, and putrifi'd, and harbors much filth within
it. This is an ill tenderness. Thus only wicked ones are tender, and
squeamish, prophecy to us smooth things, say they, Isa. 30. 10. Give us of your
softest Pillows, Ez. 13. 18. Oh how tender was Amaziah, the priest of Bethel,
Amos 7. 10. He complains of Amos, as a turbulent, and factious Preacher, The
Land is not able to bear al his words, he must be restrained. How tender were
Jeremies accusers, Jer. 38. 4. We beseech thee let this man be put to death,
for be weakeneth the hands of the people, and he seeks not the welfare of
this people, but the hurt. He is no ways well affected to the State, but a
malignant; So they, Act. 5. 33. and 7. 54. were cut to the heart and gnashed at
Steven with their teeth, as if they could have eaten him up. Thus tender was
the High Priest, who rent his clothes at Mat. 26. 65
Christ's supposed blasphemy, when he should have rent his heart for his own
treason, cruelty, and hypocrisy. All this is not tenderness, but effeminate
softness outwardly, and inwardly the greatest hardness. There may be mollities
animi, where is maxima durities cordis, as in the godly there may be summa
durities or is, and vultus, when maxima mollitudo cordis, Ezekiel. 3. 9. Christ's
face was harder then flint, Isa. 50. 7. Ezekiels then Adamant, when the heart
was most tender. So e contra, wicked men have tender skin, and flesh, hard
heart and spirit. Their Passions are soft and touchy; Their dispositions hard
and unruly; Their love to their sin is tender, to their souls as cruel as
the Ostriches of the wilderness, Lam. 4. 3. This is a corrupt softness, like
that in a rotten Plum, which if you touch, you break; But it has a hard stone
in the midst that will not break. So have these a hard stone in the heart,
when so much outward tenderness. But the right tenderness is that which was,
Act. 2. 37. Their hearts were peirced, and being pricked in heart, they cried
out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? They fall not out with Peter, but
with themselves. As Austin looked upon it as a mark of grace in Alipius, when
he had reproved his sin, viz. Stage plays, Quod ilius acciperet ad
succensendum mihi, accepit honestus Adolescens ad succensendum sibi, and ad me
ardentius diligendum. When another would have been angry with me, the honest
youth (says he) was only angry with himself, and loved me the better. Right
tenderness is to be very sensible of the evil of sin, and the danger thereof;
thereupon impatient of the sin, but easily patient of any Reproof; Let the
righteous smite me, Psalm. 141. 5. that my heart may not stab me another day;
and let him reprove, that my own heart may not reproach me: you see the sound
hand will endure touching and shaking, when the sore hand must not be so much
as touched.

2. Scrupulousness; As when one has got some stone or gravel in his shoe, he
cannot set his foot on the ground without complaint; he cries out Tender, when
his foot is plainly Galled; This is no good tenderness neither: Take out this
Gravel, and he may walk without any more ado. The Apostles rule will help him.
Romans 14. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. His meaning is
not that he would have us at adventures lay aside all Enquiries; but only rid
our selves of unnecessarie, and unprofitable scruples. Unnecessarie
scrupulousness is when a man makes a stir about that in which God's Word is
silent, and makes a sin where the Scripture makes none. The priests made one
while a great scruple of going into the Praetorium, the house of a heathen Joh.
18. 28.
man, least they should be ceremonially defiled, and so held from the
Passover, but made no matter of defiling themselves morally with the guilt of
Innocent blood. Another while they made a great scruple of putting the money
into their holy Corban, because the price of blood, but questioned not the
giving the money unto the same end, and taking the blood it self upon
themselves and their children, Matt. 27. 25. These tithe mint Mat. 23. 23
and Cummin; and yet neglect the grand and weighty matters of the Law, which
God gives especially in charge, Mercy, truth, and Judgment; keep a stir about
washing of pots, Mar. 7. 11.
and hands, make nothing of filial disobedience to parents; strain at a Gnat,
swallow a Camel; cannot walk upon even ground, yet can dance barefoot among
thorns, and kick against the Pricks. Herod had a great deal of this Conscience,
he had passed his word, and given his Oath; to go back were perjurie, but to go
forward by virtue of his rash oath to commit murder is Piety; when the rule is
injusta vincula rumpit Justitia. Unnecessarie and vain scruples the Apostle
would have us lay aside, 1 Cor. 10. 25. asking no question (in such cases) for
Conscience sake.

3. A third faulty tenderness, is that too much facilness, and flexibleness of
spirit to every Counselor, and Enticer, whereby the blind often follows the
blind, or at least, the blind follows the lame: for which Ephraim was broken
in Judgment, because he was so ready and obsequious at every commandment,
Hos. 5. 11. of this man you may say he is

Gereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper.
As wax for softness, prone to every vice,
As thorns for sharpness, stern to best advice.
Young and tenderhearted. Mollis animo. Jun.
Thus tenderhearted was Rehoboam, 2 Chro. 13. 7. Tener cord. But to whom was
he so tenderhearted? It was only to the young men's Counsel. The wiser Old men
found him not so tender to better counsel, but pertinaciously stiff to them,
and immoveably resolved not to yield in the least to any submissive Petitions,
for the ease of his aggrieved Subjects. Zedekiah, who rebelled most against the
word of the Lord of any other, was as easy and flexible to the Princes as
could be imagined, Jer. 38. 5. The king is not he who can do any thing against
you, says he to the Princes; but as inexorable and refractorie to Jeremy as
was possible. These the world calls your Good Natures, you may work them as you
will, and lead them whither you will; but who is it that may lead them? Not
God, not the godly Minister, not his religious Parents; but his vain
Companions. But he only can be said truly to be of a Good nature, who is
partaker of the Divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
I am sure Christ sets us another Example. He was as immovable as a Rock, as
hard as Adamant, he set his face as flint, Isai. 50. 7. When he heard any evil
motioned, Get thee behind me, Satan, Matt. 16. 23. said he to Peter. So to
Satan tempting, Matthew. 4. 10. Get thee hence Satan; But to God, It is my desire
to do Psalm. 40. 8. Joh. 6. 38.
thy will, O my God. I came not to do my own will, but his that sent me. And
to John, It becomes Mat. 3. 15. Eze. 3. 8. 9.
us to fulfill all righteousness. This is the right good Nature, to have a face
of flint, a forehead of Adamant, harder then flint, as Ezekiels was to any
evil motion, but as soft as wax to any good: Bray him in a mortar among wheat,
yet is he steadfast and unmovable: This hardness is better then all that former
tenderness.

4. The fourth ill tenderness is of that Conscience which is weak and sickly
((...) the Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 8. 12.) and which is easily cast down and
discouraged: This was the disease of the stony ground, it was so Mat. 13. 21.
tender, that it was offended at the Cross. Outward tenderness is a disease,
inward is a virtue; The stony ground was outwardly tender, but inwardly hard,
therefore could not endure any outward scorching; The good ground on the other
side was inwardly soft and tender to give Root to the seed received, but it was
outwardly hardy, able to endure all weathers. This kind of Conscience cries, A
lion in the way, I shall be torn in the streets. This picks a quarrel at the
Gospel for some Circumstances, Prove. 26. 13
Why do thy disciples eat with unwashen hands, and walk contrary to the old
Ceremonies of the fathers? Mark 7. 2.

This bird-eyed conscience, as I may call it, starts (as the bird-eyed horse)
at every leaf shaking, or bird flying, and lays his Rider on his back, or
flings him into the dirt happily; this is a pitiful weak conscience: This was
the conscience of the mixed multitude, and of the ten spies; they started at
sight Number. 11. 4.
of an Anakim, and would not by any means Nu. 13. 31.
advise the people to endanger themselves by adventuring forward.

This conscience is known by these ill Properties: 1. It is apt to scruple
things lawful, it eats nothing but herbs, Romans 14. 2. 2. It puzzleth and
perplexeth it self about businesses of no great moment, about days, meats,
etc. Touch not, taste not, handle not, Col. 2. 21. 3. It is apt to judge him
that (upon better grounds) is not of his mind and practice, Romans 14. 3. Let
not him which eats not, judge him which eats, which he is very apt to do.
4. He is apt to stumble, Romans 14. 21. 5. Or to be grieved, and distasted, Romans
14. 21. Occasions whereof as it is the duty of the strong and wise Christian
to avoid, so it is the property of the weak to be subject unto.

5. And a fifth ill tenderness there is of the Conscience all awakened, but such
as cannot take any rest more, Psalm. 77. 2, 3, 4. My sore ran all night, and
ceased not; my soul refused comfort, I complained and my spirit was
overwhelmed: Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot
speak. So the like Psalm. 51. 3. My sin is ever before me. Psalm. 38. 17. I am
ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me. This is a sad and
painful, if not sometimes also a sinful tenderness, when the soul sees nothing
but sin, guilt, and misery in it self; nothing but anger, wrath, and frowns
in God, and no hopes of Redemption by Christ, or of recoverie by the Spirit of
Grace. This is a sad Tenderness, or Soreness, or Bruisedness, or woundedness of
Spirit, through too much sensibleness of sin tending apace toward fearful
distrust of God, and despair of mercy. This poor soul is as a man who has all
his bones broken, and all his members dislocated, and out of Order, his heart
melting like wax in his belly, Psalm. 22. 14.
his spirit even failing, nor can he turn himself in his bed without pain. A
tenderness this is, but from disease, not soundness.

Or as you see another man who has a sore raw eye, or an eye that has been
scalded, or scorched in the fire, it is very tender, it cannot look upon the
Sun, or a Candle without offense; it always runs, drops, trickles, and
requires some soft silk, or fine Linen to be before it. So the conscience
scorched with sin, that has not the fire taken out by the Eye Salve made of
Christ his blood, Rev. 3. 18. and has not the fine silk and Linen you read of
Rev. 19. 8. is a sad Conscience though tender; it is raw and running, and sore,
and fiery. Such a Conscience is tender indeed, till it be the worse again.
Thus Leahs eyes were said to be tender; it was small Commendation to her, they
were debiles weak, as Junius renders it. Rachel was more fair, and more
beloved; her eyes were not so tender, Genesis 29. 17.

But the Right tenderness of Conscience is that due Proportion of sense in an
awakened ^. Right tenderness
and self-observing spirit, which labors to keep the soul guarded, and
unmolested. He takes up the resolution of Job, My heart shall not reproach me
so long as I live, Job 27. 6. q. d. I can endure reproaches enough from any
other hand, I am so outwardly hardy; but from my self, and my own Conscience, I
love not to be upbraided with inward heart-burning, and risings in my stomach,
I am inwardly so sensible.

This tenderness shows it self in respect of God. Others. Self.


1. Of God; in every thing to which God is In respect of God. Ex. 10. 26.
entitled, and has interest in. Moses stands for a Hoof. Our Savior tender of
the least Jod, or Title of the Law of God, He was all in Mat. 5. 18. Joh. 2. 17.
a flame with the zeal of God's house, when he saw it perverted to uses of
merchandise. This is not to be called Strictness, Scrupulousness, or
Rigidnesse, but right Tenderness, and true Zeal. The command of God to his
People is Exodus 23. 13. In all things whatsoever I have spoken unto you be
circumspect.

1. Particularly and principally he is tender of those things wherein God's
Glory and And Particularly, 1. Of Gods Honor.
Honor is concerned. Our Savior lays down this for a Maxim Joh. 7. 18. He
that speaks of himself, and acts for himself, seeks his own glory; but
he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. And he therein did vindicate himself against his
calumnious Opposers. Joh. 8. 49. 50. I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me. I
seek not mine own glory: There is one that seeks, and judges. This
tenderness makes a man altogether regardless of self, in respect of Name,
Credit, Family, Commodity, yea, of Life. I count nothing dear to my self, so
that God may be Act. 20. 24.
magnified, be it by my loss, or life, or death. The Holy Martyrs counted
nothing great, or precious, or base, or hard, in relation to God's Honor. When
the Christian women in Julians time were forbidden to sing their Psalms in
their houses, they sang out the louder, especially when the Emperor was to
pass by: And they sang out those verses of the Psalm. 115. 4. 8. The Idols of
the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They that make them
are like unto them, and so are all they that trust in them. Yea, they added by
the appointment of Publia the head and forwardest of the Company, to their
former wonted Psalms, that verse of the 68. Psalm. Let God arise, let his
enemies he scattered. And Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 19.
when the Emperor in a rage sent for her into his palace, and commanded her to
be beaten; She accounted her self honored, says the History, and went home,
and sang nevertheless as she was wont to do. Yea, the Ecclesiastical writers
of that Age tell us, that when that Apostate Julian had thrown down Christian
Religion, and set up all kinds of Religions, and Idol-worship; the Christians
would sing publicly, and at their burials, etc. Confundantur omnes, qui Magd.
Cent. 4. c. 3.
adorant sculptilia, etc. Confounded be all they that worship graven images. No
Restraint could hinder them from professing their Religion, and reproving his
impiety.

This is right tenderness, when in a clear cause of God it makes one like a
Brazen wall, Jer. 1. 18. or like Adamant, harder then flint, or like fire
invincibly resolute against all discouragements, to break through whatsoever
difficulties, to declare for the Honor and Worship of God.

Josiah was a man tenderhearted, no man more, yet in the Cause of God, and in
promoting Reformation in Religion, how beyond measure was he passionately
zealous, that he could not possibly escape the worlds Censure of immoderate
Rigor, Cruelty, and too much Severitie; yet he has this honorable
Testimony from the Spirit of God, 2 King. 22. 25. Like to him there was no
king before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
soul, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose any like unto
him. Yet this tenderhearted Josiah burnt idolatrous Priests alive, and
sacrificed them upon the altars, and burnt the bones of the dead: He threw down
Altars, and would not leave standing any of the old high Places, that some
worse Kings had set up, and some better Kings had in their days tolerated; he
would allow no longer diversity of worships, and plurality of Religions, upon
any such pretense as giving Liberty of Conscience. This had been a foolish
tenderness had he done so, and had (fitter for a weak Rehoboam) been the
greatest impiety that could have been showed to God, and the greatest cruelty
to men's souls.

Jeroboam and Jehu in their own things zealous, in matter of the subjects
liberty seemingly and Politickly tender, stout Champions against, and bold
Opposers of the Exorbitancies of Princes; but all was to build their own
houses; in the things of God as cold as Coleworts. Jeroboam frames a Politic
Religion suitable to the Temper of the People, and he would have Priests of the
Temper of his Religion; no Scripture Canon to settle his Religion by, or any
bred up in the Schools of the Prophets, (their then Universities) for his
Priests; but any gifted, or rather giving brother, though of the lowest of the
people, fit to Officiate in that Emploiment, which they atheistically look upon
as a humane but politic Invention to keep men in awe, and Order. Here was
State-tenderness indeed, but too much; but no Church-Tenderness at all; great
and tender respect had to their own glory, none to God's, and accordingly it
prospered.

On the other side you find Nehemiah earnest and tender in God's Honor and
Interest; careful he was, and strict order he gives that the Sabbath be more
religiously Neh. 13. 15 18. 19.
observed; how enraged was he to see the Temple, or any lodging thereunto
belonging to be perverted from that use which it was first intended for? he
threw out Tobiahs ver. 8.
housholdstuff, he required the Priests and Levites Portions and Tithes should
be restored, ver. 10. 11.
contended with the Nobles, and took on passionately, because the House of God
was forsaken; yet in his own particular concernments he was the most remiss man
in the world, to the loss of many a fair hundred of pounds that he might have
made of his Public Offices, as well as others before him, But thus did not he
because of the fear of his God, Neh. 5. 15.

2. This tenderness must show it self again 2. Of God's truth.
in respect of Gods Truth, which must be bought, not sold. How tender or
jealous do you find Paul, Gal. 2. 11. when the truth of the Gospel was in
danger? He that could in other things be made all things to all men, when truth
and holiness might not be prejudiced, would not admit of any halting in Peter,
but fell out with him, Resisted him to the face, and sharply expostulated with
him. The least Jod and Tittle of Divine Truth is very precious, and not to be
thrown away. As the least pieces of Jewels, or filings of Gold are very
precious, and to be made much of. He that breaks one of these least
commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Matt. 5. 19. In the second of the Revelation the Church of Ephesus is
commended by our Savior for Rev. 2. 2.
two things seeming contrary, her bearing and not bearing, her Patience and
Impatience: I know thy works, and labor, and patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, but have tried them that say they are Apostles, and
are not, and have found them liars, and have born, and have patience, and for
my Names sake have labored, and have not fainted. Here is bearing, and not
bearing, patience and not suffering commended, which seem to imply
contradictions: But it is easily reconciled. Any thing that touched self they
could bear; the least diminution of Divine Truth they could not bear. There is
a Patience that is a virtue sometimes, and sometimes a sin. There is an
Impatience that may sometime be a virtue, as oftener it is sinful. In thy own
cause show Patience, in God's cause take heed of too much Patience; Suffer
thou, that truth may not suffer; Show Patience in suffering evil, but in doing
ill, and approving evil, Show thy self impatient, it is then the better virtue.

And as the good man must show his tenderness in retaining of and contending
for old Truths; so must he take heed of venting any new doctrines. Be not too
busy in doubtful disputations, Take heed of stamping God's Image on our Coin,
and writing his superscription about our new and uncertain Conjectures, and
obtruding our own conceived new lights upon the worlds credulity. Thus may the
false prophets do, of whom we are foretold, who shall for filthy lucre, or airy
honor, make merchandise of Gods truth, others souls, and their own
Consciences; 2 Pet. 2. 3. whose Judgment slumbereth not, and whose damnation
sleeps not.

How happy is that Minister that can say, I have done nothing against the
truth, but for the truth; I have not followed cunning devised 2 Cor. 13. 8 2
Pet. 1. 16.
fables in setting forth the Gospel of Christ; nor are we as many who corrupt
the word of God, but as of sincerity, and as of God, in the sight of God 2
Cor. 2. 17
speak we in Christ. How sad is it Our Church should be troubled every day, and
weak unstable souls tossed to and fro with that which was the haunt of the false
prophets of old, I have dreamed, and I have dreamed, Jer. 23. 25. How much
better were it if all could say with the Apostle John, I write no n^w
commandment unto you, but the old commandment which ye had from the
beginning, and that old commandment (he says it again) is the word which ye
heard from the beginning, 1 John 2. 7.

Truth is not to be looked upon as a Garment that may wax old, and needs to
be new dressed, and fitted to the persons, and the times; but as the Sun which
retains its first Light, Luster, and Majesty; that though it bring forth the
same Light, and appear in the same Likeness every day, yet is it every day
welcome, and looked upon with delight.

God's Servants have always thought they could no ways do better service then
in seeking to stop new errors in their Course, or to procure Liberty and
encouragement to old Truths, therefore have been content to lose Places,
Offices, Life, that Truth might not lose ground, and would adventure any thing
to help forward Truth. There is a notable story of One Terentius a valiant and
Fortunate General under the Arrian Emperor Valens, who for the many great
services he had done, was bidden by the Emperor to ask whatsoever he would for
his Reward, and he should have it. But it is said, he made no use of this large
Offer, to ask Gold, Silver, Lands, or Offices, but made this only Request to
the Emperor, That one Public Church might be granted to the Orthodox and
sound Christians, who were denied the Public Exercise of their Religion. The
Emperor in a rage tore his Petition in pieces, and bad him ask somewhat else;
but he gathered up the torn pieces of his Petition, and made the same request
again, and said, Oh Emperor, you promised to grant me any Request that I
should ask, I have nothing else to ask but Magd. cent. 4. cap. 3.
this, I will have this, or nothing.

Thirdly, Tenderness of spirit will show it self as in regard of God's Honor
and Truth, 3. Of Gods commands.
which refer to God, so in respect of whatsoever does proceed from God, as to
yield and submit to every Command of God, for he is the man of a contrite
heart, who trembles at his Word, Isai. 66. 2. One word of God prevails more
with him then a thousand stripes with a fool; when God says, Go, he goes;
when come, he comes; when do this, he does it; when fly that, he flies it. I
must be about my Fathers business. I came not hither Luke 2. 49. Joh. 6. 39.
to do mine own will; but the will of him that sent me. These were the words of
the Son of God. It was an excellent Expression of a gracious heart, of
Baldassar a German Divine in an Epistle to Oecolampadius, Let the Word of God
come, let it come, and we, if we had Veniat, veniat Verbum Domi^i and
subm^^^mus ^lli, sex^^n^a ^obis si essent ^olla.
six hundred necks, would put them all under it. This man is now so tractable,
and easy to be ruled, that even a child with the Word of God in his hand may
lead him, as was foretold, Isai 11. 6.

Fourthly, this gracious Conscience does 4. Of Gods Threats.
ever yield, and melt, and break under any Threat of God's Word, or sense of
Gods Displeasure; Thus you read that Josiah was affected upon the reading the
Threats of the Law, his heart was tender, he rent his clothes, he mourned and
wept, 2 King. 22. 19. But when the like Roll of Judgment was read in the ears
of Jehoiakim, it is charged on them as a sign of their graceless obstinacy
and security, that not a man of them was afraid, nor rent their garments,
neither the King, nor any of Jer. 36. 24.
his servants that heard those words. This man says, Shall the lionroare, and
the beasts all tremble? Am. 3. 6, 8.
Shall the trumpet sound, and the people tremble? and shall the Lord God speak,
and we not be afraid? This gracious soul is like the waterie and dropping
cloud, which hangs low, and is full of the Influence of Heaven, and leaves a
blessing where it falls: whereas your high-flown, secure persons, and such as
in their own account need no repentance, but are past it, or like those higher
and brighter clouds, which have nothing in them.

Fifthly, he does much more yield and 5. Under afflictions.
humble himself under God's mighty hand in affliction, and if God put him into
that furnace, he comes forth as gold all melted, and refined, Job 23. 10.
and with a new stamp, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, said Job,
42. 6. whereas another uncircumcised heart will not be humbled, nor accept of
the punishment of his iniquity, but walk contrary to God, Lev. 26. 41.
after he has begun to walk contrary to him: Oh this is a desperate
condition: The Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they cry not when he binds
them, Job 36. 13.

Lastly, this gracious frame of heart does make the soul kindly thaw and melt
under 6. Under the loving kindeness of God.
the sense of the free favor, and abundant love of God; As you see the Ice
contracted and hardened with cold, dissolves of it self under the warmth of the
Sun. This is right Evangelical Tenderness; Shall not so much Love constrain me?
What cords shall draw me, if these draw not? After such deliverance as this,
shall we again break thy commands? Would thou not then be more angry with
us? say those godly and Gospel spirits in Ezra's time, Ezra 9. 14. This was the
gracious Temper of that poor woman, Luke 7. 38. dissolved into Tears by the
warm overcoming Love of Christ. Christ loved much, she mourned much; Christ
forgave much, she repented much. This is the right Gospel Temper to fear the
Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3. 5. Have you not seen the hardest Sugar dissolve
of it self when dipped into the Cup of wine? Nothing so powerfully breaks and
dissolves a gracious heart, or has the like mollifying virtue, as to be
steeped in the Love of Christ. Lord thou have ravished my heart with one of thy
Eyes. The Masters eye and heart of Love set Peter's heart afire, and his eyes a
broach. Just as you have seen the soft and gentle fire drawing out all the
moisture of the ripened Rose, and causing it to distill his dew in sweetest
drops. So is this Soul affected with the Love and Grace of God: Shall I sin
because Grace does abound? Shall I Romans 6. 1.
love the less, because God has loved me more? Is this to requite the Lord, to
be most straitened when his bowels have been most enlarged? Must not Judgments
needs break, whom Mercies cannot bend? Is he not worthy to have Judgment
without mercy, that despises mercy? And may not he exspect to find grace
turned into fury, who has already turned Grace into wantonness? This last is
the Tenderness of filial Love, as the former was of filial fear. And so much of
this first part of Tenderness in respect of God.

Secondly, Tenderness of Conscience must 2. In respect of others.
show it self in reference to Men as well as to God, and so both to all in
general; and to each man particularly, to godly, to wicked, to strong, to weak.

1. To the godly, and that, 1. Forbearing to 1. The Godly. 1. By not grieving
them.
offend one of them, one of the least of them by any just scandal, or grievance
on our part, Who is offended (at least through my default) and I burn not?
says tender Conscience. He is ever tender of the Peace, and studious of the
satisfaction of every honest man* If my meat, or my wine, or my apparel, or my
hair, or my Company make my brother to offend, I will eat no meat, drink no
wine, put on no such apparel, keep on no such hair, frequent no such company
while the world stands, least I make my brother to offend. This is the voice
of Tender or True Conscience, like that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 8. 13.

2. We must be as tender of their Reputation, 2. Not disparaging, or
discrediting them.
that we expose not them, or rather Religion in them to reproach. What an
excellent Instance have we in Joseph? who is called a just man for his labor.
He had looked upon Mary formerly as a godly and gracious woman, and she being
now with child, he knew not what to think on it; but having a purpose to leave
her (being formerly contracted to her) that he might not bring reproach upon
himself, he purposed to leave her privately, that the world might not take
notice of any such thing, that so he might not bring reproach upon her. Joseph
her Matt. 1. 19.
husband (says the Text) being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privately. This was his Care, his
Honesty, his Tenderness, and his Righteousness. But where shall we find the
like Tenderness or Righteousness now adays to salve the Credit, and conceal
the failings of our brethren? we are glad if we have any thing to
Paradeigmatize them for, and say, Report, and we will report it, Jer. 20. 10.
As if we were of the mind of him of whom Jerome spoke, whom he calls
passionately Scriptorem illiteratum, qui Procacitatem, and Ruffinus.
maledicentium in omnes signum estimet bonae Conscientiae, that is, to think
there is no other token of a good Conscience then to speak ill of other men,
and traduce their persons, and lay open their nakedness to their disgrace.
That godly Emperor Constantine was quite of another mind, who was wont to
say if he should find a Christian Bishop, or Pastor overtaken in any infamous
Act, he would rather pull off his purple Robe to throw upon him to cover him,
then that any should come by his means to hear of it, to the scandal of
Religion. I am sure this is more like to the Example of Christ, who casts his
Purple Robe upon us, that our sins should not be taken notice of.

3. This good Conscience will make us tender of disagreeing with, or dividing
from 3. Not dissenting, or dividing from them.
any who are godly, upon unnecessarie and frivolous grounds. Enter not upon
doubtful disputations, fall not upon questions that nourish jangling, but
destroy Edification: This is the common sin, or misery shall I say, of these
times? Or shall I say both? There is much of misery in this sin, and much of
sin in this misery. How much good is ill spoken of ordinarily, because it is
the good of such persons against whom we have taken up a prejudice? and how
much ill is gladly spoken of with the Joy of all the heart, when it is of some
persons, of whom we had rather hear ill then well? when we should study to
make and represent one another as good as we could, that we might congregate
and unite, we strive to make (at least to represent) one another as bad as we
can, that we may disgregate, and divide. This is a lamentation, and cannot but
be for a lamentation to all godly, and peaceable spirits, to see such unkind
Heats and Animosities raised and cherished among men (otherwise) godly,
judicious, and learned, differing about matters of no great moment; yet filling
the world with bitter invectives one against the other. Jerome is fallen out
with Ruffinus, and writes bitterly against him, Ruffinus thinks as much scorn
of Jerome, as he could possibly of him, he resolves not to die in his debt, he
writes as bitterly against him. The truth is though both good men, they were
both to blame. There was too much of passion in them both. Must they needs be
condemned, and abandoned by all men, whom some learned men have once condemned,
and that happily out of inconsiderate prejudice? must a godly man be presently
expunged out of the Calendar of Saints, and enrolled in the black Bill of
Heretics, because it pleases some to reckon him such? Must Jerome's only
Censure, and sharper writings against Helvidius, Jovinian, Vigilantius, Aerius,
or some others, make them ipso facto execrable Heretics? When upon through
disquisition and calmer consideration their reputed errors were but the
prejudices of those present times: Oh how were it to be wished that this were
more thought of upon all hands: So that Christians might not be to Christians
as the Jews were to the Samaritans. Joh. 4. 9. The Jews have no dealing with
Samaritans. And that one godly man might not be to other godly men as a
Shepherd to the Egyptian, Genesis 46. 34. and that our public meetings, and our
religions exercises there, might not be as the Israelites Sacrifice in the
sight of the Egyptians; both of them an abomination, Ex. 8. 26. How happy were
we if we had so learned Christ, as to put off with the old man, according to
the Apostles counsel, Ephesians 4. 31, 32. All bitterness, and wrath, and clamor,
and evil speaking, with all malice, and to be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us.

2. As we must be thus tender to all godly 2 Weaker ones.
ones in general, so especially to the weaker ones among them, no ways to
discourage them, despise them, or impose any burdens upon, much less lay any
stumbling block before them; but to bear their infirmities, To. 15. 1.
condescend to their terms, Romans 12. 16. And not to please our selves, but them
rather. This is to be like-minded to Jesus Christ, who is tender of all his
little ones that believe in him: He himself bears their infirmities, and
feels their sicknesses, Mat. 8. 17. He (says the Prophet) gathers up the
Lambs with his arm, and carries them in his bosom, and gently leads them
that are with young, Esaias 40. 11. He does not strive nor cry, nor is his voice
heard in the streets: The bruised Reed he breaks not, and the smoking Mat.
12. 18, 19.
flax he quenches not. But was among his Disciples as one that served, Luke
22. 27. He could wash their feet, and stoop to any the meanest office, to
leave with them a never dying example of matchless humility in remembrance. It
is no argument of weakness (said a learned man) but of much strength, Dr.
Staughton.
to be able to bend the body backward, and to recover ones self again; so to
stoop backward as it were, to our brothers weakness, implies much prudence and
strength of grace in us.

3. Nor are we to be so tender of the godly 3 Toward all men. Phil. 4. 5.
only, strong or weak, but our moderation must be known to all: The wicked
himself must see we are tender of his good, more then he is of his own good:
With meekness we are to 2 Timothy 2. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 15
instruct such as yet oppose themselves, with well-doing (not with ill
speaking, and contumelious reviling) to put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men, and we are to labor to take away all occasion from such as seek occasion
to speak reproachfully of us, 1 Timothy 5. 14.

4. But of all others we must show our 4 Of those nearest to us. Josh. 24. 15
selves tender most of the good of those who are nearest to us, that we and our
houses may serve the Lord, that all ours may be Gods. Job disliked sin in
others, but was most fearful Job 1. 5.
of it in his children, least they should in his absence curse God in their
hearts. Paul was especially jealous of his Corinthian Believers, with a godly
jealousy, whom he had espoused 2 Cor. 11. 2 and 6. 11.
to Christ, because his heart was enlarged to them. Austin says of his mother
Monica, That it was as much to her as the new bearing of a child, whenever
any child of hers did amiss. Toties filios parturiebat, quoties a Deo eos
deviare cernebat. This is right Religious tenderness, when we put no
difference between sin in a friend, and in an enemy or stranger, unless this
difference, to be more plain in rebuking thy friend, and dealing effectually
with him, to reclaim him. If thy signet on thy right hand, or thy friend Jer.
22. 24.
in thy bosom, that is as thy right eye, cause thee to offend, show most love
to him by the most dislike of his evil way. Be not like Pharaoh, who would
have an Israelite beaten, whether there was a fault or no; but his own
servants, in whom the fault was, must not be beaten, but borne out in all they
did, Exodus 5. 16.

Thirdly, In respect of self, tender conscience 3 In respect of self.
has much to do, and will show it self in these particulars:

First, in respect of finne already committed, his heart now smites him as often
as he sins, 1 Samuel 24. 5. and 2 Samuel 24. 10. his heart gives him no rest,
till he has made his peace with God by renewed repentance; and with man by
restitution, or other satisfaction, as Zacheus did. This is a certain evidence
of the life of grace within, when so sensible of sin committed: Thus was David
after his foul sins, his iniquities were ever in his eye, Psalm. 51. 3. and
38. 8.
they cost him many a tear, groan, yea they made him houle out ere he had
done, he made his bed swim with tears, his eye dim with Psalm. 6.
weeping, and his flesh abate with fasting. The like was to be seen in Peter,
after his shameful denying of his Master.

Austin tells us what a change he saw in Confess. l. 2. c. 1. Da castitatem da
continentiam, sed noli modo malebam morbum concupiscentiae, expleri quam
extingui. Conf. l. 8. c. 7.
himself, after his conversion in respect of sin, Exarsi aliquando saliari in
inferis. He said he could never have enough of it, he could have gone to hell to
fill his body with it; no bread to him like those husks: And though he was wont
sometimes to think of his sins, yet all his prayer was rather to have sin
pardoned, then purged and mortified: and his hearts secret wish was, that his
lusts might be satisfied rather then extinguished. He did pray indeed sometimes
for continency, and victory over his lusts, but he was afraid he should be
heard too soon. But after he had put his hand upon the hole of the Aspe, and
had done playing before the Cockatrices Den, he tells us what his sins cost
him: Then he had enough of hell, Rodebar intus, and confundebar vehementer
pudore horribili, quibus sententiarum verberibus flagellavi animam meam?

He then felt as he said, an inward gnawing worm within him, and a fearful
horror of shame fell upon him, that he fell out with himself, that he did
chide and rattle himself to the purpose in his privacy for his former folly,
and foul miscarriages.

2. In respect of sin not yet committed, He fears, and departs from evil, and
shuns all occasions and provocations leading to it, How can I yield to any such
wicked act, and sin against God, says Joseph to his immodest Mistress, Genesis
39. 9.
whom he did fly from as from a Serpent; he would not hearken to her, though
day after day solicited by her, either to lie with her, or be in her company.
Austin also tells us what care he had after that happy change in him, to keep
himself from his wonted sins, In illa grandi Rixa interioris domus, quam
fortiter Conf. l. 8. c. 8.
excitaveram cum anima mea in cubiculo nostro cord meo, etc. That there was so
much unquiet and chiding in his little house, his heart, between his lusts and
his conscience, they fell out so sharply, that they must needs part; and he
would never harbor his wonted lusts any more: A happy falling out, and a happy
parting.

3. Tender conscience flies those which the world calls small sins as well as
gross sins: He will not be found in a lie, no not in an officious or
excusatory lie, such as Gehazi's was: 2 Ki. 5. 25. Eccles. 9. 2. Mat. 12. 36
He sticks at a thread, and a shooelatchet, he fears an oath, even a lawful
oath, if not necessary. He flies your lesser Oaths (as they are counted) of
faith and troth; he takes heed of idle words, wanton looks, vain thoughts,
wishes and motions; he allows not a light behavior, an unseemly habit; he is
watchful against inordinate anger, immoderate cares or labor, even in his
honest calling; he knows in much laughter, and unseasonable mirth, there is
danger; in loquacity and multitude of words, there is no want of sin. He
finds foolish talking, and vain jesting, reckoned among sins, and forbidden;
that jesting (...), which among the Moral Philosophers went for virtue, and
which common Christians account Ephesians. 5. 3.
all their grace: He is better taught then to call any sin little, for there is
no Poison little, death little, or Hell little. He knows no duty small, for
there is no Commandment small. Christ, though he turned water into wine to
refresh others, would not at Satan's instigation turn a stone into bread to
relieve himself; Matthew. 4. 3.
he might have done it, for he was able; had he done it, who could have called
it sin? he was then in want, nothing to feed upon but hard stones, yet would
he not go out of Gods way, to gratify Satan's plausible pretenses, or to
relieve his own necessities. The matter in which the first Adam offended,
seemed not great, but the offense it self was great. More go daily to hell for
small sins unregarded, then for your most horrid Atheism, Blasphemy,
Desperation, or sin against the holy Ghost. Now a penny, and then a penny idly
spent, undoes more men then the desperate hundred pound cast with a Dye: There
is no heed taken of the one, when most abhor the other. Ahab received his
deaths wound through the little hole that was not heeded in his Armor. From my
secret sins cleanse me, Psa. 19. 12, 13.
says David, as well as Keep me from presumptuous sins. How circumspect and
tender were the Primitive Christians in this point? They would rather dye, then
cast the least grain of salt or incense into the fire, as the Pagans did to
save their lives; they refused to swear by the Genius, or good fortune of
their Emperors, although they never forbear to pray for their health and
prosperity. Eusebius tells of one that was apprehended, and led to the Altar to
cast on Incense, he refused, they were willing to save him, only they would
have him, as he had done nothing, so he should say nothing, and make no words:
They would say for him, that he had sacrificed; if it was a sin, it was their
sin, not his: But they could not so persuade him, when he came forth, he
protested that he had not sacrificed. Theodoret tells also of Marcus Arethusius,
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 20.
who having formerly in time of Constantius pulled down a Paganish
Idoll-Temple; and in Julians time being accused for it, was ^njoyned to build
it up again as it was, or give as much money as would do it: he would do
neither: They then fell to half Theod. l. 3. c. 6.
the sum; he refused still: At last they came so low, as to bid him give what
he would, never Perinde impium esse obolum in impium opus impendere, atque
summam pecuniae universam.
so little, were it but one halfpenny, so it were but any thing at all: He in
the midst of his extreme torments, constantly stood out, saying, It was all one
to give but a halfpenny toward the furthering of any evil, as to be at the
greatest charge: And therefore would not part with one single halfpenny to
such a purpose, though to save his life.

4. Tender conscience flies secret sins as well as open, and is best seen in
the dark, and most known by his Closet and solitary carriage; His warning and
memento is, Shall not God search this out? Psalm. 44. 21. He pitcheth up Labans
Watchtower, and makes this Inscription, No man sees, but God sees. Whereas
men of no conscience say, Who sees us, who knows what we do in the Chambers
of our Imagery? They write that sentence of Atheism over their secret and close
design, that was in the mouth of those miscreants Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 9. 9. The
Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the Earth.

5. The tender Conscience keeps a man as well from the guilt of sinful
Omissions of good, as of sinful Commissions of evil. Our Savior was as much
displeased with Peter's Mat. 16. 2^, 23.
carnal disswasion from a necessary duty, to go up to Jerusalem, to suffer as
with Satan's Diabolical persuasion to Daemonolatry, to Mat. 4. 8, 9.
commit the most horrid impiety imaginable, to fall down, and worship him in
the room of God: His answer was the same to both, Get thee behind me, Satan.
Thou must as well observe what thou do not, as what thou do. Though the
world makes small reckoning of omissions, God takes notice of what ever
opportunity we had, but neglected; and it seems, Mat. 25 42. in the day of
judgment, these are the sins which chiefly shall be charged on the wicked, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, because when I was hungry, thirsty, naked,
imprisoned, sick, you did not minister to me. Omissions are damning and cursing
sins it seems. Mat. 3. 10. The tree that brings not forth good fruit is for the
fire: The slothful servant is called the evil servant, and for his negligence
sentenced to Deprivation first, Matt. 25. 26. 30.
and after to Destruction, Cast the unprofitable servant into utter darkness.
No Negative Holiness, or Righteousness sufficient to approve to God, though it
may commend to men. There be as many prove Bankrupts in the City, and beggars
in the Country daily, through negative il-bus bandry, neglecting their
Calling, Shops, Opportunities, as by profuse expenses. Hence you have it in the
Proverbs; That the idle person may take the great waster by the hand, and call
him brother. He also that is slothful in his business is brother to him that is
a great waster, Prove. 18. 6. And as many go to Hell daily through omissions of
Duties required, though the world take little notice of any such danger, as by
foulest sins committed.

Sixthly, this Conscience you may ever know it by this, that it makes one fly
and avoid the common sins, and prevailing errors of the times. Nehemiah is a
famous instance, and pattern of such a good Conscience: he saw
Sabbath-Profanation, swallowing up the Priests Maintenance, and oppressive
Usury were the sins of that state and time: he sets himself with all his might
to restrain the offenses, and reform the offenders in all these kinds. First
for the Sabbath-Propbanation, see what a Covenant they made Neh. 10. 31. To buy
nothing which was brought to sell by others. But chap. 13. 15. to ver. 23. much
more: when some were treading wine-presses, bringing in sheaves, lading asses,
and brought in burdens into Jerusalem on the Sabbath, as if it had been like
any other day; He testified against the parties offending, declares his
judgment and Conscience against their practice. And to the Nobles and
Magistrates he goes expostulating with them for winking at such abuses. What
evil is this ye do, and profane the Sabbath Day? Did not our fathers thus? and
did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? yet ye bring
more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. And at last he puts forth his
coercive power, to prevent the like. A gracious heart, if he see the morallitie
of the Sabbath questioned, as now it is by some, he rises up for the strict
Observation of it the more zealously. So again, when he saw the Priests
maintenance embezeled, the Levites and Priests (the then Ministers) under
disesteem and poverty, the Priests Patrimony devoured by irreligious
encroachers, their appropriated Tithes and set maintenance detained by
dunghill-minded Professors, whose Gain is all their Godliness, and who would
maintain (it may be) there was nothing due to them Jure divino; They must
labor with their hands as well as others. The service of the House of God was
neglected, the Levites (through such discouragements) taken off from their
Ministry, and diverted to Mechanic Emploiments. They were fled every one to
his field (that is) they were fain to shift for themselves as they could, there
was Neh 13. 10, 11, 12, 13.
no Public Church maintenance for them; what does Nehemiah now in such a Case?
He does not go to the common people, whose hand and heart was in it, they would
all have cried out, No more tithes, no more Priests; Ease us of this charge;
The temporal things we sow upon our Priests are above all the spiritual fruits
we reap, or ever look to reap by them. Cannot Religion be upheld without these
Priests? cannot these Priests afford their service to God and his Church
gratis, and of free-cost? or, at least, be content to live upon the voluntary
Contributions of the Church? He does not go to these, I say, Reason is not to
be exspected among the multitude; but he goes to the Nobles, and chief
Representatives; he contended, and expostulated with them, Neh. 13. 11. Why is
the House of God forsaken? Shall our return out of Babylon be honored, and our
Reformation bear date and be made famous for our laying aside Sabbath, and
Public Church-worship, Churchmen, and Church-maintenance? Then I contended
with the Nobles, says he, Why is the House of God forsaken? What a reproach
will this be to our Reformation? The Nobles it seems were either too forward,
as well as others, to keep back and take away Church maintenance, or put the
people upon such designs, or else the Nobles were too backward to compel the
people to pay their duties. They made not such provision for the Ministers
livelihood and subsistence as they should, but now Nehemiah takes care to see
it amended, ver. 12. 13. So his detestation of their Usury, and Extortions, and
the Nehem. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
means he used for Reformation and Restitution, you may read in the fifth
Chapter. By this you see a godly man observes what are the prevailing sins of
the times, and he sets himself against them; when another now of no Conscience
thinks it a principal point of Prudence to give way to that which is like to
take and obtain the upper hand, yea, to sit still, connive, keep silence, and
it may be against his Conscience and Judgment to comply as Peter once did,
while he was in the high Priests Palace, he saw all spoke against Christ there,
and therefore thought it was to no purpose for him to speak for him; nor was it
safe. But it cost him dear. Yea, some account it a Note of singular Piety to
be forward in promoting such a way and opinion as it at present the prevailing
way, and rising opinion, though they see no weight of Reason leading thereunto.
Herein many dealing with their understanding, and poor Consciences, as they did
with their bodies, when Eutropius the Eunuch was in that Power and Greatness in
the Emperors Court, and favor, that he could raise and prefer whom he would,
yet would he never prefer any but those who were like himself, and first made
Eunuchs, whereupon many were so mad as to gain his favor, and attain their
ambitious ends, they did voluntarily geld themselves, and were content to Cease
to be men, that they might be more capable of an Office, or a great place. So
do not we see men of low spirits ordinarily to obtain a great place, and esteem
in the world, abase themselves even to hell (as the Prophet speaks) and Isai.
57. 9.
stoop to Nahashes conditions for a quiet life, and Eutropius his Terms for
preferment, to part even with their right mind, and to castrate themselves of
the best member they have (their Consciences,) ceasing to be Christians, that
they may become some body in the world. These are a fourth sort, and a new
Order of Eunuchs besides those three reckoned by our Savior, who are made
Eunuchs by men for the kingdom of earths sake, Mat. 19. 12.

7. The tender Conscience must fly as well all sinful Occasions, as Actions.
He must keep out of the way, and company of the Psalm. 1. 1.
wicked man, out of the chair of the scorner, he must not come into the chamber
of the wicked woman, whose eyes are snares, whose Eccles. 7. 26.
hands bands, nor near her doors, he knows that evil words corrupt good
manners, and evil Company soon corrupts good Natures. Set cold water over the
fire, it grows fire-hot. Can Prove. 6. 27, 28.
you carry coals in your bosom, and not be burnt? How soon did Nebuchadnezzar
degenerate into a beast by conversing with them; when he was driven from men,
and had his dwelling Dan. 4.
among the wild beasts of the earth? Bury a man in the earth, he soon becomes
earth. Judas took no hurt among the Disciples, leaving them, and going to the
High Priests, he was for ever lost. Peter in the garden took no hurt, in the
palace was ensnared. Austin tells how his friend Alipius having resolved
formerly against beholding their wicked plays and sports, once yielding
through importunity of friends to go along (but with a purpose not to be a
beholder, though he were upon the place) He went, he sat down, he staid, he
kept his eyes fast closed, till at last hearing the loud shout and acclamation
of the people he was not able to forbear opening his eyes, he returned a lover
of those vanities, which S. Austin did much bewail and lament in him. Et non
erat jam Aug. Conf. l. 6. cap. 8.
ille qui venerat, sed unus de turba ad quam venerat. Quid plura? Spectavit,
clamavit, exarsit, abstulit secum inde insaniam, qua stimularetur redire, non
cum illis, sed prae illis, and alios trahens.

How many have utterly undone themselves, brought their friends to shame and
grief, their states to beggary, their lives to untimely ends, their souls to
hell, and their posteritic to infamy by the wicked company they have kept?
nothing so infectious as this, nor has made more fall among Genesis 34. 1, 2.
men. Dinah walking out to see the daughters of the Hivites, and Sampson to see
the daughters of the Philistines, neither of them returned so well as they went
out. And Judge. 14. 1, 2.
again, How many by leaving Ministers, Ordinances, Assembling together, etc.
have made themselves a prey to seducers, and have been corrupted? They went out
from us, therefore it follows, they were not of us, says S. John: for if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, etc. 1 John 2. 19.

Eighthly, he must not only fly what is simply evil, but whatsoever has an
appearance of evil: for so are the Gospel Precepts, 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from
all appearance of evil; Fashion not your selves to the world, Romans 12. 2. But
be transformed from them, not conformed to them. Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things
are pure, are honest, are prais-worthie, and of good report, etc. These are we
confined to. By which Rules we see what to say to many things not by Name
expressly forbidden in any place of Scripture, as Stage-plaies, Dice, Cards,
mixed dancing, healths drinking, unseemly Hair, fantastical attire. But by
Consequence from those forenamed general Rules, and such like, Have no
fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Let not
fornication, or uncleanness, or covetousness be once named among you, neither
filthiness, or foolish talking, or jesting, which are not convenient, etc
Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 11.

How precisely careful were the Primitive Christians of doing, or approving
any thing that might any way redound to the wounding of Religion, and at which
any offense might be taken, or an ill construction made of it.

There were in Cyprians time, certain persons called Libellatici; they were
numbered inter lapsos; whereof, as Baronius observes, there were two sorts; the
one called Sacrificati, or Thurificati, Sacrificers, who had out of fear
yielded to cast Incense to their Altarworship, or Idoll-worship. The other were
called Libellatici; who had protested they could not in conscience yield to any
such irreligious act, nor would they, if they died. But they desired they might
not be urged to any such thing, but that they might have a protection against
force and persecution for refusal, and they would give some certain sum of
money for such a dispensation or protection: From whence they had that name
given them of Libellatici. One would think that this had been no great matter;
yet because it had an appearance of evil in it, they were looked upon as
persons offending, and deserving Censures, though not in an equal manner with
the Sacrificati. Whence Cyprian somewhat lessens their fault, and says they
were not, tam crimine quam errore decepti, guilty Mag. Cent. 3. cap. 6.
more of oversight, then of any great crime. Yet were these enjoined penance,
and received, upon promise that they should not so far yield any more after.

9 Note. In the ninth place you may further know the tender Conscience by this
Note: As he does ever fly whatsoever has an appearance of evil; so he dares
not always trust whatsoever has an appearance of good. He 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
knows we are to try all things, and hold fast only what is good, not what
seems so. He knows that remarkable speech of our Savior, Luke 16. 15. That
which is highly esteemed (...).
among men, is abomination in the sight of God. He still suspects that action,
person, and state of life, of which all men speak well. He knows that Satan
deceives more easily, and destroys the more dangerously when he assumes the
shape of an Angel of Light. The Meridian Devil, that destroys at noone day,
under pretense of new Gospel; and greatest perfection is more to be feared,
then the evil formerly walking in the darkness: Therefore are we warned to
try all things, we are charged to distrust many things, not to believe every
Epistle, or every Apostle, or every Gospel, or every Revelation, 2 These. 2. 2.
Rev. 2. 2. Gal. 1. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Mat. 24. 24. 1 John 4. 1.
or every Prophet, no nor every Christ, nor every Spirit, for there have been
discovered false Epistles, and false Gospels, false Revelations, and false
Prophets, false Christ's, and false Spirits: There be that lie in wait with all
possible craftiness to deceive, and by their fair speaking sometimes, their
high swelling and high flowen expressions other whiles, do with much art
inchant their credulous hearers, and deluded followers, into an admiration of
their parts, and to an unexamined implicit swallowing of their pernicious
Doctrines; and those oftentimes not the silly underlings, and the weaker
people, but those that are accounted godly, and had clean escaped 2 Pet. 2. 18
from them who live in error; yea sometimes the choicest wits, and greatest
parts have been entangled as far as any; as may be seen in that Imposter
Montanus, who gave out himself to be some Great One, no less then the
Paraclet, far above the Apostles; That his Doctrine and Gospel did contain
more excellent things then Christ and his Gospel: And such an overcoming
tongue and carriage he had, that he took with most; but that Tertullian, one of
the greater Luminaries of the world, a man of that eminency for learning, and
of that desert in the Church, whose Champion and Advocate he was against both
Pagans and Persecutors, that he, I say, should be bewitched into those horrid
assertions, to believe and affirm the same of that Montanus, who can read or
Tertulliamus Montanum Paracletum saepe nominat, spiritum sanctum in Apostolis
fuisse dicit, non Paracletum, Paracletum plura in Montano dixisse quam Christus
in Evangelio, nec plura tantum sed etiam meliora atque majora.
hear it, but with astonishment.

Tenthly, the tender conscience must go further; not only fly what appears
evil, and try what appears good, but take heed of what he knows lawful: He
dare not do all that he may do.

Ob. You Will say, This is simple niceness, not necessary tenderness.

An. He that will do all he may, often does more then he ought. 1 Cor. 6. 12.
and 10. 23. All things are lawful, but all things are not expedient. In use of
things lawful, he examines himself, and goes by three Rules:

1. This or that may be lawful, but is it expedient? when? how much? how far?
how often expedient?

2. It is lawful, but will it edify or offend?

3. It is lawful, but I must not suffer my self to be brought under the power
of any thing, though lawful; I may not drink too largely of the most wholesome
drink, no not out of my own Cup. If any thing be as lawful and needful as my
right eye or hand, if it make me offend, I must have done with it. Another who
has no sense of tenderness, enquires no further commonly, but is this or that
lawful, in any kind, by any circumstances, or will you say it is absolutely
unlawful? He loves not to be too straightly tied up with Rules, Cautions, and
Distinctions. But it is a sad and true saying, Licitis perimus omnes, All the
world is undone by lawful things abused, and mis-timed. This was the old
worlds, this Sodoms sin, the immoderate and intempestive abuse of what was
lawful. The worst our Savior says of them; was, That they eat, drank,
bought, sold, built Mat. 29. 38. La. 17. 27. 28.
and planted, married, and were given in marriage: All of which are lawful,
some of them altogether necessary to life, in their measure and time; yet when
they gave themselves to nothing else, and were insensible of the Judgments
coming on them, they perished in these. What is it to a man to be drowned in a
Butt of Malmsey, or in a Vessel or Pit of water? Say not therefore, Is such a
thing lawful, may it be done, or must it not be done? I will not fear to do
whatever the Law of God, or the Law of the Land will bear me out in. But we
must have more words and quaeries to an action, then this one, An licet, we
must ask, An decet, An expe^it? To swear, to go to law, to take away ^^e life
of another man, are sometimes lawful, but it is upon such and such
considerations, and circumstances; which circumstances of actions are as much
to be looked upon often times, by him who would keep peace and purity of
conscience, as the actions and things themselves. The wary beaten Bear fights
with more advantage hard at the stake, then at the full length and scope of his
Chain. Observe your measure, limit your liberty with bounds in lawful things:
For lawful and sinful are so near neighbors, that they border one upon the
other, and join in their utmost bounds.

11 Note. This man again in the next place dare not do always what is in his
power: Joseph had his unkind brethren now in his power, had committed one of
them to custody, yet set him free again, and sent them home in peace; This do,
says he, and live, for Genesis 4^. 18
I fear God. The man of conscience has other rules to walk by, then a
permissive Providence, or a prevailing power, and a concurring suitable
Opportunity. In maxima fortuna minima est licentia. Seneca.

12 Note. Nor dare he do what others have familiarly done before him, in his
place. As Nehemiah, though he knew what was the Governors power, and what he
might claim for his due; yea, what estates their servants had raised formerly,
yet thus did not he; his conscience would not serve him to raise himself and
his house, by imposing Taxes and Payments upon the People: He studied not how
much he might profit himself, and how good he might make his place, but how
much he might profit others, and how much good he might do in his place; he
sought rather prodesse then praeesse: He kept a Princely Court, an open House,
an honorable Table, an hundred and fifty at the least every day were at his
Neh. 5. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Table, yet did he not charge the Public with it; Yet for all this I required
not the bread of the Governor, because of the hard times that lay so heavy on
the People. Luther could glory in it, that he was poor himself, yet many were
enriched by him. And Austin says, Among all the Gallants that ever the Romans
could glory in, there was none to be preferred to M. Attilius Regulus, a brave
Commander, Quem neque faelicitas corruperit, Civit Dei, l. 1. c. 24.
nam in tanta victoria Pauperrimus permansit, nec infaelicitas fregerit,
because he got all he could for his Country, nothing for himself: He continued
a very poor man in his estate, notwithstanding the great Employments and
Offices he had: His whole Estate was (say the Historians) a parcel of Land of
seven acres, for his wife and children to live upon.

13 Note. The tender conscience does not only beware of sinful actions, but
does also bewail, and take sad notice of his sinful affections, and the
depraved dispositions of his nature: He mourns under the sin that dwells within
him, the Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind, and the Body
of Romans 7. 20. 23, 24.
Death, which he carries continually about him; these are his greatest burden:
Whereas the hypocrite, or the man of a looser and larger conscience, could be
content that sin should remain in him, so it would not reign, and too much
rage, to put him to shame, or into much disorder. He seeks more to have his sin
covered then cured, desires rather his sins should be curbed then conquered: If
he could keep his lusts and passions in some aw, and some good order and
decorum, he would desire no more; these Canaanites should live by him; he would
not expel, or destroy them, if they will but become Tributaries. If they bring
him in any Contribution-money, and pay him Tribute, and yield him any benefit;
if they will but hew him wood, and draw him water, he will be content to spare
them. Now these simple Gibconites will submit to any terms, so they may but
live.

The hypocrite (I say) could be well content his sin should be chained up, but
desires not that his sinful nature should be changed: He would rather have sin
qualified, then nullified, moderated then mortified. He would have sin weakened
and impoverished, but not wasted and destroyed. He would have sin his Captive,
and brought down on his knees, but not brought to execution; as Ahab spared his
Benhadad, when he was his Prisoner. In a word, he would have sin only
restrained, not ruined.

But now the Conscience truly tender of sin, hates his sin in every degree,
with a perfect and impartial hatred; he would have no mercy showed to this
Benhadad or Agag; no Covenant made with these Gibeonites: By his good will
these Canaanites should neither draw water, nor draw breath; his sin should
neither reign nor remain in him; he would have sin both covered and cured, but
rather cured then covered; he would have it both curbed and conquered, but
rather conquered; both chained and changed, but rather changed; he would have
it both weakened and wasted, but rather wasted; he would have it both captived
and executed, but rather executed; he would it should be qualified and
mortified, but rather mortified and nullified; he would it should be restrained
and ruined, but rather utterly ruined. And this is the right property of a
tender Conscience, which makes a man tender and compassionate to his soul, but
unexorably hardened against his sin, because either sin or he must die, if he
kill not that, it will kill him. Therefore as it is said in that sore and
straight siege of Jerusalem, The hands of the tender and pitiful women did
slay and boil their own Lam. 4. 10.
children, for if they had not killed and lived on their own children, they had
died themselves: The Law of extremity here overcame the Law of nature, and made
the mother cruel to her child, yet is she called a tender and pitiful
mother. So the soul being long besieged by the Ministry of the Word, and at
last close begirt with an Army of convictions and terrors, legal terrors and
threats, and inward horrors, and all within full of mutinies, after denouncing
of final Judgments, and the last Summons by Mercy tendered, and gracious
promises of life held forth: The Law of Nature is overcome by the Law of
Necessity and Extremity. Sheba's head is cut off, and cast over the Walls, to 2 Samuel 20.
save the City, and the soul that was formerly as tender of sin, as the mother
of her child, with her own hands slaies and strangles it.

14 Note. This man again, you shall find him ever consulting rather with
honesty, justice, and duty, then with honor, commodity, and safety: If he
promises, passes his word, gives his hand, bond, or oath, he changes not,
though it be to his own prejudice and Psalm. 15. 4.
damage. That famous Regulus I now speak of, having given his faithful promise
to return again, being discharged upon his Paroll, though he knew he should die
if he did make it good, returned again, yielded himself their prisoner again;
delivering this memorable Maxim to his eternal fame, Fides hosti data est
servanda, Faith is to be kept with whatsoever enemy, and upon whatsoever
peril. This also made Austin so much to extol him, as I said before, as a man
not altering with his fortunes; greatness made him not swell, nor affliction
could make him shrink? ^ad tanta exitia revertit Intrepidus. Aug. ubi supra.

Mr. Latimer, though he had notice before, that the Pursevant would come for
him, would not absent himself; yea, when the Pursevant having delivered his
Message, was willing to have left him behind, that he might have made an
escape, he made himself ready to go along with him. Here was no consulting with
flesh and blood, but with conscience, duty, and the honor of the Gospel.

15 Note. Lastly, this man alone in the cause of Christ and Religion, dare
stand it out against the whole world; as Athanasius and Luther in their
several Generations sustained the rage and fury of the age they lived in, yet
were nothing discouraged. The three most eminent of all David's valiant men,
purchased their honor by some singular exploit, one of them did the work of
many; Adino the Eznite, the first, lift up his Spear against eight hundred at
one time, and slew them. Eliazar the son of Dodo stood his ground, and endured
the shock of the Philistines Army, when all his men had left him: The like did
Shammah the third of them, 2 Sa. 23. 8, 9, 10. The Philistines were gathered
together in a Troop, where was a piece of ground full of Lentiles, the people
fled and left him, he stood the charge, and beat off the Philistines, and made
good his ground: These things did those three mighty men. So a man of
conscience considers not so much the danger that lies before him, as the duty
and necessity that lies upon him, to appear in such a time and cause. A fiery
Elias is the more jealous (which is the greatest measure of tenderness and
love) of the cause, truth, and worship of God, when the whole world is halting
between a God and no God, and when all his fellow Prophets were slain and
butchered, and he himself was left alone; yea, his life laid out for; then was
a fit time for him to show his courage and fidelity, or jealousy, as he calls
it, 1 Kin. 19. 10. We find by experience the fire to burn most scorchingly in
the extremest frosty weather, and the most generous conscience is then most
forward and fervent, when he lives in a cold and freezing climate.

And so much of the tender Conscience.

CHAP. XIII. Of the suffering Conscience.
THe last conscience we spoke of, was the Of the Passive and suffering
Conscience.
Tender Conscience, here we are to speak of another Conscience as good as that,
but quite of a different nature, that is, the Passive and hardy Conscience,
which is to admit of no fear, timorousness, or tenderness at all in it, as to
suffering; as the former was not to allow of any patience, or boldness at all,
as to sinning. Yet are they not so opposite neither as they may seem to be, but
both are to be found in the same persons; gracious dispositions always agreeing
together, and one helping and increasing another: The more of that Tenderness
we spoke of in the last Chapter, the more of this Passiveness if need be will
be found, of which we speak here; yea, this hardiness proceeds from that
tenderness, and is inseparable from it, therefore it is fitly handled next to
it. For as there is a bad, base, and sinful tenderness, that proceeds from as
sinful a hardness, or hardness, so is there a holy and honorable hardness,
that proceeds from the best tenderness. There is a childish softness, and
effeminate tenderness of face and flesh, which comes from hardness of heart;
and there is again, a gallant and resolute hardness of face and back, as unto
men, to endure all kinds of pains and tortures, which comes from real
tenderness of heart and conscience before God.

Good Conscience then must not be bred so daintily, and kept so tenderly, but
that it may digest the worlds hardest usage, and coursest fare; it must be
Patiens famis and frigoris, ensis and ignis, Patient to all sufferings,
impatient only of sin. This puts within a man a heart of adamant, and upon a
man a face of brass or flint: He is not dashed out of countenance with the
fiery countenance of enraged Tyrants, nor made to tremble at the sight of a
seven-times-heated fiery furnace. We are not careful to answer thee, O King,
in this matter.

This is that Conscience which St. Peter so highly commends, 1 Peter 2. 19.
This is thank-worthy, says he; if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully. You have not such an expression in all the Bible
again, that any thing should be thank-worthy with God; for our Savior says,
Luke 17. 9, 10. Does any Master thank his Servant, when he does what he
commands, I trow not? So nor can we expect thanks, but when we have done all,
we are, to say, unprofitable servants, we have but done out duty. But here St.
Peter, ver. 19. says, This is thank-worthy, etc. and repeateth it again, ver.
20. If ye do well, and suffer patiently, this is acceptable or thank-worthy
with God.

This is a mighty honor put upon this Conscience, we must therefore get it.
Know that all is nothing if this be wanting, Not thy Conscience of faith,
purity and sincerity, not thy Quick-sighted, well-spoken, well-doing, not thy
Inoffensive or Tender Conscience, if thou have not also this Property, All is
not worth a Thank. As all thou can do is not worth a Thank, if not for
Conscience sake; so it seems Conscience it self is not worth a Thank if not for
suffering sake.

This did commend the Christians in old times, they had learned to suffer as
much for Religion, as we to dispute for it, or rather against it. They could be
content to be bound, that Truth might be at liberty; and to die, that Religion
might not die; and they chose rather to suffer for the Gospel, then that the
Gospel should suffer through them; They were more willing that Religion should
live upon them, and their ruins, then we are to live upon Religion, and its
ruin now adays. Any thing was easy for them to suffer for Conscience, only
one thing they could not endure, viz. to suffer in, and from Conscience. And
here might I write a whole Volume of the sufferings of Primitive, and later
times, or transcribe many large Volumes of Ecclesiastical Histories, treating
of this subject in their Martyrologies. They were deprived of States, degraded
of Offices, yet did bear it; they were imprisoned; they were exiled, yet did
endure it; they were slain, racked, tortured, yet did they suffer it. Some were
hanged, some headed, some were burned, some drowned, some devoured of wild
beasts, some pulled in pieces by men more savage then beasts, yet they did all
bear it, and rejoiced they suffered for Conscience, and for God. Attalus and
Alexander were twice bayted with wild beasts, to be torn in pieces Eccl. Hist.
l. 5. cap. 1.
by them, (as Eusebius reports) Attalus escaping the beasts, was reserved to
other torments, to be burnt to death in an iron chair, heated red-fire-hot, yet
did he bear all. Macedonius, Theodulus, and Tatianus laid Socrat. hist. l. 3.
cap. 13.
upon a Gredyron, and broiled to death; yet did they bear it. Marcus Arethusius
was stripped naked, then had his body all over daubed with Broth, Butter, and
Honey, then hung up in a Cage in the hot scorching Sun, to be eaten up with
flies, and stung to death with wasps, yet did he suffer all rather then give
one halfpenny to re-edifie that Idol Temple in his diocese, which he had
formerly plucked down. To be eaten up with flies, and stung with wasps he did
account far more desirable, that he might preserve his Theodoret. Lib. 3.
cap. 6.
Conscience in Purity and Peace, then to be eaten up of horror, and stung
with Hornets, if to preserve his life, he had delivered up his Conscience.
There were many Christians together stopped up in Lakes, or Caves artificially
made close, which Lakes, or Ditches were filled with a company of Dormise,
kept hungry to gnaw and feed upon the poor Christians, they all the while
bound hand and foot, that they could not keep off those hunger-starved
creatures, which were kept Mag. Cent. 4. cap. 3. Ex Theodoreto.
without meat also purposely, that they might fasten upon the bodies of those
godly men; which lingering and miserable death they under-went, yet was not
their faith and patience at all born down, says the Historian. They chose much
rather to lie in such a Lake artificially stopped, and to be eaten up alive with
those Vermin, their Conscience being preserved, then to yield up this Fort of
Conscience for fear of any earthly torments, to be eaten up while alive with
guilt and horror of Conscience. And when dead, to be bound hand and foot, and
cast into an infernal Lake of fire and brimstone, eternally stopped up, there to
be conversant with filthy spirits, and to be eaten up with those hellish furies.

Yea, to make an end, for it is impossible to mention all, Lactantius says not
only the men among the Cbristians, and those of stronger years and hearts, but
even our women, and little children (says he) have Latrones, and robusti
corporis viri ejusmodi lacerationes perferre nequeunt, exclamant, and gemitus
edunt; Nostri autem (ut de viris taceam) pueri, and mulierculae tortores suos
taciti vincunt, and expromere illis gemitum necignis potest Lact. 1. 5. cap. 13.
endured all torments, and been too hard for their Tormentors; no rack, no fire
could fetch so much as a groan from them: which the stoutest Thieves and
Malefactors among their Persecutors could not undergo, but they would roar and
cry out through impatience, and disabilitie to endure them.

But how little of this good Conscience is to be found now adays, when Christ
says, Who is on my side? who? Our times have brought forth many a degenerate
Christian, silken and satin Christians, Christians for the right hand and the
left, if Christ have any Kingdoms, Mannours, or Honors to bestow: But if a
Cross, they all forsake him, and fly, and shift for themselves, as the
terrified Disciples did the night of his Passion. Luther call's some of the
Divines of his Time Theologos Gloriae, they would not suffer. Some faithful
Ones were called Theologi Crucis, so have we many Saints now adays, who are
rather Triumphant Saints, then Saints militant. Well, we know who has said, He
that is ashamed of me, I shall one day be ashamed of him; he that loves his
life, shall lose Mar. 8. 38.
it; but he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. Joh. 12. 25.


There is no condition, or sort of men, have in Scripture more abundant, and
more excellent Promises then these that suffer; And none in Scripture have more
Cautions, and Rules given, then those set down to regulate and circumscribe our
sufferings: for all that suffer cannot say they suffer for Conscience, and for
God: and then what thank can they exspect from God, if they suffer for their
own default, they must (as we say) thank themselves.

There be four kinds of sufferings which a Four ill kinds of sufferings.
good Conscience can have no comfort in, therefore must seek to avoid.

1. That we put not our selves upon Voluntary and Arbitrarie sufferings, and
place Religion and Conscience in it when we have done; thus did the Baalists of
old, who did cur, and lance themselves that the blood followed. 1 Ki. 18. 28.
Thus do the blind Papists at this day Penance, and Discipline themselves out
of a superstitious opinion of merit, or satisfaction; but they have no thank of
God, because though it may proceed from some kind of Conscience, yet it is a
blinded and deluded Conscience, not that Conscience toward God (which Peter
spoke of.) Therefore 2 Pet. 2. 19.
God will say to them, Who required this at your hands? Isai. 1. 12. And as to
them who offered their sons and daughters to Moloch, It never came into my
heart, neither did I command them, says the Lord, Jer. 7. 31. These things
have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting of
the Col. 2. ult.
body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh. But these are not the
sufferings of Christians, nor can these say, They bear these as the marks of
the Lord Jesus in their bodies. Gal. 6. 17.

2. That we pull not upon our selves Unnecessary and unwarrantable sufferings
by a preposterous and precipitate intermedling in businesses out of our way and
calling: This is to suffer as busybodies in other men's matters. But that in
the Apostles Language is clean another thing then to suffer as a Christian,
therefore he does oppose them, and is all one as to suffer as an evil doer,
therefore they are joined together 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16.

3. That we pull not upon our selves Necessary, but deserved evil sufferings
from the hand of Justice, for our evil doings. These may say with the Thief
suffering with Christ, we have the same Crosses that he, but we have not the
same Titles written on our Crosses. We suffer justly the deserts of our ill
deeds, He has done nothing amiss. These like Luke 23. 41.
Zimri are burnt with the fire which their 1 Ki. 16. 18
own hands have kindled.

4. Last of all, that we bring not our selves under worse sufferings then any
of the former, viz. sufferings in Conscience, and from Conscience, by shunning
any other sufferings for God and Conscience; as Judas and Spira, who because
they could not suffer outwardly, now suffer inwardly; they suffer dreadfully
from God, and from Conscience, because they would not once suffer Honorably
for God, and for Conscience; these find God departed from them in anger,
because they departed from him in base fear; these want now the Peace of God,
and the Peace of Conscience, by seeking to buy at too high a rate the peace of
the world. They would have saved themselves, but they have lost themselves.
These are the greatest sufferers, and Losers in the world. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God; these have run from the fear,
and are fallen into the pit, to avoid Isai. 24. 18.
the wrath of man have fallen under the insupportable wrath of God.

The first of these sufferings are foolish sufferings, the second sinful, the
third shamful, these last dreadful sufferings.

But the sufferings of good Conscience are of another nature, and that it may
suffer Six honorable kinds of sufferings.
with Glory, and with Comfort, must observe these Rules:

1. That his sufferings be ever, and only for well-doing. These are honorable,
and comfortable sufferings. As he shuns not sufferings, so he seeks them not.
He procures them not by evil-doing as a Thief, or flagitious Malefactor, nor by
over-doing as an eager busie-bodie; he is not so fool-hardie as to be ambitious
of suffering. But his first and Chief Ambition is well-doing, that he may
prevent il-suffering, 1 Pet. 2. 15. for so is the will of God, that by
well-doing we may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. His second
Ambition is to be Quiet, so is the Apostles Rule, 1 These. 4. 11. That we study
to be quiet, and to do our own business; the word signifies (...)
that we do ambitiously and studiously affect it. Sufferings are only to be
desired and undergone in the last place, when I can no longer will, nor choose,
that is, when I can no longer go on in well-doing according to my duty, and no
longer sit still in quiet according to my Desire with a safe Conscience, then I
must be content to suffer. But we are to pray and endeavor, that we may live a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. We are to try how far
Integrity and Innocence may protect us, and how long we may be followers of
that 1 Timothy 2. 2. Psalm. 25.
which is good, before men molest us, 1 Pet. 3. 13. The good Conscience must
not go out of God's way to meet with sufiering, as he must not go out of
suffering way to meet with sin. In a word, the Christian can never expect to
take the degree of Martyr, till he have first commenced Saint. It is not Poena,
but Causa that commends the sufferer.

2. If he do suffer for il-doing, yet he must be sure to look to it, that it be
wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2. 19. And if any evil be charged upon him, that it be
falsely, Matthew. 5. 11. And then we are under the same Promise of blessedness, as
if we suffered for Righteousness; But if ye do well, and suffer wrongfully,
taking it patiently, this is that which is thank-worthy with God. And blessed
are ye, says our Savior, when men revile you, persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you (falsely) for my sake. When Conscience can say we
are as deceivers; yet not deceivers, but true; as unknowen, yet well known to
God, 2 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

3. The good Conscience desires chiefly and especially to suffer in the Cause,
and for the Name of Christ, this with him is to suffer as a Christian. In the
matter of the Kingdom Daniel was careful to carry himself unreproveable, Dan.
6. 4, 5.
but in the matter of God he cared not what he suffered. All the businesses of
a Kingdom are below a wise Christians spirit to suffer for them; civil and
secular interests and quarrels, he likes not to adventure himself in; but the
only quarrel that he would engage in, and lay down his life for, is the cause
and truth of Christ, the worship and matter of his God. Life, as it is too
little worth to be laid out for Christ, so it is too precious to be laid out in
any other cause. I must take heed that my own blood be not mingled with my
Sacrifice, as the Galileans was (...) ^uk. 13. 1
with theirs. This is thank-worthy only, if a man for his conscience toward
God suffer, etc. Austin somewhere says, Non refert qualia quis patiatur, De
civit Dei. l. 1. c. 8.
sed qualis quis patitur, It matters not so much what it is that the man does
suffer, as what the man is that does suffer. What an honor is it if I can call
my suffering, the suffering of Christ, Col. 2. 24. my skars and marks the
(...), brands and marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. 17. and if I can subscribe
my self the Prisoner of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 1.

4. Good Conscience loves to see his ground he goes upon; that his cause be
clear, his grounds manifest, that he may not be stimulated and thrust forward,
by a heady and turbulent spirit, a misinformed Conscience, but it must be for
conscience toward God, or according to God (the phrase is emphaticall, the
Conscience of God) that I may say as the same Apostle in another (...). 1 Pet.
2. 19.
place, that I suffer according to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 19. That when I
shall say to God, Lord thou see what I do and suffer for thee, I have
contended, and have fought for thee, I have lived and have died for thee, God
may not reject all, and say, You have eaten Zech. 7. 5, 6.
and drunk, fasted and feasted, lived and died, to your selves: As the poor
persecuted and hated Jews have for many ages, from the Romans first, and all
other Nations since, suffered all extremities; yet while they say, it is for
their Conscience, God says, it is for their obstinacy, and contempt of Christ
and the Gospel.

5. As the matter must be good that we suffer for, so it must be in a good
manner that we suffer after, or we stain our suffering. If thou 1 Pet. 2. 19,
20.
suffer wrongfully, thou must yet suffer patiently, impatience in the best
cause will keep thee from thy Crown: This is to suffer according to the will of
God, not only for the matter, but manner: This is to follow the example of all
sufferings, Jesus Christ, who being 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, be threatened not, but committed
his cause to him who judges righteously; yet had he done no evil, neither was
any guile found in his mouth.

6. Lastly, be sure thou commit thy self to God, when thou art suffering
according to the will of God in well doing, so is the Apostles rule, 1 Pet. 4.
19. Suffering times had not need be sinning times; he will never make good
Martyr, that is not a good Saint first. The Israelites were warned not to go
Ex. 2. 22.
out of their doors, but to be within at their Sacrifice, when the Destroyer
was abroad. Daniel was within at his Prayers, when the Inquisitors came to
apprehend him. Many cautions are to be kept in suffering times, and many
ingredients must be in our sufferings, that they may be comfortable sufferings.
1. It is not poena but causa, was said of old, Cum boni; malique pariter
afflicti sunt, non ideo ipsi distincti non sunt, quia distinctum non est, quod
utrique perpessi sunt manet enim dissimilitudo passorum etiam in similitudine
passionum, and licet sub eodem tormento, non est idem virtus and vitium, Aug.
de Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 8.
that is true, but not enough. 2. I may say, it is not poena and causa too that
makes a Martyr, but conscientia. 3. Nor is it every conscientia, but
conscientia Dei. 4. Nor is it poena, causa, conscientia, but vita that makes
the Martyr. 5. But poena, causa, conscientia, vita, and patientia, aut modus
patiendi, makes the complete Martyr. A good cause, a good conscience, a good
life, a good death, a good matter to suffer for, a good manner to suffer in,
make the happy sufferer, and the honorable Martyr.

Thus much of the Passive or suffering Conscience.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the last Good Conscience, the Conscience of Charity.
THus are we come to speak of the last of Of the conscience of charity.
those ten particular good Consciences which we propounded at first, that is,
the Conscience of Charity, which I have reserved this last place for; not
because it is of the last or least worth, but because the world has put it in
the last place, if so be yet it has left it any place at all. This is that
which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 1. 5. As the end and perfection of the Law,
and Gospel too, Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and
faith unfaigned. Wherever you see truth of Charity, question not there the
truth of Conscience: The more of Charity, the more of Conscience. And the now
total want almost of this in the world, argues the general want of good
Conscience, in this Iron Age of the world, These are the days foretold by our
Savior, wherein all iniquity does abound, Mat. 24. 12
and vice increase, because Conscience does decrease, and Charity wax cold. The
world was never more full of knowledge, nor empty of Charity, 1 Cor. 8. 1. All
have that knowledge which puffs up, few that charity which should build up; and
while Conscience in most men calls for freedom, Charity is by all left bound.
But it is by this badge of Charity that you may know a Disciple of Christ,
better then by the Joh. 13. 35
Language of a Galilean.

Now this Charity is twofold, Charity of two kinds.
External, or Civil. Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual and Christian.


And this External Charity is threefold, respecting three sorts of persons, 1
Poor. 2 Neighbors. 3 Enemies.


1. To the poor is to be showed the love or Outward or civil, and that first
to the poor.
charity of beneficence: To the neighbor and friend, a love of benevolence;
and to the enemy, a love of forgiveness.

Tranquilla Conscientia est omnibus dulcis, nulli gravis, utens amico ad
gratiam, inimico ad patientiam, cunctis ad benevolentiam, and quibus potest ad
beneficentiam. Bernard. de Consc.

1. To the poor is to be showed the charity of beneficence and well-doing:
This kind of charity is the worlds grand Benefactor, the poores great Almoner,
the widows Treasurer, the Orphans Guardian, the oppressed man's Patron: This
lends eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, deals out bread to the hungry,
clothing to the naked, makes the widows heart sing for joy, and brings upon
the Donour the blessing of him who was ready to perish. How did Zacheus show
the truth of the work of grace upon his Conscience, but by those first fruits
of his charity? Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, Luke 19.
8.

How did Job vindicate his conscientiousness and sincerity, against all his
friends detracting calumnies, Job 30. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. but by such
unquestionable demonstrations of his charity? I delivered the poor that cried,
the fatherless, and him that had no helper. The blessing of him that was ready
to perish came upon me, and I made the widows heart to sing for joy. I was eyes
to the blind, and feet was I to the lame; I was a father to the poor, etc.

Religious Obadiah left it to Elias to judge of his sincerity, and whether he
truly feared God or no, 1 Kin. 18. 13. Was it not told my Lord what I did when
Jezabel slew the Prophets of the Lord, how I hid an hundred men of the Lords
Prophets, and sed them by fifty in a cave with bread and water?

Nehemiah, that matchless pattern of a self-denying Magistrate, had much
comfort in relating what oppressions he had removed, and what ease he had
procured to his Country, how chargeable others had been, how charitable he; not
so much as ever requiring the Governors bread, nor his ordinary allowance, but
had at his own charge redeemed many Captives, relieved many impoverished, and
when he has done, concludes to the comfort of his Conscience. Nehem. 5. 19.
Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for this
people.

To be short, it is one of the good man's Characters, Psalm. 112. 5. That he is
merciful, and gives; and of the good woman's, That she stretches out her hand
to the poor, and in her heart and mouth is the law of kindness, Prove. 31. 20,
26. Abraham and Lot, so famous of old for faith and piety, were persons as
eminent for their charity, liberality, and hospitality. What should I speak of
the Alms of Cornelius, who has a complete description of a god^y man applied
to him? That he was a devout man, one that feared God with all his house, who
gave much Alms to the People, and prayed to God always. These Alms of his are
said to come into remembrance with God, Acts 10. 2, 4. Yea, Every liberal soul
devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand, Isai. 32. 8.
When the Instruments of the Churl are evil, he devises wicked devices against
the poor, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the
thirsty to fail, Isa. 32. 6, 7.

Conscience knows it is bound in duty, as much to show charity to neighbor,
as love to God; and to the poor neighbor this love of beneficence and
compassion, as to God the love of obedience and complacency.

This is indeed cum aliis scire, to know and feel the heart of a stranger and
widow, and Exo. 23. 9.
to say with Adrian, What I would have the rich be to me were I poor, that must
I do to him my self being rich.

Yea this is cum Deo scire, who considers the poor and needy, relieveth the
stranger, He does execute, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. 18, 19. the judgment of the
fatherless and widow, and loves the stranger in giving him food and raiment:
Love ye therefore the stranger, for ye were strangers in the Land of Egyp.

But alas the ill consciences of these times! What means the bleating of the
sheep, and lowing of the exen, shall I say? Or, What means the beating of the
poor to pieces, and grinding of their very faces, says the Lord? Surely he
will enter into judgment with the Ancients of the People, and with the Princes
thereof, because the spoil of the poor is in their houses, Isa. 3. 14, 15. What
judgments do you read threatened in all the Prophets, for this unmercifull
neglecting or oppressing of the poor, Amos 2. 6. God threatens Israel not to
turn away their punishment, because they made no more of the poor man and his
cause, then of a pair of old shoes. The like Micah 3. 3, 4.

Surely this is one of the crying sins of our times, that the cause is not
judged, the cause of the poor, and the right of the needy. But Jer. 5. 28, 29.
may we not say, Has not the Lord begun to visit for these things, and shall
be not be avenged on such a Nation as this ere he has done? Romans 14. 15. When
the Apostle in a certain case would tell a man he walks not conscientiously, he
tells him, Thou walk not charitably: What is it therefore to walk charitably,
but undeniably to walk conscientiously? I conclude this therefore with the
Apostles exhortation, Col. 3. 12. Put on, as the Elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, etc. And 2 Cor. 8.
7, 9. As therefore ye abound in other graces, in faith, utterance, and
knowledge, see ye abound in this grace also, for ye know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that
ye, through his pove^ty, might be rich. This is to be like-minded unto Christ
you see.

2. There is another charity of benevolence 2 To thy Neighbor
to be showed to thy neighbor, whom thou art to love as thy self; this is the
second great Commandment, which so great a part of the Law and Prophets do hang
and comment upon. Have thou a friend, then show thy self friendly; Mat. 22. 39.
Pro. 18. 24. Romans 13. 8.
owe no other debt to any man but this, to love one another, and this we must
owe to every man, yet owe it so, as to be also paying the debt; and pay it so,
as also to be yet owing the duty; always owing, and always paying. Debts of
Justice must be so paid by every honest man, that they may be no longer owing,
but debts of charity, though daily paid, must daily be acknowledged, and yet
we are daily in debt, till we come thither, where the love of God and brother
shall be consummate, and where love shall be all in all.

O what a pleasant and delightful sight it is, to see neighbor with
neighbor, brother with brother, living in this mutual unity and benevolence!
there is best living, there is best air, there is best earth, Psalm. 133. 1, 2,
3, 4. There is best air, perfumed with like ointment to that which Aaron was
consecrated with, like which none other for any use was to be Exodus 30. 32.
compounded; and there the best and richest Soil, As the dew of Hermon, and as
that dew that fell upon the Hills of Sion: There the Lord commands his
richest blessings, and life for ever. But what stinking Air is Meshech, and
what noisome Earth is Kedar? Ill dwelling with those that hate peace, and are
still for war. Psalm. 120.


The third Charity and Love is to thy Enemies, a love of forgiveness at least,
and a 3. To thy enemy.
contending with him for the most glorious victory, not to return him like
evil for like, or greater for less; but to overcom any evil he has done thee
with all that good which thou can do for him. This is the hardest, and
therefore highest pitch of Love; A Lesson not to be learned in the Philosophers
Schools, Romans 12. 20, 21. Luke 6. 27, 28.
or in the Pharisees Synagogues; but in Christ's Sanctuary, and is one of the
highest points of Gospel Divinity, and Christian Perfection.

The Pharisees of old had said, Thou must love thy neighbor, but corrupted the
Text with another addition, Thou may hate thy enemy. Our Saviors command
is that thou Love also thy enemy, that thou bless them that curse, that thou
pray for them that revile, and persecute, yea that we reach out the hand to
help those, who have lift up the heel to hurt us. What thank is it to be but as
Heathens and Publicans? Mat. 5. 46. Luke 6. 32, 33.
They are friendly to their friends, yea this may be found in Hell, Satan is
not divided against Satan, the devil himself will carry it fair with those who
correspond with him. But to cross thy nature, and to overcome thy self first,
that thou may overcome thy enemy at last. Nobile vincendi genus hoc. -- This
is a divine, and heavenly Spirit, and a divine kind of Love; this is to be
like Our Father which is in heaven, who is kind to Luke 6. 35.
the unthankful, and unkind; and like to his Son on Earth, who prayed for his
enemies; and gave his life for those who sought his death. Therefore the
Apostle adds Col. 3. 12, 13. to bowels of mercies, and kindeness which we
should put on, humbleness, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel against any, as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye.

This Love then must not be a bare, negative, Magna virtus est si non laedas
cum a quo laesus es; Magna gloria si cui nocere potuisti parcas: Nobile
vindictae genus est ignoscere victo. Bern. de inter. domo. 2. Inward and
Ecclesiastical.
and Non-revenging Love, not to render railing for railing, in^urie for
injury, vim vi repellere, but it must be an overflowing, overcoming and a
Non-removed, and unabated Love, that when he does strive to wear out thy
patience by continually reiterated and new provocations, thou may strive to
outvie him by a continual return of new good Offices, that thou may never
be overcome by any evil of his, but may overcome all his evil with much more
good.

Secondly, There is another kind of Charity, which we call Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, which is to be showed in the Love we bear to the Church, and
Truth of Christ, and to the Souls of our Brethren. This is an excellent and
most necessary Charity, and is to be preferred before any of the former, the
love of Beneficence to poor, of Benevolence to friends, of Forgiveness to
enemies; these may be among Heathens, or Civilized Christians. But this Love I
now speak of is the peculiar Badge of Christians: A Love of Symphonie in
Judgment and Opinion, of Sympathy in heart and affection, and of Symmetrie or
harmony in an unoffensive conversation.

Common Charity may be found among honest and ingenuous heathens, yea, there
is a Love and agreement among the worst of men, who have one heart, and one
purse, Prove. 1. 14. and among the devils themselves Mat. 12. 26.
may be found an unanimous conspiring in opinions and designs. But our Love
and agreement must be in good, an Agreement in the truth, and to be of one
mind in the Lord. Phil. 4. 2. Joh. 2. Ep. ver. 1.


There is no duty pressed upon Christians either with more store, or strength
of Arguments in all the New Testament then this. See Phil. 1. 1, 2, 3. If there
be any Consolations in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Is the Apostle any
where so patheticall again? He lays out all his affections, and all his
arguments to prevail in so necessary a duty. In the second verse he presses
four duties, and he lays down five Motives beforehand to carry them home,
laying before them All that is in Christ, in the Spirit, in Gospel fellowship,
and Grace, and whatever respect they had to him, that they be like minded,
etc. If there could have been found any thing in heaven it self of more force
to persuade, he would have fetched it thence. There are four particulars
exhorted to of like nature: 1 To be like minded, 2 have the same love, 3 to be
of one accord, and 4 of one mind. All are to be endeavored after, and if
possible, to be attained; but if we cannot reach the first and last of them, we
must never part with the two middlemost, if we cannot come to (...), and (...),
To think and hold the same One thing, yet must we be (...), of one accord, and
having never the less love. S. Peter likewise exhorts to the same purpose 1
Pet. 3. 8. to five things of like nature, Be ye (...).
all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous. And here we are to hold these five links of this golden
chain all entire, and united, if possible; but if we cannot reach the first and
highest link, we must nevertheless hold all the other four. If we cannot
attain to be (...), we must be nevertheless (...), if we cannot be same-minded
(so the word signifies) yet must we be loving minded. Oh what happy times, and
Churches, and Christians should we see if these duties and Graces were studied!
This would keep Unity of spirit in the Bond of Peace. Ephesians. 4. 3.


The outward and civil Love we spoke of is the blessing of Families, Beauty of
Cities, and the strength of Commonwealths: But this, if it were to be seen, is
far more excellent and transcendent, it is the Street of gold in the holy
City, the rich pavement of the heavenly Jerusalem. It would be the Crown of
the Church Militant, for it is the Glory of the Church Triumphant; It would be
the Cement of the walls; It would be the Gates and Bars of the Tower of Sion;
It would render the Church fair as the Moon, glorious as the Sun, terrible as
an army with banners. This Love is the Mantle, and Seamless Garment which
Christ left to his Church, that it should not be divided, or rent. What a
reproach is it to us, that the barbarous soldiers should deal more civilly with
his Garment, and with his Body when dead, (they did not divide the one, nor
break a bone of the other) then we? when we divide and rent both Garment and
Body, beating and striking our fellow servants, biting and backbiting one
another, til we be devoured one of another, Gal. 5. 15.

Oh what Encomiums are put upon this Grace of Charity in the Scripture! It is
the Queen of Heavenly Graces, preferred in some sense to Faith and Hope, 1 Cor.
13. ult.

It is the End of the Law, the adorning of 1 Timothy 1. 5.
the Gospel, the Vive Image of God, the very Effigies of Christ, the first
fruit of the Spirit. The Daughter of Faith, the Mother of Hope, 1 John 4. 8,
16. Joh. 13. 34. Gal. 5. 22. Gal. 5. 6.
the Sister of Peace, the Kinswoman (nearest kinswoman) to Truth; It is the
Life and Joy of Angels; the Bane of Devils; It is the Death of Dissensions, the
Grave and Sepulcher of schisms, wherein all Church ruptures and offenses are
buried; It is the Morning and Resurrection, yea, the high Noon and clearest day
of Reformation. It is that which covers all sins. And what can be said more? In
one word, 1 Pet. 4. 8.
It is the very bond of perfection, (...), Col. 3. 14.

This does nothing il, it vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, envieth not,
does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
rejoyeeth in no iniquity, rejoices only in the truth, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6.

This does all things well, bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7.

This is the Head River in Paradise, which divides it self into many Channels,
that it may water the Church through the whole earth; It is the womb or breasts
of the Church; It is the Seed of the Gospel; The Blood of the dead Martyrs, and
the Love of the living Professors, being the best seed of the Church.

But where is the Havilah where this gold and Bdellium is to be found? How sad
is it that this Manna is only to be found when the Church is in the
wilderness, but cease the morrow after persecution cease, when we once eat
the bread of common Peacel But how much more sad that that third part which had
escaped fire and sword, should be cast afterward into another fire, Out of
which a fire shall come out into all the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 5. 2, 3, 4.

In the Primitive times there were indeed cloven Tongues, but single, and
united hearts: Act. 2. 2, 3, 4.
but now are cloven tongues and cloven hearts too. Their cloven Tongues spoke
the same things to diverse Nations, that they might unite, gather, congregate,
and Head all into Christ to make a Mystical Body, and a City compact
together, the joy of the whole earth. We speak in one Language diverse things,
whereby we divide, scatter, loose and Est jam serpentum major concordia. Juv.
Sat. 15.
disgregate, and thereby endanger more the setting up of a new, and literal
Babel in England, then the pulling down of the old and Mystical Babylon in
Italy. That we may sadly complain, that the world was never so woefully, and
universally divided since the days of old Peleg as now. Gen 10. 25


Their cloven Tongues were set on fire from heaven, and spoke (...). Our fire
is taken from Elias harth, Luke 9. 54. or Joshuah's Censer, My Lord Moses,
forbid them; if not Number. 11. 28. Jam. 3. 6.
lower, as James says, set on fire of hell. There the wind filled only the
house, but the holy Ghost filled their hearts, Act. 2. 4. Here the wind fills
the head and heart, and the fire the house.

But did our Savior pray that we might all be Perfect in one, as he and the
Father are One; and shall we imagine our Perfection Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23.
lies in division? Shall we not suffer this Prayer to take place any where but
in Heaven? Is it the Perfection and glory of the Church Triumphant to be One,
and Harmonious, and is it our perfection to be ever militant and jarring? When
all prophecy and speak the same thing, the ignorant man comes in, is
convinced, and cries out, God is in you of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25. But when
all speak with differing and diverse tongues, the ignorant and unsettled man
goes out, and cries, They are mad, as it is ver. 23.

Nor are we to wonder, that God has such a Controversy with his People in
this land, and has poured out such a Vial of contempt upon them, breaking us
with breach upon breach, We may read our sin in the judgment, we can impute it
to nothing more then to our unnecessarie and unkind Controversies among our
selves, whereby we have cast contempt upon his truth, and made breach upon
breach in his Church. When the father sees such a wrangling, and froward
disposition in his children, that they are still Quarrelling, he takes them all
in hand and gives them enough of fighting, till they see their folly. It has
been many times observed by godly Ecclesiastical Writers, that when the
Christians have abused Peace, Liberty, and Fullness of Gospel Blessings, to
unkind Contentions one with another, and to wantonness in Opinions and
carriages; God has raised up some enemy to scourge and still them. Cyprian
gives Cyprian. lib. 4. ep. 4.
this for the reason why God let loose that bloody Decius to be so bitter a
persecutor, Patrimonio and lucro students, superbiam sectantes, amulationi ^c
dissensioni vacantes, simplicitatis, and fidei negligentes, seculo verbis
solis, and non factis renuncian^es, unusquisque sibi placentes, and omnibus
displicentes. Vapulamus itaque ut meremur. Confessores non tenent disciplinom.
Quosdam insolenter extollit Confessionis suae tumida Jactatio, etc.
and waster of the Christians, as he was. God is righteous, says he, that our
flocks are scattered, and all spoiled by this persecution. Our sins have
procured all. Jesus Christ obeyed the will of his Father, but we obey it not.
We mind, says he, our pride and profit; we study divisions and differences;
we contemn faith, simplicity, and plain dealing; we disclaim the world in
words, but not in our deeds. Every one will please himself, none cares to
please other. May not the same and worse be said of this Generation and the
Professors in it?

It is very observable that of all the Places where Israel provoked and
offended God, The waters of strife were the most famous for greatest
provocation, therefore had that name given them. There were two such Places,
the one in Rephidim, the other in Kadesh; Exodus 17. 7 Number. 20. 13 Psalm. 95. 8.
Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
Both were called Meribah, and both Massah. All waters of Bitterness are
Provoking and Tempting waters. There all offended, They chode with Moses, and
he as meek as he was chode with them at the latter; They strew one with
another, and all strove with the Lord, Numb. 20. 13. Here it was that God was
angry with Moses; here did this holy mortified Saint speak unadvisedly in his
Passion, Hear now ye Rebels: The worst word that ever he spoke, which cost him
dear, even kept him and Aaron from entering Canaan. How many chiding Meribahs
have we drunk of? Bitter waters! which have been unto God wrath-provoking
Massahs, even Moses and Aaron have not been free from too much faultiness.
Tertullian says, In the Primitive times the Heathens were wont to say with
indignation, See how these Christians love one another, they are ready to die
one for another. But is it not a just scandal now to them that are without, to
see the contrary? who may say, Behold how these Christians hate and malign
one another, how they bite, devour, and seek to destroy one another!

But to draw to an end of this complaint, and Subject: We may take up the words
of Job in his Parable, speaking of wisdom, and with a sad and sorrowful
Allusion apply it to our good Conscience of Charity, Where is, says he, and
where is again the place of wisdom? and where is understanding to be found? Job
28. 12, 20. So may we say, Where is Charity to be found? and where is the
place of this good Conscience? Man knows not the price thereof, neither is it
to be found (says he) in the land of the living. It cannot be valued with the
gold, The price thereof is above Rubies. England may say, It is not in me:
Professors must say, It is not in us. Our children may say, they have heard
the fame thereof; Our selves may say, We have seen the Departure and Funerals
of it, which we have traced leaving us, as the Glory of the Lord departed by
degrees from the Sanctum Sanctorum into the wilderness at last, Ezekiel. 11. 23.
That we may Ezekiel. 9. 3. and 10. 18. and 11. 23.
cry out in the words of Elisha, when he saw the last of his Master Elijah, or
that King who came to see Elisha, and found him sick upon his bed, and ready
now to leave the world, Oh my father, my father, the Charets of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof. So may we 2 Ki. 2. 12. and 13. 14.
say, Oh my mother, my mother, the Leah and Rachel of Israel, the nurse and
breasts, the beauty and strength of Israel. We have parted with the Power and
Spirit of Elias, and the Presence of the Prophet, and have only caught up a
Mantle. How sad is it that this Holy fire should be wanting in the second
Temple of our latter Reformation! And that we should find that observation of
Austin made good, who moving the question, Whether Peace or War devoured more
Christians? resolved Peace. Pax cum bell^ de crudelitate certavit, and vicit.
Peace and War once strove, says he, who should do most mischief in the Church,
and Peace carried it.

Thus have I given the Description of these ten Good Consciences, and shall
name no more. There are more, I confess, then these ten to be found in the
Word: But this I am bold to say, If these ten were to be found in the world in
this age, in this Nation, God would deal with us yet, as he had done with Sodom
had he found ten Genesis 18. 32
Righteous men there, we should not be destroyed, but this whole Nation
spared for these Tens sakes; yea, doubtless had not the Lord reserved a very
small Remnant, in whom these ten properties of Good Conscience have been found,
we had already been made as Sodom, and should have Isai. 1. 9.
been as Gomorrah before this time.

CHAP. XV. Of the Excellency of a good Conscience, and the benefits thereof.
HAving hitherto spoken of the nature of good Conscience in general, and of
these several kinds of good Conscience in particular, I shall now proceed to
give such reasons, and use those arguments which may provoke us to get and keep
such a good conscience. Which reasons are drawn from three general heads:

1. From the excellency in, and bene^^t gotten by a good Conscience. 2. From
the danger and mischief of an evil Conscience. 3. From the difficulty of
getting and keeping a good, and escaping a bad Conscience.
This Chapter shall speak of those excellencies which are in, and the benefits
gotten by a good Conscience: Which appears in five particulars:

1. The excellency of good Conscience appears The excellency of good
Conscience.
both in the Honorable Title given it above all other graces, and the real
Pre-eminence it has, if compared with all other things: 1. It has this proper
Epithet and denomination given it ordinarily, of good Conscience, Act. 23. 1.
1 Timothy 1. 5. and 19. 1 Pet. 3. 16. and 21. whereas other graces, excellent in
their place and kind, seldom called thus. When do you read of good faith,
good repentance, or love, or holiness, or obedience; but still conscience is
called good Conscience. There is surely some eminent and superlative goodness,
yea much communicative goodness in it. It is good it self, and makes the good
faith, and good love, and repentance, and obedience, etc. which all cease to be
good, when separated from good Conscience.

Then compare it with all other good things, and it has the better of them.
What Quid prodest plena bonis Arca, si inanis sit Conscien. tia?
good is there in a chest full of goods, when the Conscience is empty of
goodness, said Austin? What is a man better if he have all goods, and want this
one good? what if he have good ware in the Shop, good stock in the ground,
household in the house, clothes on his back, and good credit abroad, and have
not a good Conscience in his heart? all this were like a rich suit on an
ulcerous body. This man is like Naaman, a rich man, 2 Kin. 5. 1.
but a Leper, a great and honorable man, but a foul man. What are all great
Parts, and excellent Gifts, and Abilities of mind, without good Conscience,
but as so many sweet flowers upon a dead man, wrapped up in fair linen? He is a
dressed man, but a dead man, outwardly sweet, inwardly smelling; or like a
sounding brass, and tinkling Cymball: This is above knowledge alone. Add Con,
to Science, and you have the complete Christian, Omnibus numeris perfectum:
Take away Con, and leave all Science, you leave nothing but Ciphers. Though,
says Bernard, many seek Knowledge, and desire Science, few care for Multi
scientiam quaerunt, pauci Conscientiam, Conscientia autem quam scientia citius
apprehenditur, and utilius retinetur. Bern.
Conscience, yet is Conscience gotten with more case, and kept with more
advantage then all your Knowledge.

This is above All Faith alone, therefore they often go together in Scripture, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and 19. and 3. 9. when Conscience is put away, the text says, Faith
is cast away, and shipwrackt. Nothing profits alone without this; not Baptism,
1 Pet. 3. 21. not coming to the Lords Supper, Heb. 10. 22. not Charity, 1 Timothy
1. 5. not any serving of God, 2 Timothy 1. 3. not our subjection and obedience to
men, or Magistracy, Romans 13. 5. not all our sufferings, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20.

Take any man with all endowments (...) Dirt kneaded with blood, as they called
Tiberius Nero.
without Conscience, you have but the carcaese of a man without the soul. What
is the learned Philosopher, and eloquent Orator without Conscience, but a
rational brute, or a speaking beast? who may like Balaams Ass open his mouth to
rebuke another more mad, yet is beaten himself. What is a Magistrate without
Conscience, but as the Giant without his eye, or the eye without his sight?

Let all Duties be performed, and Conscience not regarded, you have but an
Hypocrite; let all gifts remain, and Profession stay, if Conscience go, you
have but an Apostate. Bernhard says excellently to this purpose, It is better
running to Conscience then to all your wisdom, unless you mean by your Vtilius
est currere ad conscientiam quam ad sapientiam, nisi cadem sit sapientia quae
conscientia.
wisdom nothing but Conscience. The unlearned man with his good Conscience,
says Austin, will get the start of thee, and be in Heaven before thee, when
thou with all thy learning and abilities wilt be cast into hell. Surgunt
indocti and rapiunt regnum Coelorum, etc.

2. Consider the absolute Necessity of a Good Conscience to the very esse, and
being of a Christian, when many other things serve only to the melius esse,
better being: And this will show you a higher Excellency in Good Conscience,
which should set us upon getting it. This constitutes the Christian, and is
that sine qua non. To suppose a Christian without Conscience were to suppose
the Sun without Light, or fire without heat; this is of the very same
consequence to spiritual life, as the sense of feeling is to natural life,
which compared with the rest of the senses has the pre-eminence in sundry
particulars, as the Philosopher lays down in his Axioms, all applicable to
Conscience.

1. Tactus Origin primus, they say: Feeling Conscience to the soul is as sense
of feeling to the body, in four respects:
is the first sense in being; So is Conscience the primum vivens, and ultimum
moriens in the new Creature: Life discovers it self in the soul first in his
sensibleness and tenderness, as in the childs feeling appears the first of
natural life, the child begins to feel, when it first begins to li^e, and
the man cease to live when once he cease to feel. So it is in the Soul, the
life of grace appears sooner in the sensibleness of Conscience, spiritual
Compunctions, Heart-smitings, and Heart-prickings for sin and guilt, spiritual
fears of his danger, sorrow for his sin, and miscrie, then by any other tokens
whatsoever.

2. Tactus as Origin primus, so it is Necessitate maximus, and usu summus, of
greatest use, and absolute Necessity. It is first in the Original of life
appearing, and the most necessary above all the other senses in the continual
course of life. A man may want his sight, yet be a healthful and understanding
man; he may want his hearing, yet be a very active, and apprehensive man; he
may want smell and taste, yet be a strong man; but if he want his feeling, he
is a dead man. These serve more to the been esse of natural life, then to the
simple being; So is Conscience absolutely necessary to the very being of a
Christian, a man may be short in parts, defective in knowledge, weak in duties,
have lost his comforts, never had the Ornaments of Abilities, Expressions,
Experiences that some others have, yet a very good Christian. But if he have
lost his Conscience he is a dead Christian altogether.

3. Tactus, they say, is Hominis Optimus. The other senses other creatures
excel man in. Vultur odaratu, the Dog and Vulture in smelling; in sight the
Eagle, in hearing the mastiff, etc. But in feeling man, which is the most noble
and excellent Creature, excels most, he has the most quick and tender
Touch, (which considered, I know no sufficient reason to say of it, that Tactus
is digniute ultimus, when they confess it is Origin primus, and necessitate
maximus;) So the best Christian excells in the tenderest and quickest Touch of
Conscience: Others may out-go him in Excellency of speech, and wisdom of
words, worldly men may have stronger brains to out-wit, and overreach the
child of God, who is not so wise in his generations as the children of this
world; they have Luke 16. 8.
the finer wits, stronger memories, sharper inventions, the better expressions,
he has still the better part, and is the better man, because he has the
better Conscience.

4. Whereas other Senses have a particular Organ of their own, and lie confined
to a narrow room; Hearing lies in the Ear only, Seeing in the Eye, Taste in
the Tongue or Palate, Smell in the Nostrils: Feeling has no such narrow
confinement, but is extended all the body over, within and without. So is
Conscience of vast and universal extent over the whole man, over all our
actions, intentions, words, motions, from first to last. Faith looks to
Promises, Fear to Threats, Hope to futures, Obedience looks to duties,
Repentance to sins. Conscience looks to all. This is the great Superintendent,
and oversees all, all Graces, duties, all sins, and snares. Therefore says one
well, Conscience is not confined to any one part of the Soul, it is not in the
understanding alone, not in the memory, will, affections alone; but it Dyke.
has place in all the parts of the Soul. Conscience is the great Mistress of
the house; she as soon as she is up calls up all her maids, sets them all about
their work, and calls Pro. 31. 15, 27.
them to their account.

3. The virtue and worth of a good Conscience is most excellent above all other
things, because it most fortifies the soul with strength against, and gives
victory over all Adversities; it carries the soul unwounded through the
greatest afflictions; It Is like Oil that always swims aloft whatsoever waters
of distress are below; It is as the Ark which has a window open in the Top to
let in the light of Heaven. This like Elias Mantle has divided the waters, and
earried godly souls through a flood of miseries as on dry land. This has
encouraged them in the midst of fire and faggots, has accompanied them in Dens
and Caves, and made Martyrs sing in midst of Prisons and flames; It overcomes
all his tormenting Persecutors; It Is like the Anvile which breaks all that is
beat upon it, but is it self by all strokes made more firm. It makes a man like
a brazen wall, Jer. 1. 18. All may fight, none can prevail against it; at sight
of fear it says Aha; At destruction and famine it does laugh, and fears not
the beasts of prey, Job 5. 22.

This like Noah's Ark, to which it is compared 1 Pet. 3. 21. is pitched within
and without; Ideo bituminata intrinsecus, ne aquam emitteret suam, extrinsecus
ne admitteret alienam. Aug.
It is pitched within, that it may not let out any of his own water of comfort,
laid in for his own necessities, and relief; And pitched without, that it may
not let in any thing from without that may endanger the safety of the ship: It
keeps in all that may do Good, it keeps out all that may do hurt; It is the
Christians Armourie, or Magazine, like the Tower of David furnished with a
thousand Bucklers. Cant. 4. 4. or like the house of the forest of Lebanon,
wherein Solomon put three hundred shields of beaten gold, 1 King. 10. 17.

This will enable a man with undaunted courage to hold up his head before any
Judgment seat, Act. 23. 1. yea, before God's Tribunal, 1 John 3. 21. Keep but
Conscience safe, it will keep thee safe; Keep it in purity, and it will keep
thee in peace. It will make Tranquilla Conscientia tranquillat omnia.
thy face to shine as Stevens did. The cheerful Conscience makes the cheerful
Countenance, Prove. 15. 13.

This will be a dry house to thee in a wet day, it will make always fair
weather within doors; what ever weather it is abroad, Thou shall sub tecto
imbrem exaudire, and thou shall ever find it fair above head, what ever it is
under foot.

This makes nothing of the Viper of Detraction, Envy, and Malignitie, at which
another man would have swollen, or sworn, but without any more ado shakes it off
into the fire whence it came. Premat corpus, fremat Diabolus, trahat mundus,
illa semper erit secura. Let men, world, and devils do their worst, Bernard. de
Consc. ca. 8.
they cannot hurt Conscience.

This is the whole skin which it is good sleeping in, for a torn Conscience is
the worst rent. The wounded spirit who can bear? If Prove. 18. 14.
thou suffer Conscience to be torn, to keep thy skin whole, the rent is made
worse; if thou lose thy Conscience to save thy life, thou art a Loser, not a
Saver; and if thou lose thy l^fe to save thy Conscience, thou art the greatest
gainer by that which the world calls greatest loss. Skin for skin, and all that
I have to save my life, says the world in Satan's Language. Job 2. 4.
Skin for skin, and life for life, to save my Conscience, says the godly man.

4. Good Conscience does not only bear up the Spirit with invincible Patience
under all Pressures, but it anoints the head with oil, and causes the cup to
run over with Joy and Consolation. His excellency herein is beyond all
expression. Good Consciences Peace is the Peace that passes understanding. It
makes a Heaven (...) tam sunt Dies ejus jucundi, quam si quotidie lautissime
aleretur. Junius in Ioc.
on earth, a continual feast, Prove. 15. 15. The merry heart, our late
Translation reads it, has a continual feast; Bonus cord. Ar. Montanus.
Laeti cord. Junius. He has Benjamin's Mess before him, his fare is far above
the ordinary: The bread he has to eat, others know not of, nor does the
stranger intermeddle in his joy. He has Jehojakim's Provision, Every day a
rate from the Kings Pro. 14. 10.
Table all the days of his life, even to the day of his death, Jer. 52. 34.
His feast is beyond Ahasuerus Royal feast, which lasted the longest of any
feast we read of, an hundred and fourscore days, Esth. 1. 4. but then ended.
This maintains the heart, as Solomon did his subjects, with continual
undisturbed peace all the days of his life, not by force and sword, but by
Prudence and Counsel. This makes thee live Halcyon-dayes in life, and sing the
Swan-like note at death, and leads thee into a new year of Jubilee, after the
expiring of the former year of Sabbath.

The Good Conscience is it self the Conscientia bona titulus est Religionis,
Templum Solomonis, Ager Benedictionis, Hortus Deliciarum, Aureum Reclinatorium,
Gaudium Angelorum, Arca Foederis, Thesaurus Regis, Aula Dei, Habitaculum
Spiritus Sancti, Liber signatus and clausus, and in die Judicii aperiendus.
Nihil jucundius, tutius, ditius bona Conscientia. Bern. de int. domo.
greatest Good a man can have, and is the Procurer and Entertainer of all that
Highest good that man is here possibly capable of. It is the only Paradise
which God loves to walk in, the only Throne which Christ sits in, the only
Temple which the holy Ghost dwells in; it is the golden Pot which the bidden
Manna is kept in, the white Stone which the new Name is written in, the Ark
which the Tables of the Covenant are laid up in, the earthen Pot where all our
writings and Evidences are preserved in, it is Gideon's fleece which all the dew
of Heaven falls on; it is the soft bed which the weary soul sleeps in; it is
the Top of Jacob's Ladder reaching unto Heaven, Stevens Perspective looking
into Hic est Lectus Animae, in hoc requiem capit. Bern. Par. Sermon.
Heaven, Moses Nebo where first a view is taken of all the promised
Inheritance, and thence a few steps higher, and he was in heaven; it is indeed
our Penuel, God face to face.

5. The Good Conscience is so extensive and communicative a good, that it is
not only a real Good it self, but makes all other things better where it has
to do, whence it deserves that denomination of good Conscience, which it
commonly is honored with. Other things are called Good, as Riches, Honors,
Learning, Eloquence, etc. which are not so really, but only in opinion, nor do
they make any man the better. This makes all Good, and Good better where it
comes. Your Riches, Honors, Great Parts, you call them good, but who is made
good by them, if Good Conscience be not there to do it? Bad men may have them,
and bad they find them, and as bad or worse they leave them. But this is that
which is inconsistent with any badness, no bad man can have a Good Conscience.
This makes all good it meets with, and leaves them good whom it found evil; It
finds some sinful, but leaves them holy; finds some proud, leaves them
humble; unmerciful it finds some, leaves them charitable; covetous it finds
some, leaves them content; unjust, and dishonest it finds men, but makes them
just and honest ere it has done with them; it finds men unprofitable, and
good for nothing, it leaves them profitable; it finds some sad, leaves them
merry; poor, and leaves rich; dead, and leaves alive. What a change does this
one thing make in the world? It mends a Magistrate, it mends a Minister, it
mends rich, it mends poor, for it mends all. This alone would mend ill times,
mend ill Officers, mend ill Laws, mend ill execution of good Laws, mend
Church, mend State, and mend all.

What Plato said long ago of Commonwealths, Tum demum fore beatas res publicas,
cum aut reges philosopharentur, aut philosophi regnarent. It would never be
well in the world, till either Philosophers were Kings, or Kings Philosophers;
we may certainly say, It will then be well with Commonwealths, (and not till
then) when they that are most conscientious are put in public place, and made
Magistrates, Rulers, Commanders, Officers, Ministers, etc. or when they that
are in such place be most conscientious.

Good Conscience is the Treasury of good, which therefore brings forth nothing
but what is so; Good Communication to edify the hearer, Good Conversation to
edify the Beholder: yea, Conscientiae ea est vis, etc. says Dr Ames, that it
alters the nature of things; it makes Actions in their own nature indifferent
become good, and Actions good become better; as Conscience when not good makes
lawful and indifferent actions sinful and displeasing, yea the most holy
Action is turned into sin, the sacrifice is abomination offered with a wicked
heart, Prove. 21. 27.

How mightily does it concern us to get this Good Conscience, which has so
much of Good Epitomized in it, which makes Learning, Parts, Riches, Honor
Good; yea, makes Faith, Repentance, Prayer, Alms, Holiness, Obedience, all Good
when Good Conscience there, which all cease to be good if it were not for good
Conscience commending them. Therefore did Irenaeus well to resemble the Good
Conscience to the Altar, which sanctifies the gift that is upon it. Non
sacrificia sunt quae sanctificant hominem, sed conscientia ejus qui offert,
sanctifi^at sacrificium pura existens. It is not sacrifice which can sanctify
a man, and commend him to God, but it is Good Conscience which sanctifies and
commends the sacrifice it self.

CHAP. XVI. Of the danger and mischief of an evil Conscience.
THe Excellency and Benefit of the Good The danger and mischief of an evil
conscience
Conscience is not so great, but the evil and mischief of the evil Conscience
is as great, which is our second consideration, and this will appear in three
particulars:

1. Here commonly is the first decay, as in the Text you see, Hymeneus and
Alexander no sooner had put away their Conscience, but they sink their faith,
when once Conscience is tainted and become corrupt, then presently the
Judgment, then the Affections, then the Life, and what not? Corruption in the
Conscience is as poison in the spring head; this fountain corrupted all the
streams run muddie. Therefore Satan commonly begins here, and seeks Entrance
for less sins upon the Conscience, as House-robbers put in their less boys
into the windows, to set open all the doors of the house for all the company
to enter. Nemo repent fuit Turpissimus --

No man arrives at the height of impiety at once; And this is commonly the
first step. One unclean spirit entertained makes room Mat. 12. 45.
for seven worse to follow. When Conscience likes not to retain the knowledge
of God, God gives up to vile affections, at length to a reprobate mind, at
last to be filled with all manner of unrighteousness, Romans 1. 26, 28, 29. The
hopeful Professor by this means soon becomes a dangerous Apostate, and at
last a downright Atheist in life, as the Apostle says Titus 1. 15, 16. when
once the mind and Conscience is defiled, they may profess still to know, but
in works they deny God, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work
as any reprobate. When the wormwood star falls into the fountain of Conscience,
all the rivers become bitter; the sun beginning to set in Conscience, night
hastens on in the affections, Then farewell Grace. And when the sun goes back
in the heaven of Conscience, the shadow must needs go back as many degrees in
the Dial of Comfort, Then farewell Peace.

2. As the first decay is here commonly begun, so it proves the worst decay and
danger that can befall a man, a breach in Conscience is like a breach in the
Sea banks, proves desperate; or like the Leake sprung in the ship, drowns men
in utter perdition; after a crack in Conscience a man proves an utter Bankrupt;
after other shipwracks one may recover and get up again, there are post
naufragium Tabul^, but this is a fatal and commonly irrecoverable shipwreck.

Some sins and slips are like breaking of a Leg, or an Arm, which may be set
again; this is like breaking the Neck, few recover, to take hold of the paths
of life after this. Judas brake his Conscience Neck, and that brake his Neck.

Enquire as often as you will, by what degrees any is come up to the highest
sins. As for instance, how some came to give themselves over to lasciviousness,
to the committing of all uncleanness even with greediness. Ephesians. 4. 19. The
Apostle tells us they had been practicing upon their Conscience first, they had
first blinded their minds, and had stunted their Conscience to bring them to
that dedolencie, that they might be past feeling.

Again, do you wonder and enquire, how it is that in these last days so many
do depart from the faith, and give heed to seducing spirits, yea, to the very
doctrines of devils, as was foretold? 1 Timothy 4. 1. the answer is at hand in the
next verse, They had first seared and stupefied their Conscience.

Do you enquire again, how it comes that some most hopeful Professors become
at last most violent and enraged Persecutors, and as bold broachers of accursed
errors? you have the answer in the Text, Hymeneus and Alexander laid down
their Old Testament weapons Faith and a good Conscience, then became filled
with new wine, then grew corrupt themselves, then vented blasphemies, then were
delivered up to Satan, as fitter for Hell then the Church. They fell into
prodigious opinions and conceits, making a fable of the Resurrection, 2 Timothy 2.
17. At last this Alexander came to be an open enemy to Paul, and Persecutor of
his doctrine, whom he prays against more then he does against any other, 2 Timothy 4. 14. This is indeed the ready way, nay the only way to sin that
unpardonable sin, the sin against the holy Ghost, which never has forgiveness,
because it never has Repentance.

A man that has lost his Conscience is like a Be that has lost his sting,
becomes a Droan ever after, and is at last expelled the Hive. The beginning of
the Decaie of Conscience is like the beginning of the Hectic fever, which at
first, as the Physician says, were easily cured, but that it is hardly known;
but at last it is easily known, but hardly cured.

3. The third danger and mischief is, that either thou must resolve to make
this Good warfare, required in the Text, for a Good Conscience, or to suffer an
ill warfare made upon thee from an ill Conscience; either thou must make this
Tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit
corrupt: but Mat. 12. 33.
know that this war is the worst war which can be made. All wars are bad, and
end in bitterness, but of all wars civil wars are the most dreadful, worse
when it is between City and City, then if it were Nation with Nation; and of
all civil wars domestical in the same Family when divided is worse, then when
a Kingdom divided; And in the same family again, Matrimonial war when in the
same bed is worse, then any other war in the same house between father and son:
for where the Relation is nearest, division there is unkindest. But there is
one war yet worse then all these, the personal division is worse then any
division between man and wife. This is to speak properly the only Intestine
war, when two are divided against three, and three against two. Understanding
and Conscience joining together to keep in order Will, Affections, and
Practices; but these jointly rise up to suppress their Legal and Rightful
Superiors Understanding and Conscience.

It is a sad Story to read that of the father and his two sons, who separating
from our Churches in England, kept together a while, but ere long the two
brothers divided among themselves again, and when the father could not
reconcile them, he left the one child to adhere to the other; but after that
differences grew between the father and this one son, and they must
Anathematize each other. Here was a lamentable Example to see in three persons
of nearest natural Relation such an Enmity, each stood aloof from the rest,
all three stood excommunicated, and accursed by each other. But this separation
and difference I speak of is beyond that, when a man does separate from his
Conscience, and excommunicate it first, then after does Conscience separate
from him, and accurse him, yea, and he shall be cursed.

Many have thought that they have been able to make offensive war against
Conscience, none have ever been able to make the defensive. To fight aginst
Conscience is to fight against God, and who has ever hardened himself Job 9. 4.
against him, and prospered? Pharoab would begin with God, and make an
offensive war, Who is the Lord? I know him not, I will not let Israel go; but
he was weary of the defensive, Exodus 5. 2.
Let us fly, for the Lord fights against us. So if thou think it a light
thing to Exodus 14. 25.
challenge and provoke Conscience, while it would be at peace with thee, know
thou will find it next God himself the heaviest adversary that thou could
have had.

If Conscience be not regarded in his two first Offices, he will be known in
his two last, if his Ministerial reproofs, and Magistraticall rods be
slighted, he will as a witness against thee, and a Judge over thee, chasten
thee with Scorpions. Did not I speak to you, will Conscience say, as Reuben to
his brethren, Gen 42. 22
and you would not hear then, see now what is come on it, Now his blood is
required.

4. I might add in the fourth place, that which follows in the Text, that
when once any have betrayed their trust, and delivered up this Fort to Satan,
they are ever after cashiered God's service, and are by him delivered up to
Satan's custody, and an evil Consciences mercy; either to be misled by an
erroneous Conscience, or terrified with an accusing Conscience. He that is
filthy, let him Rev. 22. 11 Zech. 11. 9.
be filthy, and that which perishes, let it perish, says the Lord in his
fiercest anger; as they had no love to the truth, so they shall have no
Judgment to discern lies, but be given over to strong delusions, to believe
any lying doctrines, That all they may be damned who received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Thus it befell
these Hymeneus and Alexander, who having once renounced Conscience, and
forfeited their faith, they were discharged any more emploiment; They have no
more part in Christ, nor lot in the Church, but are delivered up to Satan among
blasphemers.

CHAP. XVII. Of the difficulty in getting and keeping a good Conscience, and
escaping a bad.
WE have already spoken of the excellency The third Reason from the
difficulty of getting the good Conscience and escaping the bad.
and benefit of the good Conscience, and the danger and mischief of the bad.
But here we shall see the difficulty of getting and keeping the good
Conscience is as great as the excellency or benefit when had, and the
difficulty of escaping an ill Conscience, is almost as great as the danger of
it. What can be so hardly got or kept, as the one? what so hard to escape and
miss, as the other? Consider it in these three respects:

1. First in respect of Satan, it is hard to get and keep the one, and escape
the other. Satan, all his spite is at good Conscience, all his aim is to make a
bad: He envies a man nothing but his good Conscience, not riches, not honors,
no learning, parts, duties, not mirth, pleasure, not his peace, but only a
good Conscience. He envied not the Serpent his subtilty, he could make use of
it; not Pharaoh his Kingdom, not Ahithophel his Policy, Genesis 3.
nor Absalom his Beauty, nor Haman his Court-honours, or State-offices, nor
Dives his wealth and good cheer: He could tell how to make use of all. Yea, he
will offer his help to men to get them riches, honors, offices, learning, so
they will quit good Conscience: He will grant any Articles you can propound, so
he may gain this Fort. He can make use of all other things, parts, power,
policy, but a good Conscience is never for his turn, in a Magistrate, or
Minister, or in a private person, but it is constantly against him, and he
against it; and therefore he despairs of doing any good on it; as they said of
Luther, when some persuaded the Pope to attempt to take him off by offering him
some great preferment, and Church promotions, it was answered, it was in vain
to try. Germana illa bestia aurum non curat. That German beast Mel. Adain vita
Luther.
(said they) cared not at all for all their gold.

Yea if a man be plundered of all his estate, and stormed out of all his
outworks, his riches, friends, children, power, places, yea stormed out of his
nearer comforts, out of his faith and hopes, out of his prayers and promises,
all on the sudden surprised, if he retreat to a good Conscience, and make good
this last hold, by a still retaining of his integrity, Satan will be repelled
with shame and loss, and draw off with dishonor, weary of laying his siege
against so impregnable a Fort. Job had lost all, but keeping good Conscience
alone, and manfully defending this piece, he recovered all again he had lost,
and his Job 42. 12, 13.
last state was double to his first.

2. In respect of thy self, or of the work it self, thou will find a hard task
of it, to get or keep a good Conscience in an evil age; it will require thy
greatest skill, and utmost diligence. So the Apostle found it, Act. 24. 16.
therefore he says, Herein do I exercise my self, Mr. Harris. Mr. Ward. (...)
meditari and exercere se in re aliqua Gagnei. In genere notat severius
exercitium Religionis Christianae, sive praeparare se ad certamen. Vid. Leigh.
Crit. Sacr.
to keep alwaie a Conscience void of offense. (...), The word signifies, says
one, I use all my skill, diligence, and constancy together. I lay my policy,
or bend my wit, says another godly Divine. All which tell us, it is the
Christians masterpiece to look well to a good Conscience: A work of continual
exercise to an Apostle himself. Look but well into it, and thou will f^nde
there is work enough in it, as much as thou can turn thee too. To keep a
Merchants book is a piece of art, requiring skill and care: To keep this book
well, is the art of arts. To keep thy Masters accounts if thou be a servant,
thy Lords if thou be a steward, thy Shop-book if thou be a tradesman, requires
much care and diligence. What is it to keep thy soul-book, to keep Gods book,
to keep this Dooms-day-book? for so Conscience is.

3. Look yet further, and in respect of others thou will see it more difficult
still. How many have thou seen miscarry in it? who is sufficient for this work?
How should we fear? This is much insisted on in the Text, and given in charge
to Timothy, Timothy see thou war a good warfare, and look well to thy charge,
hold fast faith and a good Conscience, for all have not done so. Of many that
have run in a race, most have lost, but one ohtained the prize; of many that
have fought, most have been foiled, or wounded, or slain, or fled, but one
crowned. Run not uncertainly, fight not saintly, look well to thy Conscience.
And here are many Items couched together in this place:

1. Some] Not one single person in an age, but it is the case of many; not one
man's only, many have miscarried, and it is incident to all. Look well to it,
Be not high-minded, but fear, Romans 11. 20.

2. Some have put away Conscience] A monstrous vile act, for men sometimes of
better principles, to send Conscience packing like a vagabond, or to thrust it
out of doors, as if it were the Son of the Bondwoman. It is the most unkind
and ungracious act that can be, to disclaim Conscience, as they did Moses, Acts
7.
for an intruder, or busy usurper, or an imperious Commander.

3. Concerning faith made shipwrack] see what followed upon it; They did not
perfect and mend their faith, as they might be ready to pretend or affirm, but
weaken it, not weaken but shake it, not shake but sunk it, and lost it.

4. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander] Consider who these were, even great
Professors a great while, and stout Champions somewhile, that had adventured
far, and engaged much for the truth, and the Preachers of it; Alexander
especially, who had showed so much zeal to truth, and love to Paul, Acts 19.
that to secure Paul's person, he had exposed his own to the danger of an
unruly tumult; he could have laid down his own life to have saved Paul's, and
would have parted with his right eye to do Paul service. Yet see what is become
of these now; where will he stay that has lost his Conscience?

5. For they having put away their former good Conscience, become now branded
Apostates, and open enemies of the same Preachers they had before so loved and
honored, nay they themselves become Preachers, but blasphemous Preachers.

6. Lastly, after all this, the Church that formerly had joined with them, now
spues them out, gives warning to the godly to avoid them, and to their grief
deny them any more Church Fellowship, and gives them over to Satan, that no
more mischief may be done by their impure Doctrines. The Church in her direful
Censures says, Write these men childlesse, let no more of their seed rise up
after them, to bear more gall and wormwood.

CHAP. XVIII. The Application of the Doctrine, and first by way of Information.
THis point admits a sevenfold Application, The Application.
as containing matter, 1. For Information, 2. Lamentation, 3. Reproof, 4
Terror, 5. Consolation, 6 Examination, 7. Exhortation, with some Directions.

The Information has two parts: 1. It gives 1. By way of information.
notice of certain errors and mistakes, to remove them. 2. Of certain Truths
and Duties, to assert them.

1. It meets full in the face with that too And that first in removing mistakes.
common and plausible opinion, but most dangerous error, That to preach
Conscience, and press Duties in this nature, is but legal teaching, not
preaching Jesus Christ and the Gospel. But sure we have more cause to complain
of the world for too little of legal living, and Christian doing, then the
world to complain of too much legal preaching. When men call us legal
Teachers, we may with too much truth, and as much grief, call them illegal,
ill-Evangelicall, and ill-Christian livers.

Hymeneus and Alexander are alive again, and by many Professors counted better
Preachers then Paul and Timothy. These counted Good-Conscience-Doctrine to be
legal strictness, and old Leaven of the Pharisees; faith was enough, faith was
all: But when Conscience ceased, faith deceased, they put away Conscience,
faith suffered shipwreck. So that we may more rightly call this an
old-new-Testament-error, to cry down strictness, then you, our preaching it an
Old Testament Truth and Doctrine; This opinion broke out almost as soon as the
preaching of the Gospel. Paul had preached, That where sin had abounded and
reigned, grace did much more abound and reign, Romans 5. 20. Others inferred
hence as good Doctrine, and the right knowledge of the Gospel, and walking by a
spirit of liberty, Then may we continue in sin, that grace may abound, Romans 6.
1. Paul had said, sin shall not have dominion over regenerate believers, For we
are not under the law, but grace. Hence others concluded, We may sin, because
we are no longer under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6. 14, 15. Paul refutes
the impiety of both Assertions with the same answer, detesting both, God
forbid, Romans 6. 2. and 15. These Tares we see sprung up as soon as the good
Seed began to appear. We wonder the less if among us there be some that say,
Believe once, and away with Conscience, and Duty, and Works, and have no more
Conscience of sin. The truth is, once believe, and thou have no more Conscience
of sin, as to the guilt and punishment of it: But once believe, and ever make
conscience of sin, to avoid, resist, and mortify it, that it reign not in your
mortal body. The other were to overthrow the true grace of God, by the name
of the grace of God, and to set up an imaginary faith and Gospel, to beat down
real faith and Gospel, while they cry down Sanctification and Conscience of
duty, not as to the resting in them, but as to the very having and seeking
them.

But let the mind that has wisdom judge, can one grace in God be contrary to
another, his justifying grace to his sanctifying, or sanctifying to justifying?

2. Is one Attribute of God opposite to another, his grace, love, and mercy,
to his holiness, justice, and purity?

3. Must Christ needs be divided, and by redemption and justification drive out
wisdom and sanctification? two of his benefits destroying other two, when he is
all or none, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

4. Or must two ends of Christ's death be opposite to two other ends set down
all together, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Must Christ his dying for us, and redeeming of us, make his people less
pure, or less zealous of good works?

5. Can any imagine that one grace of the same Spirit should cross another, the
Spirits consolation evacuate the Spirits sanctification, and by his obsignation
mortify mortification?

6. Can one grace in the Christian be imagined to weaken and destroy another?
Is faith the enemy of holiness? Does Conscience extinguish confidence?

7. Is the Law now against the Promise, or Gal. 3. 21.
the Promise against the Law? did grace then fulfill the Law, and est ablish
it; and does it now Romans 3. 31.
make it void? All these would have been accounted strange Divinity in the
Apostles ears.

This bewitching error does not only set earth into disorders, neighbor
against neighbor, professor against professor, some people against their
Ministers, and some Ministers (though they are not many who are so gross)
against other Ministers, but it sets earth in rebellion against heaven; yea
would attempt to put heaven into a combustion, and make heaven at variance
within it self, while it would set Gods Decrees against Gods Decrees, Promises
against Promises, Grace against Grace, Saints against Sanctity. And again,
Decrees against Promises, Promises against Commands, Commands against Duties,
and all against Holiness.

This hellish Doctrine came from the Gnostics of old, and their followers:
They thought it their perfection to set Conscience at liberty, and to
discharge it from all purity. Epiphanius and Irenaeus say that the Gnostics
did purposely resolve to live a loose and base life, that they might reproach
the stricter Christians, and wear out that legal Doctrine (and as some of
later times have had the boldness to call it) that Idol of Sanctification:
That no regard was to be had to any scandal taken by others: That all things
Studiose sibi iurpem vitam elegerunt, ut infamiam and opprobrium Ecclesiae
conciliarent. Basilides vesci jussit Idolothytis seu victimis, and rebus illis
quae simulachris immolatae essent indifferenter and sine respectu Conscientiae,
etiam in casu scandali. Fidem perjurio negare tempore persecutionis.
Carpocrates omnibus operationibus and libidinibus indifferenter uti necessarium
d^^it, ut sine Turpitudine nemo perfectionem mystagogtae consequi posset. Alli
se Jesu similes, alii se Petro, Paulo, praestantiores ob excellentiam
cognitionis dixerunt. Vide Plura Mag. Cent. 2. cap. 5.
were lawful: That they might converse with any Idolaters and Idolothytes:
That the only way to perfection in their mysterious Religion, was to give
themselves to any libidinous and obscene actions: That some of theirs were
equal to Christ Jesus himself, and nothing inferior to him. And as for Peter,
Paul, and the other Apostles, they were far their superiors, and their
Doctrine more perfect then any of theirs: That to deny and forswear their
faith, in case of danger, was lawful, etc.

These are the (...) which the Text speaks of, who deal with Conscience as
Amnon did with Thamar, first ravish and abuse 2 Samuel 13. 17.
it, then put it out of doors. And like those Sons of Sodom, who will no longer
endure any more reproofs, but assault the reproover in his own house. This is
he who came to Genesis 19. 9.
sojourn, and he will now be a judge, therefore will we deal worse with thee,
etc. These give the Harlot erroneous or seared Conscience, the living child
from the right mother pure and tender Conscience, laying the dead child at her
doors. But while these give Conscience a Bill of divorce, God gives them a Bill
of divorce: And while they would make Conscience a reprobate, themselves become
reprobates. A shame it is these things should be said or suffered among
Christians. What would those ignorant Heathens now say, if they should see
these things? who when once they saw the Spirit carriage, and Acts of the
Apostles, cried out, The Gods are come down to Act. 14. 11.
us in the likeness of men. But changing their voice, say, that rather Devils
are come up to us in the likeness, and under the name of Saints.

But to conclude, This particular conscience is that which does constitute and
commend the Christian, and all that belongs to the Christian. The Christian is
no more a Christian, if he have not, and keep not a good Conscience. Our
Baptism is no Gospel Baptism (but without efficacy) if there want a good
Conscience, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Knowledge not right Gospel Knowledge, if not according
to godliness, Tit. 1. 1. Faith no more Gospel Faith, if not joined with
Conscience, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Love no more Love, if separated from good Conscience,
1 Timothy 1. 5. nor assurance good assurance, if not joined with good Conscience;
Heb. 10. 22. nor Obedience acceptable, except for Conscience, Romans 13. 5. nor
Sufferings thank-worthy, if not for Conscience, 1 Pet. 2. 19. You may do much
in vain, and suffer and expend much in vain, and all be in vain, if not for
Conscience sake. Yea the blood of Christ it self profits not, if not sprinkled
upon pure Conscience, Heb. 9. 14.

2. The second mistake is a practical mistake of those who reckon not
Conscience a Fort or Tower, but a Snare and a Prison rather, and think in evil
times to abandon and desert it, is the only safety. He that looks overmuch to
Conscience, must die a beggar, is a chief Article of the worlds Creed. Better
protection is to be had in policy, and a safer refuge in lies and falsehood,
and to make an agreement with hell, and covenant with death, or to break the
Covenant with God, and agreement with Heaven is the only way to security. But
shall not an overflowing Isai. 28. 17, 18.
scourge come and sweep away the refuge of lies, as the Prophet says? And
shall not men at last be forced to say, That the effect of righteousness is
only quietness and assurance for ever, Isai. 32. 17. When the sinners in Sion
shall be afraid, and the hypocrites surprised with fear, crying out, Who among
us shall dwell with the devouring fire, who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Isa. 33. 14, 15. Then shall he that walks uprightly be
set up on high, and have his defense in the munition of rocks, etc.

3. There be others who will easily yield that good Conscience is worth making
of, but are mightily mistaken in judging what good Conscience is. And there be
many mistakes in this respect.

First, some, and those very many, do conceive, if they live according to their
Conscience they do well, although their Conscience be but a natural
Conscience. Now the nature of Conscience is very good, but the Conscience of
Nature is very bad. Some good natural Conscience may have in it, but good it
cannot be called.

1. It may make a man cum seipso scire. Romans 2. 15. And so become a law unto
himself.

2. Such an one may cum aliis scire, and so far is good, as Adrian said to do
that to others, which he would exspect from others.

3. Such an one may be exact in matters of the second Table; he may answer all
the duties of natural and civil Relations, observe the Laws of humanity and
friendship religiously; be true to his trust, interest, country, friend,
promise, engagement, to his Oath taken as Regulus, To the salt of the Palace.
Ezra 4. 14. as those Idolaters were.

4. He may make scruple of many sins, such as the light of nature condemns,
gross sins commonly, Abimelech abhors adultery, Genesis 205. Pilate's Conscience
grudges and relucts Joh. 18. 31, 38. and 19. 4, 8. Act. 25. 27
to condemn an innocent man to death; Festus holds it unreasonable to send a
Prisoner bound without matter of weight charged upon him, to be inserted in the
Mittimus.

5. He may have some sense of the Deity of God, and of the force of Religion.
Romans 1. 20. and 2. 14, 15.

6. May in that respect tremble sometimes, and be terrified in Conscience for
sin and hell, as Felix, Act. 24. 25.

7. He may sometimes, and ever and anon when he seriously reflects on himself,
have a dislike of his own state and ways, and know and confess his sinful
doings, yea, he may have store and plenty of tears, and make show of much
passion and compunction for sin; so did Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 16. and 26. 21. He
was under great and frequent fits of horror of this natural Conscience.

8. Or he may on the other side have much inward and pleasing natural Peace,
while he observes the rules and dictates of his natural Conscience, Romans 2.
15. They have their Consciences witnessing with them (says the Apostle of the
natural Heathens) and their thoughts as well excusing as accusing them. They
may have tranquillam, but not securam conscientiam, as Bernard distinguishes.

And thus it is said of Socrates, who living according to the rules of his
natural enlightened understanding, when he came to die, and was put to death,
he took his death with much Resolution and Tranquillity of mind: He said of
his enemies, They could but kill him, they could not hurt him: (...)* Yet for
all this no natural Conscience can be a good Conscience. 1. Because though it
may cum seipso, and cum aliis scire, yet it does not cum Deo scire. At the best
it is liable to that rebuke given unto Peter. Matthew. 16. 23. Get thee behind
me, Satan, thou art an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that
Mat. 16. 23
be of God, but those which are of men only.

2. Because it is not purged by the blood of sprinkling; It is without Christ,
therefore without God, and Covenant, and Promise, and Ephesians. 2. 12.
Hope, and Mercy.

3. Because as it has not the purifying blood of the Lamb, so nor the
purifying water Ezekiel. 36. 25.
of the spirit sprinkled on it, whereby it should be cleansed, now whatsoever
is born of the flesh is still but flesh, and only that which is born of the
spirit is spirit. Joh. 3. 6.

4. Because it has not Faith, which is that whereby the heart is further
purified, Act. 15. 9. And the Apostle, when he bids Timothy hold faith and a
good Conscience, tells us as much, that first faith must be had, and then good
Conscience. Good Conscience is never without Faith, never before Faith.

This Conscience how ever many may lull themselves asleep on it, yet is it a
bed shorter then that a man should stretch himself on it, and a Isai. 28. 20.
covering narrower then that a man should wrap himself in it. No sure Refuge is
it, and a strong fort it is not to endure a storming: It is not the Ark of
Noah, of Moses it may be, not an Ark of Gopher wood, but made of Paper Rushes,
not pitched with Pitch, but daubed with slime; not furnished with all manner of
Provision, as Noah's was to hold out to the utmost for a whole year and longer,
Genesis 7. 11. with Genesis 8. 14.
but utterly unfurnisht for a day, that unless he be taken out of it, as Moses
was, he may there lie and cry, and famish and perish. This fort is no better
then that hold of the idol Berith to which when the men of Shechem fled for
Refuge, it was fired over their Judge. 9. 46. 49.
heads, and they perished miserably in it. A poor man and this natural
Conscience may perish and burn together.

Oportet Conscientiam non solum bonam esse, and tranquillam, sed and securam.

Bern. Par. Ser. 4. The fourth use discovers another mistake of theirs, who
judge their Conscience good when it is nothing so. With many that is held for
the best Conscience, that is most still, quiet, and sleepie; as ignorant people
think of a Minister, he is the best Minister who is the good neighbor, the
quiet man, who troubles none, even he in whose mouth is no reproofs. Whereas
the Prophet says, They who bless the people, cause them to err, and they who
are called blessed of them, are destroyed, Isai. 9. 16. and 3. 12. The blind
lead the blind into the ditch. But a man may have so much of this Peace till
he be the worse again: He may have this Peace too soon, he may have it too
long. There is a Peace of Satan's giving, Luke 11. 21. As there is a sword and
variance of Christ's sending, Luke 12. 51. The kingdom of God is righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of Satan is
ignorance, and peace, and joy in unholy courses: yet this is the Conscience
which most men call good, if it be Pacate bona, they care not though it be male
Pacata. Cain desires his Conscience would be quiet, therefore he sets upon
business of building, and travells to go from his discontents. Saul makes use 1 Samuel 16. 16, 17, 23. Act. 24. 25.
of music. Felix would stop his present trembling by an abrupt diversion. I
will take another more convenient season purposely for this Meditation. Judas
would fill up the mouth of hell and clamours of Matt. 27. 3, 4, 5.
Conscience with loud and bitter Confessions, fearful Exclamations, and
plenarie Restitution. Some call for wine, and Mirth to cheer themselves against
a day of slaughter. All James 5. 5.
which is like the drinking cold water to one who is in a fever, who for the
present finds relief, but his fever is increased thereby.

There are four Quiet Consciences, and never Four ill quiet Consciences. 1. The
ignorant man's conscience. Luke 11. 44.
an one of them good:

1. The ignorant man's Conscience is quiet and still; and as the blind man
eats many a hair, and drinks many a fly; so these know not that they do evil,
no more then the graves are aware who goes over them. Blindeness of mind
makes men past feeling, when they commit all uncleanness with greediness.
Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.

Abimelech talks much of his Integrity and Genesis 20. 4, 5.
Vprightness, and stands much upon his Conscience, when all was but morality
or ignorance. Without knowledge the Conscience cannot, as without Conscience
knowledge is not good. The Scripture somewhere calls Knowledge the Key, but if
Knowledge be the Luke 11. 52.
Key, Conscience must be the Lock. The one must be made fit to the other,
therefore Paul calls Good Knowledge, the Knowledge according to Godliness. Now
what is a Lock Titus 1. 1.
good for without a Key? what Conscience good for without Knowledge to open and
shut, to lock and unlock it? and what is the Key good for without the Lock? Get
both Science and Conscience.

Glory not that thou have got a quiet, that is a blind, deaf, silent, and
speechless Conscience. The dumb and deaf spirit was the worst spirit to cast
out of all the evil spirits we read of in the Gospel, Mar. 9. 25, 26, 29. The
other roaring devils were more easily ejected. Better a roaring, raging, and
racking Conscience, then a dumb Conscience. Mar. 1. 23, 26.


The second Conscience that is quiet, yet 2. The unawakened conscience
not good, is that Conscience that was yet never well awakened. But sin lies at
the door like a Mastiff asleep, and makes no noise. Here is quiet indeed, but a
dangerous quiet. This Conscience either is given over to sleep a perpetual
sleep, as God threatens Jer. 51. 39, 40. In their heat I will make their
feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not awake, says the Lord. Then will I bring them like
lambs to the slaughter. This sleepie Conscience makes a man like Nabal when he
went drunken to 1 Samuel 25. 36, 37.
bed, unsensible of any danger; yet is it a great Judgment to be thus drunken
with sin, to rejoice and sleep a perpetual sleep, and if these go sleeping to
Hell, which is to die like Lambs, as the world says, The judgment is the
greater. Or else this Conscience now asleep will arise and cry out like a
Isai. 42. 14.
traveling woman, it will destroy and devour at once. Sin will not always be
kept out of doors, but will break in and lie down with thee in thy distress,
Job 20. 11. Joseph's brethren had their Consciences asleep long, but at last it
awakened, and stared in their faces, and made them tremble. Jonahs Conscience
was once asleep in the midst of his sin, when he was out of Gods way; he was
asleep also in the midst of the storm, but God would have him awakened ere he
had done with him, He shall be cast out of the Storm into the Sea to awake him,
and out of the belly of the Sea into the belly of the Whale to awake him, and
out of the Whales belly into the Belly of Hell, and there he awakes: And
there he cries, Out of the belly of Hell I Jonah 2. 2.
cried, and thou heardest my voice. Awakened, guilty, staring Conscience is
Hell opened, here is crying in this Hell, and there may be hearing and mercy
for these: These are indeed in Purgatarie, and for such souls prayers may be
made, Ex hoe inferno redemptio. But the sleeping Conscience is hell shut up,
and sealed; there is no crying, and therefore no hearing. When Peter was
asleep, though he had a guard set upon him, and was laid in irons, and had the
doors shut, and the Keepers before it, and the warrant sealed for his Execution
the very next day, he was quiet, but all that while in Durance and Danger. But
when he was to be delivered from the danger, the Angel comes, and not only
opens the doors, as if to carry him out in a sleep, but he smites him, and
awakes him, and warns him, and hastens him, and leads him, and leaves him not
till he come to himself. Act. 12. 6, 7, 8, 11.

How many men are there who use all art to charm Conscience, and to make it
drunk, that they may be rid of it, as David did to 2 Samuel 11. 13. Genesis 38. 23
Vriah, or as Judah concerning Thamar, Let her go, enquire no more after her,
least we be ashamed. But Conscience may be snib'd, cannot be extinguished;
oppress it you may, suppress it you cannot; it will lie at the door, and will
not be gone, or beaten away; Vriah slept at his masters door, and was at 2 Samuel
11. 9, 13. Genesis 38. 24, 25.
hand, Tamar proves with child and Judah must father it.

How do men ordinarily bless themselves in their quiet Consciences, and reckon
of no hell but in an unquiet Conscience, whereas the still Conscience is the
worst hell. What pains do many take to make themselves Conscience-proof, and
their Conscience hell-proof, that they may not be tormented before their time?
They do by hellish magic make their Conscience as impenetrable as the young
man had by his charms made his body, whom Luther said he saw thrusting a naked
sword with all his might against his naked Vidi ipse ego adolescentem, qui
stricto gladio in ventrem nudum fixo, tam valide urgebat adversum scipsum,
donec capulus reversus copulare^ur acumini super ventrem, and nihil laesus,
gladium rursum remisit. Luth. Conc. in 1m. Praecept.
belly with that force, that the point bowed to the hilt again, yet was the
wretched young man not hurt at all.

The charmed quiet Conscience is the unsafe Conscience, the troubled is the
better; where the strong man is disturbed, and angry, and resisted. Then the
flood is cast out of the Dragons mouth, when the woman is delivered, to drown
her and her child, Revel. 12. 15. The Dog never howls till he be shut Mr
Rutherford.
out of doors, said a learned Divine, nor does Satan rend, and tear, but when
he is going out. Mark 9. 26.

The third ill quiet Conscience is the deluded 3. The deluded Conscience.
Conscience, the Conscience deluded by Satan or his Instruments dreams nothing
but visions of Peace, Luke 11. 21. Lam. 2. 14. When the strong man armed keeps
possession, All is peace. As in a town close besieged, and beset round with the
enemy, the commander within labors to keep them in blind obedience, and at
hard duty by concealing from them the enemies strength, their own weakness,
and want of provision, and is vigilant in preventing any Intelligence with the
enemy as long as possibly he can, till either necessity force them to quit
the service, or they without shoot in arrows with letters, giving notice how
they are bonght and sold (by their Commanders for their own ends) and offers of
mercy, and fair quarter upon submission, and coming in, or of putting all to
the sword without mercy, if they still stand out. Then do the soldiers and
inhabitants resolve to rise up against such a Commander, they seize on him, and
to make their own peace, throw over his head, as they 2 Samuel 20. 22.
did Sheba's once in such a case. Such is Satan's policy to keep poor souls in
obedience, by promising them security, till God in his mercy be pleased to
shoot in arrows of deliverance upon submission, or of destruction upon contempt
of grace offered. Then does the soul rise up against Satan, resolves to seek
out for his own safety by casting himself on the mercy of God, and will go
out though he die for it: for he sees he is a dead man else if he fit still.
Ahab deluded speaks 1 Kin. 22. 27.
of nothing but Peace and victory, Keep Micajah in prison till I return in
peace. Satan was a lying spirit to entice him to go on that he might fall.
Micajah shot in an arrow of deliverance, if he would have submitted, I saw all
1 Kin. 22. 17.
Israel scattered, let them return every man to his own house in peace. Ahab
stood out still, and would go on. The next arrow was an arrow of destruction, a
fatal arrow came and pierced ver. 34.
his armor in the joints of it. He was now a dead man.

The whole world is full of quiet Consciences, because full of deluded
Consciences. The Angels account when they returned was, That they walked to and
fro through the earth, and behold all the earth sits still, and is at Zech.
1. 11.
rest. The most of men are settled on their lees, and have this belief in their
heart, That God will neither do one thing or other, neither good or evil;
whatever men do, Zeph. 1. 12. How ordinary is it for most men to flatter
themselves in their own eyes, and to say, I shall have peace still, though I
add drunkenness to thirst. Deuteronomy. 29. 19? No observation among all the Proverbs
is more often verified then that of Every man's way being good in his own eyes,
when the end thereof proves the way of death. Prove. 14. 12. and 16. 25.

Yea there be many that live and die in this condition, and go away without any
horror and roaring of Conscience, whom the world calls blessed, saying they
die like lambs, having no bands in death, nor trouble upon Psalm. 73. 4.
Conscience. Whenas they die rather like Salomons ox, who goes to the
slaughter, or the fool who goes to the stocks, when neither is aware. Prove. 7.
22.
Or if you will have them die like lambs, like Jeremie's Lambs they die, Jer.
51. 38, 39. They are drunken with delusions, and sleep a perpetual sleep before
they die therefore they rejoice, and are secure, but I will bring them like
lambs to the slaughter, etc. says the Lord* And they shall not awake till they
are awakened in hell. It is given to him to be in safety for a little while,
says Job, and he rests in it; but they shall be cut off as the tops of the
ears of corn. These Job 24. 24
persons die so securely, not because the sting of sin is taken out, which were
their happiness, but because the sting of Conscience is taken out, which is
their misery. This is therefore a dangerous quiet Conscience. Let me rather
die the most dreadful death of the righteous, then the most hopeful and easy
death of the wicked! Happier a thousand times to be fetched away in an instant
in Elias his fiery 2 Ki. 2. 11.
charet, and in a whirlwinde into heaven, then to have Nabals lingering fit of
the stone, and to 1 Samuel 25. 37, 38.
lie ten days before his death as if he had been asleep: When these are
interred we may as well say, Stone to Stone, as Earth to Earth, and Dust to
Dust.

There is another ill quiet Conscience still, 4. The hardened conscience
which is the hardened Conscience. This treasures up wrath against the day of
wrath, Romans 2. 4, 5. The hypocrites in heart heap up Job 36. 13.
wrath, they cry not when God smites. Then this there is not a greater plague
on Earth, or Judgment in hell; It is a sin that has as much misery, and a
misery that has as much sin in it as can be imagined.

Now there is a six-fold hardness of Conscience, A six-fold hardness.
as you may observe so many several expressions in the Story of Pharoah's
heart-hardness.

1. There is a natural hardness, and insensibleness 1. Natural hardness.
in Conscience, which is part of the sin and punishment of Original sin, which
is in all alike. This is that heart of stone which is in all, till by
Regeneration it be changed into an heart of flesh. This made Paul say he Ezekiel.
36. 25.
was alive once without the Law, Rom 7. 9. His heart had then this hardness on
it, he saw no such sinfulness in sin as afterward, therefore did he apprehend
no danger. Thus Pharoahs heart was at first before ever Moses came. It might be
said Pharoahs heart was hard by natural and original hardness.

2. There is an attracted and acquired hardness, 2. Attracted voluntary
hardness.
Acquired by the crebrous and iterated acts of sin which by degrees by the
latent deceitfulness in it, and the secret curse of God upon it withal, brings
the soul over to a dedolencie, and unsensibleness, therefore does the Apostle
warn some, Heb. 3. 13. To exhort one another daily, least the heart be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. And he does report of others, Ephesians. 4. 17,
18, 19. who by walking in the vanity of their mind, had the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindeness (or hardness) of their heart, who being past
feeling have given themselves over to laseiviousness, to work all uncleanness
with greediness. Where you have the steps by which the poor soul goes down to
hell, and the blind winding-stairs by which you are going down to the chambers
of death, if you take not heed. 1. The first step is vanity of minde] Therein
we commonly think there is little hurt, Thought is free, Phancie will be
working, etc. So long as we do no evil, or speak not vainly, what would you
have us do? Remember that vanity of mind is the first step to Hell. 2. The
second step is Darkness of understanding] which ever follows upon vanity of
mind, and this darkness of understanding leads you to the third step
Alienation in affection from the life of God, having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God.] Alienated actively on their
part, they loathing God, a sinful alienation. And alienated passively, and on
God's part, His soul abhorring them; Zech. 11. 8.
a Judicial alienation. 4. This alienation leads to more darkness still, and
Excaecation, stricken with blindeness of ignorance; One sin begets another in
infinitum, Darkness of Understanding caused heart-alienation from God, That
again produces ignorance; alienated from the life of God through the ignorance
that is in them.] 5. This ignorance leads next step to hardness, not natural
and simple, but double and judicial, because of the hardness of their heart] 6.
This hardness carries you on next step to insensibleness, who being past
feeling] 7. Insensibleness brings on Desperateness, being past feeling they
have Given themselves over.] Here you may give them over for lost, when they
come once to this seventh step to give themselves, or sell 1 King. 21. 25.
themselves, as Ahab did to work wickedness. Here is their love of sin, they
give themselves over to it, when nothing is to be gotten by it. 8. This
desperateness leads to brutishness, and turns a man into a beast. They give
themselves over to lasciviousness] They have 2 Pet. 2. 14 Jer. 5. 8. Romans 13.
13. Phil. 3. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 12
Eyes full of adultery, and are like fed horses in the morning, neighing after
their neighbors wife; their life is chambering and wantonness, their belly
their god, their end destruction, like beasts they live, like beasts they die,
which are made to be taken and destroyed. 9. This brutishness leads to
laboriousness, (...). To the working of uncleanness] They will labor as a
horse in a mill to commit iniquity, They draw sin with cords, and iniquity
with cartropes. Isai. 5. 18.
As in a gracious heart, love of God puts upon any labor for God, so love of
sin makes men drudges to their lusts and to the Devil. 10. This laboriousness
next step carries them to unsatiableness, which is the next step to Hell; They
gave themselves over to work all uncleanness] nothing comes amiss to them, so
it be uncleanness, All uncleanness, Romans 1. 23, 25.
in sinful though natural acts, and in more sinful, unnatural acts of
uncleanness. 11. And lastly, this insatiableness leads into the midst of Hell
which is delightfulness in sin, and there it leaves him, to commit all
uncleanness with greediness] what can be worse in a Devil? Thus have we showed
you the eleven steps of Satan's Ladder, That reaches from the Top of sin to the
Bottom of Hell, and tells us by what degrees a man is transformed into a beast
at first, and into a Devil at the last.

And thus do you see the second kind of hardness of Conscience, following upon
the former. Thus it is said of Pharaoh, that Pharaoh hardened his own heart,
Exo. 9. 15, 32. Adding to natural hardness, voluntary, attracted, and
augmented.

3. Then is there left nothing but Judicial 3. Judicial hardness by Seducers.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
hardness, such are all the four following kinds. As that then is the
Conscience or heart further hardened by Impostors and Seducers. Thus it is said
further, that Pharaoh's heart was hardened by the Magicians, Exodus 7. 22. The
Magicians turned the waters into blood by their Enchantments, and Pharaoh 's
heart was hardened etc. God gave them over to work their lying wonders, and
gave him over to believe their lies, and to be hardened by them. God does still
the same in his just Judgment to this day, giving men over to strong
delusions, to believe a lie, who had cast off the love to the truth, whereby
they should have been saved. In this respect it is that God is said to lay a
stumbling block before the Apostate, Ezekiel. 3. 20. to deceive the false prophet,
Ezekiel. 14. 9. And to have put a lying spirit into the mouth of all Ahab 's
Prophets etc. 1 King. 22. 23. This is a Judicial and fearful hardness
following upon the voluntary and attracted.

4. Then is there a Ministerial hardening, 4. Ministerial hardening.
God lets men enjoy the Gospel, and the means of Grace, but they having added
to natural hardness of heart voluntary, and to contempt of truth their love of
error, God sends leanness into their souls, under fatness of Ordinances,
barrenness under fruitful Ordinances. Go tell this People, says he Psalm. 106.
15.
to Isaiah the most Evangelical Preacher under the old Testament, Isa. 6. 9,
10. Hear ye indeed but understand not, and see but perceive not, make the heart
of this People fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes etc. Then does
the preaching of the Apostles themselves prove but a savor of death to death,
2 Cor. 2. 16. Then does the best Gospel Preacher become but a hardening
preacher; hard he found them, harder he leaves them; asleep he found them,
asleep leaves them; deceived he found them, and he cannot undeceive them. Thus
Moses also hardened Pharaoh's heart, viz. accidentally and occasionally Pharaoh
grew worse and worse by every precept, by every reproof, by every sign, by
every plague, by every deliverance, and by every mercy.

5. Besides these there is a most dreadful 5. Divine hardening.
hardening of God's part, a Divine hardening, a Poenal hardening by Divine
Vengeance: This God calls the sending of all his plagues upon the heart, Exodus
9. 14. A heart hardened by the curse of God, is an Epitome of all plagues in
the world; yea all the plagues of Exo. 10. 1. and 20. and 27.
hell are in it. Thus is God said often to have hardened Pharaoh's heart, which
what it does particularly implie, I shall not here enquire: How far God does
act in the Judicial hardening of a sinner to sin, yet is not the Author or
approver of the sin. It cannot be meant that God does infundere malitiam, but
that he does not infundere mollitiem. Thus is God said to lay stumbling blocks
before men, Eze. 3. 20.
as was said before, to blind their eyes, to harden their heart, that they
should not be converted etc. Joh. 12. 40. To send strong delusions upon men, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. To give men over to vile affections, and to a reprobate mind,
Romans 1. 28.

All these five forementioned Consciences may be quiet and still Consciences,
but are wretched and unhappy in their quietness.

Lastly, none will make question but there 6. Satannicall hardening.
is another who had a prime hand in hardening Pharaoh's heart, viz. Satan,
though it be never said expressly that Satan hardened Pharaoh's heart. But
certain it is, that Satan has his first or second hand in every sinful act,
and had a hand in the first hardening to the last. He brought in the first
natural hardness, he brings on from that to voluntary hardness, he subornes
Deceivers to harden further; he steals away the Word, when the Gospel preached
Mat. 13. 19.
should soften. And when God has tried all means, and finds men desperately
wicked, having pleasure in unrighteousness, he gives over striving any longer;
then comes Satan with full Commission of power, and efficacy of lies and
errors, to persuade and prevail also, 1 Kin. 22. 22.

The like expressions the Scripture also uses as touching the spiritual
blindness of mind: 1. We are said to be born blind, blind we are naturally
in spiritual things. 2. Then to close our eyes wilfully, Matthew. 13. 15. 3. To
have our eyes closed Ministerially, Isa. 6. 9. 4. To be led blindfold by
Seducers, The Mat. 15. 14
blind leading the blind; those blind whose eyes God has put out, leading
such blind whose eyes themselves have put out. 5. Then does God close men's
eyes Judicially, Joh. 12. 40. Romans 11. 8.


And lastly, Satan is said to close the eyes of them to whom the Gospel is hid,
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

Now to end this Discourse, the world is full of Consciences that are bardened,
either by natural, or voluntary, or Judicial hardness; Judicially, I say,
either by godly Ministers accidentally, or by wicked Seducers purposely, or by
Satan's instigation, or by Divine indignation, But howsoever it comes, all these
are quiet Consciences, and the more hard the more quiet, the less trouble and
noise is in the Conscience, the less life and soundness ordinarily. This
Conscience is quiet till the worse again.

We all complain the world is hard, and that times were never more hard, and
less quiet, and never more full of troubles. Thus all complain. But God
complains, men and Consciences were never so hard, though never more quiet
and less troubled for sin under Gods wrath, fearful judgments, mighty signs,
wonders, temptations, deliverances, confusions, and the hewing of his Prophets,
and Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4. Hos. 6. 5.
his own slaying us by the word of his mouth, and melting us under Mercies,
Ordinances, and offers of his Grace, and entreaties of his Ministers, yet do we
as our stiff-necked and uncircumcised-hearted Acts 7. 51.
Fathers, always resist his Grace and Spirit, till there is almost no remedy.
Therefore 2 Chro. 36. 16.
no wonder for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still, Isa. 9. ult.

Yet there is a quiet Conscience that is a good When quiet Conscience good.
Haec est bona and tranquilla Conscientia eorum qui carnem spi^^^ui subdiderunt,
qui cum his qui oderunt pacem sunt Pacifici. Bern. Par. Sermon.
Conscience, when it is purified as well as pacified, as was said before, when
it has done all his four Offices, and speaks peace, that is a happy peace,
and when it has those ten properties of good Conscience before spoke of; viz
of faith, of purity, of sincerity, of inoffensiveness, and of charity, and
when it is a well sighted, well spoken, and an honest dealing Conscience, when
it is rightly tender and rightly hardy, and after all these speaks peace.
This is the only right peace of Conscience, the peace that passes
understanding.

5 Use. The fifth use is to discover another ordinary mistake in men, who are
apt to judge a troubled Conscience a good Conscience, and for no other reason,
but because troubled. These are the third sort of men who are mistaken in
judging of Conscience; these are as much out as the former, they judged
Conscience good, because quiet; these on the other side say, I have a good
Conscience, because I have had troubles in Conscience, therefore I hope the
worst is past, bitterness of death and hell is over. But so had Cain, and Ahab,
and Judas, and Simon Magus. There is Conscientia mala turbata, as well as mala
pacata. Thou may have had great horror, and a dreadful sound in thy ears,
yet only felt Job 15. 21.
the beginning of sorrows, Eccles. 9. 3. The wise man says, that there are
they whose heart is full of rage and madness while they live, yet after that
they go to the dead and damned, out of one hell they go into another, and out
of one Ex inferno ad inferuum Eze. 15. 7.
fire into another. Then is Death and Hell cast into the Lake of fire.

Now there is a troubled Conscience which is not the better for it. And there
is a Conscience troubled again, then which there is no better.

The ill troubled Conscience is known by 3 Marks of an ill troubled conscience.
these three marks: When those troubles have an ill original or rise, whence
they take their beginning. 2. When there is an ill carriage and frame of spirit
under them. 3. When an ill course is taken to remove them. Then from first to
last these troubles are evil troubles.

1. Troubles are then evil, when the root is 1. When proceed from an evil root
and cause.
evil whence they spring. Ahab is much troubled, till he is sick again, not
because his covetous lust is unmortified, but because unsatisfied. Amnon is sick
because his brutish lust is nor satisfied. Herod was troubled in his mind,
Mat. 2. 3. when he heard Christ was born. But no good trouble this, it had no
good spring, but came from hence, that he feared he should be disturbed in his
Dominion, and his usurped power should be abolished. So Prove. 4. 16. There be
they that cannot sleep if they have done no mischief all day. These troubles
are not from sin, but for it, that they may effect it. Hell is full of such
troubled spirits. This is indeed the Devils trouble, The unclean spirit going
through places, where there is no good to be done (for his purpose) seeks
rest, but finds none. This is cum diabolo conscire, or consentire, and may be
called the Devils Conscience.

2. When if it be at all for sin, it is not so much for the intrinsecal evil
and sinfulness that is in sin, as in regard of the eventuall and consequential
evils that attend sin, and the punishment that follows. Thus Ahab after his sin
is troubled, walks heavily, puts on sackcloth, and is humbled, and fasts, and
lies in sackcloth, 1 King. 21. 27. But all this ado is not for grief of the sin
committed, but for fear of the punishment threatened. So did Cain cry out
because of his punishment, Judas because he must be damned, Magus desires
prayers that none of those evils told him of by Peter should come upon him, and
Act. 8. 24.
there was all his trouble. This is to be troubled for Hell, not for sin. Hell
it self is full of such troubled Consciences, where there is continual
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teetb for their pains, but not the least
Repentance for their sins.

2. When the Carriage under the troubles 2. When attended with an ill carriage
under it.
is evil, then it is an evil trouble, as 1. when the man does rage, and swell,
and storm under the stroke of God, but his uncircumcised heart is never a whit
broken, to accept of the punishment of his iniquity. Cain was troubled enough
at his sentence pronounced by God, he was not troubled aright; it was not at
all for his sin, nor did he at all humble himself under the just sentence of
God, but rages and stormeth at his punishment, My punishment is greater then I
can bear. So those Isai. 8. 21, 22. who fret themselves, curse God, and King,
and all that comes in their way; And they look upward and downwand upon the
earth, and behold trouble and darkness, and they are driven to darkness.

2. When you see a man go on in sin under his Troubles, these are ill troubles.
Eelix sometime trembled while Paul was at work upon his Conscience, but all
this trembling did no good upon his Conscience. Paul left Felix as he found
him, an incorrigible sinner, sinning against checks of his own Conscience. And
Felix left Paul as he found him; He could not be moved ere the more to do Act.
24. 27. 1 King. 12. 33. 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
him Justice; Felix left Paul bound. Jeroboam was as ill, and that wicked Ahaz
much worse after judgments upon them. Simon Magis waxed worse and worse after
that warning given him by Peter. Hell is likewise full of such troubled
Consciences, there is continual sorrowing, but yet continual sinning. Rev.
16. 11. and 9. 20, 21.
They gnaw their tongues, because of their pains; yet blaspheme God with their
tongues, and repent not to give him glory, as they Revel. 16. 11. It is not
the thorn in the hand throbbing and burning which makes the hand well, but the
pulling of it out.

3. Those are ill troubles whose cure is 3. When an ill cure sought.
evil, or when an evil course is taken for their removal, as, 1. When men go to
outward means to remove an inward grief, and go not to God; Cain goes and
travels first, leaves his Country, to see if he can leave his sting of
Conscience; he afterward settles himself to emploiment in building, but Cain
carries his hell with him. Saul while his ill fit is on him sends for David,
and seeks to still his distempered spirit by his music, An ill Diversion does
but Prorogue, not end the disease. It is like the casting of water upon the
outside of the house, when it is all of a flame within; or like the going to
the fire in a melancholy Quartan Ague, to get outward heat, when the cold is
inward, and the man shakes before the fire, his Aguish fit is thereby
increased, and made more violent.

2. When men again rest in the Outward use and observation of Religious means,
without any inward change of heart, and a thorow-Reformation of life. Ahab
humbles himself, fasts, mourns, puts on sackcloth, goes softly. All good, but
all this not enough; Good to do these, not to rest in these: Ahab was Ahab
still, no inward change at all in him. Judas is full of inward horror, he
makes an outward confession of his particular sin, makes plenarie Restitution
of what he had sinfully gotten, but there he rests, he goes not penitentially
to God; he goes not fiducially to Jesus Christ, whom he had sold, or given up
all his former interest in: but all this he does to stop the mouth of
Conscience, and to dead that hideous noise that was within. Thus do we see
others taking up duties often, and here they rest: They fast, pray, read, hear
more then formerly; all to gratify Conscience, and keep it from grumbling and
clamor. Somewhat they do, all they do not, that they should do. All this to a
sin-troubled Conscience is no more to the cure of it, then a draught of cold
water inwardly, or pouring cold water outwardly on a body burning in a fever;
It may allay at present, but removes no part, or cause of his disease.

These torment, and task themselves, turning themselves up and down, as
Solomon's sluggard on his bed, or the door turning on his hinges; there is no
departure from Pro. 26. 14.
the bed, or from the door-Post. So is here much turning, no returning:
therefore Jeremy calls all this but gadding, a wild and disorderly gadding,
not a regular going, or penitent returning, Jer. 2. 36. Why gaddest thou about
so much to change thy way?

Thirdly, which is much worse then the former, when men have recourse to
Diabolical and sinful means, as Saul goes to the witch, 1 Samuel 28. 7, 8. 2
King. 1. 2
Abaziah sends to Baalzebub to enquire, sends not to enquire of God.
Belshazzar in his perplexity sends for the Magicians to give him comfort. Dan.
5. 7. To such as take these courses the Prophet speaks. Isai. 47. 12, 13.
Stand now with thy enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, if so
be thou shall be able to profit thy self. Thou art wearied in the multitude of
thy counsels. Let now the Astrologers, the star-gazers, and monthly
Prognosticators stand up and save thee from those things that shall come upon
thee. These all die in their sin, and perish as Ahaziah did, because they go 2
Ki. 1. 6.
to Baalzebub, not to God, and never come away with more comfort then Judas had
at the High Priests hands, when he must go tell them what he wanted, and what
he felt. He might go and die of despair for all they could say or do to him.
The stroke is from Gods hand, the cure must be from the same hand. These
should say Hos. 6. 1. Come let us return to the Lord, for he has smitten, and
he will heal us; he has broken, and he shall bind us up.

Lastly, which is worst of all, when men despairingly give over all hopes, and
all use of means, saying, There is now no hope. This latter Jer. 2. 25. and 18.
12.
evil in putting away Gods mercy, is worse then all the former, in abusing and
defiling Gods mercy; As Tamar said to Amnon; this latter evil in putting me
away is worse then the former. This was Cains case, I am 2 Samuel 13. 16. Illa
desperatio quae in hac vita tollit omnem spem, quae ex Dei gratia potest oriri,
non tantum est aerumnose, and moleste mala, sed and vitiose. Ames.
sentenced, I must be damned; I am accursed, I must bear it; God has no mercy
for me, and none will I ask him. Out he goes from the Presence of God, full of
black despair, his countenance is cast down, and he that was of late too stout
to speak to his brother Abel, is now as stout and sullen, he will not once open
his mouth to speak to God for a pardon. So likewise Judas confessed, repented,
restored, but despairing of mercy never once went to speak with Christ to
find mercy. So also Magus whom Peter bade Repent and pray, then perhaps his
sin might have been forgiven him. He never made one Prayer, or so much as once
set upon the work of Repentance. This is trouble of Conscience that Hell is
full of. This the most desperate trouble in the world, when one shall cast
himself away wilfully, and say, This evil is of the Lord, 2 King. 6* 33. why
should I wait, or pray, or repent, or believe, or read, or hear, etc? This is
to forsake our own mercy. A child of God may sometimes be Jonah 2. 8.
overwhelmed with troubles, but he is still driven to God thereby, not from
God: He says, I am distressed on every side, yet I am 2 Cor. 4. 8.
not in despair: To despair I have cause in respect of my own desert; To
despair I can never have cause in respect of Gods mercy, and Christ's
Redemption. In distress I am, in Hell I am not, therefore I may yet seek and
obtain mercy. In the belly of hell I may be, yet I will look up to Gods
Temple, and Mercie-seat, as Jonah said; what though I cannot believe? Jonah 2.
2.
yet I will not despair; though I cannot pray, yet I will look up. Though I
cannot get out of the belly of hell, yet God can bring me out, and can make
the Whale land me, and make all tempests and dangers to be means to preserve
me. Though I have sinned against the Grace, the Gospel, the Promise, and the
Spirit, yea against Christ Jesus, yet have I not sinned nor can I above and
beyond the help and saving benefit of Grace, and Gospel, and Promises, and of
Christ and his Spirit.

Now there is also a troubled Conscience, then which there can be none better,
it is the Sacrifice of Sacrifices which God will not Psalm. 51. 17 Isai. 57. 17.
and 66. 2.
despise; it is the Temple of Temples, in which God has promised his
residence; it is the Holy of Holies, in which the Mercie-seat of God is placed.

And this trouble of Conscience is then Six notes of a good troubled Conscience
good when you see these six notes there:

1. When this trouble is rather for sin, then misery; when the soul cries out
Lam. 5. 16. Woe to me, for I have sinned; Thus was repenting Ephraims case
described, He smote Jer. 31. 19.
his hand on his thigh, because the sin of his youth lay heavy upon him, which
was more then if he had cried out ten times more, because the hand of God had
lain heavy upon him.

2. When in this condition the poor troubled soul does confess, bewail, and
lament his sin. Psalm. 51. 3. My sin is ever before me, I will acknowledge my
sin, etc. What shall I say, Oh thou Job 40. 3, 4.
preserver of men: for I have finned? Job 7. 20.

3. When upon such confession and bewailing of sin, he forsakes it. Prove. 28.
13. The Promise of Mercy is to such. Such a troubled soul says, Behold I am
vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I
spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further.

4. When not only sin is forsaken in respect of the outward act, but the heart
is changed and mortified to the love of sin: when God has hidden all pride
from man, Job 33. 17. by means of all his trouble; this is a good trouble, when
the sin-troubled soul says, I find now more bitter then death the woman whose
heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands, whosoever pleases God shall be
delivered from ber. Eccles. 7. 26.

5. When the heart is not only changed from the love of sin, but is carried
out to seek after Christ for rest, and Righteousness; when Mat. 11. 29. Zech.
13. 1. Joh. 3. 14, 15.
we go to this Physician to get rest to the soul, and go to this Fountain to
wash away sin and uncleanness. Those are happy stings of the serpent, that
cause us to look up to the brazen serpent. And that Pursuer does us no hurt
which does drive us the faster to the City of Refuge.

6. Lastly, when after all this, the Conscience is made more careful, and more
tender ever after. Job 34. 31, 32. Now I have smarted for it, I will no more
offend, says 2 Cor. 7. 11. Optimum est tunc sentiri vermem cum possit etiam
suffocari, hic mordeat ut moriatur, and paulatim desmat mordere. Bern. Par.
Sermon.
the right troubled spirit; That which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done
iniquity, I will do no more. It is an excellent hopeful sign (says Bernard)
to feel this Worm of Conscience gnawing and biting; while it is here biting, it
may be killed, and when it is biting it is dying. Mordear, ne moriar. Let me
rather be bitten, that this worm may after die, then be unbitten that I should
ever die. What was Julius Cesars Motto is every Christians in this case. Semel,
quam semper. To die at once rather then to languish ever.

The next mistake is of them who think 6. Mistake.
they have a good Conscience, but it is an Erroneous Conscience. They pretend
to Conscience in some thing, yea more then others, but it is a misinformed
Conscience. The Pharisees made a matter of Conscience of it to take off hearers
and followers from Matt. 23.
Christ, to make Proselytes to themselves. Paul once thought he could not do
God better service, then in persecuting the Apostles, Act. 26. 9.
and Preachers of those times, and to disperse the flocks. How far was Saul
gone with this disease, when he would make the old Covenant an old Almanac
which was made with the Gibeonites? He would needs be wiser then all his
Predecessors, and more Conscientious, and an impulsion of spirit with a pang
of Conscience such it was set him on, He did it in his zeal, it is said, to the
house of 2 Samuel 21. 2
Israel. But was it therefore good, because he had such a persuasion? did not
his Realm first, and his house at last smart for such an error, in breaking
that Covenant which was at first subdolously obtained, and inconsiderately
made? yet fieri non debuit, factum valuit.

Much was spoken at first of the evil haunts Chap. 2.
of this Conscience, we may therefore say the less here, we shall only add
some of his common Marks whereby it may be discovered; it is impossible to
enumerate all his Wiles, and Exorbitancies: Some and his chief among them we
shall name:

1. His grand and greatest mistake is to leave the Word which is the standing
Rule to a rectified and judicious Conscience, and to prefer a Tradition, or
some humane invention before an express Precept. Thus did the Pharisees, Matt.
15. 13.

2. Erroneous Conscience leaves the waters of Siloah, the holy Scriptures,
that ran softly, and uniformly, and constantly, and takes extraordinary
Providence for a Rule in stead of Precepts: whereas Gods Providence Deuteronomy. 13.
3. Dan. 11. 35
both prospering and adverse are often more Probatorie then Directorie. To tempt
and try rather then to warrant, or discourage proceedings. But erroneous
Conscience imputes his success to his cause, and his cause prospering he
entitles God's cause. This was Rabshakehs Divinity, Am I come hither Isai. 36.
10.
without God? God has said, Go up against Jerusalem. This was the Divinity of
the Caldeans, Hab. 1. 11. Then shall his mind change (with his success) and he
shall pass over, and offend, imputing this his power to his God. These are apt
to say Jer. 50. 7. We offend not, because they have sinned, and we have
prevailed. But if Gods Permissive Providence, and our prevailing success make
any thing lawful, what is then sinful, that is in our power? Then were not
God's written will, but our will and power (Providence concurring) the Rule and
Measure of lawful and unlawful. But Providence are various and uncertain,
Our Rule must be constant and certain. Providence can never be made a Rule; for
first, no Conclusion thence can be certain and infallible, says the wise man
Eccles. 9. 1, 2. All things come alike to all, etc. so that none can know love
or hatred by all that is before him. Secondly, The success which God does often
in his Providence lay out for men is short of man's Expectation, and the most
industrious endeavors, Eccles. 9. 11. The race is not to the swift, etc.
Thirdly, Gods wise and secret Providence does often disappoint and frustrate the
expectation of the wisest and the best of men, Eccles. 7. 15. There is a just
man that perishes in his righteousness, and a wicked man who prolongeth his
life in his wickedness. The like he says again Eccles. 8. 14. Fourthly,
Providence are various, and full of alternations; that it were a brutish kind
of Logic to conclude any thing positively thence concerning the mind of God,
or the state of man. Then when Paul and all his company escape their
shipwreck, they must be all Saints; when the Viper is on his hand he must be a
murderer now, and when the Viper is in the fire, he must be a God again. All
the consequences alike valid. Fit Divinity this for Barbarians, not for
Christians. But Solomon would have us cease from such kind of daring
reasonings, when he concludes Eccles. 8. ult. I beheld all the work of God,
that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun, because though
a man labor to seek it out, yea further, though a wise man think to know it,
yet shall he not be able to find it out.

3. It prefers a supposed fictitious Revelation before written and clear
Revelations, as did the deceived prophet 1 King. 13. Now all Divine Revelations
coming from the Spirit of Truth, ever are consonant to the word of truth, which
is the Rule to try all Revelations by. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

4. It prefers a strong impulsion from his own thoughts before Gods own
thoughts, Jer. 7. 31. God said what they did never came into his mind to
approve it, yet would they do it, because it was their Conscience, and it came
into their mind. But the strongest impulsion of our spirits, though gracious
Spirits, can be no Rule. David had a very strong impression once to build God a
house, he consults with Nathan a Prophet, he has the 2 Samuel 7. 2, 3.
same apprehension of the work, Go on, for God is with thee, yet was it not
therefore good in Gods eyes, because good in both theirs. David had another
vehement and impetuous Motion to be avenged on Nabal for his inhumanitie, 1 Samuel 25. 22.
and uncivilities toward his servants, sent in his name, he backs that motion
with an Oath; yet upon Abigails submission he changes his mind, blessing both
ver. 33.
God and her, and the counsel given to stay him from proceeding so fiercely
according to the wild light of an erring Conscience. God did appoint his
people under the Law Numb. 15. 39.
to wear fringes on their garments, that they might remember Gods written
Commandments, and not seek after their own heart, after which they were apt to
go a whoring. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, the wise man Pro.
28. 26
says. And Job gives a serious Item in this case. Let not him that is deceived
trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompense. Job 15. 31.

5. Erroneous Conscience interprets difficulties and discouragements as a
discharge from duty. The time is not come, say they, to build the House of
God, nor is it any more our duty; because the Kings of Persia forbad, and the
adversaries hindered it. Hag. 1. 2. But this is the sluggards Conscience when
he sees a lion in the way, Prove. 26. 13.

6. It conceives a fair intention, or a good end may legitimate an
unwarrantable action. Now though true it is, That the goodness of the end
propounded has a great influence upon an action to make it theologically good;
yet can no good end alter the nature of an action that is materially bad to
mend it. To do the greatest good to an evil end (as to pray to be seen of men)
and to do the least evil to attain the best end (as to lie for God) are Job 13.
7.
alike abomination. Our Rule from the Scripture is not to do the least evil to
gain the greatest beneficial good, or to avoid the greatest penal evil, Romans
3. 8.

7. Lastly, this fool so rages, and is so confident, that he dare appeal to
God, to patronize his exorbitancies, Jo. 16. 3. They think they did God
greatest service when they did the Church the greatest dis-service in killing
the Apostles. So did Paul's erring Conscience once stimulate him, Out of zeal
persecuting the Church, Phil. 3. 6. Jehu could not look upon it as any other
then true zeal to God, when he saw himself so violent in rooting out Ahabs
house, and Baals priests, Come see my zeal for the Lord, says he. And were
there not forty zealously enraged against Paul, who had made a religious vow,
not to eat again unless they had killed Paul? Act. 23. 12.
Quantum Religio poterit suadere malorum! what so evil that erroneous
Conscience will not call good? It puts bitter for sweet, and darkness for light
familiarly.

7. The next mistake is of them who mistake a scrupulous Conscience for a good
Conscience, whenas all their scruples are about minute, and trivial matters,
about indifferent or impertinent things, overlooking things of greater
consequence; they stand upon Tithe Mint, Annise, and Cummin, and neglect the
weighty matters of the Law, Mercy, Justice, Faith; Strain at a gnat, swallow
a camel, stick at joining with a Christian Congregation in the commanded duties
of public worship and Communion, but never stick at joining with scorners in
sinful communion, or in conforming to the fashions of the world. Surely we may
say as Paul to his Ephesians, But ye have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20,
21.
if ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, etc. These make ado about
washing pots, and cups, and outsides, when the heart is brim full of pride,
hypocrisy, malice, censoriousness, rapine, and all iniquity; scruple rubbing
ears of corn when hungry, but not swallowing a poor widows house. The high
Priests were troubled in Conscience, and rent their clothes, when Christ said
he was the Son of God; but when themselves blasphemed Christ, and resisted the
holy Ghost, there was then no rending hearts, nor renting garments. When Judas
brought back the money and threw it down, they would not once touch it, and
into their Corban it must not come, it was the Price of blood now; but when
they drove the bargain with Judas, and told him out that very money, then it
was not the price of blood, out of Corban it might lawfully come, but into
Corban again it must not go. Oh painted sepulchers, and whited walls!

8. Such again on the other side who think that scruples, and strictness, and
tenderness are the only arguments of an ill Conscience, and that Liberty and
bold adventurousness are the best arguments of a good Conscience; And so all
the world is of a sudden become very Conscientious, and our Reformation brought
unto perfection; All men crying, Conscience, Conscience, Liberty, Liberty.
But shall we go down and see, whether they have done altogether according to
this cry? Genesis 18. 21. Is this the only good Conscience that the world has
left? Must we needs leave Jordan, and go wash in Abano and Pharpar, that we
may be clean? Must we beat down one altar, and set up many altars, going the
clean contrary way to Hezekiahs Reformation, to make sure that our Reformation
shall not be Legal, must we say, that uniformitie is the only slaverie? That
one heart, one way, one faith, one Baptism, and one Table of the Lord is too
little under the Gospel. That Jerusalem is not the place; it is too much to
meet all in one place; Dan and Bethel may do as well; private places are as
good as public? The meanest of the people as fit as the most learned? Well we
see the one part the worse part of that prophecy, fulfilled Micah 4. 5. for
all people will walk every one in the Name of his God; when shall we see the
other and better part fulfilled which follows, And we will walk in the Name of
the Lord our God for ever? Shall this serpent Liberty eat up all our other
Rods? Must all the legitimate sons of Gideon be slain, that way may be Judge. 8.
31. and 9. 18.
made for the son of an harlot, or Concubine, a bastard son to reign alone?
Must Faith, and Charity, and Purity, and Sincerity, and Patience, and
Honesty, and Inoffensiveness of Conscience All go, and shall we content our
selves only with Liberty? We have fought a good fight, and made a good
warfare, while we have put away Faith and old good Conscience, and have left
Hymeneus and Alexander free leave to spread their blasphemies, if they please,
no fear of being ejected the Church, and delivered up to Satan: It is well for
them that Paul and Timothy are dead, and gone.

In Jeremie's time when Nebuchadnezzar lay before Jerusalem with his Army,
they would make a self-denying Covenant, to provide Jer. 34.
for the Liberty of the poor servants, they made it solemnly, They cut the
calf in main, and went through the parts of it, they made it, they kept it, God
diverted the danger, they had their end, All was safe and quiet. They would
then be at Liberty from their late Covenant (All Covenants bind but pro
tempore with some, and serve to bind God to us, not us to God again) God
brings back the enemy, returns their fear afresh. And then serves them in
their kind, Liberty they would have, from Conscience, from Covenants, from
bonds of duty. They shall have Liberty enough. Behold, says the Lord, I
proclaim liberty to you, a liberty to the sword, to Jer. 34. 17.
the famine, and to the pestilence. So may not the Lord say in his anger to
such as are all for Liberty, I proclaim Liberty to you, to sins, to errors,
to strong delusions, and swift destruction? Go and serve ye every one his own
idols, Ezekiel. 20. 39. walk ye after your own hearts lust; were not this liberty
our greatest servitude? were it not much more sign of Grace and Favor, if God
should rather say as it is in the same Chapter, That which comes into your
mind shall not be at all, I Ezekiel. 20. v. 32 and 37.
will ere I have done with you cause you to pass under the rod, and bring you
under the bond of the Covenant. Yet there is a good Liberty of Conscience that
we should contend and labor Right Liberty of Conscience.
for: And that is,

1. To free our selves from humane additions to Divine Institutions, to free
Conscience from humane impositions, inventions, and observations in matters of
Religion, Gal. 5. 1.

2. To have the Conscience set free from all guilt of sin before God by the
blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 12, 13, 14. and 10. 1, 2. 18, 19, 20. This is the
Highest Liberty of the Gospel.

3. Liberty from sin, not to sin. Where the Romans 8. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 17.
Spirit of God is there is liberty indeed, but from sin the Apostle means, not
to sin; a liberty from the yoke of Satan, not Christ's. To be free from sin,
and servants still to righteousness, Rom 6. 18. but not to be servants of sin,
and free from righteousness, ver. 20.

4. Liberty from perplexing scruples, which are then removed when the heart is
established Heb. 13. 9.
by grace, and the Conscience settled by the Word of God.

5. Liberty from former fears, horror, and troubles of Conscience. Heb. 2. 15.
Christ Jesus came to deliver and set free them, who through fear of death were
all their life time subject to bondage. And if the Son make us thus free, then
are we free indeed. Joh. 8. 36.

But this liberty to be free from the yoke of duty, and from the fear, and
grief and sense of sin is the liberty of Hell, which the devils contend, and
suffer for, not the liberty of Heaven, which the Angels enjoy in the most
perfect measure. Their Liberty is a Liberty from sin, and fear, and wrath,
and bell, not a Liberty from Grace, and Duty, and They could as Tertullian
says, Salva fide peccare, and Salva castitate matrimonia violare, and he tells
them how they shall speed, Salva venia in Gehennam detrudentur dum salvo metu
peccant.
Law, and Obedience, and Subjection; but a holy, obedient, and dutiful
Liberty.

This was the abominable broth of the Gnostics boiling, mentioned before, who
thought no man could come to be a perfect Christian till he had worn out his
Conscience. To them all filthy works of darkness were lawful. This St Paul and
St Peter both do caution us against, and tell us how we should understand and
use our Liberty. Gal. 5. 13. Brethren ye have been called unto Liberty, only
use not Liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by Love serve one another.
As free, says the other 1 Pet. 2. 16. and not using your Liberty for a cloak
of maliciousness, but as the servant: of God. Both tell us we must take heed
we eat not too much of this honey, least we surfeit. Both tell us this Liberty
sets us not free from the Condition and Duty of servants unto God, or unto
righteousness. While we were free from Righteousness, Paul tells us, we were
servants of sin, Romans 6. 20. But when we are truly free we yet continue
servants to another master, being made free from sin, ye became the servants of
Righteousness, ver. 18. See Romans 6. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
There are two masters that divide the world Sin and Righteousness, No servant
can serve them both, none so much a freeman as to be free from them both; The
more thou art freed from sin, the faster thou art bound unto righteousness, and
if free from righteousness, then the servant of sin.

CHAP. XIX. The Positive Truths arising hence asserted.
THe one part of the Use of Information was to discover some mistakes, and to
seek to remove them, which was done in the foregoing Chapter; The other part
remains, which is to discover sundry Truths, and to assert them, which is the
subject of this Chapter. And first it tells us that whether we look on Timothy
as a Christian, or as a Minister, here are Inferences from it.

First, if we look on Timothy as a Christian, and find him thus charged by S.
Paul, This charge I commit to thee, Son Timothy, that thou war a good warfare,
Holding faith and a good Conscience.] That a good Conscience is the Christians
greatest Charge that he goes withal. Whatever thou take charge of, be
careful of this, This is the charge of God, look to it, if thou lose it, thy
life must go for it. What Solomon says of Wisdom, I may say of good Conscience
the truest Wisdom, Get wisdom, get understanding, above all thy getting. Prove.
4. 5, 6, 7.
So say I, Get a good Conscience, keep a good Conscience, above all getting get
it, above all keeping keep it; forsake not her, she shall preserve thee; love
her, she shall keep thee. She is a tree of life to them that Prove. 3. 18.
lay hold on her, happy he that retains her. But lose this, and lose thy
soul; hate this and love death. Good Conscience is the Prove. 8. 39.
charge we travel with, whatever danger we may meet with in our way, we must
run, or fight, or die, or fly for it, rather then deliver up such a charge.
Good Conscience is the Ship in which we embarque and adventure all we have,
Credit, State, Liberty, Life, and Soul too, as Noab put all into one Bottom,
all his Family, all the Catholic Church, and the Reserve of the whole world,
and all was safe. This Vessel or Man of war must never be yielded up, but
rather we must sink and perish in the defense of it. Good Conscience is our
strong Fort, which we must upon no terms capitulate to deliver up to the
enemy, but choose rather to die upon the ground.

Secondly, look upon Timothy as a Minister, and this does further inform us,
That a good Conscience is the good Ministers great Charge. This charge I commit
to thee, Son Timothy, to hold Faith and a good Conscience. These are Arma
Ministri, The Ministers weapons. The Minister must be a man of Conscience, and
for Conscience wholly. This is the floor he must daily purge. This the garden
which he must dress and keep. The living stone which he must hew and polish, to
make Temples for Christ of. This the Sanctum Sanctorum into which the
Gospel-Minister must daily enter. Faith and good Conscience are his principal
weapons he must be most expert in, and exercising at both in Person and Pulpit.
This is to preach the whole counsel of God, to preach Faith in God, and
Conscience in men. To say that Conscience is a Duty is too little, it is the
Sum of all Duties. To call good Conscience a Grace is too little, it is the
Sum of all Graces. It is Totum Dei, The whole Command of God. It is Totum
homi is, The whole Duty of man. Good Conscience is the Contents of the whole
Bible, and all the Scripture bound up in a small Volume. Will you hear in one
word the sum of all, Keep Faith and a good Conscience, This is the whole
duty of man; The sum of the first Table is Epitomized in one word, Love God
with all thy heart. Of the second in another word, Love thy Neighbor as thy
self. But the sum of both Tables of the Law, and all duties of the Gospel is
reduced to this one word Conscience. Have thou Conscience? Thou do fulfill
the first: have thou Conscience? Thou will fulfill the second.

Thou O man of God look well to thy Charge, thy own and thy Peoples Conscience.
Herein must thou daily exercise thy self as a workman, who needs not to be
ashamed to keep thy self pure, and to keep thy peoples Conscience without
offense to God and man; warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. The
Heathen Priests and Aruspices were to be skillful in the Entrails of the
beasts, and by inspection into the Sacrifices they were wont to make their
observations. The Gospel Minister his Inspection must be into the inwards of
his flock.

The best Christian is he who is most versed in his own Conscience; and the
best Minister is he, who is best acquainted, and has most to do in his peoples
Consciences. Bernard has an excellent saying of Conscience, Vnicuique suus est
Libellus Conscientia, and propter hunc Libellum omnes alii libri inventi sunt.
Every man's Conscience is his own Book and Bible, and for this little Books sake
all the good Books in the world, yea the Bible it self, were written. All
Divines Sermons, All Divines writings treat of this Book. And whatsoever Books
are in the world, if they no way tend to this end, to inform, or direct, or
satisfy, or better Conscience, it were better that the world wanted all those
books. How happy were it in these times if Conscience was preached more and
Controversies less? Whatever is the man that preaches, Conscience would be the
matter preached and spoken off; whatever be the Auditorie, Conscience would be
the Argument; whatever the Occasion, Conscience the Subject of the Discourse;
whatever be the Text, Conscience would be the Doctrine handled; whatever the
Doctrine, Conscience would be the Use; whatever the Company, Conscience would
be the Conference. Else I am bold to say, whatever be the Preacher, or Hearer,
or Text, or Doctrine, or Reason, or Use, or Conference, nothing is spoken fit
for the Preacher, or pertinent to the Matter, or Auditorie, or Occasion, or
Text, or Doctrine, or Use, or Company.

Conscience is the Lay-mans only Book, he can read no other. It is the
Ministers Concordance, which he must peruse and study most: He is not a
Preacher that is not well verst in this. This little Book is like that little
Book given to the two Prophets, Ezekiel, in the third of Ezekiel. v. 3. and St
John, Revel. 10. 9, 10. which both are commanded to eat, and to receive
inwardly into their belly, not into their mouth, or head, or hand. Son of man
cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy Qui legem Dei recte interpretantur
referunt eam ad rectum finem seu scopum, qui est charitas ex puro co^de, and
conscientia bona, and fide non simulata, at isti doctores non referunt legem ad
hunc sinem, sed ab istis commemoratis rebus, tanquam a s^^po aberrant, ergo non
recte legem interpretantur, sed ad vaniloquentiam deflectunt.
bowels with this Roll which I give thee. But with this difference that to the
godly and faithful Minister it is like Ezekiels Roll as Honey for sweetness,
but to an unsound and man-plea^ing Minister it is like John's Book, Sweet in
the mouth to discourse of, Bitter in the belly, displeasing when it comes to
practice This is the mark we should aim at, says Piscator upon that place 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6. The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and
of a good Conscience, and of faith unfeigned, which some having swerved from
have turned a side unto vain jangling. That is the right interpreting of the
Scripture when we refer all to this end to promote Charity, and Purity, and
Faith, and Conscience, to leave these is to miss the mark, and to become
Janglers, not Preachers.

Thirdly, this informs us in particular how it comes that so many daily break
in City and Country, making shipwreck of Credit, of States, and Families, the
matter is, they were broken at home first in their Consciences, then they must
needs break abroad. Break Conscience, and thou art broken, none thrive after
it. This makes the worst bankrupts, it makes a man to be out of Credit with
God, and in his own heart. A moth or worm in Conscience is commonly followed
with a moth and worm in the estate. The inheritance hastily gotten, is as soon
wasted. From the hire of an harlot if it came, to the hire of an harlot it
returns, Micah 1. 7. They ever who take more care to get great States, then
good Consciences, do but consult shame to their Honors, and ruin to their
Houses, They are like the foolish woman who pulls down her house with her own
hands. Woe to him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers
by wrong: That v^eth his neighbors work without wages: That says, I will
build me a wide house, and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows, and
Jer. 22. 13, 14, 15, 16.
it is ceiled with Cedar, and painted with Vermilion. Shall thou reign, because
thou closest thy self in Cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do
Judgment and Justice, and then it was well with him? Was not this to know me,
says the Lord? How many Examples do we see continually before our eyes of them
who gather riches, and not by right, who are taken from them in the midst of
their days, and in the end die like fools? Jer. 17. 11. Jeroboam would never
be beholden to Conscience, or Piety, to secure his State and Crown, Policy
should do it, but did not his State-designes become a sin, and a curse to the
whole house of Jeroboam to root them out of the Land? Ahab must not scruple the
way of getting Naboths Vineyard, to get it was the thing, but did he joy it?
The Prophet meets him with a cold Gratulation, Have thou killd and also taken
possession? where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, the dogs shall lick thy
blood also. Did Achan thrive any better with his stolen wedge of gold? Or
Gehazi with his two bags of silver of two Talents? The Consumption in
Conscience breeds ordinarily a consumption in the state. This makes the
furrows in the field cry out, and the stone in the wall, and the beam out of
the timber answer, Woe to him who adds house to house, field to field, and
pound to pound, till they are alone: Does not this leave great houses without
inhabitant, and fair houses without any to dwell in them? This makes all fly at
last, the beam from the timber, the timber from the wall, the wall from the
house, the house from the name, and the name it self from the face of the
earth. His sentence is, Write this man childless, a man that shall not prosper
all his days, for his heart, and Jer. 22. 30.
his eyes are only for covetousness, and oppression, and violence to do it.

Who^e Grandchild does the third Generation call happy in that Patrimony
dearly purchased by the expense of his Ancestors good Conscience? what house
stands long, that is founded on the ruins of integrity and righteousness?
whosoever gathers by labor increases, whosoever by indirect courses undoeth
himself. It is godliness which is the great gain, it is the name and memorial
of the godly which shall be blessed, it is the posterity of the righteous
which alone is happy. Godliness has the Promise of this life also, as well as
of that to come. Noah's Ark we know was not only the Preserver of the Church,
but of the whole Universe. So shall we find good Conscience not only the best
Keeper of the Soul, but of the State. Trust this thou may with all that thou
^rt worth.

4. This discovers yet a worse decaie then that of temporal States, the Ground
of that Decaie in Grace; whence it is that there are so many broken
Professors, bankrupts in Religion, and decayed Apostates in the Church.
Hymeneus and Alexander this broke their backs* They were men sometimes of as
good account, and great esteem as any other men in all that rich and mighty
City Ephesus, forward men, very likely to make eminent Ones in time. They let
fall purity and strictness of Conscience, then were corrupted, then corrupt
others, then deny Fundamentals, then broach blasphemies, then turn
Persecutors, then were as a Pest, and Gangrene to the Church, then out of
Communion thereof they are cast, and at last miserably they ended. When good
Conscience once departs, the unclean spirit comes in, and takes possession,
brings in seven unclean spirits into a house formerly empty, swept and
garnished, they dwell and stay there, till the last state of that man is worse
then the first. Break once these Old Bottles of good Conscience, and all the
wine of Grace and Comfort runs out, all is marred, the man is a lost man. From
profane and vain babbling men proceed at last to Highest ungodliness, as the
Apostles Advertisement is upon the lapse and downfall of these miserable
seducers, 2 Timothy 2 16, 17.

5. This does also clearly demonstrate, That by Apostolical Rules, and the
Primitive Discipline, Toleration is not to be granted, nor Church Fellowship
allowed to men who are of loose and profligate Consciences, and corrupt
opinions, they who cease to be members of Christ, and act for Satan, are to
have no longer Com-membership with the Church, but are to be delivered up to
Satan, as we see in the Text. Notice is to be given of them and of their Errors
to the Church, their mouths to be stopped, their Company to be avoided, and
the godly warned to beware of them. 2 Timothy 4. 15.

6. This resolves us how the world comes to swarm with foul and pestilent
opinions, this chief stone is laid aside by the most of unskilful builders.
Wood, hay, and stubble is brought in to litter the Church, in stead of gold,
silver, and precious stones. 1 Cor. 3. The first decaie is commonly here still,
Hymeneus and Alexander laying aside Conscience as legal, and servile, and
Old Testament ware, become soon tainted with noisome opinions, at last come up
to open blasphemies, and professed detestation of Paul, God does expose
unconscionable Christians to errors in Faith. Dr Twisse. Zech. 11. 10, 14, 15.
and all such like sound Teachers. God in his just judgment smites such
Teachers in their right eye, and in their right hand; they are corrupt both in
judgment and practice, and become no better then idol-Teachers, coming before
God with the idols of their hearts, and laying stumbling blocks of iniquity
before the peoples face. And indeed whenever the Teacher lays by the Staff
of Beauty, Faith; and breaks the Staff of Bands, Good Conscience; what has
he left to take, but the instruments of a foolish shepherd, some absurd and
dangerous opinions which drown men in perdition and error? while they speak
high sounding swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19.
and promise others Liberty, themselves are the captive servants of all
corruption.

7. This informs us whence it ordinarily arises that many have lost that
former Peace, and those sweet Soul-Comforts they have sometimes had, they have
lost or wounded their Conscience: The Lamp being broken, the Oil is lost, and
the light goes out of it self. Men little mind this, but here is the common
bane of all, They are excellent Observations of Learned Ames Med. Theol. lib.
1. cap. 30. Prou^ fides, and Conscientia vigent aut languent in hominibus, si^
(...) certitu^o aug^tu^, aut dimi^^^^ur. Ce^titudo Sal^tis non e^t ab aliis,
neque alias per^ipitur, ni^ ab iis qui una^um fide ^^tinent bo^am Conscienti^m,
idque dwn eam retinent sine graviore aliquo vulnere, quod a peccatis iis
infertur quae vastare solent Conscientiam.
Dr Ames in this respect, Look, says he, how much thy Faith and good
Conscience do rise or fall, so is thy Comfort and Assurance of Salvation more
or less. Therefore, says he, Assurance of Salvation is neither had by other
men, nor by any other manner, then by those who together with Faith do keep a
go^d Conscience, and that only while they keep Conscience from any greater
wound, which is usually given by those sins which do waste and make havoc of
Conscience. And at last he concludes, Qui igitur sine ulla fidei, and
Resipiscentiae sensu, aut cu^a certo sperant Salutem, praesumendo sperant, and
sperando pereunt. Whosoever without care had of Faith, Repentance, and good
Conscience persuade themselves they have Assurance of Salvation, that
Persuasion is their Presumption, and that Presumption will be their Perdition.

Conscience does not use to collogue and flatter any man, it will tell every
man his own. If you make it sad, it will make you as sad. And if you be found
to it what you should not, wonder not if you find that to you what you would
not: who can make me glad, but the same who was made sorry by me? said the
Apostle in another case, 2 Cor. 2. 2. When thou have put away Purity of
Conscience, wonder not if thou want Peace of Conscience. The Bell when
cracked loses not only his former soundness, but the pleasantness of his
former sound. The cracked Conscience makes but harsh music. What man could
exspect a song of the Lord in a Babylon of sin? There was no voice of
Bridegroom or Bride, or sound of Harp to be heard any more, Revel. 18. 23. But
the Harpers and Singers are only to be found upon Mount Sion. Revel. 14. 1, 2.

8. This informs us whence it is that many come to die so Tragically,
despairingly, and to make such fearful ends. They have like Zimri set their
own house (of Conscience) afire, and now must perish in it. Some have attempted
to make away themselves; some have done it, as Saul, Judas, and Abithophel;
some have accursed themselves, as Spira; some have blasphemed God, as Cain, and
they mentioned Revel. 16. 11. All fruits of this shipwreck of Conscience. All
these fiery and devouring flames break out of the AEtna of a sulphurie and
hellish Conscience. Maxima violatio Conscientiae maximum peccatum. Ames.
The more thou do wound another man's Conscience, thou do offend against
Charity, and therefore do the more wound Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 12. The more thou
woundest and grievest thy own Conscience, thou offendest against Piety, and
therefore thou sinnest against, and grievest the holy Ghost. Paul while a
Pharisee had done worse acts then Judas, he had been a raging Persecutor, a
desperate blasphemer of Christ, a compeller of others to blaspheme, he had his
hand in the blood of holy Martyrs. Judas did none of these hideous Acts, yet
Paul saved, Judas damned; Paul found mercy, because what he did, he did
ignorantly in unbelief, he had never gone 1 Timothy 1. 13
against the light of his own Conscience. Therefore he said Act. 23. 1. he had
walked in all good Conscience before God to that day. The like 2 Timothy 1. 3. I
thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with a pure Conscience. But as for
Judas he could have no cloak for his sin, he went fully against the clear light
of his own Conscience; therefore he had the more sin, and the more horror.

The consumption of Conscience does not only bring the outward state into a
consumption, that such die beggars, or bankrupts, but it as usually brings the
inward man into fits of Convulsions, which are hardly cured, and at last they
die in one of those fits in great horror. When Conscience has been often
fretted, and grated upon by known and allowed sins, at length it breeds an
Ulcer in Conscience, which is the most tormenting disease in the world, beyond
any Ulcer in Bowels or Bladder. These live and die in great extremities of
Misery. The stroke at Conscience is the stroke at the fifth Rib, the fatal and
deadly stroke.

9. Lastly, it informs us whence it is that some have arrived at the highest
pitch of impiety, to commit that sin of sins, that sin against the holy Ghost;
It is ever first by muzzling and snubbing their Conscience, and afterward
entreating it worse, wasting, worrying and stabbing of it. No other way of
coming up to this incurable disease, and unpardonable state but by violation of
Conscience. Keep this fiery sword in thy hand, The Word of God turning every
way in the door of Conscience, and the Tree of Life is guarded, The Gate of
Paradise kept, no danger of committing the sin against the holy Ghost. But on
the other side, when thou do cross the Line, and swim through and over, and
beyond thy Conscience, then is the Gulf fixed, and the Gate of Hell shut, that
there is no coming thence for them that would, as no coming thither but over
this Gulf.

CHAP. XX. Of the second Application of the Point by way of Lamentation.
THe second Use is of Lamentation: And it may 1. Be a General Lamentation
carrying a Woe in the mouth of it for the General want of Good Consciences in
this age. And I may justly make it as large as that of our Savior Matthew. 18.
7. Woe to the world, says he, because of offenses. All the world is faulty in
this kind more or less. So may we say, Woe to the world, because of ill
Consciences. All the world in general, and most called Christians in
particular herein being blameworthy: Run to and fro into the Cities of Israel,
and in the streets of Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1.
and enquire, and see if you can find a man of Conscience in this Generation.
We may change Job's Quaere, Vbinam invenienda est sapientia, Job 28. 12, 20.
and ubinam est locus Intelligentiae? Where is wisdom to be found, and where is
the place of understanding? into ubinam invenienda est Conscientia, and ubinam
est Locus Integritatis? where is Conscience to be found, and what is the Place
of Integrity? The best of men that make Inquiry after her complain that she
is not seen so much abroad as she was wont to be. The most of men say that she
is either departed, or drawing on toward her departure: And profane ones say,
that Conscience was hanged many a day ago; indeed my Text tells us that she
was drowned long ago, and perished in shipwreck; but they are much mistaken to
say it was good Conscience, for it was the ill Conscience that perished. The
Good Conscience fears neither the Gallows, nor Hell, it is the best
Preservative against both. But sad it is that there is so little reckoning made
of Conscience now adays. Bernards old complaint may be renewed, Multi
Scientiam, pauci Conscientiam quaerunt. Many are for Science, few for
Conscience. In stead of that Double Knowledge of which we spoke at first (for
such is Conscience) we have only single, which is Speculation, and therefore in
stead of single dealing (such is Sincerity) we have too much of double, which
is Dissimulation. In former time we were wont to call the Godly man, The
conscientious man, The man of conscience. Now we commend the man of Parts, and
the able man; whereas when all is done, the Conscionable man will be found the
able man. And this better part is the best Parts. The man of wisdom is the
Prove. 24. 5.
man of strength, said the wise man; though now we call the proud happy, and
the bold, and daring man we call wise, judicious, prudent. But did not our
fathers hearts, and Lives, and Dealings excel ours much more then our
knowledge, gifts, and light exceed theirs? They might desire to see our days
for Liberty of Profession, and Purity of Ordinances; and we may desire to see
their days again for strictness of life, singleness of heart, and uprightness
in their dealing. They had more Conscience, though less Knowledge; we have more
Knowledge, but less Conscience; we have greater Scholars, they had better men;
they were more for Devotion, we are more for Disputation. As Seneca commended
former times, when men strove rather to do well and virtuously, then to speak
well, and eloquently; but blamed the following times, when men had got the art
of speaking accurately, but lost the Habit of doing worthily. Vbi docti
prodierunt, boni esse desierunt. So may we say of our times compared with those
of late before us. We have all learnt to speak the Language of Canaan, yet live
the life of Canaanites.

We have yielded up our two Forts, Faith and Good Conscience, the Bulwarks of
Christendom (as I may call them, of Christianity they are) unto the enemy;
That of Faith into the hands of infidelity, error, and heresy; and that of
Good Conscience into the hands of hypocrisy, impiety, Libertinisme.

Where is our old English Sincerity to be found? Our first Love to old truths?
Our zeal for God? Contending for the Faith? Our Humility of life? Our
strictness and exact walking? It was a great reproach to Israel, that there was
more faith found in one Centurion, (him an Heathen) then in all of Luke 7. 9.
them again; and what a dishonor is it unto us that there was more of
singleness of heart, more of Faith, of Love, of all Piety to be found in our
fathers in the days of begun Reformation, then is to be found in a Land
professing righteousness, and by Covenant engaged to Personal and Exemplarie
Reformation? We may say Surgunt indocti, and rapiunt Regnum Coelorum, etc. They
went into the Kingdom of Heaven before us, and we may fear to be shut out after
them. They might well be saved though more ignorant, we may fear to perish
though more knowing. They were as it were in the night, but had the Pillar of
fire among them, in which was heat more then light; we are indeed in the Sinite
ergo, finite sapientes hujus saeculi de spiritu hujus mundi ^umentes, alta
sapientes, and terram lingentes, sapienter descendere in infernum. de Vit. Sol.
day, but have only a cloud, in which is more coolness and shade, then light
and beauty. Bernard speaks of some that were much wiser, and more skillful
then others, yet all the use they made of their wisdom was to go to Hell in a
more neat and handsome manner: And let them go thither, says he, with all their
wisdom, and fine Parts. How much is it to be lamented that all the use that
many make of the present light of the Gospel, is but to light them into the
chambers of death, and this only benefit they have by it, that they do not go
to Hell in the dark, as others have done. These when they come at death to
reflect on themselves may take up Nero's words, and cry out, Quantus Artifex
pereo! How great an Artist was I to undo my self! and how great skill had I to
go to Hell!

2. And here have we not just cause to proceed in our Lamentation further, when
we take notice not only of the want of Conscience in the most, and of the
decay of Conscience in the best; but when we have been beholders of the fatal
and frequent shipwracks of good Conscience that have been made in these
tempestuous and Faith-trying times to the hazarding of the loss both of Church
and State, both of Truth and Peace!

Wracks and Losses at Sea, if many together and frequent, whether the Vessels
be taken by Pirates, or cast away by Tempests, tend to the decaying and
impoverishing of the greatest States and Kingdoms, All being concerned in such
a Loss, Commodities thereupon growing more scarce, and dear. Though the Loss be
greatest to the Adventurers and Owners, who are usually undone thereby, and
their backs broken, as we say.

How sad and dismal a sight is it to behold a ship now near her sinking in the
depth of the Sea, whether it happen through the Pilots carelessness splitting
against a rock, or the Mariners slackness to do their duty at the Pump, and
stopping Leaks, or through the badness of the Vessel? But what a lamentable
Exoritur clamorque virum stridorque rudentum.
spectacle is it exceeding all Expression! what hideous noise is then made?
what crying out? what taking on? what running up and down? what catching hold?
But whether can they run? what can they catch hold of? They are all at their
wits end: they perish both young and old all together; buried all alive in one
vast and insatiable grave. What a sudden? what a horrid? what a Total? what an
irrecoverable Loss is there all at once? A sudden Loss of all their goods, a
horrid Loss of all their Persons and Lives, a total Loss of the ship and all
in her. An irrecoverable Loss of All.

In one shipwreck a thousand may be concerned, and very many utterly undone. A
shipwreck is more dreadful then the Calamity of fire ordinarily; The water
being the more merciless and masterless Element of the two, though both
dreadful, and in many things alike amazing and undoing:

Yet 1. Fire does not usually break out on such a sudden: This may be in an
instant.

2. From the Fire somewhat ordinarily may be reserved by carrying away the
goods off the Ground: What can be preserved here?

3. From the Fire the man, whose house is consuming, may escape, and save
himself and his little ones, though he have not opportunity to remove his
goods: Here is no flying here.

4. In a dangerous Fire the Neighbors come near offering their common
contributions to help to stay it: Here who can come near to rescue?

5. In the fire one part of the house may be consumed, and another end of it
kept up standing: But here no part of ship, or goods, or persons preserved, all
fare alike, and perish together.

6. There if friends cannot help, they can condole, and lament their
impoverished neighbors condition, which is some comfort to them: Here is none
to help, none to comfort, none to pity, or so much as to pray for thee.

7. There when the fire has done his worst, the ground yet remains, where a
new house may be built again; somewhat there is to be seen (though but heaps of
Ashes) that tells the Passenger, Here stood such a house. But here all is
swallowed up in an instant, and their place no more seen.

8. There the man commonly out-lives his calamity, and through the blessing of
God, and charity of neighbors, the house is rebuilt, the state is repaired,
the man recovers himself, and lives as well again as ever he did before. Here
the man, and his goods, and his Vessel perish all together.

But yet if any shipwreck be in any thing more lamentable then fire, This
metaphorical and spiritual shipwreck is infinitely more dreadful, undoing,
and irrecoverable then any other shipwreck.

And yet how many such ill Accidents (as we call them) have befallen this rich
merchandising Island in these late tempestuous times? Many fearful shipwracks
of Conscience have been made by Persons of all Qualities, and Professions, not
only to the hazard and loss of all their own former comfortable state, the
loss of Grace, and Peace, and Hopes, yea which is above all, their Souls
sinking in Eternal perdition, but also to the damage and detriment of the
whole. What loss has there been of men who for their parts might have been
exceeding useful in Church and State, had they not miscarried? who can sum
up the value our goods lost amount unto? not only outward goods of Peace,
Plenty, Riches, Wealth, Treasure, Power, Credit lost and gone; but of richer
and choicer goods, goods of Grace, our former Faith, Love, Sincerity, Unity,
Holiness, Zeal, and common Interest in Church-Reformation, and withal the loss
of those rich and precious Comforts they sometimes had of inward Joy and
spiritual Peace, besides the hazard of their Souls eternal safety. But which
is of more common concernment, The Ship it self in which we are all embarked
being endangered to be cast away. Both Church and State by such men's means put
into so doubtful a condition.

The truth is, our Ark is not yet settled upon the mountains of Ararat, Genesis 8.
4. And if we had not had a few names in our Rev. 3. 4.
Sardian-like State, who have kept their Garments pure, and held fast their
Integrity: We had ere this both lost our Crown and Candlestick. The Lord Jesus
seems to say to us not only as to the Ephesine Angel, Remember whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and Rev. 2. 5.
do thy first works. But as to the Sardian, Strengthen those things that remain
that are ready Rev. 3. 1, 2, 3.
to die, for I have not found thy works perfect before God. Thou have a name
that thou live, and art dead. Remember therefore how thou have received; and
heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will
come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon
thee. Christ will not only spew such out of his mouth, as he threateneth the
Laodicean Angel for their lukewarmness, but will become as a thief, or an
enemy, to strip us of all that we yet have left. Be zealous therefore and
repent. And again, I say, remember how thou have received, and heard, and have
been taught, and how thou have professed and engaged, and hold fast and watch.
Or there will follow more Uses, and greater Causes of Lamentation.

May not we passionately complain as Jeremie sometimes did for their wasted
Church. Lam. 2. 13. What thing shall I take to witness for thee, or what shall
I liken to thee, or what shall I equal to thee, O daughter of Sion, or
wherewithal shall I comfort thee: for thy breach is great, like the sea? who
can heal thee? thy loss like a shipwreck, who can recover thee? they that pass
by clap their hands, and hiss, and wag their head, saying, Is this the City
that men call the perfection of beauty. the joy of the whole Earth? Is this the
perfection and beauty of a long Reformation? Surely we may take up more of his
complaints, and say, How is the gold become dim! how is the most Lam. 4. 1, 2
7. 8.
fine gold changed! The stones of the Sanctuary are in the tops of every
street. The precious Sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold formerly, now
esteemed as earthen pitchers. Our gold proving now dross and our wine corrupted
with water.

Their Nazarites they said, our Professors we may say were purer then snow,
they were formerly more white then milk, they were more ruddy in body then
Rubies, their polishing was of Saphir; But now their vizage is blacker then a
coal, they are not known in the streets, their skin cleaves to their bones, it
is become like a stick. They who formerly were the beauty of the Churches, and
the glory of Christ, and for a Diadem in the eyes of God and men for matchless
Piety cannot now be known from common men, or sons of Belial, their visage is
so much altered.

CHAP. XXI. The third use is for Reproof.
FRom the Lamentation we proceed to Reproof; which Reproof, like the long
flying Roll in Zachary, with his Curse annexed, strikes two sorts of Persons.
Zach. 5. 3, 4
1. Those that have no Conscience yet as on this side. 2. Those that have lost
their Conscience as on that side.


First, how many are justly to bereproved who have no care to get good
consciences, when as they are desirous, as Austin said, to get all other good
things, saying, Who will show us any good: Good Conscience is not put into
their Inventory, nor reckoned among their goods.

How do men enquire for good purchases, good bargains, good houses, good wives,
good portions, good wares, good credit, yea, a good servant, and a good horse;
they would have all good, yet care not what their conscience is: they get rich
clothing on their backs (says Bernard) but have miserable Induuntur purpura
and Byss^, and subinde conscientia pannosa jacet, fulgent monilibus, sordent
moribus. Ber. ad Vir. Soph.
poor, ragged and tattered consciences.

Now the godly man says, there is nothing so necessary for me to get as a good
conscience, and therefore as he makes Solomon's choice, so his prayer, Give me
a good heart rather then a Kingdom. Solomon was more solicitous how to carry
himself in his Kingdom, then another would be how to get into the Throne; Lord
give me a large heart, and a 1 Kings 3.
spirit of wisdom to guide me. So does the godly man, Give me the heart to know
how to go in and out, rather then the great State: The godly man says, there
is no such necessity for me to have two eyes, or two hands; there is no
necessity of preserving my credit, of securing my state, of providing for my
family, no such necessity of gathering riches, to live honored, and so dye
wealthy; but there is an absolute necessity lies upon me to fly hell, save my
soul, lay hold on eternal life; and to this end to get a good conscience.

If I have but a good conscience left me (faith the Christian) I have enough;
while I have that, I can want nothing: I may be counted poor, yet am truly
rich; I may be looked upon as outwardly sorrowing, but behold I am always
rejoicing, as dying, but I live; 2 Cor. 6. Austin said of some Christians
Amiserunt omnia quae habebant nunquid fidem? nunquid pietatem? nunquid
interioris hominis bona, qui est ante Deum dives? de civ. Dei, l. 1. c. 10.
as unknown, yet well known; as a deceiver, yet true; as having nothing, yet
possessing all things: I may have dirt cast upon my face, good conscience will
wipe all off. 1 Pet. 3. 16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak
evil, they may be ashamed, who falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.
I may lie under great pressures, even to despair of help or life, good
conscience supports me, and makes all light 2 Cor. 1. 12. I may have my credit
blasted, yet repaired again as Joseph had; State ruined yet restored again as
Job had; life lost, yet found again as Christ Jesus promised; but if
conscience be lost I am a lost man. The world may with their lightning (as the
Philosopher says) Consume the scabbard but not at all pierce the sword,
destroy and split the caske but not spill the liquor, or wine in it, yet how
sad it is that the getting and using conscience is so much among the most of
men neglected.

Every one observes his rule and way Si curtatus in aequali Ton sore capillos.
Vel si Toga dissidet impar. Horat. Vide Domine quomodo diligenter observent
filii bominum pacta literarum, and syllabarum accepta a prioribus locutoribus
and a te acceptvae terna pacta perpetuae salutis negligant. Conf. l. 1. c. 18.
of living, but the Christian. Every Artificer studieth to be exact in his
kind, the Tailor has his measure, or his patterns, the Carpenter heweth and
Squareth his timber, the Mason his stone by rule, he makes his wall by Line
and Plummet, and must not the Christian observe his measure, his pattern, his
rule, and line. The welbred Gentleman is ashamed to be seen abroad in an
undecent habit, if he be not dressed from Top to Toe in the best fashion, he
thinks he is not like himself. And is not the Christian to observe his
fashion, and demenour. Austin did observe and bewail this exceeding
Pathetically, the Grammarian observes his Rules of speaking given him by his
master, and shall not we observe our Rules of doing given us by God himself;
the Grammarian, or Orator observes his Construction, his Pronounciation, will
not say, Inter hominibus for inter homines, will not lose you a Letter, nor an
accent, nor an aspiration (says he) which is no Letter, he will not commit
such a Verbal fault as to say Ominem for Hominem, yet says he, he that will
not against the Rules of Grammar, and the Precepts of his Schoolmaster
pronounce, Ominem for hominem, dare against the Rules of Divinity and precept
of God Hate a man, odisse Hominem. Yea says he, you may observe the Eloquent
Orator or Lawyer is more careful of his words, when pleading against his
Adversary, and is more afraid to speak one word improperly, then to aggravate
his charge without all charity and Conscience. Vigilantissime Cavet ne Per
linguae Errorem dicat inter hominibus, et ne per mentis furorem hominem auferat
ex hominibus non eavet, yea he confesses and bewaileth it as one of his own
sins when he was a young Scholar, that he did abhor Barbarous Solaecisines,
and Incongruities of speech more then absurdities and incongruities in his
actions.

But let all men know wheresoever Conscience is wanting, or not attended, there
is yet no Grace, nor shall there ever be glory. First, there is yet no Grace at
all in that heart, the first lesson and the A. B. C. of a Christian is, Make
Conscience. The first thing that God does work in that mighty change from
nature to Grace, and Translation from death to life, is the new heart. He
begins ever with Conscience, He a wakens it, he softens it, enlightneth it,
enliveneth it, He cleanses it, he Sanctifies it, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26.
He dwells in it. The first work of Grace is the Donation of a new heart,
and the change of a stone into flesh.

The sense of External feeling is the first Indication of the life of nature,
this sense of Internal feeling is the first and best discovery of the life of
Grace, He that has not his Conscience sprinkled, purged, quickened, renewed,
and of a new impression, is not at all of God yet, nor belongs to him,
Because he neither has his Image nor his Superscription. Therefore neither
shall he ever have Glory, which is the second thing.

Secondly, where is yet no Good Conscience There shall be no Glory. As in the
New Creature where God works Grace, he begins with Conscience, as was said
before. So in the new Covenant where God promises Glory, he begins with
Conscience also. This is the Covenant of grace when God promises to blot
sins out of his book of Remembrance, He gives unto man a New Conscience for
a Book of Remembrance unto duty and obedience, Heb. 8. 10. 11. 12. This is the
Covenant I will make with the house of Israel, I will put my laws into their
mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a People, And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and
every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord for they shall all know me from
the least to the greatest, for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. In which words the
Lord alludeth to what he did to his people Israel, when he made the old
Ceremonial Covenant with them. He spoke to them, gave them his mind in
writing, delivered them the two Tables, containing the Tenor and duties of the
Covenants, these Tables were to be laid up in the Arc. God will do much more
now, he will speak to the heart, write the law in new Tables, fleshly Tables
of the heart, and keep them there as in the Arc. And there they shall be for
a continual monitor and remembrance, that they shall need the less of outward
teaching and humane Laws, they having an inward Directer, and Admonisher, and a
Divine Law within. God will pardon no man's sins which is on part of the
Covenant where this written Law is not in the heart, which is another and
former part of the Covenant.

The High Priest might not go into the Sanctum Sanctorum, unless Sanctified
and sprinkled outwardly with the blood of the appointed expiation, nor shall
any enter into Heaven whose Conscience is not first sprinkled and purified with
the blood, and Spirit of Christ. The Persian King had none came in unto him,
but they were first purified and prepared a whole twelve month before. There
shall Esther 2. 12.
certainly be admitted into Gods presence and Kingdom nothing that is defiled,
and unclean, But all must be in some good measure Reu. 21. 27
purified, that they may be made meet to be partakers of that inheritance of
the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12.

lost it. This is the loss of losses. If a man have losses at Sea he takes on,
if lost a child he mournes, if lost an eye or an Arm he grieves, if by a Dead
Palsy he has lost the use of a side, he sees Death on himself and reckons
himself half dead, what is it think thou to have lost thy Conscience? If
Quae laedunt oculos festinas tollere, si quid est animumi differs curandi
tempus in Annum.
any Moat or Dust be in the eye he Rubbes, and wipes his eye, and cannot be
quiet till he get it out. If but a thief in the candle he takes it out, but who
is sensible of the loss and spoil of Conscience, which is the greatest loss?
Now a man may recover most losses, or bear any loss but this and not be
miserable, This he cannot, sight may be lost, and recovered, a child may be
lost and thou may have another, credit may be broken and regained, as
Joseph's, state broken and repaired as Jobs, liberty lost and regained as
Iehoiakins, life lost and be redeemed, and a better given for it, but this is
the undoing loss, this breaks a man for ever, and makes a Bankrupt of him, he
never recovers. This was Iudaas's Rupture, This man falls down Headlong,
Breaks in pieces in the midst, all his bowels fall out with this fall, and to
his place he hastens.

The man that has lost his Conscience may justly cry out with Micha's
complaint what have I moreto lose? I have lost my God, Jud. 18. 24
I have lost my Priest, I have lost my Conscience which was to me as both, and
what have Vt in portum perueni amus regendus est bona Conscientia navigationis
nostrae cursus.
I more? I have lost my Jewels and all my goods, shall any stop my mouth and
say, what aylest thou? loss of Conscience is like the loss of a Pylot to the
Ship, or the loss of Card, Compass, Sails, Anchors to the Pylot, they are at
mercy of the Sea, and in the next storm in danger of being cast away.

Its a sad and fearful sight to see a man in a Frenzy that has run out of
his wits, and has lost his understanding, he is now besides himself, he
knows not friend from foe, nor minds what he does, nor what comes of him,
what a Frenzy is the man in that is run out of his Conscience, He has lost
his Right mind indeed, and is quite Distracted and beside himself. A man
cannot be called Compos mentis as a Christian, if he be not Compos Gonscientiae.

It is the Countrimans observation as a Prognostic of an Ill and stormy day to
follow, If the Sun Rise and appear betimes, and go to bed again (as they call
it) then they look for ill weather ere night, you may observe it while you
will, it never fayles, If Conscience in a young Professor be up betimes, and
then go to bed again, such a man has sorrows, and miseries following upon
his spirit, and many an ill storm he must expectere he die.

The loss of Conscience to a man is like the loss of the sting to the Be,
she gathers no more Honey, but becomes a Drone, and is expelled out of the
Hive.

Loss of Conscience makes a man to be as Nabuchadnezar when he had lost his
Reason, It was the loss of his Kingdom, He was Deposed from the Throne,
driven away by Dan. 4 33, 34, 36.
his people, acknowledged no more for a King, nor looked upon as a man, but a
fit companion for Beasts, till he looked up to God, and received his reason
again. A man rejecting Conscience, is like Saul rejecting the word of God,
rejected and cast off by God for it, 1 Samuel 15. 26. Thou have rejected the word
of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected thee: Because thou have despised
knowledge, God has despised thee, Hos. 4. 6.

The loss of Conscience to a man some time acquainted with it, and guided by
it, is like the loss of the Star to the Wise men; Mat. 2.
it is as much as the loss of all thy Grace, and of all thy Peace, and all thy
comfort is worth, It is the loss of Christ. They had not their joy again till
they saw the Star again, nor could they go to Christ without it.

CHAP. XXII. The use of Terror to four sorts of men.
THe next Use speaks Terror, and that in particular to four sorts of men.

1. To such as have no care to get or keep a good Conscience, nor to avoid an
evil. All the diseases of the soul are bred first in an evil and vicious
Conscience: and all the torments and miseries of Hell are epitomized in an
unquiet, and self-tormenting Conscience. Suam secum Gehennam Portat, Ipsa
testis, Ipsa judex, Ipsa Torter, ipsa carcer. This man carries his Hell along
with him where ever he comes or goes, he carries his offense, his accuser, his
witness, his Judge, his Jailer, his tormentor with him.

This is the sad melancholy Ague which will set thee a shaking, that no fire
can warm Sua quemque fraus suum facinus, suum scelus, sua audacia de sanitate
ac mente Deturbat. Hae sunt improrum furiae, hae flammae, hae faces. Cicero.
Cur tamen hos tu evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti men's habet attonitos
and surdo verbere caedit occulto quati^ente animo tortore flagellum. Juvenal.
Sat. 13.
thee, nor can thou get any heat within thee, and though it may intermit and
leave thee for a day or two, it is but gathering strength to assault thee more
fiercely when the next fit comes.

None can altogether excuss and extinguish Conscience let him do what he can;
snub'd it may be, betrayed it may be as Sampson was, Imprisoned it may be; you
may cut his locks, put out his eyes, make him grind, and be thy slave, and
drudge; thou may be so secure as to make sport with him, yet will his locks
grow again, his strength will return, and he will be revenged on thee ere he
has done for his eyes put out, and will destroy thee, though he perish with
thee. Peccatum susurrans will prove Peccatum exclamans, the witnesses might be
slain, but did soon rise again, and up to heaven they went to accuse the
world of Irreligion and Impiety, Rev. 11.

2. To such as are haunted and f^^^owed with that griesly and ghastly fury of
an evil accusing, gnawing and corroding Conscience; no wolf on the breast
like this, no worm in the inwards like this torment, it never lies quiet, its
ever gnawing and corroding, as no phrenfie so outrageous as the roaring and
raging Conscience; It is like the raging Sea which cannot rest, Esaias 57. 21. No
winds abroad cause an Earthquake, but what wind is enclosed in the bowels of
the earth; no outward pressures can so torment, as this inward horror, the wind
within causes the Gollick pains, not all the winds blustering about our ears,
but that little wind though it make no noise that is shut up in the bowels, and
pent up, that wrings and tortures the body; what are all the pains of body, to
the gripes and gnawing and wringings of an accusing disquieted Conscience?

This is the heart that continually meditates Terror to it self; there is no
darkness Paena autem vehemens and multo saevior illis, quas and Caeditius
gravis invenit and Rhadamantus nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore Testem* Ju.
1 Timothy 5. 24. 2 Samuel 13. 13. 1 King. 2. 44. Genesis 42. 22
or shadow of death like his blackness of darkness: He flies from the Iron
weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him through; The glistering sword
comes out of his gall, all darkness is hid in her secret place; a fire not
blown shall consume him, Job 20. 24, 25, 26. His sins have now found him out,
and are going before him to judgment, whither he himself shall shortly follow.
I, whither shall I go? says he to his offended Conscience, where shall I leave
my sin and shame? and Conscience again replies, thou know all the evil
that thy heart is privy too, as Solomon said to Shemei: nay says Conscience
you would not hear me, as Reuben said to his brethren, did I not speak to you,
and tell you then, you must take what follows, you have troubled Conscience,
and Conscience will trouble thee. Men make light of the checks and admonitions
of Conscience while they are in pursuit of sin and amidst their prosperity, but
when distress and anguish comes to take hold of them, how do they cry out! Oh
Conscience! Conscience! Oh that I had hearkened to Conscience! as it said of
Rich Craesus, who glorying in his wealth, Solon told him that no man could
reckon himself happy till he saw his end, Craesus regarded not till being
overcome by Cyrus, and condemned to be burnt to death; then he remembered what
Solon had said to him, and in the fire he cried out, Oh Solon! Solon! being
asked what he meant, he told them now he thought of Solons words and found them
true, and repented that he had made no more use of them when time was.

3. It speaks terror to such as have an unwakened, unsensible, and sleepy
Conscience, no Lethargy so dangerous, and near to death -- Gelidae est quasi
mortis imago. The Lethargick, sleepy, stupid Conscience is the most hopeless
Conscience that can be. The dumb, deaf, silent, speechless, bedrid Conscience
is the most desperate disease in the world. The Physician cures the Lethargy by
a fever if he can cast his patient into one, and let me tell thee, it is
better God should cast thee into a hot burning fever of Conscience by any
affliction or horror whatsoever, then that thou should go sleeping and
snoring to Hell. It is not a more certain token of death approaching to the
body, when you see speech gone, eyes set in the head, breath failing, feeling
lost, pulse stopping, excrements coming away unawares, that such a one is
drawing on to his Grave. Then when you see the eyes of Conscience set, feeling
gone, checks cease, Heart-smiting done, all Sins perpetrated, yet the Soul lies
wallowing in his noisome Excrements, that such a Soul is drawing on to the
Chambers of Hell. The body of the former sleeps, but his 2. Pet. 2. 3.
Death slacks not; the Soul of the latter sleeps too; But his Judgment and
Damnation slumbers not, but is hastening upon him.

4. It speaks Terror again to such as are already fallen, or are entering into
that disease called by Divines Vastatio Conscientiae, the wasting or
Consumption of Conscience, the worst Consumption. Such a Disease as the
Physician meddles with none so bad. This if not very timely prevented and
stayed, turns ever into one of those two desperate and incurable Diseases; thou will either be stricken with a cold benumming Palsy or Lethargy, and so be
half dead while thou art alive; or into a raging and desperate Phrensy it
turns, which will make thee be half in Hell while thou art alive. The one was
Nabals disease, who was stricken with it that he became as cold, hard, and
livelesse as a stone, and was no better than a breathing Clot, and so he died,
and is much like that Plague threatened, Zach. 14. 12. where the flesh rots and
consumes upon their feet while they stand, their eyes consume away in their
holes, and their tongues in their mouths, so that they have neither sight, nor
taste, nor speech, nor motion, yet living: Death it self were to be chosen
before such a Life. The other was Joram's disease, whom God smote in his Bowels
with an incurable disease, of which he lay in great extremity for two years
space, and at last his very Bowels 2. Chron. 21. 19.
fell out by reason of his sickness day by day, and so he died in great
horror; of whom may be said as was said to Maximinus, that Tyrant and bloody
Persecutor, when swarms of Lice did Gender in his diseased and putrified body,
and daily did crawl about him, that no Physician could endure to come near him,
diverse of them being slain because for the filthy stink they could not endure
his presence, others slain because they could find no means to cure him, one of
the Physicians then spoke plainly to him, and told him, Nec est humanus iste
Morbus, nec medicis curatur. It is not a natural disease, but a Divine stroke
of Gods hand; it is past the Physicians skill to deal with it.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Use of Consolation.
ANd here we cannot but Proclaim the Happiness, and commend the Wisdom of
those blessed Souls that in this crooked and perverse Generation, have made the
better part their Choice and Care, viz. to get and keep the good Conscience,
that Conscience void of offense before God and men; that have preferred Purity
of Conscience before Liberty, and have studied Uprightness while others have
studied Policy and fleshly wisdom. These are like the few Names in Sardis, who
had not defiled their Garments, who shall therefore walk in white, for they are
worthy: these we may call the Phaenixes of the World. The good Conscience,
says Bernard, is Rara Avis in Terris; sed quo rarior apud homines, eo charior
apud Deum.

These men are the Noah's, Lots, Calebs and Joshuahs of their Generations, for
whom the World fares the better, and of whom God takes special care when times
are worst. These are indeed the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. How happy is he
that can say with Hezekiah? Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, 2. Kin. 20. 3.
and have done that which was good in thy sight. Or with Paul, My rejoicing is
this, the Testimony 2. Cor. 1. 12.
of my Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sineerity I have had all my
Conversation in the World. I can stand up and say, I have corrupted no man,
defrauded no man, circumvented no man: Let all the world stand up and say whose
Ox or Ass I have taken. Premat corpus, Secura cum corpus morie ur. Secura cum
anima coram Deo praesentabitur. Secura cum utrumque in die judicij ante
terrisic^m judicis Tribunal statuitur. De Consc. c. 3. Bern*
tremat mundus, fremat Diabolus, illa semper erit secura. This man has his
house built on a Rock, he remains secure whatsoever winds blow, and when the
rain falls and the floods arise: He is secure in Sickness, and secure in Death
when body and soul are dissolved; He is secure in Judgment when Heaven and
Earth shall be dissolved; and secure to Eternity when the wicked are destroyed.
He has the Ark pitched within and without; he has the Hid Manna, and the white
Stone; He has bread to eat others know not of, His Candle go^s not out by
night; His Gleanings better than the Worldlings Vintage; His dry morsel sweeter
than a house full of Sacrifices with strife and contenton. His Corner of the
house top, or Wilderness more delightful than the fair and large house where
that clamourous and contentious Shrew, the unquiet and scolding Conscience is
continually dropping or scalding rather. This man his walks are in the wood
dropping with Honey, his dwellings upon the mountains of Myrrh, his lodging
upon beds of Spices. This man has the best fare, and merriest life in the
(...) 1^. 15, 16.
World. A continual Feast: Feasting yo^ know is not ordinary fare, it is for no
man^ ease to Feast every day: Some great me^ have Feas^ed (may be) once a year,
as rich Nabal, Kings and Princes on their Birthdayes, as Pharaoh and Herod; Job
had a great State to set out his Children withal, they Feasted often, but not
every day at the same house, but took their turns. Ahasuerus had a Feast of an
hundred and fourscore days lasting, the longest that we read of, yet he was
King of an hundred twenty and seven Provinces: God appointed his People should
Feast of old, yet but three times in the year, except it were the Sabbatical
year, and the Jubilee, then all was Festival the whole year throughout, and in
the Jubilee for two years one after another: No man ever Feasted always, but that
Glutton, Luke 16. 19. This man exceeds them all; he has not one great Dinner
as at a Christmas Feast, or one good Supper as at an University Commencement,
and away; But every day is Festival with him, his whole life is a Sabatical or
Jubilee life. He is ever either Feasting or Feasted at home or abroad; Either he
is Feasted abroad, and Supping with Christ, or Feasting at home, Christ Supping
with him. Yea, this good Conscience is to Jesus Christ and to the Soul too,
both the feasting room, and the feasting fare; it is the Chamber, and it is the
Cheer; Christ will come into no other room but this. This Sit Conscientia pura
ut Deum perducat a^ hospitium nostrum. Bern. de iu. domo.
is his Upper Chamber, furnished and made ready, where Christ will sit down
with his Disciples and Servants, and this the fare. Give me thy heart, says
he: The Purity of Conscience is our best Dishwhich we can Feast him withal, and
the Peace of Conscience is Christ's best Dish, which he Feasts us withal.

Thus you see what a good Housekeeper the good Conscience-keeper is. He has a
continual Feast, says Solomon, Pro. 15. 15. And in the two following verses,
he answers two Objections of the worldly man's making. First they ask, Has he
so much feasting? I pray you what is his State first? And secondly, What good
Cheer has he at his Table? To the first he answers, ver. 16. He may be but a
poor man to see to, yet he keeps such a good house: for, Better is his little
with the Fear of the Lord, than great treasure and trouble therewith. And for
his good Cheer on his Table, it may be it is but homely, yet his Dinner of
Herbs where Love is (the Love of God is) is better than a stalled Ox and
Hatred therewith. So that Solomon's meaning in those three verses is, that a
Good Conscience is a Feast alone, and Riches alone, and Mirth alone; and that
all good is contained in a good Conscience, which is a most comprehensive good.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Use of Examination.
HAving already showed what good Conscience is in general, what his Nature,
what his Offices, what is the Excellency, Necessity, Utility, Benefit, Comfort
and Happiness of it, what the several kinds of good Conscience in particular
are, and what their Marks and Characters, and what is the Mischief and Misery
of an ill Conscience, and what the Difficulties of getting and keeping the good
and escaping the bad: Let it now be every man's care to Try and Examine himself,
how much of Consciis in him, and what the constitution of his Conscience is?
How much of Faith, Purity, Sincerity, Tenderness, Quick-sightednesse,
Well-spokenness, Honesty, Inoffencivenesse, Passivenesse, and Charity is in his
Conscience, that he may take his part in the Promises, Comfort, Happiness, and
Privileges belonging to the good Conscience; or whether he never had yet any
good Conscience at all, or have lost what he had? or whether that he takes for
good be not bad? whether he be not the man that has only a natural
Conscience, or an ill troubled, or an ill quiet? whether his Conscience be not
an erroneus, or scrupulous, or stupid, or Lethargick, or seared Conscience?

And so, whether those former Reproofs, Terrors, Threats and miseries are not
like to pursue and overtake him.

I shall not need here to come to any more new marks of discovery, if you have
well attended what was spoken all along in handling those particular good
Consciences with their properties, whereto I now refer you. Only let every one
remember that of the Prophet Malachie, Therefore take heed to Mal. 2. 15.
your Spirit, says he, let evey one be well versed in himself. There are three
Books, well studied and compared one with the other, which make the able
Divine, or eminent Christian, 1. The Book of Scripture. 2. The Book of
Providence or Experience. 3. The Book of Conscience. These three, I say, must
be studied diligently and compared: Read any of the three alone, it profits
not: Read any two of them without the third, thou will be imperfect.

1. Scripture knowledge alone, without Experience and Conscience, makes not a
Christian. 2ly. Providence and Experience alone, without Scripture and
Conscience 3ly. Conscience alone without the other two: No nor yet, as I said,
any two of them without the third. 1. Not Scripture and Experience, without
Conscience, 2. Not Experience and Conscience without Scripture, 3. Not
Scripture and Conscience without Experience.

Conscience is one of the chiefest volumes thou must read then, and self
Examination is a Christians great Task; Therefore says Bernard, Seek to be
well acquainted with thy self. Enter into thy self. Run through thy self, yet
stay in thy self. Begin with thy self, end with thy self, but Nulla scientia
melior illa, qua homo novit seipsum, relinque ergo caetera, and teipsum
aiscute, per te curre, and in te consiste. A te incipiat cogitatio tua, and in
te finiatur, nec frustra in alia distendaris te neglecto, and postea. Si nondum
dignus es intrare Tabernaculum primum, qua front praesumis ingredi secundum,
id est Sanctum Sanctorum. Ber. de Int. domo, cap. 65. Enter into this first
Tabernacle every day, if thou would enter the Sanctum Sanctorum once in the
end of the year, that is of thy life.
leave not thy self. As therefore the Orator said of Tully, I may say of
Conscience, Ille se plurimum profecisse sciat cui Conscientia valde placuerit.
That man may know he has made a good proficiency who is more and more
delighted in Conscience.

Let each Christian therefore try and consider what an one he is, for
Conscience, I say, not for knowledge and profession. All have knowledge, all
make profession: But how far does a little Conscience go among a great many
Professors? The number of the Romans 9. 27.
Children of Israel is as the sand on the Sea shore; yet how small a remnant
saved? There are threescore Queens, fourscore Concubines, Virgins without
number; yet my Dove, my Undefiled is but one, the only one of her Mother, she
is the choice one of her that bare her. The Daughters saw, and blessed her; the
Queens and Concubines, and they praised her, Cant. 6. 8, 9.

There were never more Saints, and never fewer Saints, said one truly; Never
more Nominal, and fewer Real; Never more Saints, and less Sanctity: And never
more talk of Conscience heard, and less of Conscience seen. We can discourse
and dispute better than our Fathers; they could and did live better. Liberty
has like Reuben climbed up into his Mother Conscience's bed, and there has
defiled it, therefore loses the Pre-eminence and Birthright, and shall not
excel. And as for Purity, Charity, Tenderness, Inoffensivenesse, Sincerity,
and the like, we have sent them afar off, as Abraham did the Children of the
Concubines. But if these things were in us, and did abound, we should not be so
barren, and frigid, and unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ as we are,
whereas for lack of these things men are blind, and doting about questions to
no profit, but to the corrupting of the Speaker, and subverting of the Hearers.

As we are wont to say of a Scholar going to the University, if he do not as
well profit Qui proficit in Dectina and deficit in moribus, non profitit sea
deficit.
in his Ethics (in his Behavior and Morals) as he does in his Logic, or in
Arts and Tongues, he does not profit but lose: So may we well say of the
Professor, if he profit not as much in Conscience as in bare Science and
Opinions, his Proficiency is but a Deficiency.

Who does not look upon the Toad as a hateful creature, although it have a
Pearl in his head, because it is full of Poison within, and all speckled
without? what is that man to be valued, who has a Pearl of knowledge in his
brain, if another had it, but his inward parts are very wickedness, he swells
with poisonous Pride within, and his life spotted abroad?

But here is the difference you shall always find between the knowledge of an
Hyppocrite, and the true Christian. The Hypocrites knowledge is like the light
of the increasing Moon, which increases in Light and bigness only, not at
all in Heat. But the light of the true Christian is like the rising Sun in the
morning, or the Vernal Sun in the Spring, where light and heat are conjoined,
the darkness and coldness of the night is lessened, the heat of the day is
increased. The Moon grows lighter and lighter, and bigger and bigger, but not
hotter and hotter: Her Plenilunium or full is as cold as her Wane. But the
rising Sun we all see does not only go higher and higher, but grows hotter
and hotter. The Hypocrite has only an increase in knowledge in his
Plenilunium and full, he has no heat in Conscience and affections to be
discerned, the true Christian has both light and heat increasing alike
together.

There is a fourfold knowledge in the world, a knowledge of Speculation, which
is the hypocrites knowledge; a knowledge joined with dislike and disobedience
which is the knowledge of the Devils; a knowledge joined with delectation and
complacency, which is the Angels knowledge; And the knowledge joined with
Conscience and good affections, which is the Christians.

The hypocrite with all his swelling knowledge is like those children which
have the Rickets, whose head indeed grows bigger than another child's, but
their strength less, they fall into an Atrophy, they thrive not, but pine away
and die. So the hypocrites head is unproportionable to his other parts, he is
swollen big with notions and opinions, but thrives not in substantial graces,
and grows not strong in Faith and Conscience.

Look therefore every one to his Conscience, and hereby know thy state; look
well that if thou have not yet got a good Conscience, thou may seek to get
one; if thou have, then seek to hold and keep it; if thou have lost it, seek to
recover it; if it be evil, get it amended; if ignorant, get it informed, if
erring, get it rectified; if dead, quickened; if hard, softened; if asleep,
awakened; if corrupt, purified; if unquiet, pacified.

CHAP. XXV. The Use of Exhortation.
NOw are we come to the last use, which is Hortatory, which I might make
twofold; First for Dehortation, Secondly of Exhortation. But I would now hasten
to an end. First, for Dehortation, let me charge thee in the Name of God, and
upon thy Soul, to take heed of an ill Conscience, what ever other evils thou
may lie under. Pray with Austin, Deliver me Lord from the evil man, I mean
my self, and deliver me from an evil Conscience, I mean my own. With Agur
pray, Remove far from me vanity and lies. With David, Deliver my soul O Lord,
from lying lips. Pro. 30. 8. Psalm. 120. 2.
and from a deceitful tongue. Lord cast out this unclean Spirit, and Create in
me a clean heart, and renew in me a right spirit. No shipwreck so perilous, no
disease so dangerous, no deceiver so deceitful, n abyss so deep, no death so
deadly, no hell so dark, no pit so steep to fall into, and so narrow to get out
of, as the evil Conscincee

But I come to the Exhortation, which contains a double charge. The text is no
other then an Apostolical Exhortation, or divine charge: therefore this Use
must be made, or the chief Use is not made yet. First to each Christian,
secondly to the Minister especially.

First to each Christian, who makes Conscience of any thing, that he especially
make it his care to get a good Conscience, and to keep it. As Solomon of Divine
Wisdom, so I of Conscience, wherein is all practical Wisdom, Above all thy
getting, get that says he. Pro. 4. 5. 7.
So say I above all gettings whatsoever, get a good Conscience, and whatsoever
thou gettest more, get it still with a good Conscience, and with all keeping,
keep thy conscience, keep it pure, keep it clean, keep it in peace, keep it thy
friend, keep it as thou would keep the apple of thine eye: Life and Death
are in the power of Conscience, it is the principal thing, therefore above all
getting and keeping, look to this, exercise thy self daily with the Act. 24. 16.
Apostle herein, to have thy Conscience always on thy side, and have it
without offense both to God and man.

What the Orator answered to one demanding what was principally necessary to
make a good Orator? Pronounciation, said he. What second? Pronounciation. What
third? Pronounciation he answered still, as if Pronounciation did chiefly and
wholly make a complete Orator. So do you ask what is most necessary to make a
good Christian? I answer Conscience. And what next if you ask? I answer still
Conscience. And what again? Conscience still say I.

As of the Scholar coming from the University, when he has been a Student
for many years, the best Testimony which can be given him, is, that he has
profited Tam doctrina quam moribus, In Learning and Religion. So the best
Testimony that can be given of a Christan going from the Church, when he has
been a frequent hearer, is, That he has profited tam scientia quam
Conscientia, both in science, and in Conscience.

To back and strengthen this exhortation, I shall first lay down some Motives
to enforce, then some Means to direct to the better attaining and retaining a
good Conscience.

Let this move first, that God does weigh Lord weighs the Spirits says
Solomon. Gold and Pro. 16. 2.
Silver men do weigh, Grace and Spirits men cannot. God weighs not Gold or
Silver, or Honors, or Estates; but he only weighs the Spirits and
Consciences of men. So much of Conscience as is in any person, or duty, or
action or suffering, so much of thank and worth with God. This is thankworthy
with God, if a man for Conscience suffer and take it patiently. That ^ction is
denominated good, that proceeds from a principle of Conscience, that suffering
good which is for Conscience. So much Conscience toward God, so much Comfort is
coming to thee from God. So much Conscience before God, so much confidence
before God.

But on the other side, if Conscience be Jehu, See my zeal for the Lord; I have
fasted, I hove fought, I have been active, I have suffered. God will say, Have
you fasted at all to me? have you done all this out of Conscience? When you
fasted, was it not to your selves? and when you did eat, was it not to your
selves? therefore walk in the sparks which you have kindled. If you have done
well and truly, Conscientiously and Religiously (as Jotham said once) do you
then rejoice in Jud. 9. 19.
Conscience, and let Conscience rejoice in you: but if otherwise, a fire will
break out of that bramble the evil Conscience, and consume you and all your
works. What a mighty stickler was Jehu, a man of an active and impetuous
spirit? yet he lost his reward for all his pains and seeming zeal, his
Conscience was not right. Ananias lost his cost and charges after he had
contributed so much. Alexander lost his reward and comfort after he had
suffered so much Judas lost al after he had followed Christ so long, and
preached Christ to others so often.

perfect and complete happiness both here and hereafter.

Here in this world it brings two the greatest benefits, being the only way Ad
been beateque vivendum. Ad been beateque moriendum.


In Life.
Ad been beateque vivendum, A good Conscience is the only way to the good and
blessed life. This makes the good days, whether thou be in prosperity or in
adversity. First, if in Prosperity, this will be as a hedge about all thou
have. As the Candle of God in thy Tabernacle, as the widows Cruse and Barrel
will never fail of somewhat to supply and support thee.

2. If in Adversity, this will be like the good Houswifes candle that goes not
out by night; Or like Isreal's pillar of fire that will not leave thee in a
wilderness: This like Ruth to Naomi will stick to thee, stay by thee, go with
thee, where thou lie it will lie, and as thou farest it will take part with
thee, when all other comforts and dearest friends like Orpah lift up the voice
and weep, and take their leave of thee. This like Ittai the Gittite to David
says, 2 Samuel 15. 21.
as the Lord lives, in what place soever thou art, be it in life or death;
there will I be. This turns Reproach into Honor, takes up a stigmatizing
invective as if it were a Garland, throws the viper into the fire, and feels
no harm. This fears neither fury of Tyrants, nor fire of furnace. It dreads
neither Anakim, nor Emim, nor Zamzummim.

This makes a man more than a Conqueror, Romans 8. 37. which is a very high and
bold expression of a poor Paul: why Paul, who art thou? A Conqueror is the
highest Title, he gives Laws to Kingdoms, his place is above that of a King,
it has been held more glory to make a conquest than to wear a Crown. Al Kings
have been crowned, all Kings have not been Conquerours; yet are we Conquerours,
and more than Conquerours. First, The Conqueror may overcome to day, yet be
overcome to morrow of the same enemy. Victorem a victo superari saepe videmus.
Secondly, The Conqueror may find the same enemy increasing by new
Associations, and then shake of his Yoke. Thirdly, The Conqueror cannot say,
though he have the better Sword, but his enemy may have the better Cause, and
that the other cause may after carry it. Fourthly, The Conqueror may pay so
dear for his victory, that he does not greatly joy in it. Ezekiel. 32. 27.
Fifthly, The Conqueror may when all is done go down to Hell with his sword by
his side, and his weapons of war under his head, though he was the terror of
the mighty in the land of the living, and then his iniquity shall lie heavy on
his bones, But we are more than Conquerours, we have overcome to day, and shall
to morrow, our cause is a victorious cause, carries not Fortunam Caesaris, but
Honorem Christi, therefore shall go forth conquering and to conquer; and let
Satan and all his Confederates unite their forces, Principalities, Powers,
height, depth, we fear them not all, we are secure of victory and safety. O
glorious and happy condition! when a man has lost all, he is as if he had
gained all the world, when killed all the day long, as if he was triumphing all
the day long. I suffer and am bound, says the Apostle, but the word of God is
not bound; my Cause is not bound, my Conscience Dr. Stoughton in his Sermon
before K. James.
is not bound; a man takes no hurt while Conscience is safe. Excellently Dr.
Stoughton to this purpose, " Job was more happy when he fate upon the
dunghill, than Adam when he sinned in Paradise; because though his body were
dissolved into worms, and every worm acted by a Devil (as Origin would have
it) to increase his torment; yet he had not eaten the forbidden fruit, which
bred this worm of Conscience, and made him fly from God. The Bride that has
good Cheer within, and good music, and a good Bridegroom with her, may be
merry, though the hail chance to rattle upon the tyles without upon her
wedding day: Though the world should rattle about his ears, a man may sit
merry, that sits at the Feast of a good Conscience. Nay, the Child of God by
virtue of this, in the midst of the waves of affliction, is as secure as that
child which in a Shipwreck was upon a plank, in his mothers lap, till she
awaked him, securely sleeping, and then with his pretty countenance sweetly
smiling, and by and by sportingly asking a stroke to beat the naughty waves,
and at last when they continued boystrous for all that, sharply chiding them,
as though they had been but his play-fellowes- O the innocence! O the comfort
of Peace! O the tranquillity of a spotless mind! There is no Heaven so clear as
a good Conscience. So that learned Doctor.

Good Conscience is to a man his closest and dearest friend, that like Baruch
to Jeremy will visit him in prison, and will keep his Evidences safe for him in
a time of common conflagration and calamity: Jer. 32. 11, and 14.
Or rather it is that Earthen vessel wherein alone our Evidences of our
heavenly state are put, and preserved from being corrupted: both our Evidences,
our sealed Evidence, and our open Evidence, (for a Christian must have two, the
sealed Evidence of Justification, and the open Evidence of Sanctification) are
kept in this Vrne, as Baruch was commanded to put both Jeremies Evidences of
his purchase, the sealed and the open, in an Earthen vessel.

Yea, good Conscience is not only the Non est utilius remedium nec certius
testimonium futerae beatitudinis bona Conscientia. Bern. de int. domo.
preserver of Assurance, but is a part of it; for what is Assurance of
Salvation? but in the original an Act of Grace, passed in favor of a poor
repenting and believing sinner in the Court of Heaven, entered and engrossed in
the Book of Life, which because procured by the Price of Blood, is written out
in the precious Blood of Christ, signed and sealed by the impresse of the
Spirit of promise, which is the Fathers and the Sons Agent on this behalf, and
attested by good Conscience, as that which sets to his his seal next God, and
is then delivered into the hand of Faith, as Gods Act and Deed, for the sole
Use and Benefit of a rightly purified Conscience. Or Assurance is a Transcript
taken out of the book of life, that sealed book, sealed in the bosom and
counsel of the Father, now unclasped by the hand of the Lamb, written fair out
in his Blood, attested by the Spirit of God within, and endorsed without with
the graces and fruits of the Spirit, and at last passed in the Court, and
entered in the Office of good Conscience. This, this is the Assurance of the
Saints, when Gods Spirit attests to our Spirit, and again our Spirit does
withal consent with the Spirit of God.

The other benefit of good Conscience 2 At Death
here, is at death, when as it enables and directs ad been beateque moriendum;
an undertaking that all Philosophy could never make good, nor did attempt, but
did only promise the way ad been beateque vivendum, yet fell short of that.
Conscience is the way to well-living, it is the only way to well-dying. This
gives rejoicing (as the Apostle says) to him that is under the sentence and
stroke of death, and is now despairing altogether of this life. 2 Cor. 1. 9.
Good Conscience, as it is sweeter than life, so it is stronger than death: and
the good man and his Conscience are like Saul and Jonathan, lovely in their
life; and which is above all, in death they are not divided. Hujusmodi
comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent Prideaux, History page
247
The goods embarked in good Conscience are the only goods which will be saved
when there is any shipwreck of State or Life. And those are the goods we should
get, said the Emperor Jews of Bavyer, which in a shipwreck can swim out as
well as thy self. A saying also which Q. Mary is said to have Englished and
much delighted in.

These are two great Benefits in this Life here.

But there are two greater for hereafter, Conscience helping Ad tuto
intrepideque comparendum. Ad Gloriose aeterneque triumphandum.


3 At judgment.
Conscience has two other kindnesses which it will do for the Soul beyond
those two forenamed in life and death, It will stand a man in stead when he is
to make his appearance before the Tribunal of God. Where Courage dares not show
his face, nor Eloquence open his mouth, where Majesty has no respect, and
Greatness no favor, (and as the Martyr said) Where money bears no mastery;
There good Conscience is known and befriended, there it dares appear, thither
it does appeal, when the King, and the Captain, and the Great man, and the
Mighty man, and the Chief Commander, and the Rich, and the Bond, and the Free,
cry to the mountains to hide them, and to the rocks to fall Rev. 6. 15. 16.
on them, that they may not appear. Then does good Conscience lift up his head,
this is the day it has longed for, and the place where it desires to be heard.
1 John 3. 20, 21.
Hereby we know says the Apostle, that we are of the truth, and shall assure
our hearts before him, for if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
(or boldness) before God. (...) Libertatem aut audaciam quid vis dicendi.
This will make the Godly man in that great Audit, to give up his account with
joy and not with grief.

4. To all Eternity. Conscientia bona, perfect tranquilla et lae^a est
formalis and essentialis beatitudo sanctorum in vita futura. Ames de Cons. l.
1. c. 15.
Lastly, which is above all, it leads him the way, ad Gloriose Regnandum,
aeternumque Triumphandum. It is the step to the highest glory, and is the state
of highest Beatitude. To be feasted with the fruits of a good Conscience, this
is Angels food, and one of the sweetmeats of Heaven. As the evil, accusing and
tormenting Conscience is one of the greatest miseries in Hell, causing the fire
never to be quenched, because their worm never dies: So the good Conscience is
one principal Delicate in Heaven. Therefore in that day Christ will not only
tell the Godly how much he has done and suffered for them; but he will tell
his Father what they have done and suffered for him, I was hungry, these have
fed me; thirsty, these gave me drink. These have kept the word of my Patience.
These were not ashamed of my Name where Satan had his Throne. These have kept
their Garments unspotted; therefore they shall walk with me in white. Hence it
is that the Crown of Glory is not only called a Crown of Grace, because the
gift of God; But the Crown of Righteousness, because the Reward of this
warfare for faith and good Conscience. Then shall the Godly be satisfied from
himself, and the fruit of his hands shall be given him: Then shall flow Pro.
12. 14
forth from the belly of each Believer River^ of living water, rivers of Peace,
Joy, Comfort, to all Eternity: where Repentance, and Faith, and Hope, and
Patience, and Knowledge, and Tongues, and Prophesying shall cease, there shall
good Conscience continue, and in it Life, and Joy, and Glory.

Consider on the other side, the miseries of an ill Conscience in every
condition, both in prosperity he can have no security, Job 20. per totum, read
especially ver. 16, 17, 22, 23, 24. He shall suck the poison of Asps, the
Vipers tongue shall slay him. He shall not see the Rivers, the Floods, the
Brooks of Honey and Butter. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in
straights. Every hand of the wicked shall come upon him: when he is about to
fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain
it upon him while he is yet eating, etc. and so Job. 15. 21. A dreadful sound
is in his ears, in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him. As Adonijah in
the day of his Coronation, rises from the table, he and all his Guests fly and
shift for themselves, a short Reign, a mourning Feast. Or as Belshazzar in his
Banquet, when he sees the Handwriting, dread and horror seizes on him. And
as the Syrians upon a secret noise God caused 2 Kin. 7. 6.
them to hear, fled disorderly from their Tents, leaving all their wealth and
good cheer, a booty to the hunger-famished Israelites. What torment like that
of an ill Conscience! of which that forenamed Author Dr. Stoughton, ubi supra.
excellently speaks. "All outward blessings (says he) cannot make that man
happy that has an ill Conscience, no more than warm clothes can produce heat
in a dead carcass, if you would heap never so many upon it. There is no peace
to the wicked.

"Aut si pax, bello pax ea deterior. "For this man in his greatest fortunes, is
but like him who is worshipped in the street with cap and knee, but as soon as he
is stepped within doors, is cursed and rated by a scolding wife: Like him that is
lodged in a Bed of Ivory, covered with cloth of Gold, but all his bones within
are broken: Like a book of Tragedies bound up in Velvet, all fair without, but
black within, the leaves are Gold, but the lines are blood. O the rack! O the
torment! O the horror of a guilty mind! There is no hell so dark as an evil
conscience.



Secondly but much more in adversity, ill Conscience that has long lien silent
and quiet, is apt to cry out and fly in the face, as Joseph's Brethren in their
distress were forced to cry out, Gods hand was just upon them: Their sin which
was before Peccatum susurrans, is now Peccatum clamans: such cry out as Saul in
his distress, I am sore distressed, the Philistims make war upon 1 Samuel 28. 15.
me, and the Lord has forsaken me, and answers me no more; then poor soul he
goes to hell for comfort, and accordingly he sped. Such have neither Joy in
Life, nor Hope in death. Vtrinque timidi, as Eusebius Eusebius l: 6. cap. 42.
speaks of some in the time of the Persecution under Decius, Cowardly and
unsound Christians, who were timidi cum ad moriendum, ^um ad sacrifi^andum; A
lamentable case, neither would their Conscience serve to let them Sacrifice to
the Heathen Idols, nor would their heart serve them to die for refusing. So
were they in a miserable strait between two dangers, of losing Life, and
wounding Conscience, and could no way satisfy themselves: whereas good
Conscience had seen in such a case, what was presently to be chosen. Ill
Conscience never made good Martyr yet.

But there are three times especially wherein ill Conscience proclaims
Terror, and Rev. 8. 13.
as the Angel in the Revelation, flies over the head of a sinner, crying Woe,
Woe, Woe. First, One Woe in life. Secondly, Two Woes at death. Thirdly, But
Three Woes at the day of Judgment. 1 Woe in this life.


The first woe is in this life: But this, how dreadful soever, is the least
because the shortest, and has an end in a little space of a few days or
years; therefore it is said, the first woe is passed, but behold two worse woes
come shortly upon it, Rev. 9. 12.

The Second woe is at death; This is a great 2. Woe at death.
woe, double to the former, the furnace is heated seven times hotter than it
could be in this Life. And as the Apostle says of the Godlies afflictions, all
the sufferings of this present time are not to be compared to that Glory that
is to follow; so may we say, all the sufferings of this life to the wicked,
whether in Body or in Spirit, are nothing to be compared to those that follow.
This is a long lasting woe. But yet of the second woe it is also said, the Rev.
11. 14.
second woe is past, to make way for the third the greatest woe that comes
quickly, i. e. immediately upon it.

Many wicked escape the first woe in life, but as it befell them that escaped the
sword of 1 King. 19. 17.
Hazael, there were two other worse swords, of Jehu, and Elisha, that should
dispatch them after. The sword of Hazael may spare the wicked in this life; but
then the sword of Jehu meets with them at death; and again the sword of Elisha
at the day of judgment. He may flee from the iron sword, but then Job. 20. 22.
the how of steel shall strike him thorough: Or as Amos has it, He may fly from
a Lion (in life) Am. 5. 19.
and a Bear meet him (at death,) and the Serpent bite him (at the day of
judgment.)

This yet has an end, though it be long first, at the day of judgment, the
second woe ends, but a greater succeeds. If a man live Eccl. 11. 8.
many years (says Solomon) and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the
days of darkness that they are many. The days of darkness that is in hell
are many, and long days they be, from thy death to the end of the world is but
one day, and there are many more after which are longer; a thousand years is
but as one day, and every one of those days are as a thousand years: yet are
there many of them, more than ten thousands of such days there are, for they
are without number.

But the third woe pays for all, which is at 3 Woe at the day of Judgment.
the day of judgment: then shall all the Cataracts of wrath be set open, and
all the vials of wrath filled and emptied out upon the heads of the wicked.
Then shall the Lord rain fire and brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven. Then
shall the sealed book of Conscience be unclasped, and out of thy own mouth, and
heart, and book shall thou be judged. Then shall both Earth, and Sea, and Hell
and Death, deliver up all their dead, but not to be annibilated, that they
would account an unspeakable mercy; but only to be Arraigned, tried, sentenced:
Then shall Death and Hell be cast again into the lake of fire, which is the
second and eternal death. Then shall a Hell in Conscience be cast into a Hell
of despair: and an Hell of guilt into an Hell of pain. But of this third woe it
is no where said, the third woe is past. Life ends, and with it the first woe:
The world ends, and with it the second woe: But Etermity ends not, therefore
the third woe never ends. Hence the judgment of that day is called Eternal
Judgment, Heb. 6. 2. and the destruction of the wicked an everlasting
Destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

The first woc may be a sad one, yet it cannot be long, because life is short:
The second woe is more sad, because more long, but though long it is, it is not
for ever: The third is the sad and killing woe, because it is both long and
endless. There is the great Gulf fixed, that there is no coming over.

As the first woe leaves a man, the second woe find him; as the second leaves
him, the third finds him, but the third never leaves. Look how Life leaves,
Death finds; as Death leaves, Judgment finds; as Judgment leaves, Eternity
finds: But this Eternity leaves not his place to any other.

Eternity is a pit which has no bottom, it is a large bottom that can never
be unravelled, it is a Center which has no circumference, no measure of times,
or number of Ages can fathom or reckon the length of it. It has ever a
beginning of his days, has never an end of his years: when Time shall be no
more, Eternity is but beginning. It is a long and perpetual night, which shall
never have a morning to succeed it. Now to all Eternity thy evil Conscience
shall accompany thee, and fill thy heart with new tortures of Grief, and fear,
and wrath, and bitterness, and despair. But this third woe must never have an
end.

Means.
The means to be used, to the getting and keeping of good Conscience, are --
Principal and they two. Subservient, and they many.


The Principal means, and without which 1. The Blood of Christ.
all the rest are insufficient, are two. First to get the blood of Christ
sprinkled on the Conscience by the hand of faith. As David said of Goliah's
sword, There is none to that, give it 1 Samuel 21. 9.
me, So may we say of this blood. This purges the Conscience from all dead
works, that it may serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. All duties, gifts,
observances, Performances, nothing to this: Other things may make the outside
clean before men, the blood of Christ is that alone which makes the Conscience
clean before God, that there is now no more Conscience of sin, as to the guilt
and spot of it. So Heb. 10. 29. The blood of the Covenant is that whereby the
believer is sanctified. Whatsoever other means are used, and courses are taken,
as by confession, contrition, satisfaction, reading, praying, fasting, building
Almshouses or the like, they are no more (without this) to the commending of
the Conscience unto God, or taking away sin from the Conscience, than Adams
Fig Leaves to take away the shame of his nakedness; or the washing of Pilates
hands in fair water to cleanse his soul from the foul sin of Bioud-guiltinesse.
He should have washed his heart in the blood of Christ, than had he been free
from all his sins, and not his hands in water, that he might be free from the
blood of Christ. His blood is that Zach. 13. 1.
Fountain opened to the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem for
sin and for uncleanness. This blood of Christ we should pray pathetically and
fervently, as the Jews did passionately and furiously, that it may be upon us
and on our Children; not on our heads, but on our hearts, not to be charged
upon us, but sprinkled on us, not by Vulnera Christi eivitates refugii. Sanguis
Christi sons Bethlehemi. Joh. 6. 53. 54.
way of imputation, but of expiation. The wounds of Christ are our City of
Refuge, said one: And the blood of Christ is the well of Bethlehem, which we
should long for, and break through an host of difficulties to come unto. Except
we drink this blood we have no life in us; But who so eats his flesh, and
drinks his blood, has eternal life, and Christ promises to raise him up at
the last day. Fly then to this City of refuge, and escape the Avenger: Sprinkle
this blood on thy Doorposts, and escape the Destroyer: Look up to this Brazen
Serpent, and be cured of all stings of Conscience from the fiery Serpent, Cast
in this Jonah, and the raging Sea is calmed, both of Gods displeasure, and
Consciences disturbance: Go to this Samaritan for his Wine and Oil to thy
wounded Conscience, his Wine to wash, cleanse, and search it if defiled, his
Oil to mollify, supple, and heal it if bruised and festered. This is the first
and great Experiment to be used.

The second is like unto it, namely this, 2. The Spirit of Christ.
to get and seek the Spirit of Christ, which is the next principal ingredient
in, or efficient of a good Conscience. It is the Spirit of God with our Spirit,
that makes the good Conscience. In this sense we may allow that of Origin, That
Conscience is another Spirit in the soul: therefore the Apostle says of his
Conscience, that it did bear him Romans 9. 1.
witness in the Holy Ghost.

The single Testimony of natural Conscience is not much to be regarded in many
cases; but when Conscience is cleared by the Spirit, and seconded with the
Spirit, the Testimony of these two is great and weighty, the Spirit of God
witnessing thus to our spirit, is the clearest Testimony of Romans 8. 16.
of our Adoption and Salvation, which thy Conscience alone is not to be
credited in; for what could the light of our body (the eye) see and discern, if
it were not for the light of the Heaven (the Sun?) we should have a continual
Night. So without the Spirit, the light of God, what can Conscience, our light,
see and discern of the things of God? Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.
10, 11, 12.
that God does reveal unto his servants the deep mysteries of the Gospel by his
spirit; for the spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. For
what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him?
So the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God. Now we have received
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we may know
the things which are freely given to us of Cod, etc. So that wheresoever the
spirit of God is, there is the good Conscience; where it is wanting Conscience
cannot be good. Where the natural enlivening Spirit is absent, or departed,
there is no life, or vegetation, or sense, or reason, or motion; but all death,
darkness, coldness, etc. So where the enlivening Spirit of Grace is wanting to
the soul, there is no life, sense, motion, comfort, but all is dead within, and
all the works are but dead works. But where the Spirit is, there is life, there
is light, there is liberty, and there is purity, there is peace, and there is
grace, there is comfort and there is Conscience, there is indeed all. 2
Subservient means.


The subservient means are thirteen, whereof the first six direct us what to
do, the other seven what to avoid.

First of all those subservient means, next to Christ Jesus himself, and his
Spirit, which are the principal, Faith is to be sought to 1. Faith.
make thee a good Conscience: Thefore how often do we find faith and good
Conscience joined? This next to the blood of Christ, and the purifying water of
the Spirit has the greatest cleansing virtue, Act. 15. 9. Christ has given
faith for this end, to purify the heart. Where faith is pure, the Conscience
is pure: this makes the good, and mends the bad Conscience. Faith and good
Conscience are made one for the other, as the woman and the man to be
fellow-helpers each to other. Faith is Consciences Keeper, Conscience again is
Faiths: These two like Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, may discomfit a whole
Host 1 Samuel 14.
of Philistines; when they keep together, nothing is hard for them to undertake;
or like Saul and Jonathan lovely in life, and undivided in death. Faith and
good Conscience do many a good office each for other, and are forced to unite
in a league offensive and defensive: In an offensive league, as Simeon and
Judah, Jud. 1. 3. the one must help the other to expel the Canaanites out of
his Coast first, and then proceed to expel them out of the others Coasts
after: Good Conscience helps to expel the Canaanites of fear, distrust, and
despair out of Faiths coasts, and to slay Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, these
Jud. 1. 10*
three sons of Anak; and faith again lays to his helping hand to expel the
Canaanites of fear, guilt, deadness, dullness, erroneousnesse, and
Scrupulousness out of Consciences coasts. And in a defensive league they are
joined, as David said to Abiathar, Abide with me, fear not; so says Faith to
Conscience, Abide with me Conscience, for he that seeks my life, seeks thy
life, but with me thou shall be in safety. 1 Samuel 22. 23. Faith is the white
Alabaster-box, in which Consciences precious Ointment is put; Faith is the
bottle into which the wine of good Conscience is poured: So again, Conscience
does as much for Faith; Faith is the light, good Conscience is Faiths lanthorn;
the lanthorn shows forth the light within, the lanthorn defends the light from
winds and weather without, that it be not blown out: Conscience holds forth the
light of Faith to be seen of men; Conscience defends faith that it be not put
out. Faith is the Apple or sight of the eye, Conscience is the eyelid; no
eyelid can see, or does it profit the body at all without the sight within;
nor can the eye see long, if it have not the eyelids to defend it from Sun,
dust, smoke, and the like annoyances, and to keep the sight clear. So what is
Conscience without Faith, but a blind and blundering Conscience? And what is
Faith without Conscience, but as a naked, weak, raw, sore eye? A threefold
faith necessary to good conscience 1 Justifiing Faith.


Now this Faith that makes and keeps a good Conscience is threefold. First,
Justifying Faith, there must be apprehending and applying the blood of Christ,
Act. 15. 9. This is principally necessary to be sought; this fides qua creditur
is the fides qua vivitur; the fides quae creditur is not sufficient without
this.

Secondly, Doctrinal faith, this is the faith 2 Doctrinal Faith.
here spoken of, Hold faith and a good Conscience, that is, the sound Orthodox
faith, contend for it, continue in it. From this Hymenaeus and Alexander
swerved, and then left the plain path of good Conscience. Say not any man is
sound in faith, and of a good Quam tu secretus es Deus solits magnus lege
infatigabili spargens paenale ^caecitates super illicitas cupidita^e^! Aug.
Conf. l. 1.
Conscience, who is unsound in Judgment, and opinions. Corrupt opinions breed
corrupt Consciences, and corruption in morals usually follows the corruption in
intellectuals: Here begins commonly the first step backward to all Apostasy,
and the first step forward to all impiety. It is a sad story of the Emperor
Valens, who while he was among the Orthodox, had gained much Glory in the
Church; he had stood firm in the time of Julian the Apostate, together with
his Brother Valentinian, choosing rather to lay down all his Military Honors
and employments, than to dissert the faith of Christ: yet afterward by his
wives means, she being an Arrian, he was perverted; and being Co-Emperour with
his Godly Brother Valentinian, he grew a Pseudo-Christian first, nec Arrianus,
nec Christianus, propemodum visus est; He was neither perfect Arrian, nor a
perfect Christian, afterward grew a Persecutor, at last he went to enquire of
the Devil who should be his successor; and upon the Ambiguous answer of the
Diabolical Oracle, that his successors name should begin with Theod, He put
to death many a man, all such whose name began with those letters, as
Theodorus, Mag Cent. 4. cap. 3.
Theodotus, Theodoulus, Theodosiolus, and the like.

The third kind of Faith necessary to good 3. A particular warranting Faith.
Conscience, is that particular warranting says (as I may call it) to
legitimate our actions, which particular warranting faith, may be also called a
kind of Justifying faith in a certain sense; I mean not justifying the person
from all guilt, but that action from sin. Every action that is good in it self,
hereby becomes sanctified to the use of Conscience by the word of God, the word
of faith, as it is called. Of this particular warranting faith the Apostle
speaks, when in things of an indifferent and doubtful nature, he says, Let
Every Romans 14. 5.
one be fully persuaded in his own mind; that is, let him be fully satisfied in
his Conscience concerning his ways, whether for practicing or forbearing this
or that: Whatsoever is not of this faith is sin, that is, whatsoever a man does
practice Conscientia fluctuante, or much more Conscientia reclamante, his
Conscience wavering, or gainsaying, must needs be sinful in him, though it be
not sinful to another. Of this that Aphorism also in the same Chapter is to be
understood, He that Romans 14. 23.
doubts is damned if he eat; he means not that in what ever faith laying
hold on Gospel and saving promises, there is not full assurance (but many
doubts yet arising, and fears yet remaining) that soul has no true faith, and
therefore is in the state of Damnation; but his meaning is, that he who is bold
in practicing what he yet sees no warrant for in the word, does wound his
Conscience, having not that sincerity and tenderness of Conscience which he
ought to look after, and therefore is justly condemned and blamed.

Secondly, Repentance, and the daily renewing 2. Means, Repentance.
thereof, is the next means to get, and keep the good Conscience. This ever
goes along with true faith, Mar. 1. 15. Repent, and believe the Gospel.
Repentance is as necessary to be taught and practiced, as Remission of sins to
be preached and believed, Luke 24. 47. Paul where he came taught both, and this
was the total sum of all he taught, Act. 20. 21. They who would set your
Conscience free to the commission of sin, and yet keep it free from confession
and contrition for sin, while they promise you liberty, they proclaim
themselves the very servants of all corruption. The Scripture rule is, Job 11.
14, 15. If Iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy Tabernacles. For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot,
yea, thou shall be steadfast, and thou shall not fear. But if thou do evil, sin
will lie at the doors, not to be driven away but by repentance, and there it
will lie to keep in Terror, to keep out Comfort. If sin and guilt have not yet
come in, they lie at the door, when thou steppest out at death, they will fly
at thy face, and tear out thy throat; therefore if thou love thy own peace
and safety, put it far away from thy Tabernacle, says Zophar. Conscience must
shut all known sin out of doors, or sin will soon thrust Conscience out of
doors. Conscience well maintained resists, and disarmes sin; sin once
entertained, and a while maintained, grows too hard for Conscience. Take heed
then of harboring this Guest, or turning in to this Host, sin; it will
Jael-like, after soft language, and sugared entertainment, in thy sleep assault
thee, and fasten thee to the ground. Take not in this Jonah at a venture;
though he pay his fare when he comes in, he will raise a storm ere he be gotten
out. Revive this discontinued duty, and work of repentance; Dream not of
lodging sin and peace together in the same heart, or at most with a small
partition, to have Peace within doors, and Sin without doors. David once
thought without the labor of repentance to have secured himself from the
trouble and infamy of his foul Adultery; what does he? he sends for Vriah,
pretends business with him, and after discourses past, dismisseth him home to
his house: Vriah would not be gotten from David's door: To prevent the shame
that David would have smothered, sin must be added to sin; next day Vriah is
made drunk, yet at the door he lies again: Then must he be made away, to send
the shame packing. But did not David's sin find him out, break in upon him, and
at last made his bed too hot to hold him, and too we^ for him to sleep in? He
may now too late swim in tears, and wash his defiled bed with weeping, ere he
recover his Peace. So dangerous it is to play near this Cockatrices Den, and to
put the finger upon the hole of the Asp.

See the like again in Amnon the son of David, who having committed that
villainous act of an incestuous rape upon his Sister Tamar, thought it was but
driving her down stairs, and shutting the door upon her, and the sin and danger
was over. But did not his sin lie at the door, and after two years come up and
stab him?

Conscience may be unkindly dealt withal, and turned out of doors, as the
Levite did his Concubine, and then forced, ravished, abused, yet it will come
home to thee again; and though it cannot get in, will lie at thy door, and be
at thy Threshold; if it cannot go, it will creep, and if it cannot cry out,
Jud. 19. 27.
there it will lie, and in the morning when thou art to go out, there thou
shall find it lying to accuse thy unkindnesse, and to terrify thee for thy ill
usage of such a bosom friend. Zophar tells Job that sin though sweet in Youth,
will lie down with thee when old and sick, and will not be beaten away. This
makes a miserable sickness, and death when sin is in thy bed; This is an
unquiet bedfellow: Sin and guilt is the worst bedfellow; better death should
be thy bedfellow, than sin. Sickness, poverty, yea death it self may lie with
thee in the same bed, and thou take no hurt, so that sin and an ill Conscience
lie not in the midst between thee and Sickness or Death; an ordinary bed may
hold these two, but what bed can hold these three?

Observe, if thou would have a good The third Means.
Conscience, what hints at any time thou have from Christ, and the Spirit. Good
Conscience must observe the eye, voice, beck, finger, and every motion of
Christ. Judas hereby showed himself to be a man of no Conscience (unless a
seared) that he could stand all those throws, and never shrink for the matter:
he was nothing moved at the sop given, nor those plain expressions in words at
length and not in figures, He to whom I give this dipped sop is the man whose
heart is dipped in Treason and Blood to be my betrayer and murderer. Woe be to
him by whom the Son of man is betrayed; It had been good if that man had never
been born: He stood all these, he stayed, he puts off all these with an
impudent Is it I? He swallows the Sop, he could now drink up Jordan; out he
goes, and out goes Conscience, and in goes Satan, first hastening him to his
sin, then posting him to ruin. All this came upon a non-advertency to hints,
and warnings, and checks, and reproofs. As it is a fearful judgment (Cains
judgment) to fear where no fear is, so it is as foul a sin (Judas his sin) not
to fear where fear should be. What a hell is it for a man to be
Conscience-proof, or for Conscience to be Sermon-proof, Terror-proof,
Correction-proof? Thou have smitten them (O Lord) Jer. 5. 3.
but they have refused to receive correction. They have made their faces harder
than a rock, they have refused to return. These come to be past reproof, and
then to be given over to a reprobate Romans 1.
mind: To be like the Smiths dog, who is so long accustomed to the sparks
flying, and the noise of the bellows, that he sleeps under them: But Solomon
has a sad warning to such, He that being often reproved, hardneth Pro. 29. 1.
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

But on the other side Peter recovers Conscience by a wise observing these
hints: Christ had forewarned him Ere the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me
thrice, he lays up these words, yet being surprised on the sudden, through
infirmity he falls; Repentance awakens him, he hears the Cock crow, his heart
trembles, he reflects on himself, and casts his eye back upon his Master, and
then sees his Masters eye fixed on him: He minds the eye, he reads the meaning,
he leaves the place, goes out, weeps, and recovers himself, and is again
received by Christ. Observe thou still the looks, and calls, and smiles, and
frowns of Christ, and learn to say, This is the Voice of my Beloved, this is my
duty, this is the voice of the Rod, and this is the meaning; this is the
writing of Christ, and this is the reading.

Listen as attentively (next to the hints 4. Means.
of Christ) to the mutterings and whisperings of thy own Conscience; learn the
language, and observe the discourse of thy own Conscience, mind what
intelligence it brings thee home. There is more in this than every one is aware
of.

Many deal with suggestions, and checks of Conscience as Joseph's Brethren did
with him, when he told them of his dreams; they accounted them one while as the
wild notions of an idle brain, then they derided him; and called him the
Dreamer; another while Genesis 37. 11.
they looked upon them as the malipert evaporations of an aspiring mind, then
they envied him: But his Father thought there was something in it, therefore he
marked and observed his sayings. Take notice what news Conscience brings thee
home every day, as Joseph did to Jacob of his sons. Be not afraid to speak with
thy self face to face.

Decline not this personal Treaty with thy self; Send Amaziahs challenge to thy
Conscience, Come let us see one another in the face, 2 Chronicles. 25. 17. Commune
often with thy own heart, Psalm. 4. and thus David tells us he himself did,
Psalm. 77. 6. when he had been much out of order, his spirit overwhelmed, his
mind troubled, he thought his Conscience might have somewhat to say to him; he
desires a right Understanding may be had, therefore he seeks a conference. I
communed with my own heart (says he) and my spirit made diligent search. I
heard what Conscience had to charge me withal, and Conscience made a search,
and heard what I could say for my self. These Soliloquies are our best
disputes, and the most useful conferences. Such Solitude is better than
Society sometimes. Man is best company for himself. Be thou daily in this
Counting House, and take a turn every evening in old Isaacs walks. Go out and
meditate Genesis 24. 69
shall I say, or go in and meditate? We read, Genesis 1. that God viewed every
days work, what it was before it passed out of his hands, and saw that it was
good ere he left it, and before the Sabbath he took a review of all he had done
in the six days before. Observe thou each day what were thy actions this day,
what were thy passions: See what words fell from thee, what purposes, and
thoughts were in thee: Did thou well or no to be so angry, or to be so merry?
So to be silent, or so to speak? Did thou not vainly discover thy self as one
of the vain fellows use to discover themselves? Especially before 1 Cor. 11.
28.
the Sabbath, or the Sacrament, view all thy works, and take thy self to task
by a serious self-examination.

Be not a stranger to thy self; live much Non venitur ad bonam Conscientiam
nisi per cordis custodiam. Bern.
at home, nec te quaesiveris extra. Fear not to be alone, whomsoever thou
trustest to be thy Cash-keeper, be thou thine own Conscience-keeper. If any be
so ungracious as to say, who made me my Brothers Keeper? Tremble thou to be so
unnatural as to say, who made me my own Keeper? what an ill account of his
Stewardship will that man give up, who can say, I have been diligent in all
things which I took in hand, but my own Vineyard have I not kept? I press this
the more, because Cant. 1. 6.
it is so necessary and near a way to a good Conscience.

I say again, be sure to be well versed in thy own heart, feel thy own pulse
how it beats; wind up this Watch every night, see how it goes every day, see if
it be not down and have done going. Be not like the Elephant, who loves not (as
they say) to see his own face, therefore never drinks but in muddy waters. Be
not as was said of Cain (Cordis tui fugitivus) A vagabond from God, and a
runnagate from thy self: Hear thou when Conscience speaks, that God may hear
thee when thou speak, else Conscience will tell thee, though thou will not
hear it speak to thee now, he will be heard before thy betters another day what
it has against thee. What a shame is it to thee, if thy own Conscience can
give no better testimony of thee than Nabals servants did of him? Our master is
such a man of Belial that none i Sam. 25. 17.
may speak to him. Be sure to carry it fair with thy self, and keep peace at
home, that thy house be not divided against it self, and so end in ruin.
Miserable it is if man and wife live at discord; God is not there. What is it
when a man disagrees with himself? Or be sure if there be any discontent here,
to get all composed. Deliver thy self as the Roe; see whether thou be in fault,
or thy Conscience. Austin tells us how he had many Quae non ad me dixi quibus
verberibus flagellavi animam meam?
a round bout with himself, after that God had showed him his sin: He went
aside, and chode himself: Then into a private Garden he got, where none might
interrupt him, and there his Conscience and he were wrangling till God agreed
them, and made them friends. These fallings out breed the strongest friendship
both with God and thy self. In hortum abiit -- tum in illa grandi rixa domus
interioris quam fortiter excitaram animam meam in cubiculo nostro cord me^ --
in hortulum abstulerat me tumultus pectoris mei, ubi nemo impediret ardentem
litem quam mecum aggressus eram Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 7. and 8.


Fifthly, yet so we must hearken to, and The fifth Means. Vnicuique suus liber
est Conscientia etc. Et ideo scribi debent libri nostri ad exemplar libri
vitae, and si sic scripti non sint, saltem corrigantur; confer amus itaque
libros nostros cum libro vitae, ^^ forte in illa ultima discussione abiiciantur
si non fuerint emendati. de Consc. lib. 1. cap. 9.
confer with Conscience, as also to confer Conscience with the Scripture. That
is the Book of life (as Bernard says) and according to that our Conscience
must be copied, or corrected. Let us therefore (says he) compare and confer
our books with Gods book, lest in that day our books be rejected as false and
faulty, when they come to be examined. See therefore if thy Copy be according
to the Original.

The Christian grows judicious, when he reads not Scripture cursorily, but when
he diligently conferreth place with place, and Scripture with Scripture.
Conscience is to be compared with the Bible, and examined by it. The able and
expert Divine rests not in perusing a Translation be it never so good, bur
confers the Traslation with the Original. Conscience is but a Translation at
the best, and in most the most corrupt Translation; this vulgar Translation had
not need be made authentic and Canonical: But thou must search the Scriptures
and not trust thy own judgment too far. Keep thy Watch still going, as I said
before; but see thou that it be right set, not by thy neighbors clock, or thy
own guess, but by the Sundial.

Conscience is indeed unto a man a kind Solis Canonicis libris debetur fides,
caeter is omnibus judicium. Luther.
of Scripture, yet at most but Apocryphal, not Canonical. Apocryphal it is,
therefore not to be denied reading; Canonical it is not, therefore not
infallible.

Nothing is to be taken Dogmatically from the Apocrypha (say we) unless it be
contained in the Scripture; So far we receive them as they consent with
Scripture, no further. So far receive thy Conscience, A (...); it is not, so as
it should be heard for it self: but it is secundariae authoritatis and
lectionis, allowed it may be, when it holds a consonancy with the written word.
The grossest Idolatry in the world, says a learned Divine, is to make thy self
the Idol; and as bad a Rutherford.
Papacy as that at Rome, to make a Pope of thy own Conscience. Thy Conscience
is indeed thy Rule, but it must then be Regula Regulata, it may not be Regula
Regulans et primaria, that is, it is a Rule ruled by another, not giving Rules,
but when from that other Rule.

Conscience is to every man his Law to himself, Romans 2. 15. but this law is to
be written out, as the King was commanded Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19.
to write his Copy out of Gods law, and then to read therein all the days of
his life. Conscience may be to thee thy Aaron, in stead of a Prophet; but it
must then have his Moses with it, to be to it in stead of God.

This consideration alone well weighed, would resolve what is to be done in
many cases, and may direct in many passages: Nothing is more ordinarily pleaded
than Conscience, Conscience. It is my Conscience say most, what ever is their
practice or opinion; and if Joab take Sanctuary here, he thinks himself safe,
secure, that none may remove 1 Kin. 2. 28, 31.
or trouble him; but a Solomon will fetch him thence, or he may die there. It
is my Conscience says the Papist: the same says the Jew, the same a
Mohammedan, and I will die for my Conscience: The same may an Antinomian, an
Arminian, or Anabaptist say, and I will not go against my Conscience, etc. I,
but is it a good Conscience? a well informed and enlightened Conscience? My
Conscience bids me do thus, say men often; I, but what does God bid Conscience
do? Had not Adam fallen, we should have needed no other Rule but our own
Conscience: Now we have a Law written and Proclaimed, we must not make
Conscience the Supreme Law, but the subordinate. In the integrity of my heart,
may Abimelech say, when it was but Genesis 20. 3.
a blind integrity: And Jonah being challenged for his frowardness, Do thou
well, Jonah to be angry? he replies, yea, so well as Jonah. 4.
my Conscience is satisfied that I could die in this mind, and thus I would do
if it were the last thing I should say or do.

Chrysostom blamed those that are curious and choice what money they take, who
will refuse to take that which they know not, and Nisi ipsi videant numeros,
and calculos constare.
they will look for the figures, and for the right Stamp. But in matters of
Conscience, and in points and practices of Religion, ^re easily overreached.
Simpliciter se huc illuc ferri patiuntur. Cum sint ab autore spiritu sancto
dicuntur. autoritatis (...), veritatisque (...). Chamier de canon. fid. l 4. c.
1. Cui subjic i^ oportet omnem pium intellectum. Aug. 6. Means. Vel Deum
interpellet, inquirat, aut consulat nam (...) vocat (...).


It is the highest honor and perfection of the holy Scriptures, that they
coming from an infallible hand, and written by the divine inspiration of an
un-erring Spirit, have this Prerogative above all other persons, writings, and
opinions, that they are of undubitate and unquestionable Authority, and of
infallible certainty, to which every thought and reasoning of man must be
brought into subjection.

Conscience is indeed to have a negative voice, so that nothing is to be done
without his assent and good liking; But Conscience must not challenge an
Arbitrary and illimited power to act or determine any thing without advice with
his great Council, the Law and the Prophets.

The last of those means to be used is Prayer, which is a great friend to good
Conscience. The good Conscience makes many a good Prayer. There is the
particular (...) and demand of a good Conscience spoken of 1 Pet. 3. 21. which
learned Beza understands of prayer. Quo fit ut bona Conscientia interroget
Deum, he renders it, The good Conscience never undertakes any thing, says he,
without prayer and asking counsel at the mouth of God. Good Conscience has
ever one eye Conscientia sanctificata ab uno Deo pendet, illum invocat, nihil
nisi eo consulto et ore ipsius interrogato aggreditur. Beza in 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Act. 10. 2. Job. 27. 10
upon God to observe his precepts, and the other to beg his direction.
Conscience cannot be kept sweet, but in this perfume of Prayer. Observe, and
you will find the man frequent in prayer, ordinarily a man of Conscience: But
the man of Conscience ever a man of Prayer. This was the Testimony given of
Cornelius, that he was a Devout man, fearing God with all his house, gave much
alms to the People, and prayed to God always. But the Hypocrites (says Job)
does not delight himself in the Almighty, nor pray always to God. There can no
Conscience be made of any thing, where Conscience is not made of Prayer. They
call not upon God, says David, what is Psalm. 14.
he then less than a practical Athiest? And Job again makes the highest pitch
of impiety this, to say to God depart from us, we desire Job. 21. 14 15.
not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him?
and what profit shall we have if we pray unto him?

Do thou then desire a good Conscience? Pray with Solomon, O Lord, give me
above 1 Kin. 3. 9.
all givings, a wise and understanding heart, that I may know how to go in and
out before thee. And with David, Lord, Create in me Psalm. 51.
a new and a clean heart, and renew in me a right spirit. Lord, be thou still
searching and keeping this my heart, it is too much for me to keep, it is too
deep for me to search, it is too subtle, slippery, and deceitful for me to
know: Lord, try my reins, Lord make me know my self. O Lord, keep me and my
Conscience with all keeping, keep me as thou would keep the apple of thine
eye, that thou keeping my Conscience, my Conscience may keep faith, that faith
may keep Christ, that Christ may keep my soul in perfect peace. Without peace,
what is life worth? Without Christ I can have no peace, without faith no
Christ, without Conscience no faith, and without thy keeping, no Conscience,
and without prayer no hope of thy keeping. O Lord set thy Angel with his
flaming drawn two-edged sword, turning every way before the door of my
Conscience to keep and guard it from being either forced or defiled.

Prayer and Conscience make such another association as Judah and Simeon did.
Help me Jud. 1. 3.
good Prayer says Conscience, to drive out the Canaanites out of my Coasts, to
expel Erroneousnesse, deadness, and hardness, the three sons of Anak out of
my Lot and Territory; and I will help thee Prayer, to drive out fear, distrust,
and despondency out of thy Lot.

As those six already mentioned are to be practiced to the getting or keeping
of the Seven things to be avoided
good Conscience; so there be seven other things to be avoided.

1. Beware even of committing smallest Non solum gravia, sed et levia peccata
sunt
sins, and of many things which go for lawful. Wink not at small faults in thy
self, for so says Piety. In others thou must often, so commands Charity. The
least spark may consume the greatest house; the least leak vitanda. Bern.
sink the greatest ship; One unclean spirit makes way for seven worse. Call not
Faith and Troth small Oaths, they are more then yea and nay: Refrain idle
words, rash anger, vain mirth, foolish jeasting, yea to say so much as Racha to
thy brother, that is says Spanhemius, Chrysostomus et illius abreviator
Bulga^orum Episcopus statuerunt Raca designare idem quod TU per contemptum.
Spanhem in Dub. Bern.
to say so much as Thou to him in contempt. Conscience must beware not only of
telling a malicious lie, but of the officious also; not only the pernicious
lie to be detested, but even the joculatory, to lie in jest, to please thy
companion, to excuse thy friend, to save thy self, is to be refrained. Every
kind of lying is sinful, because no lie is of the truth: Abhor not only to
calumniate and back-bite thy worst enemy, but to flatter and sooth thy best
friend.

The greatest spoil made in Conscience, had at first but small beginnings. Qui
otiosum verbum non reprimit, ad noxia cito transit, et vanus sermo est vanae
Conscientiae index.

David's careless glance and roving eye corrupts his heart; there the fire
begins; he is drawn away presently after and enticed; then lust conceives and
brings forth sin, sin shortly becomes perfect and brings forth death: A dart
strikes through his liver, death seizes on his souls vitals, and so low is he
brought by this Consumption as to the dust of death. Principiis obsta is a good
rule.

How soon were all Peter's good purposes, promises, Protestations forgotten and
laid aside, he being once engaged among ill company! They all speak against
Christ, he resolves not to stand up one against so many to speak in his
defense. They deny him, he denies him, they swear he swears; they curse, he
curses as fast. How soon does the thief in the candle consume it? How fast do
less sins not thrown out vastare Conscientiam, and make it flare out
presently? Peter's faint denial first time, fetches out an Oath next time to
back it; then he that has once pawned his Faith to hell by a false oath, may
now sell his Master for nothing, and himself for naught. Peter casts off fear,
he cuts off his own legs, and drinks damage. Lie! Swear! Curse! Lord it is
time for the Cock to crow, and for thee to look, and for Peter to be gone.

Oh look to beginnings, cast out (as Pharaoh did the young Children) motions to
Exo. 1. 16,
sin when they are first born: Shun occasions: Come not nigh unto her corner:
Stick at a thread, and a latchet.

There are more ill husbands undone (as I said before) by loss of time
neglecting their callings, by a little sleep, and a little slumber, by slight
expenses, now a penny and then a penny, then by a hundred pound at a clap:
these sink suddenly, none pitying them; the other fall at length, but by
degrees, none observing them.

Bernard tells us how insensibly by degrees sin grows upon the soul: A man well
bred at first looks upon sin as importable; once overtaken, sin is not now
importable, but only Primo importabile processu temporis grave, paulo post
leve, postea placet and dulce est. Ad extremum quod erat impossible ad
faciendum, est impossible ad continendum Bern. de cons. c. 3. Ex voluntate
perversa facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur facta est
necessitas. Aug. Conf. l. 8.
heavy; next time sin is not heavy at all, but easy; a while after not easy
only, but light; next time sweet and pleasant; afterward custom becomes
another nature; and what was importable at first to be committed, is impossible
at last to be avoided.

And Austin tells us a story of his mother, who by sipping a little wine at
first when she filled the cup, came by degrees to be a tippling Gossip, and to
take her whole cups at last. Qui modica spernit; paulatim decidit, he says
upon it; Despise small sins, and thou art gone. Ad illum modicum quotidiana
modica addendo in eam consuetudinem lapsa erat, ut prope iam plenos mero
caliculos inhianter hauriret. Conf. lib. 9.

2. Take heed again of adventuring upon one greater sinful act; I say any one
sinful act deliberately presuming upon Gods Remission, and thy own Repentance,
saying, I shall have peace though I do this: Such one act may for ever shut
Conscience out of doors, taking away the life and sense of it, and ever after
shut thee out of Consciences doors, taking from thee its former peace. It was
but one deliberate act of sin that threw the Angels to all Eternity out of
Heaven, and chained them up in everlasting chains of darkness. That one sin
deliberately committed by our first Parents against an express Precept cast
them out of Paradise, and caused the Cherubim and flaming sword to be set at
the gate, for ever denying any recovery, and re-entry.

See what became of Judas when he had once projected in his heart that
prodigious act of murder and treason, and was resolved to make good his bloody
engagement to the Priests.

He is now at present with Christ and his Disciples, yet intends anon to be
with the Highpriests: He takes the Sop from Christ now, and resolves the same
hand shall take the Highpriests money too: He has a bag that can hold all
that Christ can give, and Satan offer. Oh Lucifer, how art thou fallen! Oh
Judas how art thou running headlong to destruction! Judas, what if Christ
should disclaim thee for ever, as he did, for a son of perdition! All those
which thou gave me have Joh. 17.
I kept, hut that one which is lost. Judas! what if thou should be given
over to Satan that thou shall never repent? Judas! what if God should give thee
over that though thou repent thou shall not be received to mercy, that thou,
and thy money, and thy repentance perish together, and God swear in his wrath,
that thou shall never enter into his Rest? The like you may see in Ananias and
Sapphira, who having deliberately concluded to try the Spirit of God in the
Apostles, never were called to Repentance after: But when Peter had rebuked
them with their sin, Why has Satan filled your heart? they died in their sin.

3. Take heed of living under, or following after a loose, and cold,
man-pleasing Ministry, which preaches liberty, not strictness of Conscience;
which sows pillows under thine Arm-holes, and lays feather-beds under thy
feet to tread upon; cries Peace, Peace, so that none departs from his sinful
way. The voice of a faithful Preacher Esa. 40. 3. Esa. 58. 1. Ecc. 12. 11.
is the voice of a Crier; His sound the sound of a Trumpet; his words like
sharp nails, and piercing Goads; his preaching is heart-pricking; his dividing
the Text and Doctrine, the Heb. 4. 12, 13.
dividing of the Spirit and Marrow, and cutting down the Backbone, and he
lays all open. This is the best Ministry, that which is sharper than the
two-edged sword, and discovers the thoughts of the heart, and makes the man
quake and tremble, and fall down before the word, and cry out God is here of a
truth. Our blessed Savior who had the Tongue of the learned to speak the word
Esaias. 50. 4. Esa. 49. 2. Psalm. 45. 2. Rev. 1. 14. Mal. 3. 2. Es. 11. 4.
in season to him that was weary, was also as a polished shaft, and his mouth
as a sharp sword. He who had grace poured into his lips, and spoke so as never
man did, his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his coming into his Temple none
was able to abide: He was as a Refiners fire, and the Fullers soap, and with
the breath of his lips he did slay the wicked.

The Prophets of old, the Apostles in their time, and all Godly Ministers
since, have been sons of Thunder; their work has been to fall roundly upon
Conscience: They have applied all their engines to batter down, or take in
this strong hold for Christ. They have laid siege to the disobedient, and
refractory Conscience, sought to Block it up, to take away all provisions from
it, to force it to yield, and call out for mercy. They have surrounded
Jericho's high walls day after day, sounding with their Trumpets, till they
have fallen down flat to the ground, that Joshuah might enter as a Conqueror.
They still sought by loud and uncessant Alarums, to startle the secure
Conscience, to awaken the sleepy, to burn the seared, to terrify the
obdurate. And the only care they had, was to comfort the afflicted, to Josh. 6
22. Heb. 11 31
quiet the troubled, to strengthen the weak Conscience; And to rescue one
believing Rahab, from perishing among thousands of them that believed not.

These were the weapons of the old ministerial Warfare. These the Stratagemes
of Christ and his servants, to undermine and blow up Satan's Kingdom, and to
pressemen into the Kingdom of Heaven. But this Age will not endure this kind
of preaching, no more then the Israelites could endure the shrill sound of the
Trumpet sounding loudder and louder; and that terrible fire, and Heb. 12. 19 20
that voice of words, which they desired they might hear no more off. We must
have no legal teaching, we. Soft and Effaeminate Rehoboam must have young and
complying Counselors of his own humor. The Samaritan must not come with his
Wine to search, and cleanse, and wash; but only with his gentle Oil to heal,
and comfort. Physicians of no value: Say not this is to preach Christ Jesus,
free Grace, the Kingdom of Heaven, Gospel, Promises, Privileges. Is the Son
of peace there? Are thy hearers Laden, Weary, Luke 4. 18
Pricked, Wounded, Bruised, Sick? When the Gospel Commission was first opened,
the instructions were to preach the Gospel Es. 61. 1. 2.
to the poor, to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the
Captives, recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord. And withal, to proclaim
the day of vengeance of our God.

But it is noted of them that blessed the people, they caused them to err; and
they who were so blessed were destroyed. Christ commanded repentance to be
preached, and Es. 9. 16.
then remission of sins to be promised. And Lu: 24. 47 Acts 20.
Paul tells us all his Doctrine was bound up in two Chapters: The first,
repentance toward God; The second, faith in Jesus Christ.

But Luther tells us, he observed two sorts Theologus Crucis dicit id quod res
est. Theologus gloriae dicit malum bonum, and bonum malum.
of Divines, in his time; there was one the poor Divine, whom he called
Theologus Crucis, the Divine for the Cross; he (says Luther) preaches
plainly, and tells men how things stand. The other Divine, is Theologus
Gloriae, the Divine for the Crown, for preferment, Praise; The Glorious
Divine, This says he, is a dangerous, and unsound Divine; he calls evil good,
and darkness light. And Luthers prayer was, that God would deliver his Church
from such glorious A theologo gloriae and pastore contentioso, and ^nutilibus
questionibus liberet suam Ecclesiam Dominus. Luther
Divines. The men of thy peace, said Obadiah, v. 7. Have deceived thee, and
prevailed against thee, they of thy bread have laid a wound under thee, etc.

See therefore, if thou wishest well to thy soul, whom thou must choose for thy
minister; him that is most faithful, most powerful, whose fan is in his hand,
who is a conscience-convincing, a Conscience-scouring, and searching man, such
a one is like to be well skilled in the art of curing and comforting
Conscience, who seeks to discover the diseases and maladyes of Conscience.
Affect that ministry then that speaks more to thy heart then to thy fancy,
that preaches more to thy Conscience then thy concupiscence; and whose
Preaching drives more at Purity then Liberty.

But in these days how few are found, who at all stand upon the ministry of
the Word, what it is, whether Preaching, or non-Preaching; whether sound, or
unsound Preaching. Heretofore the question was, Where dwells the Seer? Now a
days, if any be to make a remove, and to change his 1 Samuel 9. 9, 18.
dwelling, They make Lots choice, enquiring what the Earth is for their Cattle,
not Genesis 13. 10
what the Air is for their Souls; and so prefer a Sodom before a Canaan: or
do as the Number. 32. 4. 5.
Reubenites, who because of their Cattle and little ones, desired to sit down
on the other side of Jordan; though they were further off from the Tabernacle
and Temple, preferring a Bashan before Jerusalem.

And if any do at all regard the Preaching Minister; yet how do they then for
the most part, make choice of that Ministry that will prophecy to them of
Peace, and speak smooth things.

In the first days of the Gospel, when Christ was newborn, there were some
Mat. 2.
Christian-Gentiles (the wise men) who that they might find our Savior,
observed diligently the direction of that moving Star of Heaven, which went
before them, and when that not seen, enquired for further directions from the
standing Stars on Earth, the Scriptures; they followed both, and so were
conducted to the place where Christ was, whom they found, saw and worshipped.
But now in these last days of the Gospel, we have some whom we may call
Gentile-Christians, who neither regard the moving Stars (the Ministers) or the
standing fixed Stars, (the Scriptures) But without both these, Rev. 2. 1.
find out new ways, and follow strange new lights, as those who (when the Son
of man was to be betrayed into the hands of men) followed a false Apostle with
Lanthorns, Torches, Firebrarnds and weapons, as if they meant not to worship,
but apprehend Christ. The former did find,, these lost Christ; They did
honor, these put him to open shame; they Deify, These Crucify him; they
Adore, these Destroy him, They opened their Treasures, and give him all they
had; these strip Christ of all he has; They usherd him into his Kingdom, and
into the hearts of the Godly; these drive him out of the world; they preferred
an Infant obscure Christ, before a King, before Herod; these prefer before a
Grown, Known, and a now famous Messiah, an Infamous flagitious Barabas

About a seven years ago, both Parliament and people came in the language of
Act. 16. 9.
Macedonia to the Godly Ministers, come over and help us, and then they were
received Jam. 5. 35.
((...)) as St. Joh. Baptist among the Jews, or S. Paul among the Galathians,
as an Angel of God; or as he and Barnabas at Act. 14 12
Lycaonia once, one was Jupiter, another Mercury. The double honor was then
thought but due. There is since a sad change some where, that the same men
should be looked upon as the chief troublers of Israel now, made a spectacle
to the world, Angels 1 Cor. 4. 9, 11, 12, 13.
and Men, esteemed (rather disesteemed) as the off scouring of all things,
(...). It is well enough. The disciple is no worse yet then his master, nor the
servant then his Lord. Yet if dust might speak to dust, and the Thistle in
Labonon say any thing at all to the Cedar in Lebanon, I would say that there
seems to me, to be more danger to the men of this Generation, from the silent
dust of the feet of the despised Godly ministers, who Jer. 17. 16
neither fight nor threaten, nor yet desire the evil day, then from all the
armed hands, and enraged hearts of the most desperate malignants, which though
they breath out slaughter and cruelty, have been but like the Es. 7: 4:
smoking Tails of easily quenched firebrarnds

4 Take great heed to him whom thou make thy bosom friend, know him well,
and Oh nimis inimica amicitia! Aug.
know him to be good. Man's wisdom is not seen in any one thing more then in
making choice of his company, and friend. Ill acquaintance has undone many.
The instance in the Text tells us, how one sinner destroys much good. One
corrupt man corrupts another. Hymenaeus and Alexander coupled Vvaque livorem
conspecta ducit ab uva.
together: They had one infected the other. Hymeneus and Philetus. 2 Timothy 2.
17. Phygellus and Hermogenes. More ill couples still, Alexander it is likely
marred Hymenaeus. Hymenaeus marres Philetus, and so comes the Gangrene Genesis 7.
2:
to spread. Evil persons and seducers, as Noabs unclean Beasts, go together in
couples. Simeon and Levi brethren in evil; Ananias and Sapphira conspire
together; Amnon had never accomplished his bestial and unclean Lust, if he had
not had the head of Jehonadab, to set him in the way, Jehonadab was a very
subtle man it 2 Samuel: 13. 3
is said. Oh come not into the way of the sinner, nor enter the Counsel of the
ungodly, least at last thou be set in the Chair of the scorner. Evil company
corrupts the best dispositions: we see godly Jehosaphat in company with a
wicked Ahab, complementing 1 Kin. 22. 4
too far, and complying too too much. I am as thou art says he etc.

5 In things doubtful be well advised, or forbear, and take the surer and
safer way. This is a necessary rule to be observed. I mean not the safer way
in outward respect: This often blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverts the
judgment of the judicious. But of inward safety before God I speak. As for
instance, Usury some allow, most condemn it; now what is to be done? Faith
and Troth some say is no swearing; others say, they have too much appearance of
evil: I am sure thy Conscience will say, they are more then Yea, Yea; Nay,
Nay. Some say to Drink and pledge healths, to play at Cards, and Dice, to
follow the fashions of the times; The long hair of men, the naked necks, backs
and breasts of women, are all lawful. Others are of another mind. Judge thou
what is safest, and let those be thy rules to judge by, Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. and
Phi. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
are honest, whatsoever are pure, whatsoever are lovely, and whatsoever are of
good report; think on these things and do them etc.

Resolve thou what is safest with thy self, when sometimes thou may plainly
see danger of sin, lying on the one hand, and none at all on the oath

The wary traveller when night comes on, and he not perfect in his way, will
rather choose to take up his lodging, and lie short, then adventure to go on,
and wander in the dark, or be in danger to be set upon. It is safe to lie
short often; go not ever to the utmost of thy Liberty, Quodcunque Licere
potest, Libere non debet.

6 Take heed of worldly-mindednesse, no enemy worse to Conscience. These
thorns choke the best seeds of Grace; and this Canker eats out the very
bowels of Conscience. For a piece of Bread, such a one will transgress; and
for one small morsel, sell a Birthright. Take heed of that maxim of the
Mammonist (...), Gain is the Godliness. This is the root of all evil, when
the man is resolved to be rich, and will dye worth thousands, leave his
Children such portions, become a purchaser, drive a great Trade, though he dye
Ditior quam Sanctior. These resolutions send Conscience packing. Then is the
wild Boar broke into the field of Conscience, all is rooted up. These will
break their word, betray their Trust, deceive their Brother, violate their
Faith, falsify their Wares, Weights, Measures, lie at catch for advantage; and
for an accursed wedge of Gold, bring the fire and curse of God into their Tents
and Families. What is become of that old honesty, integrity and plain dealing,
that was wont to be in the world? Where is that Breviary and Epitome of all
justice (as Jerome called it) to be found? Whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye the same to them.

Men many times in bargaining, make more large and cheap Penni-worths of their
Conscience, Faith, Hope, Christianity, yea salvation then of their wares; you
shall have too much of them to help off with these. What more ordinary then to
say as I am a Christian, as I hope for mercy, if there be any faith in me, upon
my Conscience, upon my Salvation, and upon my Soul, such have Venalemque fidem,
Vendibilemque animam, a lowpriced faith, and a vendible soul.

Seldom do riches and a good Conscience dwell under the same Roof. Satan
knows where to have such at any turn; Balaam in pursuit of the wages of
iniquity, will not be stopped by any Angel in the way, or a bruised Leg.
Gehazi will steal out some private way, when he thinks his Masters eye is not
upon him. Satan knew who carried the Bag among the Apostles; and that thirty
silver pieces would make him swallow the Soppe, and any the most opprobrious
open reproof too, yet go on with his purpose, to sell both his Saviors body,
and his own soul.

Take heed your hearts be not surcharged with cares of the world, and
deceitfulness of Lu. 21. 34.
Riches as well as with surfeiting and drunkenness. More go to hell that are
the worlds good husbands, buying, selling, building, planting, etc. than of
perjury, blasphemy, buggery, incest, Atheism, and malicious despighting the
Spirit of Grace. These are no light sins, they were Sodomes sins. This is no
Gospel life, it was the life of the old world whom God destroyed. The worlds
best husbands are commonly heavens worst husbands. The penny and Earthly wise,
is the pound and the Pearle-foolish. How seldom are those wise to Salvation,
who are so over-wise in their Generation.

Finally take heed, and again I say take heed of an erroneus Conscience. This
is indeed as the wildfire in the standing corn; or as Sampsons Foxes with
their firebrarnds in their tails: These are as the wild Boar, or as the
ravening Bear. No stopping this Fool in his folly. A wild Ass used to the
wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, Jer. 2. 24.
in her occasion who can turn her away? Saul, when an erroneous zealous
Pharisee, thought no better service could be done to God, than to make havoc
of the Christians. This Alexander and Hymenaeus what Heresies did they broach
after they once fell away? and because they found not Paul as vertiginous and
mutable as themselves, they hate, defame, and persecute his person, and
blaspheme his Doctrine. Oh how sad a sight it is to behold, that many hopeful
Professors formerly, after they are once leavened with the bitter leaven of
the Pharisees, how do they in their hearts undervalue and contemn, and it may
be in their speech openly cry out of, and seek to put all the disgrace and
disesteem upon such faithful Ministers whom themselves did most magnify and
prize, judging them worthy of their very eyes in their heads. Oh the unsavory
salt of Error! how does it infatuate and distaste every thing, till it be cast
out to the dunghill.

It is a doleful story, that of Valens mentioned Postea nec Arrianus, nec
Christianus visus est, licentiam omnibus dedit sua sacra celebrandi gentibus,
ac Judaeis, nec non omnibus haere^icis, Idolatricas vanitate a Joviniano
destructas reflorescere permissit. Jovis cultum, Dionysii Cererisque sacra non
in occulto celebrabant, sed per medias plate^^ Bacchantes ubique cur sitabant:
cum illis solum inimicum se praebebat qui Apostoliam doctrinam praedicare
videbantur. Theod. l. 4. c. 24.
before; who having been sound and zealous in the true profession in the time
of Julian, yet afterward being Emperor, having married an Arrian, wife; and
being deluded and enchanted with Endoxius an Arrian Bishop; he soon cooled in
his affections, and so staggered in his judgment, that they could not tell
what to make of him; he was neither Fish nor Flesh, neither Arrian not
Christian. But after he fell wholly from his Religion, and gave toleration to
all manner of Religions (to every Nation his own Religion) Judaism, Paganism;
all Idolatrous, and whatsoever wicked practices, were permitted freely, only
to preach and profess the Apostolic doctrine prohibited: a bitter Persecutor
he proved, and at last renouncing God, to the Oracle he went to enquire of the
Devil who should be his Successor.

2. To draw to an end. The other part of the Exhortation concerns the Minister
particularly. The Text being a charge or exhortation from a Minister to a
Minister, from Paul to Timothy, to hold Faith and a good Conscience.

Which the Minister must make good 1. Personally. 2. Doctrinally.


He must be a man of Conscience for his person, a man for Conscience in his
doctrine.

1. In his personal carriage he must be Conscientious, that he may be an
exemplary pattern to his flock. If he be thus a Burning light, he shall also be
a Shining light to others. The Minister must strive to excel others in every
spiritual gift, in this especially. A City set on a hill cannot be hid: He must
so walk that they may see the law in his steps as well as in his lips. He is to
be as the Sun, the light of the inferior world, is therefore to move
regularly, steadily, uniformly, that the Dials and Clocks below may be set
right, when they go along with this Sun.

It is said that nothing cuts the Diamond, but the Diamond; I am sure none is
so fit to work upon the Conscience of a man, as the man of Conscience.

The ministers lips then must disperse knowledge to the People, but his heart
must retain Conscience to himself. This little volume, Conscience, he must be
exactly read in: whatsoever other volumes he be a stranger to, whatsoever
language he be defective in, he must be well acquainted with that of
Conscience. It was an excellent speech, that of Jerome, Discamus in terra,
quorum Ad Paulin.
scientia nobis perseveret in Caelo. Those things are worth learning on Earth,
the knowledge whereof will be of use in Heaven. A saying which famous Paraeus
ever had in his mouth, and caused to be written in the public Schools where
he read his Divinity Lectures.

Learned Beza tells us what was Calvin's counsel Cum te (...) non vulgari
donatum esse videam, qua saepe ad moximos decipiendos viros abusus est Satanas
velim te diligenter cavere, ne te ullis inanibus arguti is irretias.
usually to younger Divines; in whom he saw any pregnancy of parts; to take
heed of abstruse Questions and unnecessary controversies, lest they should be
catched and ensnared in the Toils of wit, and so prove unhappy instruments of
Satan to pervert others. And he further reports, he had given the same counsel
to himself, which he had observed to his dying day, and did exceedingly bless
God for.

The want of observing this counsel, was the utter undoing of that Conradus
Vorstius, a man otherwise of much acumen, who carried away with the fleetnesse
of his wit, and the niceness of his spirit, after he had read Socinus, and
such other corrupt writings, became a pernicious corrupter of the younger
Students, who were his hearers, and an occasion of much mischief to the Church.

And since that I am speaking to the Minister, I desire to speak two words
apart to two sorts of persons that are now in the Ministry. The first is to
our younger Timothies, who as they are to be the Successors of our 1 A
particular Exhortation to Timothy.
elder Paul's when they die; so are they their hopes and delights, while they
are alive. To these we can say nothing but good: Watch you in all things; stand
fast; quit you like men; be strong; despise afflictions for the Gospel: Look
well to the Charge of God, the Charge of Faith, and of a good Conscience. Take
heed to your selves, and your doctrine: Avoid profane jangling, vain bablings,
oppositions (...). 1 Timothy 6. 21. 1 Pet. 2. ult. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
of science, Pseudo science. Study to show your selves men of God, approved
workmen, that need not to be ashamed: Your work and charge is great, but your
promised assistance greater, your reward and crown is greatest; I mean not from
men, but from the hand of the Archbishop, and (...) (as he is called) in the
day of his great visitation. Remember that famous Apophthegm of Mr. Perkins
which he wrote in the frontis-piece of all his books, Minister verbi es, hoc
age: Thou art a Minister of the word, mind thy business well. Be sure to hold
fast the form of sound words, as being well nourished up in the words of faith
and good doctrine, wherein you have made so great a pro-proficiency. Read over
and over your Directory, Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

It is the Jesuits instruction to their younger Preachers when they have to do
with some persons, as Princes and great ones, to instill Principles into them,
quae liberiorem reddunt Conscientiam. Abominate ye such policy and compliance
as greatest impiety. In freer and looser times let your principles be the
stricter, not the slacker. It is the reproach of some Lawyers, that it may be
said of them, they have venalem linguam, a tongue to set to sale: Take heed
that it be not said of any Divine, that he has linguam mercinariam, and animam
venalem, a tongue to be hired, and a soul to be sold.

Though you may be younger men for Cum ad edificium arbusta succidimus ut prius
viriditatis humor exsiccari debeat expectamus; ne si eis recentibus fabricae
pondus imponatur, ea ipsa curvarentur, and confracta citius corruant, quae
immature in altum levata videbantur. Cur non in hominibus ad animarum curas
admitiendis custoditur quod in Lignis? Greg. l. 4. ep. 95.
years, seek to grow past Neophytes, and younger plants which may be easily
plucked up by the roots from the ground they stand upon, or be bent and bowed
by any hand as they stand. Gregory very elegantly warns concerning such as
are young and tender Plants, That they be not like green unseasoned Timber,
which if put into a piece of building, will warp, and bow, and break, that no
weight may be laid upon them.

Secondly here I must crave leave to give 2. To Hymenaeus and Alexander.
an Item to Hymenaeus and Alexander, who of late Disciples are now become all
on the sudden above their Masters, more than ordinary Ministers, who not sent,
yet run; not being called, yet they go; and having Jer. 23. 21.
left the Anvile and the Forge, have taken the sacred Hammer in hand, Is not my
Jer. 23. 29.
Word an Hammer that breaks the Book in pieces?

1. Consider who has sent you, and given you your Commission. How can they
Romans 10. 15.
preach except they be sent? Tell me, when the storm comes, what answer thou
can make to these interrogatories, Jonah 1. 8. Tell us, what is thine
occupation? and whence come thou? what is thy Country? and of what People
art thou?

2. Consider whether thy entrance upon the Ministerial Office and employment:
can be called a fair entering by the door into the sheepfold, and not rather a
climbing up some other way, by a presumptuous invasion, an audacious intrusion,
or an impious irreption as Vzziahs was; to whom the Priests of the Lord said,
it did no ways 2 Chro. 26. 16.
appertain to him to officiate in that Service* lest Gods displeasure break out
upon thee, and smite thee with a Leprosy in thy head Lev. 13. 44. 2 Chro. 26.
19.
and forehead, for which if thou be not driven out, or shut up, thou may
infect all others with whom thou have to do.

I confess sometime, as Jerome says, Ex Lacicis eliguntur Sacerdotes Hieron.
ad Gerontiam.
Out of Laymen (as he calls them) some have been taken into the Minestery; but
then they have been such as were first approved by the Church; and secondly,
such as being once made Churchmen, ceased after to be Secular, either
Tradesmen, or Statesmen: They might not wear two Swords, and serve two
callings; much De Civ. Dei. l. 1 c. 35. In gregibus et armentis aries and
taurus corpore et animositate prestantior alios antecedit, homo vero bestiis
aliis bestialior tanto indiscretius, et audacius, praeesse praesumit, quanto
minus de virtutum ti^ulis, aut Conscientiae sinceritate confidit. Petrus
Blesensis.
less, as Austin said of some, Medo Theatra, medo Ecclesias replere. They must
be men of approved Gravity and Holiness, and men of considerable abilities.
Among the bruit-beasts (said one complaining of like disorder) there is none
does lead and rule, but the stronger, and more generous: and shall he that has
least of skill and Conscience, take upon him to lead and teach men? Nazianzene
sadly complained that the Ministry was more dishonored than any other
calling: none would take upon him to be a Painter, or a Tailor, but he who was
instructed in those Arts, and had served his time in learning. But, says he,
shall any step to the Ministry all at once. Non elaboratus, sed recens simul
satus, et provect us quemadmodum Gigantes finxerunt Poet. Vno die sanctos
fingimus eosque sapientes et eruditos esse jubemus, qui nihil didicerunt, nec
ad sacer dotium quicquam ante contulerunt quam ipsum velle. Shall a Saint of a
few days standing he put into the Ministry, who brings no other commendations
to his works, but only a bare good will, and an impulse of a private spirit.
Jerome often complained in many places of his works of the inconsiderate taking
in, and preposterous thrusting in of unmeet persons to this employment. Heri
Catechumenus, (...), (...), (...), heri sacrilegi, body
body Pontifex, heri in Amphitheatro, body in Ecclesia: Vesperi in circo mane
in altari. Yesterday scholars, to day teachers; Yesterday at a Playhouse,
Tavern, or a Fight; to day in the Pulpit.

They understand not the Scripture, says sacrifici. Docent scripturas quas non
intelligunt prins imperitorum magistri quam doctorum discipuli. Jerome. Antea
effundere quam infundi velint, loqui quam audire paratioces, prompti docare
quod non didicerunt, etc.
he, yet will they presume to interpret Scriptures; and they first commence
Doctors among the Ignorant, before they have been Disciples of the Learned.

They may reckon themselves full of Charity, says Bernard, being very forward
and liberal in teaching; but they should not instruct till they have been
instructed, nor teach till they have heard more, nor guide others till they
have learned better to govern themselves.

3. At thy peril howsoever thou art called, gifted, and approved, let me charge
thee to take heed of two Rocks, which such as those of your cloth are subject
to dash upon; that thou corrupt not the Doctrine of the true Faith, and that
thou cast not away the care of a good Conscience. That thou be not one among
those many Pastors, to whose charge God lays it: That they have destroyed his
Vineyard, Jer. 12. 10.

And that your manner of dealing with the Scriptures may not rather be called a
paddling with your feet, rather than a fair handling of it, as Ezekiel. 34. 18,
19. Seems it a small thing to you to have eaten up the pasture, but ye must
tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of
the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? And as for my
flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and they drink that
which ye have fouled with your feet. And so you become not Pastores, but
Impostores, not Doctores, but Seductores; not Pontifices, but Pontii; not
Prelati, but Pilati.

It was wittily said of Luther, that the young and unskilful Physician, who
Germanicum proverbium ut Lutherns de doctore medicinae juven^, opus ei esse,
novo Caemiterio, etc. See M. Bowls in his Pastor Evangelicus. l. 1. c. 13.
did more hure than good by his Practice, had need have a new Churchyard, he
would kill so many. And of the young and unexperienced Divine, Opus ei esse
novo inferno. He had need have a new Region or Plantation in hell, for by his
dangerous Preaching he would send a new Legion or Colonie thither to furnish
it, He would destroy so many.

Fourthly, let Hymenaeus and Alexander know this further, if they still proceed
to belch forth pernicious errors and blasphemous doctrines, though now there
be no Discipline on foot to deliver them to Satan; and though Paul and Timothy
are dead and gone (forgottentoo almost by many) yet Paul's sentence here shall
reach and overtake them. They who have delivered up the Forts of Christ, and
the strengths of the Church, into the hands of Satan, stand (in foro Dei)
delivered up to Satan themselves.

Lastly, because I would not altogether despair of the return of the worst of
these. Paul had yet some hopes left that these might learn not to blaspheme.
And some possibility 1 Timothy 1. 20.
there is, that even they who are already taken captive by Satan, may recover
themselves by repentance, and come to the acknowledging of the truth, out of
these snares of the Devil. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
So I entreat these men, if they have not altogether made a total shipwreck of
faith and conscience, to look well to themselves, whether their preaching be
not more out of envy and strife, to add affliction to Paul's Phil. 1. 15. 16.
hands, than out of love and sincerity to strengthen Paul's hands? and whether
they seek not more to discourage the shepherds, and scatter the flocks, to
draw Disciples after themselves, than to bring their Disciples unto Christ
Jesus the great shepherd?

Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord Jer. 48. 10.
negligently: But more accursed he that does it Deceitfully.

Secondly, To conclude, the other and last part of the Ministers charge is,
That he Doctrinally look to good Conscience as the principal part of his
Pastoral Charge in respect of others. Take heed to thy self, and to thy
Doctrine. You that have entered the Lists, see you make good this Warfare: Let
this be your Study, Care, Business, to be acquainted with the Nature, Offices,
Work, Businesses, Impediments, Helps, Friends, Enemies, Diseases, Cures of
Conscience. Seek in all your Sermons, Conferences, Writings, Debates,
Discourses, to Inform, Direct, Convince, Satisfy, Resolve and Stablish
Conscience. Still strive to speak to Conscience, to thy own first, and then to
thy Brothers.

This is the most prevalent and comfortable Preaching, when we do not beat the
Air, and study to speak only (...), or (...): but (...). Not face to face,
and from the mouth to the ear, but heart to heart, and eye to eye. By this
means, warmth comes upon the dead Shunamites son, from the greater warmth of
the Prophet. This the lively and Evangelical preaching. Let Conscience be thy
Study, Library, Concordance. Let Conscience be thy Text, thy Doctrine, thy Use.
Let Conscience be thy first and last and all. Eat up this little Book, and
receive it into thy bowels, then Prophecy. To study Books makes the Scholar.
To study Men makes the Statesman. To study the Times makes the Politician. To
study thy Conscience makes the good Christian. To study thine own Conscience
first, and then thy peoples, makes the able and accomplished Minister.

ERRATA.
Page 22. lin. 32. for Uniformity read Unanimity. p. 106. in the margin, read,
Sed Pharisaei non-sunt infirmi, sed malitiosi calumniarores, pertinaces
nebulones Jubet Dominus ne de eorum scandalo sint soliciti. Other mistakes will
not much disturb the sense: what they be, either pardon or amend.

PErlegi hunc librum, cui titulus est Good Conscience the strongest Hold: In
quo nihil reperio sanae et Orthodoxae fidei contrarium, sed quam plurima quae
doctrinam de Conscientia erudite acute et perspicue illustrant, quaeque ad
vitam pie instituendam maxim conducunt. Faculatem igitur concedo ut typis
mandetur.

December. 17. 1649. THO: TEMPLE. blazon or coat of arms


