THE FALSE ALARM OR, An Answer to a Libell lately published, entitled, AN
ALARVM TO THE HOUSE OF LORDS, Against their Insolent Usurpation of the Commons
Liberties, and the Rights of this Nation.

Wherein the Insolency and lying vanities of the Author or Authors, is
described, the Liberty of the Subject discussed, and the Just Rights of the
LORDS vindicated.

Mendacii nomine continentur Assentatores Calumniatores, infidi consilarii,
perversi educatores, qui Fontes sunt fere Malorum omnium, quibus sursum deorsum
turbatur vita mortalium. 2 TIMOTHY 5. 8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these men also resist the Truth, Men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the Faith.

Written by S. SHEPHERD.

London, Printed for John Hardesty, at the Sign of the Blackspread Eagle in
Duck-Lane, 1646.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, This Pamphlet lately coming into my hands, and I perusing the
same, finding it notoriously seditious, could not in reference to the glory of
God, and in thankfulness to our Magistrates, but proceed to a brief
confutation thereof; not out of a mind desirous of further debate, for I could
cry out from the bottom of my heart, with Severinus the Dane, Infelix
mortalitas, inutilibus quaestionibus ac Disceptationibus vitam traducimus.
Unhappy men as we are, we spend our days in unprofitable questions, and
disputations; but woe to them by whom offenses are given; and, Mutos nasci and
omni scientia egere satins fuisset, quam sic in propriam perniciem insanire, it
had been much better for some of them to have been born dumb, and altogether
illiterate, then so far to dote on their own destruction; and yet it were a
work worthy of applause, if some second Persius would not only rebuke, but
lay open the wickedness of this last and worst of ages, which does even make
me to stand amazed to survive in, living as if I lived not, to see how some men
wholly led by affection, the guide of fools, to admire and extol one man's
gifts to the clouds, sleighting and vilifying another far more deserving; to
behold the inconsiderate multitude, like so many Dogs in a Country Town, if
one bark all the rest bark also, not minding the cause; to see a Scholar
crouch, and be ridden and trampled on by an illiterate peasant, and like
another Plaums turn an hand-mill, to see a Faulkner or Huntsman get better
wages then a Student, a spruce Lawyer get more in an hour then a plain
Philosopher in a month; to see the wise thrust forth, while fools are ushered
in; but I perhaps proceed too far and may be censured by some to be too sharp
and satyricall; but if any man be offended

-- Licuit semperque licebit
Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis.
It lawful was of old, and will be aye
To speak of vice, but of the name not say.
Now if thou shall be desirous to know the name of the Author whose Libell I
shall answer, the truth is I cannot inform thee of that I know not; some
ascribe it to Lilburne, but the variety of repar^s leaves nothing certain: but
it is certain whoever he was that was the Author thereof, he had an heart full
fraught and boiling ore with malice and corruption, one harboring a greater
quantity of folly then he surmised; for though the Author throughout his
Pamphlet bring many railing accusations, yet the wise will easily discern he
has done both foolishly and unadvisedly; and not he alone, but his fellow
Lilburne^, with their accomplices, though they are not all alike so evilly bent,
yet

Ille finistrorsum, hic dextrorsum, unus utrique
Error, sed variis illudit partibus omnes.
One leanes on this, another on that wall,
It Is the same error that deludes them all.
And indeed it is greatly to be wondered at, that these men being so frequent in
Scripture, as appears by their Arguments, when they wrest the word, should not
be convicted of their errors; but were there not such, how should the Scripture
be fulfilled, which says, In the last times many shall depart from the truth;
that some shall privily refuse to obey Magigrates, and speak evil of
Dignities, that they shall have itching ears, and despising the true Ministers
of God, heap to them Teachers. These places considered, may cause us to look
up to Heaven, and thank our gracious God, that has not made us partakers of
their crimes, and to desire him to be our supporter and guide, to the end we be
not sunken under the pressures of calamity, or being freed there from, lose not
our souls and bodies, while we wander in this labyrinth of Ills, the World.
Thus Gentle Reader, desiring thy favorable acceptance of this Tract, I commit
thee to his protection that made thee, and died for thee, I remain,

Thine, as thou art mine, S. S.

AN Answer to a Libell, lately published, entitled, An Alarm to the House of
LORDS, against their insolent usurpation of the Commons Liberties and Rights of
this Nation, etc.
I Remember a pretty fable of an ancient author, bearing in my opinion a most
excellent moral. There was, says he, a great contention once about the
weather, the Seamen complaining of contrary winds, when those of the high
Countries desired rain, and those of the valleys Sunshining days; each party
offered up orisons to Jove; Jupiter sent them word by Mercury, THEN WHEN THEY
HAD ALL DONE, THE WEATHER SHOULD BE, AS IT HAD BEEN; and it will even so fall
out with all our complainers and murmurers, that when they have wearied
themselves, to procure the fulfilling of their fond fancies, they have spent
their time in vain, and God guides his Church as before. But to the matter we
intend.

The wisdom of our own age is the foolishness of another, the time present
ought not to be preferred to the policy that was, but the policy that was to the
time present; the power of the Nobility perhaps something withered, and the
power of the People in the flower; the care to content them would not be
neglected, were there no ends but Political, which ought to be entire and
fatherly. Now were it so that the Lords were guilty of this crime of neglecting
the welfare of the people, and of a desire to accrue to themselves Sovereignty
over them, which no man on earth can truly affirm, then it were seasonable
and very convenient to warn them, and to desire a speedy remedy; yet this ought
to be done discreetly and with reverence as to our Rulers and Governors, and
not rashly, and using contumelious threats.

But for as much, as I said before, as there is no man on earth that can justly
accuse them of the premises, save a sort of malicious, evil, and sordid
persons, desirous of trouble and innovation, who because they are not suffered
to proceed in their destructive courses, rail and exclaim against their
opposers, and being desperate themselves, use all art both by writing and
speaking, to involve as many as they may into their desperate condition; which
has been the constant course of seditious and rebellions persons in all ages,
who did they but know the filth and corruption they harbor, would ^^p up their
own breasts to let it forth, and according to the Divine Philosopher, and
excellent Poet,

Seneca in Herc. Oet.
O si pateant pectora Divitum,
Quantos intus sublimis agit
Fortuna metus! Brutia coro
Pulsante fretum, mitior unda est.
O that their breasts were but conspicuous,
How full of fear within, how furious,
The narrow Seas are not so boisterous.
But let them proceed and make up their measure of sin; the Lord in his good
time will open their eyes, and discover to them their evil ways, or else will
restrain their strength and fury, and that for the good of his Church. Proceed
we now to confute our cavilling Libeller. He begins thus, after an audacious
manner, speaking to the House of Lords,

In the first place we demand of you a reason, why you which are such
^rrogaters of Titles of Honor, should of all others slight him so far as to
s^^le him only John Lilburne, though you know him to be a true born Gentleman;
nor Lieutenant Colonel, though you know him to be a valiant and faithful
Soldier for his Countries liberties.

CHARON in Lucian as he wittily feints, was conducted by MERCURY to such a
place where he might see all the world at once; and after he had sufficiently
viewed and looked about, MERCURY would needs know of him what he had observed.
He told him he saw a rast multitude and a (...); their habitations like
Mole-hils, the men like Emmets; He could discern Cities like so many hives of
Bees, wherein every Be had a sting, and they did naught else but sting one
another. Some domineering like Hornets bigger then the rest, some like filthy
Waspes, others as Drones; over their heads were hovering a confused number of
perturbations, HOPE, FEAR, ANGER, AVARICE, IGNORANCE, etc. and a multitude of
Diseases hanging over, which they still pulled on their heads; some were
brawling, some fighting, riding, running, solicit ambientes, ^^llid^
litiga^tes, for toys, and trifles, and such momentary things, their Towns and
Provinces mere factions, Rich against poor, poor against rich, Nobles
despised by Artificers, etc.

Aptly and to excellent purpose is the world compared by Lucian to a garden of
Bees; but more aptly may I apply this tale to the Kingdom of England, our
habitations indeed, to our fight the strongest, but Mole-hils; for a blast of
wind overturneth them; our selves cannot be fitlier compared then to Emmets,
for if the anger of the Lord do but blow upon us we wither away, and are gone;
our Cities may fitly be compared each to a Be hire* wherein we agree not like
that prudent Nation; nor do we employ our selves to suck Honey from flowers,
but desire rather to suck our neighbors blood, each envying his neighbor
surviveth, and some so wretchedly inclined, that they could be content to part
with all their substance that another might become poor; those ravenous
devourers of the poor, that eat up the people as it were bread, may fitly be
compared to Hornets, that sing P^^ns to Bacchus in Taverns, accompanied with A
Whore.
La^^ and A Minstrill
Zenophilus, that wear the Kingdoms spoils in their ears, and dance on the
ruins of a Nation; those now placed in authority to procure the peoples good,
and yet as tyrants play Rex over them, may fitly he compared to Waspes, that
sit as chair-men, dooming men and their causes, so as may most tend to their
gain and benefit; those Neutralians that sit still and worship no God save
Ceres and Bacchus, that cry out with Horace, broach the Falerne Wine, and let
things hap as they will; each of these discern not the confused number of
perturbations hover over their heads, which will certainly descend upon them,
which punishments they shall not be able to evade. But to our libeller.

In dealing with this libeller I know

Quo quisque est major, magis est placabills (...),
Et faciles motus men's generosa capit.
A greater man were sooner pacified,
A Noble spirit's quickly pacified.
But for that the vulgar are more taken with vulgar works, then with the writs
of the wise, and knowing it is expedient they should be undeceived, and see the
vanity of their chieftaines, therefore, Whereas the libeller, in the name of
his accomplices, We, accounts it as a disparagement to them, for that Lilburne
has not his Titles.
Titles bestowed on him, gained more by fortune then merit: I answer, that the
most famous Consuls of Rome, sometime brought through the City in triumph, have
upon occasion of their default and per^^liousnesse, been led through the same
City in bands: is it not stange than a fellow of no worth^ such an one as
Lilburne should occasion as (...) at trouble in London as ever Cataline did to
Rome? but we have as valiant and prudent ^iceros, who I doubt not will ere long
suppress this faction, and bring them to as condign punishment as (...) that
di^urber and his accomplices. And whereas the Libeller charge it on the
consciences of the Lords, that they know him to be true borne Gentleman, I
answer, that if it were granted, yet only virtuous and pious actions are
symptoms of Gentil^^^ and i^ we should can Lilburnes seditious proceedings, by
them we could guess him to be no other but a branch sprung from the ancient
stock of renowned IR^S; but it is evident to all the would that Lilburne is not
of Gentle blood, but descended of an unworthy family, being in his minority an
obscure apprentice of London and if the Reader desire to be further informed, I
refer him to a Treatise of mine, entitled, The Famers Famd, being an answer to
a pair of Treatises, written in the behalf of Lilburne, th^one e^tit^led The
Just man in Bonds, the other A Pearl in a Dunghill. I now proceed.

But if Titles were of any value, or Honor of any esteem, he deserves the
Title of Lieutenant Colonel, and the Honor he has gotten in the field, in the
defense of his Countries liberties, as well as any of you your Titles of
Honor, if (...) better, and more and more worthily; for by what ^^^ns many of
you came by yours is very uncertain.

See the ridiculous ignorance of the libeller, worthy to be laughed at, he
says, if Titles were of any value; that Titles are of worth, we are informed
by God, speaking by the mouth of his servants. St. Paul counsels the Romans
to Honor those worthy thereof, the Elders, or rather Leaders that rule well,
are worthy of double Honor; our Savior says, Give Tribute to whom Tribute
belongs, Honor to whom Honor is due; with infinite other places, which for
brevity sake I omit. So that Titles and Honor is of value, and ought to be
valewed, has been ever, and aye will be respected by the virtuous, and those
that contenanc and disesteem, detract not from them, but work ruin to
themselves, as St. Paul says, sin against their own souls. And whereas the
Pamphleter says, that he deserves the Title of Lieutenant Colonel, the Honor
he has gotten in the field in the defense of his Countries Liberties, I
answer, that that Honor had been worthily bestowed on him, had he gone forth
out of a sincere intent to fight for his Country, and for the Kingdoms good:
but his intent in arming himself was rather to defend and secure himself from
arrests of his creditors, then to offend, and bring low the enemy, as I have
already made apparent to the world in my answer to two Libels aforementioned.
Comparisons are odious; the audacious libeller sticks not to parallel
Lilburnes Honor with the Lords, and goes about to prove his Honor
equivolent, nay transcendent to theirs. Was ever known such brazen impudence?
the ages to come will stand amazed, and read this truth but as a fiction.
Neither is this sufficient, but the libeller proceeds, not stinting till he
arrive at the very height of evil, for by what means some of you came by
yours, (says he) meaning the Lords, is very uncertain. Though your ignorance
falsely inform, yet the wise know and can avouch by what means the house of
Peers have attained to their worthily deserved Honors, who can derive their
pedigree, and make it apparent to the world, that they are the sons of those
men whose Heroic actions in defense of their Country deserved no less but a
far greater recompense. But I amplify too much upon so absurd an objection.

And therefore in the charge you bring against him, if yet you will persist,
afford him his Title; use him not altogether as a slave, though you have made
Newgate his habitation, and from thence have, removed him to the Tower of
London; whether to murder him privately from the peoples knowledge we cannot
tell, we judge little less.

The charge brought against him the world knows, which generally talks of
his folly, and it is not needful to set down; he is become a byword to the
sons of men; and doubtless it will be Proverb in the next age, that when
any man shall be notoriously known to be seditious, he shall be said to be, as
FACTIOUS and REBELLIOUS as ever was LILBURNE. But the Libeller is netled,
'cause the Lords in their warrant afforded him not his Title; know fool that
men honorable indeed, have as a reward of their misdemeanors been ere now
degraded; and is it such a breach for this upstart to have a Title, whereof he
is not worthy, debarred him? he has forfeited his empty Title; a trivial
power bestowed it on him, but a power full and absolute takes it away. (But
the Libeller proposes he might not be used like a slave) his usage hitherto
has been with lenity, such as the nature of his crime merited not; and did not
the Lords out of Nobleness of their nature, limmit their power, the weight of
his Irons should weigh him down, (as his sin will once,) even beneath the
center; he should be brought forth, and either make public recantation of his
high contempt, or else undergo exemplary punishment, what he and all other
libellers and disturbers ought to suffer by the known law of the Land, I have
In my answer to two Libells, the one entitled the just man in bonds, the other
a p^arle in a dunghill.
elsewhere shown, and therefore here shall not insert. But see the prodigious
baseness of the libeller, he would have the world believe; that the removal
of Lilburne from Newgate to the Tower is out of some secret intent the Lords
have to murder him privately there. Sirrah, know, the greater crime, the
greater punishment; and the more obdurate the malefactor is, the more sure
ought be his bands; but the certain cause of his commitment to the Tower, I
conceive is, for that his offenses are treasonable. He that withstandeth the
Kings Vicegerent, opposes the King, and indeed God, from whom he deriveth his
power, so long as things lawful are commanded by him; and he that resists
the King commanding, as aforesaid, things lawful, and not destructive to
himself, is a Traitor, and as a Traitor ought to suffer. But see yet more
impudencies.

But by this we may discerns your unsufferable encroachments upon our common
Rights, daily increasing upon us, which in time, if not prevented, will wholly
enslave and vassalage us all; for it is come to this already that the Freemen
of England cannot go to see their Fellow Commoner, without bazzard of their
Freedoms; and it is an act so unreasonable and destructive to us, that we
cannot choose but take notice of it, and let you know, that We cannot, neither
will we suffer such intolerable affronts at your hands.

Calvin in his the preface.
book entitled, Instructio adversus libertines says, Cum scelesta, and
perniciosa, aliqua secta pullulare O cepit praesertim vero cum auges^it, eorum
quo Deus ad aedificandum, Ecclesiam constituit, officium est ire obv^am ac
fortifer, resisiere priusquam, ad perdenda and e^rrumpend^ omnia vires
sumps^rit. When any pernicious sect begins to arise, but chiefly when it grows,
it is the duty of them whom God has appointed to build up his Church to oppose
it strongly, and to appear against it before it get strength to corrupt and
destroy all. Now cause the house of Lords has done as this holy man advises,
nay as the sacred Scriptures command, to wit, have suppressed the Author of a
most pernicious sect; or if they will not yield to that, the Broacher of new
heresies and blasphemies, Lilburne, therefore they unsufferably encroach on the
Commons Rights, and intend to bring them into slavery and bondage. I know the
Sectaries and their abettors will not stick to say, that I WILL RUN WITH THE
WIND, that I am a timeserver, and sooth up the Lords in hope of gain; but let
such know there is as great enmity betwixt flattery and my nature as between
the Wolf and the Sheep. I know that Ministers first care ought to be of the
Name of God, and next of the salvation of others, and I resolve with Horum
alterum, cum intercidere, necesse fit pereat p^pa, pereant impii Magistratus
Luther in c. 9. Hos.
pereant impiorum dogmatim patroni, pereat totus mandus, and salvetur Deo sua
gloria suum verbum su^^ cultus amen. When any thing is done by which of
necessity either of those must suffer and fall to the ground, let the Pope
perish, let wicked Magistrates perish, let the patrons of wicked opinions
perish, let the whole World perish, and let Gods glory, his Church, and his
Worship be saved. But the Libeller proceeds, and shows that already they
are in some sort enslaved for, says he, a Commoner of England cannot go to see
his fellow etc. Let any capable of sense judge whether it be convenient that
one convicted of transcendent crimes ought to have his combiners and abbettor
have free access to him, by whose poisonous Rhetoric he may not only be more
hardened in evil, but also may as Lilburne in his inprisonment formerly has
done, to the very great disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom.
deliver to them papers stuffed with language of dangerous consequence to be
dispersed abroad, as may occasion the subvertment and destruction of this
Nation, and the deterring of these men from their brother in evil, is thought
by them to be an act so unreasonable and destructive to them, that they cannot
but take notice of it, and publish to the world in print, that they cannot nor
will not suffer such unsufferable Affronts; that the act is not unreasonable,
but just, I have already proved, but that it is destructive to their
proceedings I shall easily believe; and for that intent it is performed, to
wit, to impede the growth of evil, and hinder the corrupting of many; but for
that it is said they cannot nor will not suffer (as they presumptuously term
them) such intolerable affronts: all from thence to be gathered is, that these
intend to rebel, and could they have Lilburne for leader, he would play Judas
of Galile, and lead forth; but which of them would return? but they speak
their desires not their abilities, the points of their spears are dulled, and
the edges of their Swords rebated.

But he has got a good cause, and all good people that desire not to live by
oppression of others are of his side, and that your Lordships will find, for
all these things will be laid open as the sun, and every man will see
wherefore you call his Books scandalous, seditious, and dangerous Pamphlets;
and why the Judges, Lawyers, and Monopolists are his deadly Adversaries, even
because he deals plainly betwixt you all, and the people, whom you labor by
all means jointly to keep in bondage and vassalage to your wills.

The greatest Heretics, Traitors, or Conspirators that ever yet suffered
condign punishment have pretended a good cause, was their prop, etc. and for
that the Libeller says (all good people are on his side, and that the house of
Lords will find) I suppose he means such good people, as under pretense of
goodness act the very worst of wickedness, seditious, slanderous, and
reprobated persons, no other can nor will adhere to Lilburne in his seditious
and unparaleld rebellious courses; and these I hope (saying with the Libeller)
the house of Lords will find, and bring to condign punishment. I hope they
will make a discovery, and find out, the seditious Author of a slanderous
Libell, entitled, EVERY MAN'S RIGHTS, or Englands PERSPECTIVE, the Author of a
contemptuous and disdainful reviling Paper, entitled SEVERAL VOTES OF TENDER
CONSCIENCES, at the bottom of which Paper is portraied a Pope, a Presbyter,
termed Antichristian, and a Prelate; all these, each a dagger in hand, stabbing
at an heart furnished with wings and termed TENDER CONCIENCE, the Author of a
Paper that strikes at Church and State, Emblematically called the WATCHMANS
WARNING PIECE, the Emblem is, a man issuing forth a wood, his weapons
abandoned, and cast beneath a Tree, when on a suddenly he is assailed by a
Dragon, a Leopard, and a Serpent; the Author presumes to explain his Emblem
thus: would you think Independents could versifie?

And what is by this EMBLEM represented?
The STATE, by Plots of Papists circumvented
Shall I demonstrate still, to make you know,
That these ( Papists
P Presbiters.
P Prelates.
P) are Papists all a row.
The Dragons head, the Pope does represent
His sharpt tongued His sting.
shaft, curses which he does vent
His teeth are envy, and his horns are Power
The Dragons body, is Romes Church that WHORE.
The spotted Leopard also has his doom
This body pleads, for Prelates brats of Rome
His jaws are malice, head EPISCOPAL
A gaping mouth, teeth, paws tyrannical.
The crooked Serpent, creepes upon the earth
An Antichristian PRESBITER, by birth
His head's from Rome, his Tail and Body so
With them to aye perdition, he shall go.
But to the Libeller who says, that things shall be laid open as the Sun and
all men shall see why his Books are called scandalous, seditious, and dangerous
Pamphlets.

Things need not be made more evident then they are, and all men not besotted,
see and know why and on what ground his Books are termed justly, SCANDALOVS
SEDITIOVS and DANGEROUS Pamphlets, but the Libeller sticks not to maintain
most eroneus paradoxes; ineptae and fabulosae nugae, throughout his whole
Pamphlet whereof this is a grand one, but says he, his chief enemies are the
Clergy, Judges, and Lawyers, and Monopolists, O unheard of insolency, he
ranketh the Clergy and Judges, with the Monopolists and Lawyers; all Clergymen
Judges Lawyers and all men of what craft or faculty soever, ought as they
tender their welfare in this world, and that to come, to abhor, abominate,
and declare against, the seditious, rebellious, and destructive proceedings of
Lilburne, and his wicked accomplices, but see he goes further, and makes the
Lords Judges Lawyers and Monopolists ^ombiners together, using their utmost
endeavor, to bring the people into bondage; alas alas, my friends, what need
any go about to enslave you; who seek all the means possible to fetter your
selves; and I may boldly averr such is your ignorance accompanied with self
conceit, that you differ in a small manner from the Atheists, all your life is
that you love to go to Church with great Bibles under your arm, but he that
knows best how to judge, says, cor doloplenum, sonant vitium percussa
malign, you will now and then, Dare operam Augustino, read Austin frequent
Sermons, and yet professed usurers, mere gripes, tota vitae ratio Epicurea
est, all your life is Epicurisme, and Atheism, come to Church all day and lie
with a Curtesan at night.

Qui curios simulant, and Bachinalia vivunt. But of you enough from whom we
have felt too much.

And therefore it will be good for your Lordships, in this charge to reflect
upon your selves, the people are now quick sighted, not easily deluded, if it
were not so Mr. Lilburne were in a sad case, for here is no less then the
whole house of Peers his accusers etc.

Now the Libeller, having before threatened the Lords and showed them the
dangers they have run into, by censuring and imprisoning Lilburne, whom the
Libeller is not ashamed; to term in the title of his libell (DEFENDOR OF THE
FAITH) I say having showed them into what a praemunire they are fallen, he now
gives his judgment; and advises the Lords, to reflect on themselves, (for
the people are quick sighted) I wish it were so indeed, and that they had
Eagles eyes, to discern the vanity and wickedness of their seducers, who
under pretense of advising them, in matters necessary and behovefull for them,
incite them to strife, malice, and sedition, the only way to work their own
and this Kingdoms ruins; and it is to be admired as a sign and evident token
of Gods unspeakable mercy, that we are yet a people, for as the Author of an
excellent Poem says. Entitled an expostulatory answer, to a derisory Question.


If waste Jerusalem were made
Who therein but three Factions had
This Island, how may we deplore
Wherein are three times three, and more.
But I know and can assure the world, that no people whatsoever they that
desire to tread the paths of godliness, but their sight does serve them and to
their grief they behold the unpleasing ways to God, and the destructive ways
to this Nation that Lilburn and his accomplices take; and for that the Libeller
places his considence in the people, and says but for them, Lilburne were in
a sad case, for says he here is no less then the whole house of Peers his
accusers, O vain confidence, if the people as you say, (and as I fairly hope)
will not be easily deluded, alas your hopes are frustrate, remember the
proverb; they may perchance some of them be so evilly inclined as to allow of
Lilburnes proceedings, yea and to love him therefore, but notwithstanding you
will find they love themselves better, and will not to save him from due
punishment, hazard their own welfare, but let us proceed.

You will find that you are not yet Lords over the PARLIAMENT, you have not
the least power to dispose of the moneys of the Commonwealth, much less to
imprison men's persons at your pleasure.

Folly mixed with impudence is unsufferable and a Liar in Print to be
abhominated, it is the maine plot, and chief desire of the Sectaries, could
they have their desires, to raise a discord and a difference betwixt the two
houses of Parliament, this the Libeller goes about to procure; saying, and as
it were menacing the Lords, you will find that you are not yet Lords over the
Parliament (meaning the honorable House of Commons) they have learnt
Machiavills maxim, divide and impera devide and prevail, but the ever to be
honored Lords and Commons, are so surely tied together in that Gordian knot of
the Covenant, they stand as a rock, fixed in the sea, against which though the
waves dash and murmur, as being repel'd, they remain sollid and unmovable,
but the Libeller gives an instance of some division betwixt the Houses, for
says he, you have not the least power, to (dispose of the money of the
commonwealth) no, why then does the Commons send up to the Lords for their
concurrence, ere any loan of money is levied or disbursed, therefore his is
notoriously false and subbornd, raised on purpose to bring the Lords into
contempt, and for the inprisoning men's persons, their power and authority
avoucheth, and they are enabled to punish notorious offenders, such as Lilburne
and his accomplices; but how long will ye descent O ye seditious; me thinks the
tumults, uproars, anguish, and dangers that attend upon it might persuade you,
the more you contend the more you shall be involved in a labyrinth of woes,
it is an Hydras head, the more you strive the more you may, for my own part I
have written in answer to you, knowing the most obdurate have been convinced of
their error, Nemo desperet meliora lapsus.

And now for as much as I have little reason to expect but as is your manner,
to all whom you affect not, to be vilified in print, but this is my buckler.

Integritas virbusque suo manimine tata
Non patet adversae morsibus invidiae
Virtue and integrity, are their own fence.
Care not for envy, or what comes from thence.
I say do even as your malevolent spirits shall prompt you; while I admire
your folly, and lament your punishments.

FINIS.

