SEVERAL VOTES OF TENDER CONSCIENCE.
Upon sight and consideration of the Votes of Parliament Dated Die Veneris 20.
Feb! 1645. and upon the Ordinance Dated Die Sabbathi, 14. Martij. 1645.
entitled an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For
keeping of Scandalous persons from the Sacrament of the Lords supper, the
enab^ing of Congregations, for the choice of Elders, And supplying defects in
former Ordinances and directions of Parliament concerning Church Government.

Resolved by Tender Conscience with the consent of Gods holy Word and Spirit
assembled together.

That the word of Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament without the Word of
Lord of Heaven and Earth, is no warrant for Tender Conscience to join with
ungodly Parishes in the choice of Spiritual Elders or Officers to govern Gods
Spiritual house.

Resolved etc. That the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament have the
Civil Government over the bodies and estates, in Civil things: But the Lord
Jesus in Spiritual.

Resolved etc. That the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and the
Parish Churches and Chapels therein have not been yet proved to Tender
Conscience to be Churches of Christ. Nor have the Directio^s that passed both
Houses bearing Date 19. August, 1645. Nor the supplying Ordinance since, nor
has any thing of that nature been porved to be according to the Word of God.
And that Tender Conscience never read of Classes, nor of Parochial
Congregations in the Bible.

Resolved etc. That therefore such election of Parochial and Congregationall
Elders, the warning thereof, and the Sermon preparitory before, is (in the
judgment of Tender Conscience) a taking Gods name in vain.

Resolved etc. That the Mayor part of the Parishes, being ungodly, will choose
ungodly Elders. That [all] such as have taken the National Covenant are not
sit to choose Godly Elders* That many persons under age, and servants without
Families are more Godly then their parents and Masters that keep families, and
in Christ's Church not to be accepted against in the choice of Church Officers,
seeing all Saints, both Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, male and female, are
all one in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. 28. and that his Saints are not to have the
faith of Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory in respect of persons. Iam. 2. 1.

Resolved etc. That the Lord Major and Cities presidents, (or any preseden^s)
which tend, or have tended, to the taking away, or obstruction of the setlement
or establishment of the ancient bounds of Liberty of Conscience, cannot amount
in the least, to be any binding presedent for Tender Conscience.

Finally, it is Resolved, etc. That the Lord of Tender Conscience, is LORD
above al Lords and Laws, and never made any man lawless, nor Ordained any to
bring any thing into his Worship but that which first was his own by
institution: And that therefore all Acts, Ordinances, Votes, Protestations,
Declarations etc. made or which hereafter, without the Word of God, shall be
made, by any person, or persons whatsoever; shall be of no force against Tender
Conscience, in the worship of God, And that though such humane Acts Ordinances
etc. take hold of all those men that bear the mark of the Beast, yet Tender
Conscience, and the friends thereof, shall be exempted therefrom

May the first* 1646. CHRISTIAN MEEKNES,
Ordered to be Printed Clark to Tender Conscience.
The more ye wound my dear and precious Heart The more y^ seered on's shall
feel most bitter smart. All three to Injure me as mortal foe Encaseth yo^
eternal woe, woe, woe C.8 Reve: v. 13

Tender Conscience Religiously affected Papa Antichristian Presbiter Prelat
Latin Mass (...) Liturgy




