Britannia Rediviva: Or the Proper and Sovereign REMEDY For the Healing and
Recovering of these Three distracted Nations; As it was prescribed In a SERMON
Preached in the Minster at York, at the Assizes there held on Thursday morning,
August 9. 1649.

Before the Right Honorable Judges, the Right Worshipful the High Sheriff, the
Justices of Peace, Gentry, and others of the County of York

By John Shaw, Master of Arts, sometimes of Christ's College in Cambridg, and
now preacher of Gods Word at Kingston upon Hull.

^rov. 11. 5, 6, 18, 19. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way.
The righteousness of the upright shall de^^^er them. The wicked works a
dece^^ful work; but to him that sows righteousacss shall be a sure reward.
Rightcousness tends to life.

Isai. 3^. 17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness (...) and ass^^ance for ever.

Isai 33 14 15 Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He that
makes righteously -- That despises the ga^^ of oppression, and shakes his
hands from holding of bribes.

L^^^er to G^b^^us. Cupio ego inveniri Christi and ecclesi^^ suae fidelis, ^^
prudens esse non potuerim Minister.

Christo servimus; Christo credentibus uni nostra haec scri^^^damus, caetera
turba vale. Musculus in Matthew.

London, Printed by Robert White for Nathaniel Brooks, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

To the Right Honorable John Puleston Esquire, One of the Justices of the Court
of Common Pleas; and Francis Throp, one of the Barons of the Public Exchequer,
Judges of Assize for the Northern Circuit, And to the Right Worshipful Sir
William Saint Quintin Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of York; and all the
Faithful Justices of Peace of the same County. J. S. wishes Righteousness and
Peace by Jesus Christ.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
WHat the French Chronicler says of his Contrymen in the Preface to his
History, much more truly may be said by us of this Nation, viz. That we have
lived in a time of miracles, and our posterity will hardly believe the wonders
done in our days; and every year as devils and men have heightened their rage
and malice against the Church, the more God has multiplied the loaves and
fishes of his mercies wonderfully to usward. I beseech your Honors and
Worships to help us so far as you can; that what prayer has got, praises to
God, and justice to men, may keep and wear: You may remember that while Judge
Th^^p
one of your Lordships was executing justice impartially here the last Assizes;
that costly Castle of pontefract (being the last strong hold which the enemy
had in all this Nation, as your Honors mentioned in your Charge the last
Assizes, which is deservedly since Printed) was delivered up into the
Parliaments hands, and thereby this poor shattered County (which has had
Armies in it constantly now these ten years together, cleared up from any open
enemies in Arms: And now this Assizes while you are still upon the execution of
justice, the Lord has sent us in the joyful news of such wondrous works which
his right hand has wrought in Ireland, August 2. as makes us all like them
that dream. While the Church was praying for Peter, Act. 12. God cast in Peter
amongst them, as the answer of their prayers; and when the wrestling flock of
Christ (at least many of them) had not only in private, but in public been
weeping, fasting, and praying for Ireland, August 1. the Lord of hosts did by a
handful of men that so his hand alone might be seen, and have the glory) work a
mavelous deliverance for that poor Nation of Ireland, August 2. The shield,
the sward, and the battle were broken in Salem, Psalm. 76. 1, 2, 3. God
sometimes says, That men were too many to work withal, never that they were
too few, Judges 7. 2. Go on I beseech you Right Honorable in doing justice (and
therein exalting the Nation) freely in that way committing the event to God,
notwithstanding all carnal objections. You may perhaps remember those verses
that were writ over the Court of Justice in Zant. Hic locus odit, amat, punit,
conservat, honorat,
Nequtiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.


True it is, that God has taken away by death, many godly worthies in these
our times, both in Church and State; but if we do as the London Clerks in their
weekly Bills, set the Christenings against the Burials, I mean compare the
young ones coming on in University, City and Country, with those lately
translated hence, those I think will exceed these. True it is likewise (as in
the Sermon is mentioned) that of latter times, Heresies have much overspred
this Nation (a sad case I confess:) But if we likewise consider how far the
glorious Gospel has spread within these last seven years into those places
where in Truth and Purity before it came not, and shines more bright in some
places, where before it did come; as also in the just liberty afforded to
humble conscientious men since these times, I think our gains (a primo ad
ultimam, if we judge super totam materiam) exceed our losses: Heretofore, in
many places how were Sermons on Lords days in the afternoon, Lectures,
Exercises, etc. forbidden? How were men (if suspected for Puritans) made
offenders for a word, Isal. 29. 21. If men did meet together to weep and pray
(though with most integrity) on the Churches behalf, it was well if they
escaped scorching, either in their Persons, Liberties, or Estates. We grumble
that things go on no faster, when yet our selves have hands in plucking off the
Chariot wheels; we are not content that the Lord do his own work his own way,
but are too much of Na^mans spirit, would have God limited to our time and
pace, 2 Kings 5. 11, 13. not justly considering that man's extremity is Gods
opportunity, that Jerusalems wall is usually built in the most troublous time,
Dan. 9. 24. and 12. 1. The wise God often times goes forward when he seems Genesis
42. 38. and 45. 9, 10, etc.
to us to go most backward, as in the case of old Jacob and his children, when
they were most driven out of hope, then were the greatest mercies brought
about. While Moses was a great Courtier, and the Kings great favorite, he
never delivered Israel, but when banished, had been forty years a poor
shepherd, and had lost his favor and Courtship, then does God use him in that
great work. My Lords, God has hitherto carried you on courageously, and
undauntedly in the Cause of God, and the Commonwealth, ride on in Gods way and
prosper: Judge Thorp
One of your Honors I have known intimately a long time, and am not willing to
say what I know to be truth concerning you, lest the carping world should say
that I give flattering titles to men (a thing which Elihu Job 32. 21, 22.
condemns, and which (I thank God) I could never learn, neither in Court nor
Country;) but your justice and integrity are (I am confident) clearly manifest
to the consciences of all who have known your carriages, especially the last
and this Assizes here; notwithstanding all the objections of your riding the
circuit in your own native Country. You have both of you been tried in these
sifting ^^nes, and been found faithful in the grand Affairs of the
Commonwealth. These Notes were preached at the entreaty of Master High
Sheriff, and you my Lords were pleased to own them in public, and my self in
private, and to require them to be Printed, which I the rather am content to
suffer, to testify my obedience to your commands, and to show how much I value
your judgments above my own. I am sure I can do nothing worthy of this
quick-sighted age. I will trouble you Right Honorable and Right Worshipful no
more at present, but will freely pour out my soul at the Throne of Grace to God
for your Protection, Sanctification, and Eternal Salvation; for Gods Spiritual
Blessings within you, and his Prospering Blessings upon your just Endevors, and
humbly subscribe my self,

York, August. 14. 1649. Your Honors and Worships Spiritual Servant, in my
Masters Work, John Shaw.

To the Christian Reader, Especially the Authors Christian Friends at Kingston
upon Hull, Bradfield, Penistone, and Cartmel.
Christian Reader,
THat which grieves my soul at this day, is this, That after so much light of
Gods Word, and so many lashes of Gods Rod, men are generally as unrighteous, as
unjust as ever, and drive on (as much as ever) their own private designs and
ends; men are building castles in the air, while God is pulling down our own
houses at home: How little do many ^^y the public to heart, but while the
common ship is ready (in men's eyes) to sink, many are more busy about their
own private Cabbins then ever: Some cry out against the Cavaliers, others
against the Parliamentiers, but its too apparent in the mean while, there is
too much injustice in some of both sides: Never think that mere names will
uphold us, if we neglect the substance. To you first, my dearly beloved stock
at Hull, Kingston upon Hull.
(who have been, and are to my reverend and dear Brethren, and my self, as our
threshing, and our flore, Isai. 21. 10. as our right eyes) let me commend these
Notes of Justice and Rightcousness: Consider seriously I beseech you, if ever a
poor Town was kept in the hollow of Gods hand, and raised up to Heaven by
Mercies, ye are they; other places have had the mercies of Earth, for trading,
ric^es, etc. depiction of a man reading from a book. The names of the Jury. of
life and death.
but you have had them, and the merc^es of He^ven also, the means of grace
plentifully held out in this place, long before I was born, or you can
remember: Others have ha^ mercies by Land, you, both by Land and Sea; you are
the only Virgin Town that God kept from being ravished and plundered by the
enemy in all the North of England; ^ay, not only from rage abroad, but
treachery within. How has the great God lifted up your head, who not long
since were a poor inconsiderable Fisher-Town, called Wyke in the days of King
Edward the first? but that King (as 1 have it from your Baron Thorp.
Honorable Recorder) seeing this Hamlet situate upon the great River of
Humber, and fitted by nature, both for defense and trade, began first to build
your Walls for defense without, and changed its name into the Kings Town upon
(the River of) Hull; his son King Edward the second finished the Rampire and
Walls began by his Father: King Edward the third first established you to be a
Corporation, and to be governed by a Mayor, and Aldermen; and in his days your
first Mayor was William de la Pool. King Edward the fifth made you a distinct
County, separate from the rest of the County of Yorkshire, and created here a
Sheriff with sundry other privileges. King Henry the eight built here a House
for his particular Residence, as also a Castle and two Block-houses, now of
great use (as I Presace to the three Kingdoms Case.
elsewhere more fully related) and bestowed upon you his sword from his side,
now carried before the Mayor. But yet what are these privileges to those of
Heaven? To that Sword of the Spirit? How much more excellent, and honorable is
it, to be Gods Town, to be Christ's Town, then Kings Town upon Hull? to be
compassed about with a Fathers Love, and with Christ's Righteousness (herein
discovered to you) who is the glory of Heaven, (therefore When Paul would be in
Heaven, it was to be with Christ, as the glory thereof, Phil. 1. 23.) and and
the solace on Earth, (what comfort on Earth if no Sun to shine and give
influence? Christ is that Sun, Matthew. 4. 2.) and the souls life, (for without
Christ, the soul is dead, Ephesians. 2. 1.) I add no more to you at present, but
that Jere. 7. 5. 7. If you thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his
neighbor; then will I cause you to dwell in this place. Together with that
Zach. 7. 9. and 8. 16. be not of those that nec vitia far possunt, ne^
remedia.

To you also my tenderly affected friends, At ^^^d (...)
(the smoke of whose (my Native) soil, I cannot but heartily affect, whatever
your private carriages be to me-ward) let me commend the Jewel of Righteousness
and Justice herein contained. I have lived to see many changes amongst you, I
beseech every one of you, look to your spiritual change by Grace, as the right
way to the blessed change to Glory: I know you take much pains for the Earth, I
beseech you trade more for Heaven; make it appear that you value the means of
Grace, by procuring a faithful godly Ministry among you, and practicing the
Truth revealed. I am confident diverse from amongst you have been sent abroad,
who daily send up wrestling prayers to God for you. How does my soul thirst to
see the knowledge and love of Jesus Christ shine o^t amongst you.

And let me add a few words also to you, Peristone and Ca^tpal.
Whose good and true welfare I long for in the Lord: Be importunate I beseech
you with the Lord, both for the outward means and the inward Grace; let my
affection join you both together (though distant in place Peristone in
Y^^^shire, and Ca^^^d in L^^^sh^re
) in a few exhortations: First, In regard of God, take care you know him, not
only a God, but your God, not an absolute but relative God, see David's and the
Saints propriety in him, Psalm. 48. 14. This God is our God for ever and for
ever; and Thomas Cries, My Lord, and my God, Joh. 20. 28. provide him the
lodging of a broken heart, Isa. 57. 15. A great Lord of Spain was commanded by
the King to lodge ait Ambassador in his own house, which he did, and the next
morning as soon as the Ambassador was gone, he burnt his house, which cost him
many a thousand pounds building; and said, it shall never be said that I kept a
house that ever lodged a Traitor (for so he judged that Ambassador to be;) but
our gracious God is pleased to dwell in such hearts as have been rebellious
against God a long time, and where Satan lodged before him.

Secondly, In regard of Christ, you all can tell of a Christ born at Bethlehem,
and exalted from Mount Olivet to Heaven; but O look to a Christ born w^^h^^ ^a,
Gal. 4. 19. (of which birth you will never report, (...) every that it was no
sooner, 1 Cor. 15. 8.) he will be no Savior to you, if not a King in you, Luke
19. 27. Col. 1. 27. Gal. 2. 20.

Thirdly, In regard of the Word, Know, its not so much the Bible, as thy and my
heart, that is the most proper place for the Word, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. Psalm. 40. 8.
J^ere. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 10. and that there will one day be a Resurrection as
well of Sermons to account for, as of men to give account. O let us read
Sermons preached four or five years ago, in your lives now; let your med^tation
be in his W^rd night and day, Psalm. 1. 2. so shall you bewiser then your
Teachers, then your Enemies, then the anc^ent. Psalm. 119. 98. 99, 100. This is
the duty of Kings, as David, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. of the General, Josh. 1. 8. of
all sorts, Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8. you shall ^
whet or sharpen, i. e. Go over the samethings often, as men do their knife
upon the whe^stone, or their swords they would p^erce withal: Let not the Word
come unto you only, but into you, yea, into the heart. Remember the four sorts
of ground three hal hearers, and one good, Mat. 13.

Fourthly, In regard of sin, take heed as well of spiritual sins as bodily;
Spiritual sins are of ^ times minoris infamiae, but majoris reatus, they are
like a wire run through the heart, though the wound be not so visible, yet more
dangerous then a great gath in the back: Let your care be, not only to avoid
acts of sin, but especially a state of sin. The Saints fall into diverse acts of
sin, (yea in some regard Peter's act was worse then Judas's) but never after
conversion are under a state of sin, and death.

Fifthly, In regard of the Godly, whose judgments are sound for Fundamentals,
and lives humble and holy: Take heed how thou offendest one of Gods little
ones, Matthew. 18. 6. Fall not out as Joseph said, by the way, who shall lodge in
the same Heaven at night: Some Saints have the head-ake, as well as others the
heart ache; and the Father watches as well with the one, as with the other. But
take heed of any such opinions as draw thee on to liceutiousness of practice;
holiness is the best thing on Earth, or Heaven, no attribute is thrice together
ascribed to God in Scripture, but Holiness, (Holy, holy, holy Lord) its not
Gods holy Spirit that leads thee to unholines^do not under pretense of not
resting on Ordinances and Duties) neglect or contemn them: The conduit will
soon be dry that is cut off from the Fountain, and that man be soon lean that
leaves off his meat. Prayer is all men's duty, and the Saints privilege: Having
set your faces toward Heaven, take heed of starting to the right hand or the
left, or turning quite backward.

Reader, Be not offended with the Latin or Histories in the Sermon, its far
from my constant use, neither were many ofthem mentioned in Preaching, only
such was my scribbling have in writing these Notes over, that I am constrained
to put my own Marginal References into the Text. If ye get any profit by the
reading hereof, remember him that would very gladly dobetter service to God,
and his Church, and subscribes himself in the ^
Apostles phrase,

Your servant for Jesus sake, John Shaw.

Britannia Rediviva: OR A SERMON Preached at the Asizes at York on Thursday
morning Aug. 9. 1649. holding out a Sovereign remedy for curing a sick
Commonwealth.
Proverbes 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to
any people.
SOlomon a King of Peace, he spoke Proverbs, and Jusus Christ the Prince of
Peace he spoke Parables, and the word (...) here used signifies both Proverbs
and Parables, or ruling, principal sentences. The Papists among their proud
swelling titles which they ascribe to their Doctors (as Angelical,
Seraphicall, irrefragable, profound Doctors, Doctor of subtleties, etc.) they
call Peter Lumbard, Master of the Sentences: but much trulier may Solomon be
called the Master of the Sentences, and so much the Hebrew title of this book
implies; as Axioms in Logic, Aphorisms in Physic, etc. such and much more
are these Proverbes in Divinity (principales sententie) a parable is says
S^^das, (...), Gregory Nyssen hom. 1. in Cantic. and Hieron. epist. ad
Paulixum, do observe that Sol^mon had three names, first (...) Pacificus,
second (...) Ecclesiastes, third (...) Dilectus domini: and that according to
these three names he wrote three books.

1. As he was peaceable, he initiated the young man with wise sentences of
Piety and peace therefore often calls My sox.

2. As he was the Preacher, he wrote the book of Ecclesiastes, showing to men
of riper years the vanity of the world, and to warn them, when grown up.

3. As the beloved of God, he wrote the book of Canticles, and therein
acquainted the strongest Saints with the high love and sweet Communion twixt
God and the soul; but however that may be but a mere conceit, yet sure we are
that Solomon (thewisest of all mere mortals since the full) invites poor
sinners to a great and sumptuous Banquet in the eight first Chapters of this
book, and then spreads the Banquet before them, Chapter 9. from which Chapter
to the 25. there is little or no dependence of one verse upon another, as is
usual in other books, but usually an illustrating opposition betwixt the
former and latter part ofthe same verse, as here in my Text: Righteousness
exalts a Nation, but, etc. Wherein are two most confes^edly true axioms
placed (...), righteousness exalts it, but sin (that is injustice or
unrighteousness) is a reproach (or puts down) and debaseth any people.
Wherein we have Moses his Proclamation of blessings and curses, or Joshuas
Mount Gerizim, and Mount Eball. In the former part of the verse we have a sick
Deuteronomy. 11. 26. Josh. 8.
patient, not one single person, but a whole Nation (though this word (...) is
sometimes taken in Scripture for one single person, Abimeleck Genesis 21. 4. as
some Rabbis think) a Nation, that is in a poor distracted low estate, so the
word (...) lift up or exalt, implies; and as by the other hemistichium or half
verse appears.) Secondly, here is the Physic for this sick Nation, verse 2.
justice or righteousness. Thirdly, its Cure, exalts, sets it up on his feet
again (a Metaphorical expression as Carlwright observes) advances a Nation,
suitable to that, Deuteronomy. 28. 13.

In the other hemistichium. We have first a Nation and people thereof in the
height of peace, plenty, safety, etc. Secondly, the poison and worm that gnawes
down this slourishing Nation, or people, viz. sin. Thirdly, the ruin it self
implied in the word reproach, or beggary, (...) which signifies first properly,
bounty or mercy, so the Pool in the New Testament, John 5. was called
Beth-Chesda, the house of bounty. But secondly, Per antiphrasin, its used for
impiety, reproach, disgrace, etc. and so it is used, Levit. 20. 17. Prove. 29. 9
etc. some read the Thus (...) dis^^^t, and (...) auxi^^^tus est.
word Cheser ((...) and (...) being much alike) which signifies poverty misery,
difect, etc. and so it seems the Septuagint read this place and so translate
it, sin beggars a people, or sin diminishes tribes and families; and so that
word notes, Prove. 28. 22. and indeed both are true, that sin does both disgrace
and beggar any people. But remembering your weighty occasions I hasten from the
opening to applying the words, which hold out to us (as I said) two plain
axioms and wholesome truths; which that you may the better remember I shall
wrap them up in the words of the Text.





For the first Scripture is full every where, that righteousness exalts a
Nation, from him that sits on the throne, to her that grindes in the mill;
begin at the Throne and S^epter, righteousness exalts it, Prove. 16. 12. and
25. 5. and so the body of the Nation. Prove. 29. 4. righteousness prevents
miseries eminent, Zeph. 2. 3, 4. Genesis 18. and delivers from miseries incumbent,
Prove. 10. 2. 3. and as it brings privative mercies, so positive blesings. As
first Peace, Isa. 32. 17. Psalm. 72. 1, 2, 3. and 85. 10. Secondly, honor, Jer.
22. 3. Isa. 1^ 26. and 59. 17. and 62. 2. So thirdly, righteousness brings
safety to a Nation and strength, Prove. 18. 10. and 25. 5. Isa. 26. 1, 2. and
58. 8. Jer. 33. 15, 16. Fourthly, Plenty, Prove. 8. 18. Psalm. 85. 10, 11.
Fifthly, Riches and prosperity, Hos. 10. 12. Prove. 8. 18. Sixthly, Comfort and
satisfaction to men's consciences, Uprightness has boldness, Prove. 28. 1. yea
righteousness brings joy in life, Prove. 29. 6. Psalm. 118. 15. and in death,
Prove. 14. 32. and after death, Psalm 112 6. and a blessing to their posterity,
Prove. 11. 21. Now are not all these precious clasters of sweet grapes? It is
now seven years this month (if not this day) since the Standard of war was in
these latter years set up in this Nation, and do we not now value peace? Are we
low, and in contempt? this brings honor; are we in danger by Land or Sea, at
home or abroad? this brings safety; are we poor, plundered, and an impoverished
Nation? this brings plenty, riches and prosperity, etc.

And now the (...) being thus cleared that righteousness does thus exalta
Nation, give me leave a little to unba^e the root of this large-spreading tree,
and then I shall hasten with what speed I may to shake you the pleasant fruit.
And here know, that I speak not of that infinite righteousness which is in
God, or that righteousness in Angels, etc. but only as it relates to men; and
so righteousness is twofold; its either 1. Sacred, or 2. Civil; sacred toward
God, or civil toward men.

First Sacred righteousness toward God, and that is especially of three
sorts, First, Legal, secondly, Evangelicall, thirdly, Celestial, Legal,
which is a perfect conformity of nature and actions, principles and practices,
to the perfect law of God at first written in the heart of Adam. Chrysostom
describes it to be a full keeping of all the Commandments of God (and so
unrighteousness is taken for all sin, Romans 1. 18.) this is mentioned, Romans 6.
18, 19. and 8. 4. Ephesians. 4. 24. Luke 1. 75. Ezekiel. 18. 5 and Psalm. 4 6. and this
is called in Scripture the righteousness of the law, or the righteousness of
works, or our own righteousness, Rom 9. 32. and 10. 3. Phil. 2. 9. Tit. 3. 5.
and this is omnium affectuum (...) qua omnes inferiorum partium motus (...)
rationi (...), ratio divine legi (...) adherebat.

Secondly, Evangelicall, which is either perfect but not inherent, or inherent
but not perfect: and thirdly, Celestial, which is both perfect and inherent in
us; Now seeing we have already lost the first and are not yet (till these
bodies of clay go down to the dust) arrived to the third; let me speak to the
second which is Evangelicall righteousness, and this (as I said before) is
twofold. First, imputed to us. Secondly, imparted into us, its either perfect
but not inherent, or inherent in us but not perfect: In a word, its either the
righteousness of justification by Christ's merits, or of sanctification by
Christ's spirit. The former is that whereby our persons are justified in the
sight of God; to justice, is Verbum forense a term of law, and is not the
putting of any goodness or grace into us, but the acquitting, clearing, and
absolving of us, though the satisfaction of Christ for us, Prove. 17. 15.
Solomon says, he that justifies the wicked is an abomination; now if to
justify were to put any grace into a man, it was no abomination to justify a
wicked man. Cato was ninety times accused, and yet always justified, that is,
cleared and acquitted as innocent. We are not justified either by any grace
within us, or by any works done by us, Romans 8. 33. and 10. 3. Phil. 2. 9. but
by the righteousness of another, namely Jesus Christ imputed to us; whereby
all our sins are blotted out, forgiven and forgotten, drowned in the bottom of
the Sea, as if they had never been, Micah 7. 18, 19. Isa. 43. 12. Psalm. 32. 1,
2. and the punishment also due to our sins removed, and born away upon the
shoulders of that escape goat, the Lord Jesus. So that justification is nothing
else but Gods gracious sentence, acquiting and clearing a believer, and
declaring him righteous unto eternal life, for the sake of that righteousness
which is inherent in Christ, and imputed to us: and yet understand, that this
righteousness of Christ whereby we are just in the eyes of God, is not that
essential and habitual righteousness of Christ, whereby himself is righteous
(for that is incommunicable to any creature) but it is that actual
righteousness of Christ's merits, his doings and sufferings, his
obediential^gis and Crucis, his active and passive obedience (for I think it
most proper to take in both) which he has performed for the elect, to pay for
their sins, and to purchase for them grace and glory: and this is called the
righteousness of God, Romans 3. 21, 22. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 21. because its the
righteousness of that person that is God, as well as man, and also it is that
way that God in the Gospel has appointed to justify men by. Its also called
the righteousness o^. Christ, because its the obedience performed by him,
(...) 23. ^. Its called the righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 19. 8. and the
righteousness of faith, because faith is the men, (...) God has appointed to
apprehend and apply this righteousness to us, Phil. 3. 9. and this
righteousness is more perfect then the righteousness of Angels or the first
Adam; for first, Theirs was but the righteousness of mere Creatures, but this
the righteousness of God, who is far above the Angels or Adam. Secondly, The
first Adams righteousness though perfect, was yet changeable, so as they might
lose it, and Adam did lose his, and many of the Angels theirs; but our
righteousness being inherent (not in us, but) in Christ, is more sure and in a
better keeping and we also kept by the power of God unto salvation.

Now this righteousness exalts a Nation especially two ways. First, By taking
away the National sins of a land; is a land guilty of blood, oppression? etc.
all things in the world are unable to bear away the sins of that Nation, but
the precious blood of him that is infinitely holy as he is God, and perfectly
holy as he is man: if nothing can take away one man's sins but Jesus Christ,
much less a Nations sins. Joshua in his filthy rags typed out the state of
the Jews then sorely defiled: Christ takes away their filth rags and puts upon
them change of raiment, Zach. 3. 3, 4. National sins make a land sick, 2 Chronicles.
7. 14. Christ's merits alone can cure it. Secondly, Christ's righteousness alone
can make peace twixt God and an offending Nation, he that is the only
peacemaker twixt God and one person, is also twixt God and a Nation, Isa. 32.
1, 2, 17.

The second Evangelicall righteousness, is that of sanctification, which is
inherent but not perfect; and it is a holy conformity both of heart and life,
to the will and word of God according to the measure of grace received from
Christ's spirit, Romans 6. 18, 19. for while we are here, we have grace in truth,
but not in perfection, we may be without reigning guilt, not without all guilt;
we have perfection of parts, we have every grace wrought in us at our new
birth, as a child has all the parts of a man when its born; but not
perfection of degrees, no member, no grace in the highest degree; but here we
have flesh and spirit, Gal. 5. 17. I would and I would not, Romans 7. Now this
righteousness of our sanctification is discovered three ways. First, Quoad
fontem, Secondly, Quoad formam, Thirdly, Quoad finem. First, By the principle
we act from, in all services we perform, see whether it proceed from that
commonly (but falsely) called Good nature (for all our nature is corrupt since
Adams fall) or from that new and divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. from principles of
honor, credit, fear, shame, natural conscience, in a word from natural or
supernatural principles; all living actions toward God come from living
principles, not the bare brain-light of the Law without, but the Law written in
the heart, not from the hearsay of a Christ without us, but the power of a
Christ reigning in us, Col. 1. 27. Phil. 3. 8, 9. Albertus Magnus was thirty
years in making an image, that at last by virtue of Wires, Gimmers, and such
Engines, could speak some words, and walk, but yet it had no life within; such
are all their actions who have no love of God in their hearts, no delight in
his ways, Psalm. 40. 8. Jere. 31. They are dead services that come from dead
principles, when men are not sanctified throughout, 1 These. 5. 23.

2. Quoad formam, when a man's general bent and endevor is to do the whole will
of God, as well in one thing as another, when men do not serve God by chance,
but by choice. It was the saying of that holy Martyr Master Tindal, (for which
the Papists did so bitterly (but causelefly) rad against him) That God does not
judge of us by our actions only, but by our affections, and values us to be
that which we sincerely endevor to be: He that is truly sanctified, is
universal and impartial in Gods Word, he does not pick and choose like Jehu or
Herod, but makes conscience of the whole Law of God, as David, Psalm. 119. 6,
128. and Paul, Acts 24. 16.

3. Quoad sinem. When we aim at Gods glory, not at the praise of men, with
^cribes and Pharisees; or profit, like Jehu and Judas, but Gods honor; as God
is the terminus a quo, so also ad quem, 1 Cor. 10. 31. And herein all Heathens
failed extremely, though they did many good moral actions. Brutus the Roman
Consul slew his own sons who plotted and endeavored the ruin of their Country;
but the Poet tells the end why, Vicit amor patria, landumque immensa cupido:
Herein all Hypocrites (...).
sail, Matthew. 6. 2, 5, etc.

Now this Righteousness of Sanctification exalts a Nation; first, because such
sanctified persons and actions are very pleasine to God, such as Joshu^.
Josiah, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphat Mordecai; and God has made many promises to such
and the places where they live, Psalm. 94. 17, 19. Prove. 11. 8, 28. Isai 48. 18.
Psalm. 37. 17, 39. Prove. 29 2, etc. Esther 10. 3. Secondly, because such
sanctified persons have power with God, by their prayers and tears, and can
prevail for blessings on the Nation they live in. These are the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel; for the Wheats sake God spares the Tares; for ten righteous
persons God would spare Sodom; The Island is preserved for the sake of the
innocent, Job 22. 30. The praying Saints in Marcus Aurelius his army, were the
thundering army. Thou have prevailed with God, thou shall now surely prevail
against men, said God to Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. These are called Righteousness, 2
Pet. 3. 3.

Having now spoken of that Evangelical Righteousness toward God, I now come to
the second, which is, Civil Righteousness or Justice toward men. This though
in it self good, yet is I confess, the far younger sister; and this fruit is
never right, except it grow upon the root of Gospel Righteousness; this justice
'twixt man and man, which Aristotle and Tully call a moral virtue, and is
described to be (...); or as Plato, Habitus rectis legibus obediens; or as
others, Constans and perpetua voluntas jus suum cuique tribuendi. This
Righteousness (I say) is not proper to a man as he is a godly man, or as he is
a Christian man, but belongs to him as he is a man; as learned Hooker observed,
and before him, both Augustine Eccles. (...) 3.
and Chrysostom; for Heathen Aristotle knew it, and many Heathens, as
Fabricius, Aristides, Cato, etc. had it: This justice godly men have, Genesis 30.
33 Josh. 9. 19. Numb. 16. 15. 1 Samuel 12. 3. And also some who are not
religious, nay, not Christian by profession, have Gods image on them, but not
in them, Genesis 20 6. Abimelech and the young man, etc, Matthew. 19. 20. And this
will much help as to some particular calling or actions, but will not reach to
the whole man, and to our whole conversation. Adrian the fifteenth, of the
forty Heathen Roman Emperors (counting from Julius Casar to Constantius
Clarus, the Christian, and father of Constantine the Great) was very just
according to his principles, his Motto was, Non mihised Populo, agreeable to
that Law of the twelve Tables, Salus Populi suprema Lex. The peoples good must
be the chief scope of the Ruler, who is not to rule for himself, but for his
peoples benefit; and yet in his reign was the fourth of the ten persecutions
against the primitive Saints; and when he came to die, how terribly did his
conscience warble out that woeful ditty!

Animula vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in l^ca?
Pallidula, rigida, ^udule,
Nec^ut soles dabis jocos.
He that has no more but this Civil Justice twixt man and man, may be said in
the phrase of Tacitus, to be rather Extra vitia quam intra virtutes: This being
like that stone called Lapis Calidonius of which some write, That though it be
a very precious stone, yet it has no virtue, except it be set in gold; so
neither has our Baptism, Justice, Civil honesty of life, etc. except it be set
into Jesus Christ, and his Righteousness.

And this Civil Righteousness is either private or public; Private, either in
respect of himself, or private converse with others: Himself, as when a man
follows some lawful calling diligently, which is acceptable to God, profitable
to men; he that is idle and careless this way, is a thief, and unjust to
himself, to his family, to the Commonwealth, Ephesians 4. 28. Romans 12. 11. 1 These.
4. 11. and 2 These 3. 10. So also in regard of others, with whom we have private
converse, as justice twixt Husbands and Wives, twixt Parents and Children,
'twixt Masters and Servants; this ^conomical justice the Scripture requires in
Families, Matthew. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9. Col. 3. 24, 25. 1 Timothy 6. 1. 2.

Secondly, Public Righteousness, whether Ecclesiastical in the Church, and
those affairs; or Military in an Army, that Soldiers should be content with
their wages, do violence to no man, etc. Luke 3. 14. or State Justice in the
Commonwealth, whether Architectonical in making just and good Laws, (not the
Statutes of Omri, not settling any iniquity by a Law, etc.) Or Executive, by the
inferior Magistrates, exe^^^ ting those good Laws justly: And this either
distributive or commutative justice; distributive is either remunerative or
vindicative, and consists in a just distribution of punishments and rewards,
honors, offices, penalties, not to every man alike, but in a Geometrical
proportion, according to every man's deserts, the Magistrate should have his
due, the Subject his, the Malefactor his due, without partial respect to
friends, foes, profits, praise, etc. Romans 13. 7. 2. Commutative justice which
keeps an equality, an Arithmetical proportion in buying, selling, trafficking,
etc. without circumvention, deceit, etc. as we would (or by the rule of justice
ought to) desire that others should deal with us, Genesis 23. 3, etc. And this
exalts a Nation; First, because justice does satisfy men's consciences: Courtly
garb, Complements, great Housekeeping may please men's humors, and phansies for
a time; but nothing satisfies men's consciences, but justice, because that is a
giving to every man his right and due, without respect to rich or poor, Levit.
19. 15. What brought down the former powers in this Nation, former Courts, etc.
But partial, unequal, and unjust Sentences, Decrees, Practices; unequal and
unjust distribution of punishments Amos 5. 15. Jere. 21. 12.
or rewards? Now that is the strongest building which is built upon
satisfaction to men's consciences.

Secondly, This is a sure way to free a Land from the guilt of national sins,
and destruction by National judgments, when the public Officers betrusted by
that State, do faithfully execute justice. Private men's sins lie upon
themselves, public Officers sins much more reflect upon the Nation, as David
sined, and 70000 of the people suffer; but when there is public execution of
justice, and the Officers do what in them lies to prevent or suppress it, God
will not lay the sins to their charge, 1 Kings 20. 42. nor to the Nation; when
Moses, Exodus 32. 28, 34 and Phinehas, Psalm. 106. 30. and Josh. 7. 9. and David,
2 Samuel 21. execute judgment; Gods wrath is stayed off from the Nation, Numb. 35.
33, 34. Public persons like Briarius do good or ill with one thousand hands.
If Ahab spare Benhadad, he endangers both himself, and the nation, 1 Kings 20.
It was an Advocates speech to a Judge in Germany, aggravating the fault of a
murderer that had killed six men: No my Lord (said the Advocate) he killed but
one, you are guilty of the blood of the other five, because you let him escape,
see Isa. 5. 6, 7. Micah 3. 9, 12.

Thirdly, this brings many blessings on a Nation as we mentioned in the
beginning. But that I may no longer detain you, having thus far unbared the
root, let us now glean the fruits, and apply all this by way of use.

Englands freedom or liberty (as some men call it) viz. righteousness toward
God, and justice toward man, the silver stream of truths and justice running
down the Church and Commonwealth --

Jeroboam the first, thought to settle the Kingdom by Idols at Dan and Bethel,
to keep the people at home from going to Jerusalem to worship; but this way
ruined Hos. 5. 13. 1 Kings 12. 16, 27, 28.
him and his Kingdom in the end; so Jebu thought by this policy to settle the
Kingdom upon his line, but it ruined them, and brought all the blood (though
God commanded them to shed it, and commended the material of the fact, 2 Kings
10. 30.) upon his head and his posterity, Hosea 1. 4. It was one of Luthers
Oracles, that if ever Church or Nation were destroyed, these or one of these
three things would prove the bane of it. First, Carnal policy, Secondly,
Carnal security. Thirdly, Unthankfullnesse for Gods mercies. After King Henry
the fourth of France was turned Papist, he was asked why he forsook the
Protestant Religion, he answered, It was to save his life and his Kingdom, and
prosessed to Beza, that he would wade no deeper into the Sea then he could wade
out when he lift. And when Ravilliac stabbed the foresaid King, he gave this as
the only reason, because the King was not constant to any one Religion; his
carnal policy ruin him.

Secondly, By riches without right ousnesse, but alas Quidsunt magna regna
absque justitia nise magna latrocinia? Master Rogers relates a story if a man
whom he knew, that when he was going to dye, stopped a twenty shilling piece of
gold in his mouth, and mid, some are wiser then some, I will carry somewhat to
help me; and our Cronicles tell of one Bea^^ord Bishop of Winchester in Henry
the sixth days, who perceiving he should die, murmured sore that riches would not
reprive him? Fie quoth he, will not death be hired? will money do nothing? No
more will these (though called the strong sinews of a State) any way save or
exalt a Nation without righteousness.

Mahomet said, the name of Religion and outward show would win credit and
esteem amongst men, but the power of it would dull and emasculate their
spirits; Plato marvellously bragged of three things (alas they were most poor
things to bragg on) as first, that he was a man not a woman. Secondly, A
Gracian not a Barbarian. And Thirdly, Socrates his scholar; and accordingly
many at this day bragg of three things. First, that they are Cristians and not
Pagans. Secondly, Protestants and not Papists. And thirdly, professors and not
openly profane, and yet alas how far may these men be from true
righteousness? like Micah bragging that he had a Levite to his Priest, Judge.
17. 13.

Th^^^ kingdoms (...)
said) when its necessary, for the maintaining of a just cause; the power of
the sword without justice will not exalt, but destroy a Nation, as the voice
said to Phocas, If you build your walls to heaven, yet this sin will bring them
down, witness Zenacheribs, and the Ethiopian Army, 2 Kings 19. 35. 2 Chronicles.
14. 12.

Jer. 22. 17. Augustus his saying was, that the overthrow of a City was rather
morum quam murorum casus, and yet some men think by tyranny, cruelty, etc. to
establish a Nation, but this runs cross to Scripture rule, Deuteronomy. 16. 20. Levit.
19. 13, 15.

Jeremiahs saying to Baruch, Jer. 45. 5. Alas alas, we need make no great
search to find out this unrighteousness, we need not do as the Papists relate
the story of learned Cardinal Bellarmine, who when he was to consesse his sins
and receive absolution on his death bed, he could find no sin to consesse
committed in his old age, no nor middle age, but was forced at last to search
into the vanities of his youth, and there he found some Peccadillos to
confess, if this story be true of Bellarmine, I will say he was a great
scholar, as to reading books, but the poorest scholar in the world in the
knowledge of his own heart; but we need not make so long a search for
unrighteousness amongst us; O bemoan it and avoid it for the future as ever
you tender the safety and welfare of this Nation; our danger is not so much
from Foreign States as from our own unrighteousness, these are the worst
enemies to Church and State, bemoan it, Jer. 22. 13. Isa. 5. 6, 7, 8.



First, That this is your highest excellency, other things make men honored a
while and admired amongst some men, nothing without this is valued with the
just and holy God. There is more difference twixt the poorest righteous man (I
mean truly righteous toward God, and not only civilly just toward men, for
this without the former is but an unholy justice, an ungodly righteousness) I
say there is more difference twixt the poorest Saint, and the greatest
unrighteous man, then twixt the brightest star and the darkest lump of clay,
the one partakes of the divine, the other of the hellish nature, and this
difference will appear more clearly at the great day, when all the sheep shall
stand on one, and all the goats on the other hand; all other greatness of
places, offices, temporal honors without this true righteousness, are rather
the greatness of an excrescenc^e, as in a wen or wart, then any true and real
worth: the poorest Saint far exceeds Pompey, Caesar, Alexandar, etc. Paul
esteemed no man after the flesh, his affections did not run after men for
temporal relations and honors, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Nay he would scarce set pen to
paper to write to any man but either to a Saint, or for a Saints ^ake, thus run
his Epistles, To the Saints at Rome, to the Saints at Corinth, to the Saints at
Philippi, Colosse, etc. Rem. 1. 7. 1 Co^ 1. 2. 2 (...) 1. 1. (...) 1. 1. Col.
1. 2.
Other great men without true righteousness may by virtue of their places
which are Gods, have the image of God upon them; but if no grace, they have the
image of Satan within them, and in Scripture phrase are called dirt, dung,
chafe, smoke etc. such titular gods, may become real devils, but they who
truly righteous, are the people that God sets apart for himself, Psalm. 4. 3.
separates from others here, Gal. 1. 4. and at judgment, Mat. 25. 32. these
have the greatest riches: Angels are richer then men, yet have no gold or
silver, but have more righteousness; God is richer then Angels, and the Holy
Ghost sets out his riches to be Grace, Ephesians. 2. 7. and 3. 8. these are a
people of Gods purchase and trading (...) Populus acquisitionis, Col. 1. 20.
All Gods trading here below, its for their sakes that God set up a Shop of the
world for men to work in, which shall stand until all they have done their
work, these are Gods great favorites, whoever wrongs them shall smart for it,
though as great as Pharaoh, Goliath, Zenacherib, etc. Psalm. 105. 14, 15. 1 Kings
19. 15, 17. These have power with God, and therefore shall have power over men,
as God said to Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. as a Prince have thou power with God and
with men, and have prevailed with God, and therefore over Laban, and Esau, and
their men; they have power to bind Gods hands from destroying a people
sometimes, Exodus 32. 10. Stop Lions mouths, open and shut heaven, Rev. 11. 5.
break bow and shield by prayer (not in the ^rmy but at Salem at Sion) Psalm. 76.
1, 2, 3. The Queen of Scotland said she more feared the prayers of o^e K^^x and
his companions, then an Army of thirty thousand men; we find it related in the
Acts and Monuments, that a young man having by contract yielded his soul and
body to the devil w^^^^ and signed the obligation with his own blood, after
ca^^. (...) Luther, confessed his folly and wickedness: Luther s^^ (...)
fasting and prayer, and was so prevalent with G^^ (...) devil was forced to
cast in the Obligation at the Window where they were praying; whereupon they
used to say of Luther, Hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit; The prayers of
the Church fetched Peter from chains, opened iron gate and all, etc. Acts 12.
Godly Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, prayed the Heretic Arrius to death,
for so the Church said, that Arrius his death was Non tam morbi quam
precationis opus.

2. Without this true Righteousness, all our natural privileges, of wit,
parts, etc. all our artificial privileges of Learning, Education, etc. all our
Church privileges of Baptism, hearing, etc. all our Profession and
Protestantism, will do us no more good then Paganism and Heathenism, as to
salvation. Those who are by profession Christians, are by the holy Ghost called
Heathens or Gentiles, Revel. 11. 2. And the circumcised Israelites are by the
Lord esteemed, as Ethiopians. Amos 9. 7. Are ye not as children of the
Ethiopians unto me, O house of Israel? says the Lord. So Matthew. 7. 23. this
Righteousness wherein the children of God agree, will last for ever; but those
things wherein they differ, as rich, poor, high, low, etc. will quickly end.

3. All other honors and greatness without this, do but hang upon thee, and may
be soon shaken off, but add no worth within thee. If thou have these riches,
honors, and no more; we may truly say, The man has many good things, but is
nothing, Prove. 10. 20. The heart of the wicked is little worth, his house, his
Land, his purse is worth much, himself worth nothing; but true Righteousness
will last us in life, death, to our name after death, and to eternity. There
are many of whom when they are dead, we may talk much of their acts, but not of
their goodness; but that is an honorable testimony, which the Chronicles give
to Hezekiah after his death, 2 Chro. 32. 32. Now the rest of the a^^ of
Hezekiah, and his goodness, etc. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of
God, I am that I am. Paul then did value himself to be a mere nothing, without
this Grace of God.

4. These are they to whom the promises are made, they have good security for
all good things to be call in unto them, Gods bills and bonds, yea, they enjoy
Heaven and eternal life now, in initio, in promise, sub sigillo, John 3. 36.
and 5. 24.

John Baptist his head as silence his tongue.) Let me in a word exhort you all,
as ever you tender the safety and glory of these British lles, of our darling
soil, to advance Righteousness and Justice within your places and power: And
here give me leave Right Honorable. first, to speak to you my Lords on either
hand, and to quicken you herein to your duties.

Consider, first, That this execution of justice is your great honor, when
other honors are but your burden: It was the saying of Polaian, I do not
account my self taller in the morning or night. because my shadow is longer,
nor shorter at noon, because my shadow is shorter; no more do I account my self
better, by reason of honors, praise, or slattery; nor worse by disgrace,
contempt, or wrongs unjustly cast upon me; these are but external shadows,
Righteousness is my true worth. In all these external honors, there lies a
snare, against which, we had need to watch, Prove. 29 25. Exodus 23. 8. It was
the saying of Pope Pins Quintus, (so was he only called) Qnum essem
religiosus. been sperabam desalute animemea, Cardinalis factus extimui, at
Pontifex creatus, penc despero. I need not English it. Logittans say,
Exeffectis laus and vituperium

2 If you shall (as I hope you will not) neglect impartial execution of
justice, you would come below many Heathens, F^bricius a Heathen man and yet
one m^^h as (...) ^^m have ^ved the Sun f^^m ^eaven, as him from the st^^^ht
path (...) lu^t^e, (...) with (...) fourth (...) of (...) his (...); so (...)
d^, Ca^^ Qumtus (...) us t^k^n from the plough, ma^^ D^^at^^r, saved (...)
Country, de^^ justly and retuned again willingly to the plough, to his mean^^
(...) lived and died Consul of Rome, had for a long time the custody of the
(...) o^ R^me; yet at his death was so poor, that the Commonwealth was fain
to desray the charges of his funeral. Camby^^s a Heathen King ^^mmanded that a
P^r^^^ Judge being found unjust, should have his skin pulled over his cass,
na^led to the Judgment^ (...), and that Judges son to fit thereon as Judge. Quam
^^ltos (...) and (...) Quod (...) August epist 142. (...) also (...) Chry^^^t.
hom. 18. in cap. 5. Matthew.
, who have beeb eminent in the execution of justice.

3. You bought not by wholesale, as the common fame is that some others before
you in those places did, and as men thought, were quickly tempted to sell
injustice by retail: I am assured you did not the first, and therefore (my
Lords) I am confident you will not do the last.

4. Consider your place, its not to serve men's humors, for hire or reward, not
to serve parties, sides, friends, or your own ends, but to advance Gods glory,
and the public good; your persons and places are public, its your office to
afford men justice: When a poor woman kneeled down to Francis the first, King
of France, begging justice: Stand up woman (said the King) I owe thee justice.
that is thy due. if you beg any thing, ask mercy Remember Jehosaphats advice to
the Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. You judge not for man, but for the Lord; therefore
take heed What you do. Plutarch faith, that Pelop^^as when he was going to the
war, his wife taking her leave of him and weeping, said, I beseech you husband
look to your self; no wife, answered he again, not so, it is for private
sould^ers to look to themselves, and not for men of public place, as I now am.

5. Consider your oath. what it is you best know, only remember the vow and
bond of God is upon you; therefore take heed, Ezekiel 17. 16, 18, 19. The Egyptian
Kings usually gave this oath to their Judges, That they should not swerve from
the apparent truth and their Consciences, whatsoever commands they should
receive from them to the contrary: And Justinian tells, that in his days they
took this oath or curse: If I willingly incline to either party against the
Truth, let me have my part with Judas. and let the Leprosy of Gebazi, and the
trembling of Cain fell upon me. Melancthon said a little before his death, I
was never drawn aside by Profits, Preserments, etc. nor with Emulation or Envy
against man; and (said he) Hanc conseientiam ausero quocunque discedo, This
comfort I carry with me to my grave. When Justina, the Arrian Empress. offered
to Benevolus large preferments, to perform ^ me vile service against his oath;
What, says he, do you offen me a higher place for a reward of iniquity? nay
rather sa^d he, lake this away which I have already, that so I may keep my oath
and conscience; and thereupon threw at her feet the badg of his place.

6. Consider your titles which the Scripture gives you; as first, You are
called gods, and sons of the most High, Psalm. 82. 6. Now what a contradiction
would it be to say, an un ust god, an unholy god! And remember that though you
are gods to men, yet you are but men to God, and must die accordingly.
Secondly, Guides, Prove. 6. 7. and should lead us in the path of justice.
Thirdly, Fathers, nursing fathers. Isai. 49. 23. Job 29. 16. and should nurse
us with the milk of Righteousness. Fourthly, Ministers, so are the Civil
Magistrates called Rom 13. 4. And Ministers should be holy and just, Isai. 52.
11. Fifthly, Shields, to deliver the oppressed, to defend the poor innocent,
Psalm. 47. 9. and 72. 12. Shepherds, Micah 5. 5. Ezekiel 34. 23. to feed us with
justice. Seventhly, Saviors, Nehe. 9 27. Obad. 21. 1. Eighthly, Healers, Isai.
3. 7. Ninthly, Governors or Pilots (for the word in the Greek used for
Governor, is taken from Mariners, Pilots of Ships, (...) Navem rego inde (...)
nauclerus, gubernator) Ezekiel. 27. 29. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Tenthly, Heads or chief of
the people, Deuteronomy. 29. 10. Judges 20. 6. So also are they called Benefactors,
Patres Patrie, Luke 22. 25. The Bars of a House, and Stakes in the Hedge, Hosea
11. 8. The Arms of a people to bear them up, Ezekiel 31. 17.

7. Consider the qualities and properties that Scripture requires in such as
are Judges, Magistrates, etc.

First, in the first place, Men fearing God, Exodus 18. 21. For without this
first, all our justice will be no more (though in itself a moral virtue) then
unholy justice, then ungodly righteousness, as I said. Omnis virtus absque
Christo, est in vitio, said holy Luther.

Secondly, Wife, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. discreet, grave, and prudent men should they be,
Genesis 41. 39.

Thirdly, Just; so David in his Swanlike song, 2 Samuel 23. 3.

Fourthly, Men of courage, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Judge 6. 12. when they told Luther in
what danger he was in, in going to Worms, he answered, If all the Tiles upon
the house were devils, I would go in the cause of God; it was said of him, Hic
unus homo totius orbis impetum sustinuit; and when they called him Apostate, I
am so (said he) but it is Jesus Christ's Apostate, in that I forsook Antichrist.
When the Emperor required Basil to subscribe to the Arrian Herefie, he answered
boldly and freely, He would not; some told him, That he was mad so to answer
the Emperor, who had power over his life, Opto me in aternum sic delirare,
(said he) I wish I may ever be so mad. See but the courage of a woman in the
cause of God, (though in the midst of many dangers) If I perish, I perish,
Esther 4 16. This courage should not be natural only, a Roman spirit, or fury.
but Christian courage bu^le by Faith upon the promises: such was Nehemiahs
courage, Nehe. 2. 20.

Fifthly, Men of truth and faithfulness, they should be faithful themselves,
and have care to put faithful men in places of trust under them, Nehe. 7 2 thus
Exodus 18. 21.

Sixthly, Men hating Covereousness, they should be sober men, as well free from
that dry drunkenness after gain, praise, etc. as from that wet drunkenness. of
which Bathsheba warns Solomon, Prove. 31. Not only hating bribery of money and
gifts, (which in Scripture phrase do not only blind the eyes of the Judge but
quite pull them out of his head; so the word (...) used, Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
signifies, and is used 2 Kings 25. 7. for quite putting out Zedekiahs eyes.)
but the more deceiving bribery of friendship, flattery, fear, praise, honor,
etc. which cause men to warp aside. When Pilate did the most unjust act in the
world in condemning (hrist. I read not of any moneybribe that was given him,
but only the bride of fear; If thou do it not, thou art not Casars friend.
Alexander would have Mr. ^^
judged pretty well, only a kinswoman could have made him partial. Claudius
was a good Magistrate, free from moneybribes, but then his wife and servants
could over persuade him sometimes; so was Ti^aius, but retainers and
flatterers. that blew up the bladder of praise and vainglory, could have
blinded him. Elisha would neither take bribes himself, nor suffer his servant
Gihazi to take any; if he do, he do, he shall smart for it, they will bring a
curse, Job 15. 34. Ames 5. 12.

Seventhly, Men well known, that is, for soundness and integrity, Dent. 1. 13.
free from those open vices which they punish in others, 1 Timothy 3. 5.

Eighthly, Men of mercy as well as justice, Psalm. 101. 1. Prove. 20. 28.

Ninthly, Men of public spirits, that seek not themselves, but the good of
the people, over whom God has placed them, as the text says of Mordecai,
Esther 10. 3. that Mordecai the Jew was one that sought the wealth of all the
people, and spoke peace to all his seed: so Nehemiah did not seek his own gain,
refused his own stipend in those days, and bought no land, when in those times
of distraction he might have bought it very cheap, Nehem. 5. 14, 16.

Luke 16. 2. when the trumpet shall blow, and another throne erected, and you
your selves to be judged who of late judged others; Nuper eram judex, jam
judicis ante tribunal
Subsistens paveo, judicor ipse modo.


When you must give account, not to the Parliament, or people, but to the just
God, and then it will be a black day with all wilful perverters of justice.
Our Chronicles tell us, that in the days of our Edward the third in Anno.
1360. when King Edward the third laid siege to Paris in France on April the
fourteenth, being the monday next after (that commonly called) Easter day
(though by the way observe, there is no such word as Easter in the original,
Act. 12. 4. but after the Passover) it was a day so black, dark, and bitter
cold, that many of King Edwards men died on their horse backs with cold,
whereupon ever since that day has been called black-munday; but if you execute
not justice that day of account will be a blacker day: I have often heard tell
of Doomsday book (you much better know the meaning of it then I) I pray you
remember Doomsdayes account.

malefactors, in a word, of exalting a Nation, and bringing much glory to God
now you have a call and opportunity. First, to maintain and uphold true
Religion, that we may lead a quiet life, as well in all godliness as honesty,
1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 am confident (my Lords) that you are resolved that clipped or
brass money shall not pass, I beseech you take care also that clipped Religion
may not pass. I think they deserve severe punishment that do endeavor to
overthrow the just fundamental Laws of our Nation, and I shall not think him
guiltless that endeavors to overthrow the fundamental Laws of heaven: I
think him too blame that will needs picture up the Trinity in Windows; but him
more that denies the Trinity and the God head of Christ, and Holy Ghost. I
think him much too blame that denies the Supreme Authority of Parliament, but
him more that denies the Supreme Authority of Heaven, and think this should
with more zeal be vindicated and maintained; he that would by any unjust way at
this Assizes, take away my estate, is much too blame, but he that would take
away my my Christ, Scripture, etc. much more.

Peter 2. 2. destructive, 2 Timothy 2. 17. fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19. 20.
But what is all this to the Civil Magistrate? he has nothing to do with
reforming of them.

Jeho^^ap^^t, Hez^^^ah Josiah, etc. thus Deutero. 13. Nay a very (...) and
Darius, th^^^^h Heathens, had so much light, Daniel 2. 29. and 6. 2^^^



for punishing these crime? now if they setch their Authority for punishing
these from the Old Testament, why not for the former? I fear, men that desire
such unlimited tolleration for all the most desperate fundamental errors, will
in time desire the like for intolerable practices, which they will say flow
from those principles: the devil (faith one) will think himself a great gainer,
it for the putting down of one Prelacy and Popery he may get an universal
liberty for all desperate errors, but I hope it shall never so be. Its very
hard (says godly Master Buroughs) To prove in the New Testament, the (...) on
(...) p. 16^.
Ma^is^^ates power in matters of Religion, seeing then there Was no Christian
Magistrate; yet this we find in Romans 13. 4. 1 Pet. 2. ^3. that the Magistrate
is a terror to evil doers, and evil deeds, and we find cursed Doctrines to be
styled evil deeds, 2 Epistle of John verse. 10. 11. and they that pertinaciously
hold them, called evil doers, Phil. 3. 2. Its true, I know that that text must
be limited, the Magistrates power reaches not to all evil deeds, for such are
hypocrisy, unbelief, by ends, etc. and so lesser errors of weakness, yea
others though not vented openly; but why this should hinder the Magistrate who
is custos un insque Tabulae, from punishing fundamental errors pertinaciously
maintained, I see not: especially when they lay Rats-bane in every corner to
poison the children, to seduce others. Those that plead for universal
tolleration, yet condemn that as wicked counsel which Themistius the ^
hilosopher, gave to Valens the Emperor, that he should let all fects and
opinions alone, because it was for the glory of God to be honored with
diversities of opinions and ways of worship. O how would holy John the
Evangelist, Polycarp, Ignatius, Ir^^aeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. have
thundered out against such advice, who started from one Cerinthus, were so sharp
and (...) against one Marcion, etc. nay would not keep com^^^^ with the
heretics of those times, after once or twice (...) but cried out, nulla cum
talibus convivia, nulla (...) ^^mercia misceantur: far be it from me either to
mean (...) of the lesser differences of godly brethren, who differ about
external government or about smaller matters, and live upto (...) principles,
or to wish men to be converted by clublaw from the most fundamental errors:
no, I wish their errors could be (as Luther says) igne tantum charitatis
consumendi. I heartily wish that all godly brethren (though in some things of
different lights) might cordially agree; and that as the Poet feigns that two
dear friends came to Vulcan the Smith and prayed him that he would either melt
or beat them with his Hammer into one, so God would do by us, and I am verily
persuaded ere all be done, God will melt or beat the Saints into one.

Secondly, you have opportunities to seek out the truth of causes Job 29 16.
and hear both parties speak, according to the command of God, Dent. 17 4. and
the rule of Seneca Qui aliquid statuit part inauditd alterd.
practiced both by the godly, 1 Kings 3. 9. and the very Heathens, Acts 25. 16.

Thirdly, To punish the guilty, whether openly vicious, or such as are (...) 1 Thessalonians 5. 14. (...) 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. (...) 1 Timothy 1. 9. that are idle, vagrants, I
mean follow no calling, but whereas they should be time-redeemers, Ephesians. 5.
16. in these evil days, they are time-sellers, and time-stealers, seducing
young Gentlemen to riotous, idle courses, or selling their time to any that
puts up the finger; these are men that walk (...) 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. Sesostris
King of Egypt made a Law, that all the subjects of his Kingdom should once a
year give an account of their manner of living, and if any were found to spend
their time idly, they were severely punished. Cain and Abel were heirs of the
whole earth, yet had their special employments and vocations; how many are
there that spend their time (as Seneca complained) aut aliud, aut nihil, aut
male agendo, before the fall of Adam he had labor, after the fall sudor, how
many are there now that would live without either! especially such deserve the
lash, as will not be subject to any rule themselves, and disturb the public
peace. The ancient Romans painted pride with three Crowns on her head, on the
first was written this motto, transeendo, on the second, non obedio, on the
third, perturb: many such proud men there now are that seek themselves, folter
and maintain need less brabbles, and lay all the wait of disgrace upon other
men, whereas indeed three things may not be dallied with, our faith, our eye,
our good name, non patitur ludum, fama, fides, oculus; such visible malefactors
should be punished without respect of persons, rich or poor, Levit. 19. 15.

Fourthly, To relieve and deliver the innocent and guiltless, that in your
days may the righteous flourish, Psalm. 72. 7. Deuteronomy 25. 1. Athanasius was
thirty times accused, yet always found inocent, distributive justice is as well
of rewards as punishment, your robes are white as well as red.

Fifthly, You have an opportunity, under Jesus Christ to free this land from
the guilt of innocent blood, which else would overthrow the land, by doing
justice impartially upon the guilty herein, Numb. 35. 33.

Sixthly, You have opportunity to make much of, be tender over, and to advance
such things as Christ your Master is most tender of. As first, His name.
Secondly, His truth and Ordinances. Thirdly, His Sabbaths. Fourthly, His
children: Suffer not his name to be blasphemed, rent, and torn, and he will
keep up your names, Parliaments name, Magistrates name, etc. suffer no cursed
errors to justle out Gods truth and Ordinances, and God will keep you from
being justled down: so his Sabbaths, Neh. 13. 17, 18. Jer. 17. 27 and his
children, advance and favor them, who are Gods jewels, apple of Gods eye,
what is done to them is done to him. But my glass and your business cause me
to break off, only let me speak a word or two.

Secondly, To the Justices of Peace, I beseech you (Worthies) up and be doing,
the Assizes it may be last here not above sixteen days in a year, but your
care should last all the year: if you be either ignorant and cannot, or idle
and will not, or partial and respect friends (as if he be an old serving-man,
a retainer to my Lord, to Sir such a one, to my cosen, etc. then he must be
suffered to keep a drunken deboist. Alehouse, alas he must live, he has a
great charge, etc. though all the word that the painful Pastor holds out on
the Lords day is lost at the Alehouse in the week; many a wife and children,
and families undone to hold up the last of that one, I say if thus you carry)
sad is your case, I profess I would not for a thousand worlds have this to lie
on me when I dye; moreover you then do what in you lies to debase and overthrow
a Nation; I beseech you consider its not enough to have good estates, rich
clothes, to keep good houses, to come to Assizes and Sessions now and then that
will serve to make a man a good Justice. But, First, Pray much, if thy work be
doubled, let thy prayers also. Secondly, Be diligent Daniel advanced, paries
much. Dan. 6. so does David. Psalm. 55. 17.
to know the estate of your Country. Thirdly, Take heed not only of bottel and
basket bribery, but of flattery, praise, private revenge, etc. and that you
your selves affect not too much to pot and pipe, to swear, etc. how then can
you punish others for those faults? Fourthly, Be active and diligent in your
places, quo nobilior eo laboriosior was the old motto, see Nehemiah, how active
in his own person, Neh. 2. 11. and 4. 23. again be resolute in Gods cause, and
know neither friend or servant, be content to commit thy good name, and
liberty, and all to God.

Thirdly, I would gladly have spoken a word or two to the gentlemen of the long
robe (had they been here this morning) I bless God I have no temporal suite
this Assizes (as I here told you the last Assizes also) yet let me make this
suit to you: not wittingly and against your knowledge to do what in you lies to
uphold and maintain an unjust cause? take heed you do not care how light the
cause is, so the sea be heavy: do you think that is your calling or office, to
do what in you lie to destroy a Nation? I know men put the fai^est gloss on
their own causes, when they come to you men love to slatter themselves, and are
partial in their own relations, besides some causes are very intricate and
difficult, but however that is no Calling of God that cannot consist without
wilful endeavor to overthrow justice, truth, and the Nation. I beseech you
therefore, first, pray much ere you come to plead. Secondly, plead no cause on
which you durst not beg Gods blessing upon your proceeding (who dare mock God
so for an unjust cause?) Thirdly, plead so now as you may have Christ to plead
for you at the latter day: there are some whom God will destrov at last, and
Christ will not plead one word for them, Luk 13. 9. nay plead against them, Luk
19. 27. Fourthly, do not (...) labor to advance injustice, which overthrows any
Nation, do not labor to make black seem white to flourish and color ever a
bad cause; a very Plantus calls such, sordida poseinummia that for private gain
would plead causes which they knew bad, another calls such (...) f^^ces
decemdrachmariae, and adds, Linguas (...). It is reported of Nevessan (a great
Lawyer, but bad man) that he used to say, He that will not adventure his body,
shall never be valiant; and he that will not venture his soul, shall never be
rich. O take heed of these desperate and destructive ways! He that was to plead
before the Judges in the great Court of the Areopagitae, must plead (...),
without either Preface or Passion, left with their thetorical flourishes, they
should any way prevail to draw the Judge to pass an unjust Sentence. And Philip
King of Macedon displaced a Lawyer, because he colored his hair; and his
reason was he was jealous, That he would also color over a bad cause.

And let me in the fourth place speak a word to my Brethren of my own cloth
(and perhaps some of you think its more then time that I had been there ere
now) let us practice and advance Righteousness, we are men of God, and should
not be men of the devil, 1 Timothy 6. 11. Our lives hearts, and hands should be
clean, we that carry the Vessels of the Lord, Isai. 52. 11. Three Emperors
successively made and confirmed a Law, That the Clergy (as they called the
Ministers) should not receive Tithes, I mean such Rents and Payments as
formerly they had done: Jerome writing to Nepotian about it, It grieves not me
so much (says he) that they made such a Law; but that the Priests by their
unrighteous lives did deserve it. Erasmus his tart expression against such,
was, That they were dumb in a Pulpit, not in a Tavern (profecto in hypocausto
nemo illo vocatior:) Let not men justly upbraid us with golden Chalices and
Wooden Priests. Secondly, Hold we out the Truths of God, and not men's phansies
and inventions in our ministry (sound doctrine is called Righteousness, Heb.
5. 13.) When men ask bread, do not give them a stone, nor scorpions for fishes;
and hold our the truth plainly, that poor Country people may not need to study
Latin to understand our English: How far was holy and learned Paul from going
out in that kind of Creature strength, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 4. speak plain and home.
As Luther writ to Gerbellius, Cupio ago inveniri Christi and ecclesie sue
fidelis, si prudens esse non potnerim minister: I desire to be found a faithful
Minister of Christ, if I cannot be so prudent and politic as some are.
Thirdly, Be diligent, it is not justice to take men's Temporals, and not
discharge your duty in sowing Spirituals; see Paul's charge, and tremble, 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2, 3. Fourthly, Be zealous for the truth: When one desired to know what a
one Basil was, he showed in a vision, a pillar all on fire with this Motto,
Ta^^^est Basilins. Old holy Latimer said, in his days there were many good
Ministers in England; but deest ignis, deest ignis, said the old man, There
wants fire of zeal. And as we should be zealous for the Truth, so against
desperate Errors: Remember but the Spirit that was in Polycarp, Ignatius,
Irenaeus, etc. How zealous were the Bishops in the Counsel of Nice against
Arrius, who differed from them but in one Letter ((...) for (...)?) How zealous
were the Ministers of the Latin Church, against the Greek Churches, about the
proceeding of the holy Ghost, yet the difference lay only in two prepositions
((...) and (...)?) How zealous was the Church against Nestorius, who differed
from them only in one Letter ((...) for (...)) yet six hundred Bishops then
rose up and said, That (...) etc.

Fifthly, A word or two to all you my Brethren and Countrymen (for I cannot
but love the smoke of this darling soil) that are flocked hither to these
Assizes: I beseech you advance Justice and Righteousness; this God expects from
all, Micah 6. 8. Luke 3. 14. First, I beseech you put off, and avoid needless
wordy brabbles and suites, rather as Christians yield and submit one to
another; it is no dishonor for the better man to offer terms of peace herein,
as Abraham to Lot, though he was Lots Uncle, and remember that motive in Genesis
13. 7. 8. Aristippus said to Aeschines (they being at variance) Though I be the
elder man, yet I seek to thee; nay verily said Aeschines, Thou art not only
the elder, but herein much the better: Or secondly, Refer your controversies to
honest men at home: Remember that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 5. I speak to your
shame, Is there not a wise man amongst you? Thirdly, You that are of the
Juries, grand or ^^nall, proper or tall men, take head of Judas his practice
and principles, his cry is, Matthew. 26. 15. What will you give me, and I will
deliver him? he never asks, is he guilty, or not guilty? what has he done, or
what will you do with him? but only quid dabitis? Again, Take heed of wresting
men's words in your Testimony beyond their true meaning, or those Witnesses did
against Christ. Compare John 2. 19. with Matthew. 26. 61. Christ did say. Destrey
this Temple, and (...) it up; (...) they affirmed that he said, I (...) to
de^^^^ the Temple or God, and to build it in three days: Christ said, (...) and
day affirm that he said, I can destroy: Christ said, This Temple (...) ing his
Body) and they say that he said, Temple of God (though if he had so said, it
had neither been felony nor treason.) Nay, take heed that you do not swear the
truth out of malice, and byends, not from the love of the Truth, but Revenge
and Mischief, lest if thou so do, God call thee a false witness. We do not read
that that dogged Edomite. I Sam. 22. 9, 10. testified any thing but truth for
the matter; yet is called a false witness, or lying tongue that devised
mischiefs, Psalm. 52 2, 3, 4, etc. This should in the next place, have been a
sharp reproof to very many particulars, that do exalt unrighteousness
apparently, but I may not detain you too long; Like wise another Use should
have been of Trial, whether we are truly righteous or not: First, Look to our
principles, whether the Law of God be come unto us only, or also into us? To
some it only comes unto them, John 13. 3, 4. to others into them, not only
brains but hearts, (...) Heb. 10. 8. (...) Heb. 10. 16. Is our obedience, the
obedience of Faith and Love? Romans 16. 26. and 12. 1. Hosea 3. 5. A reasonable
soul is the form and specifical difference of man from beast; but it is
supernatural grace that makes him more then a man, viz. Godly man. Union
natural ^twixt reasonable soul and body makes a man; but its union mystical
^twixt soul and Christ, that makes him godly. But I must, though unwillingly
break off, and leave the rest, together with the second doctrine: And having
made already, in Gods name, my humble suit to you, let me in your name to God,
make my humble and hearty suit for you

Let us pray.

NOw having preached these Notes, ere I could quite transcribe them (though in
much have) God sends us the joyful news from Ireland. which his own hand
wrought, August 2. 1649. which makes me add there lines.

Promission pacem tua nu^^ Ecclesia Christ
Insanu mund. turbine pressa petit:
Evigila tandem, fluctus compesce surentes,
Fac tibi non percant, ques pater ipse d^dit.
Et smul ad ju^^um pergas perduce^e sinein,
Quod tua pro nubis dexiera capit opus.
Musculus on Matthew.

Ve^pcra jam venit, nobiscum christ mancto,
Exitingm luccm ne pallare iuam.
Parxus on Matthew.

Ni^^^ in cassum cb(...) subrnergere navim
Fluctuai at uunquium mergitur illa ra^^s.
FINIS.

