The three Kingdoms Case: OR, Their sad Calamities, together with Their CAUSES
and CVRE. Laid down in a SERMON PREACHED AT A Public Fast at Kingston upon
Hull. With some very remarkable Passages of Providence worthy of general
Observation.

By JOHN SHAWE M. A. sometimes of Christ's College in Cambridge: and now
Lecturer at Hull aforesaid.

JER. 12. 10, 11, 12. They have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness
-- being desolate it mourns unto me, the whole land is made desolate, because
no man lays it to heart: the spoylers are come upon all high places through
the wilderness, for the sword of the Lord shall devour from one end of the
land even to the other, etc. no flesh shall have peace.

Nullus fere credit quod propter peccata nostra variis modus Deus animadvertat
in homines hujus secule: mayor pars secure praeterit quaecunque profert Deus
irae suae iudicia, alii fortunae tribuunt quae videntur in orb conversiones ac
mutationes: in summa pauci sunt vel propemodum nulli qui manifesta dei iudicia
expendant,

Aug. Plectimur a Deo, nec flectimur tamen; corripimur, sed non corrigimur,

Salv. London, Printed by T. B. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the gilt Cup, under Saint Austins
Gate. 1646.

To the Christian and well-affected READER, especially to my worthy and loving
friends, both the Inhabitants within the Town and Country of Kingston upon
Hull, and also the Parishoners of Bradfield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire:
Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
Christian Readers and friends,
I Have looked with Elijah's servant more then seven times, to see what would
be the issue of these troubles, 1 Kin. 18. 43. and I long since espied a great
cloud (bigger then his, ver. 44. yea, like that ver. 45) and trembled because
of this matter, and for the great (...), Ez. 10. 9. and my self have felt
neither few nor small drops of these troubles (as you know;) and truly still, if
I did not see that the great and wise God had a special hand in carrying on,
and ordering al these wars and combustions, I yet see so much malice, private
spleen even in those who return home and sit still, such factions, scisms, and
upon (any occasion) apostacies; in a word, so much of that many-headed Monster
Self, yet in the Kingdoms, that I could hardly expect fair, quiet, sunshine
days of long, but that the Lord reigns, and therefore may the earth rejoice,
and this poor Island be glad thereof, Psalm. 97. 1. I have in the ensuing lines,
opened and applied, as I could, what the word and sword, my Text and times hold
out unto you. My Text tells of war, plunderings, spoilings, which In locum.
Hierom refers to the overthrow of Jerusalem after Christ, by Titus, because
the Jews rejected Christ, the Son of God, and salvation by him, (ostendens
ferociam Romanorum (says he) in populum Judaeorum qui idcirco punitus est quia
Dei filium non recepit.) Piscator refers to the troubles of the Jews by
Zenacherib and the Assyrians, Calvin to the plague, famine, wars and all such
miseries laid on them by the Lord at several times; others, to Nebuchadnezzars
desolating wars, and the Jews seventy years captivity; Musculus to the war and
misery which Israel endured by the Philistines, Idumaeans, Amorites, Moabites,
Syrians, Assyrians, etc. notwithstanding all which troubles, Israel could not
be persuaded that sin was the cause, but either chance, or because they wanted
their number of men, and were not strong enough; but the Prophet prophesies
sin to be the true cause, and confesses, that he living among them, had
contracted sin and guilt, so as that he had a hand in bringing down these
Judgments, (we have sinned) yet presently in the same verse, changes the
person, his sin not being so wilful, contemptuous, and perserved in as theirs,
ver. 24. (they would not walk) yet in these sad wars and combustions of ours in
England (like those in the Text) I see some grounds of hope; as first, a
budding generation coming up, hungring and gasping after Christ and the means
of grace (a good sign that God is not leaving our land, but that the time of
the promise draws nigh, Acts 7. 17. Isa. 49. 20, 21.) Secondly, many active
and eminent spirits raised up like Moses, Aaron. Phineas, like Zerubbabel and
Joshua, for the work of the Lord in Church and State with boldness, Hag. 1.
12, 14. Jer. 50. 2. Micah 5. 5. Thirdly, cleerer light shines in the Kingdom
(even by contentions which satan stirs up to overthrow the truth) and in many
dark corners, Dan. 12, 4. add to these, that the iron and clay break asunder
daily, Dan. 2. 41, 42. and the stone cut out without hands grows more and
more, Dan. 2. 43, 44, 45. and I see all this carried on above, and contrary to
the power and policy of the subtillest heads, by the mervailous hand of God,
Zach. 4. 6. let me to the only praise of the wonder-working God, and the better
to perpetuate the memories of his miracles of mercies to this Town of Kingston
upon Hull (which place, if ever any is most infinitely indebted to God, who
has showed mercies indeed to other places, but to this town miracles) let me
(I say) instance in some particular mercies which God has afforded to this
town, wherein it appears, that God himself has bared his arm and saved it
beyond, and contrary to the wit and will of the subtillest enemies and seeming
friends, and made the very enemies to help on your safety, and their own
ruin; as appears, first, in that a little before these wars began, your Castle
and block-houses were out of repair, and too much (through long peace and
dis-use) unfit for service; upon which pretense, some of the Kings Coachmen
begged them of the King, and sued you for them; whereupon you presently
repaired them; which Forts, thus on this occasion repaired, helped now to keep
out the Kings party: Secondly, whereas formerly you had no draw-bridges to keep
out an enemy, Captain W. Leg and others of that party caused draw-bridges to
be made about the Town, on purpose to keep out our Brethren of Scotland, when
first they came into this land for our assistance; but these bridges kept out
Captain Leg and that party: Thirdly, Arms were also sent hither for above
20000. men, under the managing of the said Cap. Leg; and after that, a
Garrisonof 1000. should. here planted (having not bin any here for many years
before) under the command of Sir Tho. Glenham, by the direction and advice of
the Earl of Strafford (for the same purpose aforesaid) and yet all this turned
to keep out that very party: Fourthly, in the dawning of these troubles,
Captain Leg being settled in this Town, and having this strength and power
aforesaid, and the Earl of Newcastle being also sent hither by the King, with
his Commission to be Governor here (who came into the Town by the name of Sir
John Savage) but the town demurred upon their answer to him, till they heard
from the Parliament) both these persons (viz. Earl and Captain) thus in the
town, upon a bare summons from Parliament, left the Town and posted to
Westminster (a thing which I believe both of them have forethought an hundred
times since.) Fifthly, the day before the King came first to Hull, to demand or
command entrance (Sir John Hotham being then Governor here) the King sent the
Duke of York, the Prince Elector, the Earl of Newport, the Lord Willoughby, Sir
Thomas Glenham, and others, into Hull, which caused some jealousies in the
Governor and Townsmen, whereas if the King had come suddenly to the gates,
without any warning, when the Duke and the rest came, I am confident none had
then suspected his coming, nor would any soldier have hindered his entry at
the gates (such a work was then rare.) Sixthly, the next day after (viz. about
Ap^^^ 25. 1642. being saturday) the King with some hundreds of attendants, came
to enter the Town of Hull (the Governor being busied in entertaining the Duke
of York, the Prince Elector, and their Company) and had the King still come
without any further warning, suddenly to the gates, I am confident no soldier
would have hindered him; but the King sent Sir Jews Dives two hours before him,
to tell the Governor that the King was within four or five miles off, and
would dine with him (and this time and warning had Sir John Hotham to advise
and hearten himself and his soldiers, to keep out that company that came with
the King, and to draw up their bridges, etc. Seventhly, add this for a wonder,
that Sir John Hotham should then so resolutely keep these persons out, having
such a numerous party of the contrary mind, most active that day; both within
and without against him (a work at that time not for every man's spirit)
himself, as since it appears, proving so unfaithful; of whom and which work, I
may this say, that when he could have ruined the Town, and endangered the
Kingdom thereby, he would not, and after when he would have done it, he could
not: Eighthly, when the Kings Army came first against this Town, they
(thinking thereby to have compelled you to yield) burnt your Mils, but this did
wonderfully set the hearts of all, both rich and poor against them (their food
being endangered) whereas some of them before were not so fully affected to the
Parliament and that cause. Ninthly, the Earl of Newcastle after this, having
over-mastred all the North, save Hull and Wresle Castle, and having got so
great and formidable an Army, with which he might in probability have gone
through most parts of England then, and have ruined or endangered many a City,
Town and County, yet were his old, wisest and subtillest soldiers so far
befooled, that they persuaded him to bring this Army against Hull, in August
1643. and lay a second siege here; but partly by the shot and sallies out of
the Town, partly by lying in wet trenches (the Country round about being
drowned at spring-tides) their whole Army was brought almost to nothing, and
those that were left of them (now no way formidabe) after six weeks and odd
days siege, went away with infinite shame and loss, October 11. 1643. (for
which mercy you still keep on that day an aniversary thankful commemoration.)

Tenthly, In all these six weeks siege, though the enemy shot many fiery hot
bullets into the Town night and day, yet very few of you were hurt; sometimes
many well-affected persons were met in a chamber to repeat sermons, and pray, as
soon as ever they were departed and gone down the stairs, (and not till then)
came a red hot bullet through the place where they met; so in another chamber
where children went to school, came another of those fiery messengers as soon
as ever the children were gone from that place, and none hurt.

Eleventhly, on Thursday, June 29. 1643. when Sir John Hotham was conceived
treacherous, he being always very active and vigilant, and especially then, yet
were the Magazine, the several guards and forts of the garrison seized on by
the Townsmen and others (no experienced soldiers) within the compass of
less then an hour (and that before Sir John Hotham was aware) without the
loss of any blood (which great and hazardous attempt, one would have thought,
and it was feared, would have cost many a man's life.

Twelfthly, that on the very day after this (viz. Friday, June 30. 1643.) the
right Honorable and Noble Lord General Fairfax had that great loss at
Atherton More, and when he was retired from the field into Leeds, and was in
danger, yet more sad and troubled (as his Lordship said) for the loss of his
men and the danger of the Country (and not well knowing which way, or what
course to take the next day) a Boy came just in that nick Like the case of
Mordecai, or the Shunamite, Est. 5. 14. with 6. 1, 4, 6, 10. 2 King. 8. 5.
of time, with a Letter from the Major and Aldermen of Hull, acquaitnting his
Honor, that Hull was open for him if he would come thither, and that the town
and ammunition were seized upon, as aforesaid; Sir John Horham fled, and in his
flight apprehended in Beverley, (a joyful message at that time, though till
then, neither had his honor heard thereof, nor the town, when they sent, of
Lordships loss.)

13. Though it was generally said and thought, that if the wars should
continue, and Armies should lie in Yorkshire but one year, there could not
possibly be any provision or food left; yet have Armies been here almost six
years already, in Yorkshire, sometimes six Generals and their Armies at once,
often above 20000d. soldiers abominable firing, spoiling, plundering, etc. yet
seldom have we seen meat and drink more cheap or plentiful here, then still it
is (blessed be God:) This is the Lords own doing; thus have you Seamen, seen
Gods wonders as much by Land Psa. 107. 23 24.
as by Sea, and this Town sometimes a poor Hamlet called Wyke, after, in Edward
the second his time, called the Kings Town (upon the River Hull) which is a
greater honor, then if by the cowardice or treachery of any, it had been turned
to be (in that sense that some badly mean it) the Queens Town, may now justly
be called Gods Town, because of the miracles God has wrought for it. (Oh that
it appeared to be so by our holy practice answerable Psalm. 116, 12, 13.
to such mervailous mercies!)

To conclude, let me for the same end acquaint you, the Inhabitants of
Bradfield, with another instance, though of a lower rank, viz. the mervailous
delivery of a Minister of Christ's Gospel, born in your Parish, wherein you may
still see Gods hand; learn to trust and praise him more: it is this, When the
Earl of Newcastle besieged Rotherham in May 1643. at last, the Town wanting
powder (which was taken at Gainsborough, as it was bringing to them) and some
bouses being on fire by the enemies Grenades, the Town was forced to
entertain a parley with the Earl, who after some shameful repulse and loss)
assured them under his hand, that upon laying down their Arms, they should have
their estates, lives and liberties safe; but as soon as be entered, fined,
imprisoned, plundered many, and as it seems had a special intent to ruin the
Minister of that place aforesaid; yet, first, that Minister went through the
midst of the Town (then so thronged) undiscerned by any; secondly, he hid
himself in a vault of a bouse not inhabited (after he heard of the enemies base
unfaithfulness and cruelty) which house (the enemy pulling down the Works
about the Town) came into, and kept as their main guard night and day, and lay
close by him (which thing he neither did nor could suspect before-band;)
thirdly, the enemy proclaimed him traitor by a crier throughout the Town, yea,
and all others traitors also, who knowing of him, brought him not in to them
within 24. hours; in the aforesaid bouse the soldiers seeking him most
diligently, thrust their swords betwixt the Loards frequently, yet neither
found, nor hurt him; fourthly, at last they looked up to a vault above their
heads (which lay visibly open to view, by the space of three yards and more,
where himself and his man lay indeed) and swore that he was there, whereupon
they instantly ran up their stairs (which they kept) broke open the door
(entering to the vault which they saw, and where he was) found it locked, and the
key in the door on the inside, sought him five several times, the great
windows all open round about, be and his man lying on their sides, could have
taken hold on them, yet never found either of them (no cause but that Jer. 36.
26) fifthly, he having layen there on the stones most part of three days and
nights, viz. from Thursday May 4. 1643. (when the Town was taken) till Saturday
evening May 6. could not stir, scarce cough or spet, left be should be heard,
and no friend, meat, drink or relief could come at him (the enemy keeping the
Town, that house and stairs to the vault) be resolved that night, rather then
starve, to go down and yield himself to their cruel mercies (for be might
hear them swear his death with many dammees) presently, that very afternoon
they went away (be cannot to this day learn any reason why) for they came
thither again the next day, and staid there constantly long after, as if they
had meant (as indeed the good and wise God did) to give him just a fit time and
space to get safe away, for neither before nor after could be get away thence,
nor longer stay here: sixthly, when he was come down the stairs from the vault,
though the enemy be found removed, yet were the doors lock; but the enemy had
caused a Carpenter to pull up two boards of the floor to seek for him in a
hollow place underneath, and left them unnailed down again; through which space
(as if they had meant to have made him away forth) be got out: seventhly, when
he came forth Acts 12. 7, 10.
by that hollow aforesaid, he came through the midst of the Town again to his
house undiscerned; and as he was stepping into the Hall (not knowing now who
lived there or in any other house) there were seven Cavaliers billeted (having
formerly plundered him sufficiently) amongst whom he was just stepping, had not
a friend of his pulled him by the shoulders into another Room next the Hall:
eighthly, yet durst he not carry there, but got to a vault in another house,
and lay upon an earthern floor the remainder of three weeks in the midst among
them, yet never got cold, nor was the least sick, no not so much as usually
before: ninthly, after this he got safe to Manchester, and after some cumbers,
is safely returned to his nativeCountry; for all which, he entreats his
friendly neighbors and readers that praises may be returned to the only wise
God, and sole and lively confidence put in him for ever and ever. Which
passages (Christian Reader) together with the ensuing notes, bad I not been
importuned to publish, till I was in Elishah's case, 2 Kin. 2. 17. nor thou nor
I had had this trouble: however, if God may have glory, his Cause any
furtherance, or any of his people profit by them, I have all my aim, and rest

The unworthiest of the least of Gods mercies, J. S.
Hull November. 17. 1645.
The three Kingdoms CASE, with their CAUSES and CVRE. OR, A SERMON Preached at
Kingston upon HVLL.
ISA. 42. 24, 25. Who gave Jacob for a spoil and Israel to the Robbers? Did
not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned, for they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law?




I Need not (right Honorable and beloved) to use any other motive to bespeak
your attentions then the words immediately foregoing my Text, verse 23. Who
among you will give ear unto this? who will hearken and bear for the time to
come? Only give me leave for the clearing of the words, to acquaint you (and
that very briefly) first, with the Prophet; secondly, the time when; thirdly,
persons to whom he prophesied; fourthly, the substance of his prophecy.
Divines use to cast the sixteen Prophets (whose prophesies are recorded in the
old Testament) into three ranks; first, some prophesied before the Jews
seventy years captivity in Babylon, as Jonah, Hosea, Isaiah, and some others:
Secondly, some of them gave cordials in the time of the captivity, as Ez^^iel
and Daniel: Thirdly, others quickened them after the captivity, and their
return, as Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. Amongst these, our Prophet is of the
first rank, yet though his prophecy be ranked in the first place, its not
probable that he was the first of them in time that prophesied, but rather
Jonab, who prophesied before (or at least in the beginning of) the reign of
Jeroboam the second, 2 King. 14. 25 (whereas Hosea, though you grant him to be
a Preacher seventy years, began but in the latter end of his reign, Hos. 1.
1.) so in the new Testament its thought by the History in the Acts of the
Apostles, that not the Epistle to the Romans (though placed the first) but that
to the Thessalonians was first writ; also, not the book of Malachi, but
Nehemiah was the last book in order of time and story in the old Testament.

This Prophet Isaiah was nobly borne, by both births, of nature and grace,
being of the royal blood both of Heaven and earth (let no man think himself
too good, by reason of his birth or estate, to be Gods Prophet, see David,
Solomon, Isaiah, etc. God calls to this office, sometimes men of greater birth
and estates, as this Isaiah son of Amoz, sometimes poorer, as Amos, a poor
Neat-heard of Tekoah, Amos 1. 1. which two names Robustus fortis, (...) Onustus
durus (...) Hie^. in Isa. 1.
differ much both in the Hebrew writing and signification) Isaiah prophesied
above sixty years to a stubborn people of the Jews, that profited little (so
did Hosea to Israel above seventy years) yet would not leave off his Ministry;
to leave off ones Ministry because he cannot see it do that good which he
wishes (says old Latimer) is a naughty, a very naughty deed.

After all his toil and pains, he was sawne asunder by his near Kinsman; let
us learn to be content, though ill rewarded by men, seeing this Evangelicall
and noble Prophet was so used, after so long and great pains for their souls
good.

The sum of the Prophecy is a discovery of the abominations of the Jews,
and of Gods judgments against the impenitent for those finnes, together with a
promise to the Elect, and prophecy of the Lord Jesus Christ; his birth, life,
death, resurrection, ascension, and intercession.

In this chapter, the Lord holds out Christ full of beauty and bounty,
goodness and pity, ver. 1. 10. exhorts the Jews to prize and praise him,
ver. 10. 13. but foreseeing their contempt and rejecting of such an invaluable
mercy, he denounces heavy judgments against them, ver. 13. to the end,
whereof my Text is part. In which, consider, first, the punisher, the Lord;
secondly, the punishment, battle, war, with the fruits of it, robbing, firing,
spoiling, etc. And thirdly, the punished, not Heathens, but the Members of Gods
visible Church, Jacob, Israel; fourthly, the meritorious cause of this
punishment, sin and disobedience, neglecting Gods ways; fifthly, the Peoples
incorrigiblenesse and unprofitablenesse under all this, they consider not, nor
lay it to heart. I will graspe as much together as I can, and collect some
observations as suitable to the Text, occasion and time, as with convenience I
may. And first this:

Observe. 1. That war with the fruits thereof, robbing, firing, spoiling, are
very sad and heavy calamities, yet such as may befall a Nation professing the
true Religion.

Observe. 2. That when such wars befall such a Nation, it is God that sends
them, and gives up a people to them (Who gave Israel to the robbers, did not
the Lord?)

Observe. 3. When ever God sends such wars and calamities on such a Nation,
their sins and iniquities were the procuring and meritorious cause.

Observe. 4. That when a people have such judgments poured upon them by God,
and yet do not consider rightly thereof, and lay it to heart, it much provokes
and angers God.

For the first, that the strength of battle, robbing, firing and spoiling, are
sad calamities, it needs no further proof, it is too apparent already; I may
say of this, as our Savior, Luke 4. 21. this day is this Scripture fulfilled
in your ears; yet that this point may prove more useful to us, let me a
little cut it up, and show you the miseries of war; first, by the precedents
or occasions of it; secondly, the nature of it; thirdly, the consequents,
especially of a civil war (such as ours now is.)

And first, for the occasions of war, I will name some; as it is a sad thing
when King a and people fall out, and clash one with another till one weaken
another, and endanger the ruin of both; thus Abimilech and the men of Sechem,
the Lord sent an evil spirit of dissension betwixt them, Judge. 9. 22, 23.
after Abimilech had reigned a while, ere long both parties took up arms, so as
no man could safely travail on the highway because of the Soldiers, ver. 25.
the event of this war was this; first, the people were ruined, ver. 44. the
City destroyed and sown with salt, ver. 45. the Tower, a strong hold of
Sechem, burnt, and a thousand men and women in it, ver. 49. and ere long, the
King was ruined, and that dishonourably, ver. 53, 54. a sad and heavy case, to
see a body tearing out its own bowels, to see a Kingdom, like Judas or
Achitophel, making it self away when the Lord sends a spirit of perversities
amongst a people, Isa. 19. 14. (the Lord has mingled a spirit of perversities,
etc.

Secondly, it is a sad thing when Courtiers and favorites of a King, who much
mind not any Religion, yet come to Church and perhaps take a Protestation, the
better to please men and keep their places a while, but as soon as they epsy
their time, take advantage upon a King, and labor to seduce and draw his heart
from God and his truth, to idolatry, and to raise up arms and make war upon
his Subjects, and this has been done, see 2 Chronicles. 23. 16. in Jehojada's days
the Courtiers and people entered into Covenant to be the Lords people, and
opposed idolatry, ver. 17. but as soon as Jehojada was dead, 2 Chro. 24. 15. the
flattering CGurtiers with their congies, obeisance and cringes, vowing they
would serve King Joash for ever, ver. 17. and espying their advantage with the
King, wrought upon his nature, and drew him away with them from the pure
worship of God, ver. 18. but see what wars followed, and what became of those
Courtiers, ver. 23.

Yea, sometimes a Queen, the wife of his bosom, may draw a King away, as
Jezabel to Ahab, that was an high addition to all his other sins, that he
took Jezabel to wife, 1 King. 16. 31. and there was none like him, whom his
wife Jezabel stirred up: 1 Kin. 21. 25
so Solomon's wives, 1 King. 11. 3, 7, 8. and rending his Kingdom followed
upon it, ver. 11, 13, 14, etc. so Ezra 9. 2. 14. thus the Son of godly
Jehosaphat did evil, because led away by a bad wife, 2 Chronicles. 21. 6. we read 2 Chronicles. 22. 1. that the So the people met to make Rehoboam King 1 King. 12. 1.
See Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15, etc.
people made Ahaziah King (called Jehoahaz, 2 Chronicles. 21. 17 and Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 22. 6.) but two things drew him away, a bad mother, and her bad kindred
and Counselors, 2 Chronicles. 22. 3, 4. (if not a third, 2 Kings 8. 27.) and these
cause wars and divisions.

Thirdly, it is a sad thing when some young flattering Courtiers be near about
the King, that persuade him to stand upon his points and prerogative, and not
to condescend to his Subjects petitions at all, but either to rule by his own
will (an arbitrary government) or else venture his Kingdom and all; thus did
Rehoboam's young Counselors, 1 King. 12. Solomon was the wisest of mere
mortals, he had a thousand Wives and Concubines, 1 King. 11. 3. and yet had but
one son, and he foolish; when his Subjects came humbly petitioning his
Majestly, Rehoboam takes the advice of Malignant young Counselors, who tell
him, would I have my neck under my Subjects girdles? either rule at your own
will, and keep them under, or adventure all, 1 King. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and see what rents in the Kingdom followed, ver. 16.

Fourthly, it is a sad thing when malignant Counselors and parasites about the
King, who study the humors of Princes, lie at watch to spy an advantage,
while they may take the King in a fit mood, to persuade him to ruin the Church
and people of God, yea, subtly entrap the King, and get his hand and seal (or
else sign it themselves, and counterfeit his hand) to a decree destructive to
the honest party, and by their deep plots draw the Kings heart away from them;
thus did the enemies of Daniel subtly work upon King Darius, and got a decree
signed for Daniels ruin, though against the Kings mind, whose conscience told
him, that Daniel was a faithfuller and honester Subject then they, Dan. 6. 5,
6, 9. they pretend they stand for the Kings honor, and that this decree is
only for the Kings greater glory, ver. 7. the King ere long saw himself abused
by them, but could not mend it, ver. 14.

Fifthly, it is a sad thing when flatterers about the King persuade him that
those who are Gods best servants, and the Kings faithfullest Subjects, are
Rebels and Traitors, and the Kings enemies; thus they accuse Christ to be enemy
to Caesar, and that he would hinder his tribute and revenues of the Crown, Luke
23. 2. and they that favored him were no friends to Caesar (that word struck
deep) John 19. 12. thus the three childrens enemies persuade the King, that
they are enemies and rebels against him, Dan. 3. 12. so did Daniels enemies,
Dan. 6. 13. thus At halia cries treason, treason, (but who was the Traitor?) so
foul-mouthed Rabsbekah cries rebellion, rebellion, 2 King. 18. 20. thus
Courtier Haman would preswade King Ahasuerus that the Jews (Gods best
servants, and the Kings best subjects, whereof one Mordecai had done more
faithful service to the King, then an hundred flattering Hamans) were a
factious, perverse people, regarded not the King nor his laws, and were
against his profit, Ester 3. 8.

Sixthly, it is a sad thing when those that are near a King, not only whisper
and tell lies and tales to draw his heart away from his best Subjects, but also
use all means, yea adventure purse and life and all to ruin such: Balaam the
Witch (Josh. 13. 22. Numb. 24. 1.) would seek to Heaven and Hell to ruin
Israel; Moabites and Midianites were content to make their daughters whores to
ruin them; so desperate is the old Serpents malice, (see Numb. 25. 1. Rev. 2.
14.) thus Haman, who would never give a penny to a good cause (not only makes
the King glad with his lies, Hos. 7. 3. as before) but will give ten thousand
talents to the Churches ruin, Ester 3. 8. so that cursed Edomite Doeg (a
stranger, but now made a Courtier) not only lies against the honest party, and
sets on the King (who of himself was eager enough against them,) Psalm. 52. 3.
but himself (when the rest refused) plays the Butcher, not only slaying the
Priests (as he was bidden, 1 Samuel 22. 18.) but also man, woman and child beyond
his commission, ver. 19 and so brings much crying guiltless blood upon the
King and his own head.

Seventhly, it is a sad thing when Ministers (that should be men of God) advise
and harten a King on to such a war as a matter of conscience; thus Zedekiah
with four hundred Prophets, or rather satan by them, 1 King. 22. 21. persuades
Ahab to go up to a battle, which proved destructive to himself, 1 Kin. 22. 11,
12. and how bitter was Zedekiah against the true Prophet, ver. 24. (a godly
Minister has not a worse enemy in the world, then a wicked, wretched Minister,
see Jer. 26. 8, 11. with ver. 16.) hence followed a war that ruined King Ahab.

Eighthly, it is a sad thing when some bloody minded men even force a King (for
their own safety, gain or ends) beyond his own inclination. Let me put a case;
I can tell you of a King that had two Nephews, his own sisters sons, the elder
of these was General of the King his Uncle's Army, he was a furious,
bloody-minded man, yet often times the King his Uncle could not restrain him, but
at last the King and he fell out, and the blood that he shed, falls in time upon
his own head; my meaning is, David the King had a sister called Zerviah, 1 Chronicles. 2. 15, 16.
she had two sons, (for the third was dead, 2 Samuel 2. 18, 23.) Joah the elder
of these was David's (his Uncles) General of his Army, he was bloody, very
bloody, 1 King. 2. 5. yet his Uncle sometimes could not rule him, 2 Samuel 3. 39.
at last they fell out, 1 King. 2. 5, 6. and his cruelty is revenged upon him, 1
King. 2. 32, 34.

Ninthly, it is a sad thing when there is emulation and envy amongst Commanders
in Armies, or betwixt chief persons of the same side, so that out of envy some
desert the cause, leave off, or turn to the other side; how did Aaron and
Miriam envy Moses, Numb. 12. thus great General Abner makes Ishbosheth King, 2 Samuel 2. 9. (as the great Earl of Warwick said, it is more honor to make, then
be a King) Ishbosheth afterward reproves this Soldier for whoring, 2 Samuel 3.
7. presently Abner takes this in snuff, and revolts to the other side, and
loses Ishbosheth his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 3. 9, 10. ere long Joab and Abner (two
great Commanders) envy one another, and Abner is slain ver. 27. see Achitophel
and Husha^s clashings.

Tenthly, it is a sad thing when Soldiers make but a play of war and killing
men, 2 Samuel 2. 14. Let the men arise and play before us:] and care not how long
the wars last, or what ruin is done, so they may thrive, saying with
Demetrius, by this craft we get our wealth, Acts 19. 25. all these are sad
things, which are but the beginnings and occasions of war: But the point will
further appear, if we consider war it self, especially ours, and that but in a
word (for I at once consider my time and your occasions.) Therefore

Secondly, view a little what a sad thing war is; first, of all judgments war
seems to be the sorest, by David's choice, 2 Samuel 24. 14, etc. secondly, of all
wars civil wars Graud. Sa^^ifice.
are wont nothing got but grating one upon another, like mil-stones without
grist (as I have showed elsewhere Summum (Brute) nes as Civilia bella satenuer,
Ceto. apud Claud. 1. 2.
in many particulars at large;) thirdly, of all civil wars, English war is
Bella pox Emitheos plus quam Civilia Campas. See Mark 3. 24, 25.
the worst, see the Barons war compared with foreign troubles; fourthly, of
all English wars these present wars is worst, if we consider, first, the truell
bloody minds of the adversaries, who profess they had rather the Turk or Devil
prevailed, then the Roundheads; secondly, in former times of calamity (as in
Queen Mary's days) there was an Ireland to fly to, not now, then sixty or
seventy suffered, now so many thousands, then lands descended to the Martyrs
heirs, but if this Parliament be by force brought down, you may write upon the
doors of your Liberties and estates, Lord have mercy upon us.

A^^^e 3ly the consequents of war (I will clean but a few) as, first, plague;
secondly famine Ier. 14, 3, 4, ^. and 52. 6. Lam 4. 7, 10. and 2. 20. 2 King.
6. 26, 30. 2 Samuel 24. 13, 15.
(read Jeremy and Josephus for both these on Jerusalem once and again;)
thirdly, firing, Jer. 52. ^3. Judge. 1. 8. and 20. 48. etc. fourthly,
plundering, Where is strife there is every evil work, James 3. 16. Isa. 13. 16.
many godly men left thouslesse, without Harbor, victuals, goods, money in an
hour, by one party nor by another, what the palmer-worm leaves; the locust,
ranker worm or caterpillar eats, Joel 1. 4. we whose goods escape the sword of
Hazael, yet plundered by Jebues, etc. Sabenns, Chaldeans, etc. fifthly, want of
means of grace, Amos 8. 11, 12.
neglect of studies, Pastors dare not come at their Flock, but hide themselves,
Jor. 36. 26. nor Flocks at the Congregation; the ways to Sion mourn, Lam. 1.
4. Psalm. 74. 7. sixthly, want of execution of good Judge. 5. 11. and 17. 6. Lam.
2. 9. Inter Arma silent leges.
laws, where all things are lawful, nothing is right; seventhly, want of
christian society of Saints, who are scatteved, perhaps never meet together
again, husband and wife, parents and children in this world, Acts 8. 1. Math.
2. 14. eighthly, want of treding, none dare pass the highways, Judge. 5. 6.
Levit. 26. 22. Lam. 4. 18. Isa. 33. 8. 2 Chronicles. 15. 5. ninthly, many like
Mephibosheth, lamed, wounded, want arms, legs, etc. tenthly, many (whose blood
is precious in Gods sight) are slain, and their blood run down the street, part
from their friends, and never return again, Acts 12. 2. 2 Chronicles. 35. 23, 24.
Judge. 20. Isa. 3. 5. Lam. 4. 5. and 5. 8.
21, 25, 35, etc. and many of the beggarly and baser sort, rifle houses, and
domineer over the persons of such worthies, whom they durst heretofore scarce
look at.

But I have much work yet to do, and little time, I adjourn the reasons; the
truth of the point is apparent, and I accoast upon an Use or two.

Use. 1. Ad Magistratum, all you that be in places of authority and power, use
all lawful means, do what in you lies for the sheathing up of the sword, the
preventing plunderings, spoilings, etc. and removing these sad calamities, etc.

Secondly, Ad Clerum (as we use the phrase) pray we, and preach, and use our
best endeavors for the composing of these differences, preventing these
spoilings and robbings, to our grief we see it; the Papists take away the
second Commandment, the Courtiers did take away the fourth Commadement,
Plunderers the eighth, and the abuse of these wars in many places the pra^^ice
of all.

Thirdly, Ad Populum, and that in diverse things; and first, be we all affected
with mourning spirits for these sad judgments, war, and the fruits of it, as
were Vriah. Nehemiab, Jeremiah, etc. Jer. 4. 19. Ezekiel. 21. 9, 10. My bowels, my
bowels, etc. Should we now make mirth? etc.] take we up the lamentation, Lam.
3. 48, 49. 51. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, etc. Isa. 22. 4.
considering first, what a land we lately had, like the Garden of God before
these wars, Joel 2. 3. secondly, how woefully now spoiled especially in many
places, like a desolate Wilderness, ibid. 2 Chronicles. 15. 5. no peace to him that
goes out or comes in: Thirdly, by whom all this is, viz. one neighbor against
another, yea, and by Papists (and their confederates) who in quieter times
burnt living men, women and children, and dug others out of the grave to
burn their dead bodies; what would they now do? Fourthly, how long it may yet
last, The first Carthaginian war lasted 23 years, that betwixt the Hollanders
and Spain about 70 years,
we see the differences are greatned, miseries hightned, and gape, widened
every day, divisions in Church grow greater, and divisions in the State not
lesser; see also how long the calamities were upon Israel in Aegipt, upon the
Jews in Babylon, upon Germany of late years, etc.

Secondly, pray hard for those of our Brethren, that be in, and under the sury
of battle, and the cruelty of the enemies; and that first, they may not sin,
that they may keep a good conscience; alas, this is their hour of temptation
and sore trial, Satan is winnowing them, pray their faith may not fail, Revel.
3. 10. Luke 22. 31, 32. see our case, Ezekiel. 22. 26, 31. Isa. 62. 6, 7. pray God
to keep them from sinning, Psalm. 74. 20, 21. Jer. 14. 19, 21. Secondly, pray
God to sanctify these troubles to them, to take away the scum, Ezekiel. 24. 6. to
fan away the chafe, purge away the dross, Isa. 27. 9. Mal. 3. 2, 3. Thirdly,
in due and the fittest time to deliver them from their troubles, and recompense
the enemy, Psalm. 79. 11, 12.

Thirdly, endeavor in thy place and calling, to stench these wars, this
bleeding wound, by first, repenting toward God: secondly, not willingly
assisting the Enemies of the Commonwealth, so as to hinder Delinquents from
justice, or in what we are able any other just way.

Fourthly, Prepare for the worst, who knows what sad days we may yet see,
Jer. 25. 15, 16. especially if we seriously look at, first, our sins and abuse
of great mercies; secondly, what far better men then we have suffered before
us; thirdly, how many clouds and mountains seem yet to be betwixt us and a
quiet end; fourthly, how sins in every part of the Land yet increase; fifthly,
how all Treaties and probable means of reconciliation still knap asunder; we
thought if ever the Armies met, one battle would do it, but, etc. sixthly, what
selfishnesse and ends are yet in men, what envy and emulation, that sometimes
we cannot agree to follow the probablest means close.

Therefore prepare (I say) for the worst that can come, and trust not, first,
to policy (how little has been done in these wars, by the deepest dungeon
politicians (those who were thought the wits and Achitophels of our time) even
as much as Balaam and Achitophel did; God has befooled men, I Cor. 1. 19.)
secondly, nor to riches, oft-times they make men fare the worst, as at
Jerusalem, 2 King. 25. 9, 12.
and massacre at Paris; thirdly, nor to strong walls and works (as was said to
Phocas) Nahum 3. 12. fourthly, nor to multitude of soldiers, strength of men
and horse: But first, turn to him that smites speedily, cordially, thoroughly,
Isa. 9. 12, 14. Hosea 6. 1. Secondly, get into the Ark, Noah's Cabin, Jesus
Christ by faith; then safe, if floods come, Isa. 26. 20. thirdly, take heed of
lying in any sin securely, Amos 6. 7. fourthly, look to uprightness, that
fundamental grace of sincerity, pluck up a good heart; so Hezekiah, Isa. 38.
3. fifthly, keep peace with Heaven and conscience, however things go here
below; sixthly, gang loof off from the creature, take heed of being ensnared
now, Jer. 45. 5. Seventhly, hide thy treasure in Heaven, where no plundering,
etc.

Use. 2. Reproves those that delight in war, and are the wicked incendiaries of
these troubles, and still add (for their own ends) fuel to the fire, Psalm.
68. 30. And this delight is furthered, either, First, by custom in the wars;
about five or six years ago, what a strange thing was it to hear of a man
slain, or especially if twenty or thirty slain, now (to many once flesht in it)
but a play, 2 Samuel 2. 14, 15, 16. or secondly, treachery; should two Neighbors
have walked together seven years ago, and one of them should have wept; his
friend asks him, why weepest thou? the other should answer, I foresee within
these four or five years the Papists and Atheists in Ireland, will raise a
horrid rebellion; and I foresee, that though thou and I walk to Church
together, eat and drink together, yet thou will join in the same cause with
them, and wilt plunder my house, seek to betray me and mine, yea, to slay me,
etc. this would have been thought strange, yet now proved true in many; see
this 'twixt Elisha and Hazael, 2 King. 8. 11. how true is that now in many,
Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14. God has opened a window in men's breasts (as sometimes
through the wall to Ezekiel in a vision, Ezekiel. 8. 8.) whereby their
hollow-heartednesse has been discovered: Thirdly, gain, as Demetrius said, By
this craft they get their wealth.

Object. But if sword and war be such sore judgments, Ezekiel. 14. 21. is not war
then simply unlawful? Answ. so said Cyprian and Lactantius of old, so Erasmus
and others of late, others affirm it unlawful only to Christians in the new
Testament (as Anabaptists formerly) but he that considers that war is an art,
first, of Gods teaching, Psalm. 18. 34. and 144. 1. secondly, of Gods directing,
1 Samuel 23. 2. thirdly, commanding, Numb. 31. 1. Josh. 6. 2. himself Captain,
Josh. 5. 14. fourthly, practiced by choysest Saints, with good approof from
God, as Abraban, Joshua, Gideon, David, etc. Secondly, ye war with men
professing the same true Religion with you is lawful, Jndg. 20. 28, etc. 2 Samuel 2. 13. and 18. 7. yea thirdly, in new Testament lawful, as appears,
first, by Christ's direction, Luke 3. 14. and secondly, the Magistrates
Commission, Romans 13. 14. and thirdly, by the Saints practice allowed, as
Centuriou, etc. Matthew. 8. 10. Acts 10. 1, 2, 4. Revel. 17. 14. he needs not
doubt the lawfulness of it.

Qu. 2. But secondly, the greater Quere is, When, and in what cases war is
lawful? An. first, in general (for we speak of ordinary war) when it is
necessary, and when no other means can obtain our just and necessary desires;
but in particular, our Casuists require four conditions to a just and lawful
was: First, lawful and sufficient authority requiring it; secondly, a just
cause; and not only so, but weighty (not de l^na capitan) but first, for
defending of our laws, lives, liberties, etc. as a Sam. 3. 1. and 18. 7.
secondly, for taking just revenge upon such as do public wrong, outface
justice, Malignancs, Delinquents etc. Jud. 20. 8, 18. 1 Samuel 15. 2. 2 (...).
10. 7. or 3ly toregain something unjustly taken or detained by Land or Sea, 2 Samuel 7. 14. etc. 2 Chr. 13. 5. Thirdly, a right end, not to maintain a popish
Diana, nor any faction, or private opinion, not enrolled in sacred writ (such
as of which Chrysippus used to say, that many times he wanted new opinions to
broach, but if he had the opinion, he never wanted arguments to defend it) not
to maintain monopolies, great places, to get other men's estates, to revenge
private spleen, etc. but to obtain a just peace, 2 Timothy 2. 2. so 2 Samuel 11. 2.
it is there said, that David demanded of Vriah, how the war prospered; in the
Hebrew it is [of the peace of the war] i. e. in what readiness the war was for
a peaceable end; the end of suits is to be quiet; and of physic is health:
Fourthly, a right manner of managing the war for such an end; as, first,
undertaking it by prayer in the fear of God, Judge. 20. secondly, when we go
along in a just manner, not to fancy a man guilty for a word, Isa. 29. 31. or
for praying Dan. 6. 5. thereby to plunder him, not to accuse men falsely, but be
content with their wages, Luke 3. 14. not to whore, be drunk, steal, etc.
holiness should be on the bells of the horses, and soldiers blades, as well as
Priests frontlet, Zach. 14. 20. Deuteronomy. 23. 9, 14. thirdly, firsttender terms of
peace, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11, 12. fourthly, carry it wisely, Josh. 1. 7. Deuteronomy. 20.
38.

There is yet a third Quere, more difficult then the two former, and that is;

Qu. 3. What may be said for the lawfulness of these wars which the Parliament
now maintain; are not those against the King, and so unlawful?

Answ. I have elsewhere said my thoughts, Britains Remembran^^^.
at present take this; first, that there should be Rulers, or superiors over
men, 2 Samuel 23. 3. is Jure Divino, all lawful government, whether Monarchy,
Aristocracy, Democracy; whether Kings, or (which were before them in Israel,
Judges, Patriarchs; whether by Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes, etc. in a word,
all lawful government is of God, and the Ordinance of God, this is clear by
the light of nature, reason, Scripture, old Testament and new: But secondly,
whether this or that Kingdom (or any particular Nation now) shall be governed
by Kings, States or Consuls, by a Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or
Democraticall government, this can be but Jure Humano, according as that people
at their first union, coalition and fundamental constitution, did bargain or
agree; God never by his Word or Revelation said, that France and Spain should
be governed by Kings any more then Holland, Venice, etc. when Rome was governed
by Consuls, Dictators, etc. it was lawful, according as they did agree for the
public good and safety of the State; the world has yet not stood six thousand
years, and the greater part of this time that the world has stood was spent,
ere Gods Israel had a King, 1 Samuel 8. 5, 6, 7. yea, among the Jews, where they
needed no Parliaments (for God him. self made and gave them their Law of the
Land) and God had a special hand in choice of their Kings (more then can be
said of any Kings now) yet even then the people had a hand and consent in the
choice of their Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15. 2 Chro. 22. 1. 1 King. 12. 1, etc.
much more in any other Kingdoms) the institution of government is of God; but
the constitution of this or that particular government, is from men.

Thirdly, if any Nation be governed by Kings, yet what line or family shall be
the Kings or chief governors there, this is from man, or according as the
people first made their compact, gave their binding consent and choice:
Marriage is Gods Ordinance, but whether this woman shall have this man to be
her head, is by her own choice and consent; God has not said, thou such a one,
be thou King of Spain, etc.

Fourthly, suppose this line or family, King of this or that Nation, yet
whether he shall be King for years, or for life, or to him and his heirs, or to
him and his heirs males for ever, this is Jure humane, a humane Ordinance, 1
Pet. 2. 13. according as that Nation first made their bargain, agreement, etc.

Fifthly, what privileges, Prerogatives such a King shall have, what liberties
immunities that people under him shall have, this is Jure humano, according as
they have, and do make the bargain, according to the fundamental
constitutions, agreements and laws of that Land (for France, Spain, Denmark,
Hungary, etc. are not all bound by any word of God to have just the same
liberties, laws, prerogatives, etc. but according as themselves agree, so they
be not against the general rules in Scripture; so that I herein concur with
the Lord Digby, that our case is not so much to be resolved by Divinity, but
law; and properly to be determined by those who are Judges of what is, or is
not law; what are, or are not the fundamental constitutions of our government:
Now to the case in England, the King was never made or esteemed Judge of Law;
men used not to go to the King to know what is Law; and if he said this or
that to be Law, it was but his own opinion; neither are our Lawyers or
inferior Courts the ultimate Judges, but the last Judge from which there is no
appeal with us, is the supreme Court of Parliament: (now no Court of the
Kingdom is null, or the acts of it void, because the Kings person is not there,
or his mind against it.) This supreme Judicatory affirming and declaring to me,
that by the fundamental constitutions and constant agreements and laws of this
land, we may defend our laws, liberties, lives, estates, etc. by arms, and that
now is this case, and necessity thereof; I believe it, and have no further to
go for resolution in this case: The objection of conquest is fond and
frivolous; an unjust conquest without just title (merely because another is
stronger) gives a man no right to my purse, without my consent some way, much
less to a Kingdom; should the Turk or Spaniard unjustly make wars upon our
King Charles, and conquer him, have they a just right therefore to his Kingdom?

But secondly, I conceive a man may very much see the hand of God in these wars
going along with the Parliament; if we consider, first, the beginning of them,
and that first, when we were very low, when by reason of flatterers, etc. many
were banished and terrified, so as it was thought no man durst lift up his
head, Zach. 1. 21. yet thousands appeared presently; secondly, when it was
thought that by idleness and long disuse we were grown so effeminate, rusty
and unfit for war, yet have we found men not bred, but made as gallant
soldiers on the sudden, as any in the world; thirdly, when we were embroiled
in a war with our brethren of Scotland, yet some of both Nations delivered,
like brands out of the fire, for this work, Zach. 3. 2.

Secondly, if we consider the growth of them, first, God has wrought upon men's
spirits, and that is above man's work, Haggai 1. 14. God touched men's hearts,
Ezra 1. 1. 1 Samuel 10. 26. and has fitted men like Bezaleel and Aholiab, Exodus
31. beyond their natural temper for this work; of weak, made strong; of dull,
made quick, see Judge. 6. 1, 6. a strong, potent enemy, ver. 5. yet a poor
Leader (a thrasher) Gideon, mean person, mean family, mean furniture, weapons,
etc. prevailed.

Thirdly, consider how God has befooled the strongest wits and subtillest,
deepest plots in this business, how little men's deep plots have done in this
work, but God has carried on-things beyond the wit of man, 1 Cor. 1. 19. Isa.
44. 29. had those reaching wits many a time taken a quite contrary course, how
much in probability, had we been endangered?

Fourthly, we have gone most forward by going backward, gained most by our
losses, like that plot, Josh. 8. 20. 22. at our loss of Albertan, Bristol,
Leicoster, etc. how did our seeming friends turn, and were discovered, and when
we were weakest, we did most; in most great victories, we almost quite lost
all, ere we conquered, as Keinton, Newbery, Hessam-More, Naseby, etc. at
Atherton we first won, then lost all.

Fifthly, our enemies have helped and furthered us much in this work; how came
the Bishops to be shut out of the House of Lords, Delinquents from the House of
Commons, but by their own deeds? treacherous persons and plots discovered the
enemies victories and plots knit the Houses firmlier together when any breach,
and won them a peg higher (see Daniels three childrens, and Joseph's enemies
raised them, this is Digi^^ Dei.)

Sixthly, Religions purity, the plots and filth of popery more discovered; tell
me of any war in all the world (Grecians, Romans, etc.) that ever looked at the
power and purity of Religion so much as this:

Seventhly, the work is done, not by might or by power, but Gods way, by Gods
spirit, Zech. 4. 6. like Jericho's wase, the way that Babybon must down, Revel.
14. 6, 7, 8. and Antichrist fall, 2 These. 2. 8. Ezra 5. 1, 2.

Object. But Antichrist seems to befar from his fall and going down.

Answ. Consider if as great things, and as unlikely have not been done in
England within these few years, he that should have told thee but six years
ago, that we should have an indissoluble Parliament (save by its own power)
that it should The Lord is gone out besore us, Judge. 4. 14.
last above five years together, that there should be never a Monopoly or
Bishop in England, that the Book of Common Prayer and twenty such things should
be removed; would you have believed them? may not we say, God has done wonders
that we looked not for, Isa. 64. 3. B^^d. 15. 11. and who knows but God may
say, thou shall see greater things (...) these, John 5. 20. then may we change
our praises as they, Jer. 16. 14.

Secondly, when Antichrist goes down, he will go down suddenly, like his
Master, Luke 10. 17. like Pharaoh, Human, Belshazzar, unexpectedly, see Revel.
18. 8, 10, 17, 19, 21. like a great mil-stone thrown down violently.

Eighthly, God has done much already, he has already made that good to us in
Isa. 14. 2. that Gods people take them captives, whose captives they were, and
rule over their oppressors: but the time warns me, let this serve for the first
point, and I will dispatch the rest in few, or else prorogue them. The next is,

King. 24. 3. 2 Chronicles. 15. 5, 6. Amos 3. 3. the enemies are Gods rod, Isa. 10.
5. Gods sword, Psalm. 17. 13. Gods battle-Axe, Jer. 51. 20. And this is not
without reason, if we look at Gods glory, on his peoples benefit: Ezekiel. 8. 8.
has God revealed to us.

Secondly, his power; that he can make medicines of poisons, bring light out of
darkness, and much good to his people and Church by wars and losses, 2 Chronicles.
12. 9. and in the first time (eft times as worst, as Isaac) deliver them, 1
Cor. 10. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 9. make devouring Whales and Lions help and save them,
as Jonah, Daniel.

Thirdly, his love; when the wars and spoilers have left them nothing but a God
to live upon, yet often times then have they most enlarged, full comfort, as John
in Patmos, etc. Apostles Acts 4. ^^^.

Reas. 2. In regard of his people, God suffers plunderers; and that, First,
hereby to put them in mind of their former abuse of their houses, lands,
estates and liberties, therefore suffers them to be plundered of them, and to
teach them to prize and value them better another time, and God in them.

Secondly, to prevent some spiritual disease, or sore evil that he sees would
else grow upon them, perhaps pride, carnal security, loosnesse, therefore he
hedgeth their way with these thorns, Hos. 2. 14. 2 Cor. 12. 7.

Thirdly, to quicken them to duties with more heat, to cry more heartily, Hos.
5. 15. to take away their scum, Ezekiel. 24. 6. to make them shine brighter, Dan.
11. 34, 35. Isa. 4. 3, 4. Zech. 13. 8, 9. Isa. 1. 25, 26. and 27. 9. and other
such good ends, which I have formerly mentioned.

Use 1. To apply it briefly, first, art thou robbed, plundered, spoiled, look
up higher then man, as Job did, Job 1. 21. and 2. 10. as David, 2 Samuel 16. 10.
Psalm. 39. 9. not like dog at the stone.

Use 2. Snarl not, but learn patience, it is God has done it, who is just and
wise, who may do what he will, who will do what is best; it is a fathers cup
and rod; any thing on this side hell is mercy; thou art no poorer yet, then thou
came in, and must go out of the world: Consider first, such a submitting
patient frame of heart God loves and likes, and looks for, 2 Samuel 15. 26.
secondly, such a frame of spirit has a promise of ease and delivery, Levit.
26. 41, 42. thirdly, with such submission cast thy care on God, and thou
need take no distracting care in the worst times, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Phil. 4. 5,
6, 7.

Use 3. Is it God? here is a cordial in the worst times; he can take off these
spoilers, plunderers again (who sent them) when he will; go to him, he can hook
back a Zenacherib, bring down a Pharaoh, Herod, Haman, when he pleases, by
Angels, Stars, winds, rains above; by Lions, Whales, lice, frogs, etc. below;
weak means, contrary means, no means, Job 34. 20. when past hope in man's eye,
Deuteronomy. 32. 36, as Isaac, Jonab, etc. wait on God then in these hardest times,
and comfort we our selves: for first, are there not a great number of Abels
slain, whose blood cries under the Altar, Revel. 6. 9, 10. and will not God
avenge his elect speedily? Luke 18. 7, 8. Jer. 51. 35.

Secondly, many Saints (though dead) have left prayers for these times, and for
this work, who sowed what others must reap, John 4. and laid the first stone of
this work, and these prayers are upon the fyle.

Thirdly, there are many thousand Saints alive, for whom God will do much, as
for ten righteous in Sodom, for the wheats sake, yea, many young ones coming
on (and we use not to execute a woman while great. with child;) the Lord often
blesses a Potiphar, a Labans house, for a Joseph, a Jacob's sake; when the
great men of a Kingdom be in a combustion, yet the Saints then are the strength
of a Land, Zech. 12. 5, 6.

Fourthly, we have a thousand of wrestling prayers go to God daily for this
cause, if one poor widow can so prevail with an unjust Judge, Luke 18. one
Jacob, Genesis 32. 26. how much more the Armies of prayers that begirt Heaven; the
thing that we aim at, that Christ may reign, is the desire of the godly in all
Nations, Haggai 2. 6, 7.

Fifthly, we have many sweet experiments, tastes, and beginnings of what we
desire already; the bush is not consumed, two Kingdoms reconciled, much done
already, many grievous yoaks we are freed from.

Sixthly, Gods Name is much engaged in this work, Exodus 32. 12. Numb. 14. 15,
16.

Seventhly, enemies sins ripen apace, Genesis 15. 16. Zech. 5. 9. Ephah fills apace.

Use 4. Learn to profit under Gods rod; and that first, by seeking our ways
more then formerly, Haggai 1. 7. Lam. 3. 40. (you hear my haste;) secondly,
accept the punishment meekly, Micah 7. 9. Levit. 26. 41. thirdly, learn
obedience, Heb. 12. 10. and 5. 8. fourthly, learn reformation, Josh. 7. Isa. 9.
13, 14. Hos. 6. 1. fifthly, prize mercies more hereafter, and use them better.
For first, this is Gods end when he sends these robbers and troubles, Zeph. 3.
5, 7. secondly, it was the Churches way, David's Psalm. 13. 1. Isa. 26. 9.
thirdly, then the plaster will fall off, etc. But to end it:

Use 5. Lastly, art thou, thy friends, or Church distressed, look up at him for
cure that made the wound, meet God, Amos 4. 12. seek his face, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13,
14. Psalm. 80. 3. yea, cry to God for help now; for first, the enemies are very
cruel, Ps. 83. 3, 4. secondly, Church in much need, like a woman in travail,
ready to bring forth an excellent birth, but a Dragon stands ready to devour
it, Revel. 12. many are like those wicked spirits, Mark 9. when they see they
must be cast out, they rend all (though a Kingdom) in pieces; thirdly, God
expects thy cries for his sick Spouse, Ezekiel. 36. 37. fourthly, Church expects
and calls for it, Isa. 51. 18. Lam. 1. 1, 2, 17. But may I but have leave to
give you a brief of what I should have said to the other points, and I have
done.

Observe. 3. Jacobs sins and iniquities are the procuring and meritorious causes
of Jacobs punishment, Micah 6. 9. Jer, 9. 12. Lam. 3. 4. Isa. 59. 1, 2. and no
wonder; Cor. 6. 10. oh but they shall, says the sinner: thirdly, sin would
take away Gods sovereignty; a wicked wretch could with there was no God, and
will not have Christ to rule over him: fourthly, sin crosses the nature of
God; he is not only holy, but holiness; not only righteous, but
righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. but sin is unrighteousness, it is a very opposition
to infinite truth and justice, etc. fifthly, sin kicks God upon the bowels,
abuses infinite kindness, patience; for which of my good works do you stone
me? wherein have I wearied you, etc. no wonder then if this procure sore
punishments: A word or two of Application shall shut up this point.

Use 1. See then whom to blame for all the miseries that have and still do
befall us; all the Nations in the world could not have put us into that
condition that our sins have, and that justly; we but drink as we brewed; clear
God in all, he has done nothing without a cause.

Use 2. It informs as also, who is the greatest Malignant in all England,
Scotland, Ireland, etc. truly sin; there are bad Courtiers, but sin is worse,
else all hell could not have made us thus miserable and distracted.

Use 3. Let this show us sin in a right glass, and hereby learn to hate and
leave it; we may say of this war as Zipporah of Meses, a bloody war have thou
been unto me, in which some have lost their husbands, some their sons, some
their friends, some their estates; but then chiefly say, oh bloody sins that
caused all this: There are four glasses wherein I would show you the baseness
of sin: First, in the rise and spring of it, it is a bastard, whereof the Devil
is the father and man's naughty heart the mother; who would nurse such a brat,
etc. Secondly, in the nature of it, it is a thwarting and crossing God and his
law to his face: Thirdly, See two clean Birds.
by way of comparison, dirt, poison, crosses, Devil, hell, are nothing so ill
as sin, but shadows of it, etc. fourthly, in the effects of it; see what
misery it brought upon Angels; Secondly, Adam; thirdly, Sodom; fourthly; old
world; fifthly, what troubles on Jesus Christ: sixthly, on all the world to this
day, it is a makebate and break-peace every where, in Heaven, earth and hell.

Use 4. Exhorts us as ever we would have war removed, sword sheathed, wounds
healed, break off our sins by repentance; would you like it to see your Town
robbed and spoiled, your channels run with blood, your houses plundered? if
not, forsake your sins that procure these; then first, acknowledge 1 John 1. 9.
Hos. 5. 15.
thy sin, Psalm. 32. 5. and thy worthiness to perish forthy sin, come before
the Lord like Benhadad, with ropes about your necks, say, Lord if thou will
condemn me, here I am, thou shall need no other witness; acknowledge thy
sins, national, personal, inside and outside.

Secondly, break off thy darling sin, that is a main work, this fasting day,
Isa. 58. it is not consessing, like Judas, or sackcloath with Ahab, will serve
without this, Isa. 1. 11, 15.

Thirdly, do the contrary good, Matthew. 21. 29. repenting was expressed in the
sons doing the contrary to his former finnes.

Fourthly, mourn, lend a tear to a poor sick mother when we are almost robbed
of our God of our King, of our Religion, and our liberties, of our estates, of
our friends and lives, and (...) still in many (...) the growing hand; should
we now make, (...) 1. Ezekiel. 21. 6. be not insensible; but a word of this in the
next point, and an end. Which is,

Observe. 4. That when God pours these sore calamities of war, spoiling, etc.
aforementioned, upon a people, he expects they should be sensible of, affected
with them and mourn under them, and is very angry and displeased, if they do
not lay them to heart; and no wonder, for first, God calls for this mourning
temper, when he afflicts a people, Isa. 22. 12. Romans 12. 15, 16. secondly,
Church calls for it, have pity upon me, have pity upon me, Job 19. 21. Lam. 2.
18, 19. thirdly, God complains when we are not affected with the rod, when we
lay it not to heart, Hos. 7. 9. Amos 6. 6. Obad. v, 12, 13. so does the Church
also complain for want thereof, Lam. 1. 12. fourthly, the Saints of God have
laid Gods rod sore to heart, when it has layen on their brethren, though
themselves have been free; thus Nehemiah, though he had provision, wine, etc.
enough, and was servant in ordinary to the highest Potentate on earth, Neh. 1.
3, 4. and 2. 2, 3. so Daniel one of the highest subjects on earth. see how he
is affected with the Churches calamities, Dan. 10. 3. so Jer. 9. 1. witness
his Lamentations, see Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. 11. see Elisha, when he but foresaw the
miseries that would come on Israel, 2 King. 8. 11, 12. above all, see Christ
over Jerusalem, Luke 19. 41, 41. And reason good, if we look at, first, God;
secondly, our Brethren that suffer, or thirdly, our selves.

Reas. 1. In regard of God, it is he that strikes, his rod, his work, his
strange work, and should we not be affected then? if a father lash one child,
smite another, chide a third, shall not the rest lay it to heart; a child of
God trembles at his word, Isa. 66. 2. much more at his blows and judgments; the
Church trembled and were all afraid, when but one or two were smitten, Acts 5.
11. how much more when God strikes down thousands, David cries, he was afraid
of Gods judgments, Psalm. 119. 120.

Secondly, in regard of God also, because in plundering, fighting, robbing
times, there is much wickedness committed against God; see in our times what
open wickedness against both Law and Gospel; what professed Atheism against
the first Commandment, like him that was advised to leave sin, else there was
hell for him, cried, Tune credam cum illuc venero; or that Soldier that on the
one side of his shield (as he fancied) pictured the image of God, with these
words under it, Si tu non vis, on the other side, the Devil, and under it these
words, Isle rogitat, if God will not, the Devil will; that was all that he
cared: So what open Idolatry against the second Commandment (Atheists and
Papists being combined together,) what profane swearing, cursing, damming,
ramming, banning against the third; so that many men (tolerably civil seven
years ago) cannot now speak except they swear; I think verily God has given
them over to that in wrath; which they at first prided themselves in; for the
fourth Commandment, we need no books of sports to be read to cry it down;
amongst many, it is almost forgot, some denying it in opinion, others in
practice; for the fifth, how do the vilest people if stronger, insult over the
ancient, rifle his house, so that he whose face they durst scarce (the other
day) look at, cannot say, his house, lands, goods, wife, children, etc. are his
own, Isa. 3. 5. Lam. 4. 5. and 5. 8. but drag him forth of his house bare,
though gray headed and barefoot, and use him villanously, as Phocas did to
that good Emperor Mauritius, for murder, whordome and stealing, (breaches of
the sixth, seventh and eighth Commandments) which usually go together; how
rarely are these punished? nay, made but a jest? plundering, smoking, etc.
lying is grown a trade in word, writing, print, etc. For the Gospel, how do men
jeer at it, the gospellers, gospel lives, faith, etc. nay, how do some openly
cast off the old Testament and much of the new, both in doctrine and practice?
and should we not, nay, can we but lay these things to heart that are practiced
in these plundering times? if our father, husband, wife, etc. was struck down,
we would mourn; and is not God dearer to us then a thousand friends, shall we
not lay it to heart when men grow worse then Devils, James 2. 19. neither
believe nor tremble?

Thirdly, when the enemy gets a petty victory, Gods name is blasphemed,
therefore should we be affected and afflicted, he cannot be content to strip,
plunder, beat the poor Saint (whom he blasphemes Roundhead) but he must rail
on and revile his God; where is your God now? what is become of your Fasting,
Conventicles, long prayers, praying by the spirit? alas, this kills a David's
heart, troubles old Eli and his daughter, more then other crosses, 1 Samuel 4.
18, 19, 21. Psalm. 74. 18, 19. and 79. 10, 11. so Moses, Exodus 32. 11. Numb. 14.
16. so Psalm. 3. 2. and 10. 13. and 42. 3.

Reas. 2. In regard of our Brethren and Country; for first, many are banished,
plundered, wounded, slain, their houses burned, themselves outwardly undone,
that are very dear to God, whose lives are precious, Lam. 4. 2. blood precious,
Psalm. 72. 14. death precious, Psalm. 116. 15. Gods servants, friends, children,
heirs, Christ's fellows (fellow servants, fellow sufferers fellow conquerors,
Romans 8. fellow judges, 1 Cor, 6. 2. fellow citizens with the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 8. 17. nay, Christ's spouses, partakers of divine promises, divine nature,
divine (communicable) privileges of Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and shall we not lay
this to heart?

Secondly, they are near to us, of the same house with us (for all Gods Church
is but one house, only several Chambers and Parlours, 1 Pet. 4. 17.) nay,
members of same body, under same head, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 26. and when these suffer
deeply, shall not we mourn? then are we but glassie eyes, and wooden legs, no
living members; shall Christ be sensible, who is the head, Acts 9. 4, 5. Matthew.
25. 42, 43. and not your fellowmembers? 2. Cor. 11. 29. 1. John 2. 9, 10.

Thirdly, in regard of our Country; can we see our native Country spoiled, torn
in pieces by its own sons and not mourn? see Neh. 2. 3. Psalm. 107. 34. Joel 2.
3. how has this darling soil and Kingdom been harassed and overrun by the
Saxons (Anno 447. after Christ) whom King Vortiger sent for to help him against
the Picts and Scots, who came over hither under the conduct of Hengistus and
Horsus, with about 9000. men at first, but after they had conquered the enemy,
they conquered King Vortiger himself, slew his Nobles, got first a Castle in
Kent (Thong Castle) then a County, then most part of our Kingdom, and made
seven Kingdoms of it, plundered, banished and spoiled the Britains: After came
in the Danes, fetched in by one of our Nobility, Beorne Bockard (as some say, by
occasion of one Lothbroke) under the conduct of two Danish Captains, Hunga and
Hubba, upon the Danes coming into England, they slew Osbert King of
Northumberland, and so revenged the cause of Bockard, and after shot King
Edmond to death with arrows, having bound him to a Tree, therein revenging the
death of one Lothbroke (slain by one Beric King Edmonds falconer:) These Danes
again plundered the poor Inhabitants of this Land, kept them under as slaves,
so as they could not drink, but a Dane would cut an English-mans throat; hence
were they fain to get one to pledge them when they drank, to save their throats
from being cut. After this, came in the Normans from Normandy in France, in the
days of King Harold brought hither by William Duke of Normandy (after called
William the Conqueror) landed near Hastings in Sussex, September 28. 1066. Duke
William sunk all his ships, that so his men might resolve to fight (for fly
they could not) fought with Harold October 14. in the year of Christ 1066. in
which battle were slain about 68000. men, William proved the Conqueror, got the
Crown, the poor Inhabitants were again plundered, their lands, places, estates
were given to the French, many fled to Scotland, to King Malcolme there, etc.
but yet these were plunderings from foreign Nations, but now are we tearing
out our own bowels in civil wars and broils one with another; it is true also,
we have had terrible civil wars in England before this in the Barons war, in
the divisions twixt the houses of Lancaster and York; but still ours are worse;
when those wars were at hottest, it is Chronicled for a strange wonder, that in
the Reign of Edward the fourth, there were nine several battles fought in that
civil war, and yet he reigned (I think) almost 23. years. But I can tell you of
nine battles in half a year in King Charles his time, nay three times nine
battles in three years of his Reign, and the Lord knows how many more yet may
be. In every one of our late Sovereigns Reigns, there has been some remarkable
trouble or danger to this Laud; burning in Queen Mary's days, a Spanish Navy
in 88 in Queen Elizabeth's days; a hellish Powder Plot in 1605. in King James
his days, but these troubles in King Charles his days exceed all the rest; in
Queen Mary's days some three hundred were burnt, in our days above thrice three
thousand slain; alas; how is our Country (lately like the Garden of God) now
become a desolute Wilderness, Joel 2. 3. that Land that Gregory (after called
the great) at Rome called Angel-land, a Land of Angels; which Spain called the
fortunate Island; how sits she like a widow? alas, one comes from the Army and
brings news like his 1 Samuel 4. 17. there has been a great slaughter, and thy
sons are slain, and then what pity to see how Rachel weeps because they are
not; another cries, my Husband is slain; another comes like Jobs messengers,
and cries, thy goods are plundered, sheep and Cattle etc. gone by the Sabeans,
etc. Job 1. another is shot to death, but locked in the saddle, swags up and
down; another has his arm off, leg off, nose off, hand off, etc. ah, alas ten
thousand pitties! Cornfieldsd burnt, houses; Churches burnt down, Isa. 64. 10,
11. Psalm. 74. 4, 7. thumbs and toes cut off, as in Adonibezek's time, Judge. 1.
7. swords make women childlesse, as in Agag's time, 1 Samuel 15. 33. cruelty used
to living, yea and to the dead also, Psalm. 79. 2. which a very Tacitus would
have abhorred.

Reas. 3. In regard of our selves: First, our sins have had as deep a share in
bringing these judgments as any, and shall we not be affected then with them?
then are we worse then the old Prophet was, 1 King. 13. 30. he hurt the young
Prophet, but then mourned; David's sins hurt the people, Actions the Army; the
peoples sin hurt Vzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13. 10. a bad stomach hurts a good head, and
shall we not mourn then, as Daniel did in the like case? Dan. 9. 5, 6.

Secondly, because that which lies on others to day, may be our case to morrow,
ille body ego cras, as Bernards good old man said, the cup may pass unto us,
Lam. 4. 21. we may be forced to drink round of Gods cup, Jer. 25. 28, 29. and
49. 12. say not they are greater sinners then we that are sharplier chastized,
Luke 13. 4, 5. but lay it to heart as if we were in bonds, Heb. 13. 3. Gal. 6.
1. But I must break up; an Use or two therefore shortly, and I have done.

Use 1. Of reproof to many (herein nigh a kin 20 Jacob, to Israel) that though
we are thus given to the robbers and spoilers, yet consider not, yet lay it not
to heart; these are of diverse sorts; First, they that are glad of it; en^^^es
cry, down with us, down to the ground, Psalm. 137. 7. seeming friends, that say,
hereby they get their wealth, Acts 19. 25. Newters of Gallio's temper, or of
theirs, 2 Samuel 2. 14. Obadiah ver. 12. Psalm. 35. 15.

Secondly, they that are sensible of Jacobs troubles, but impute them to a
wrong cause, they say as Barbarians of Paul, or Job's friends of him, Surely
Jacobs cause is naught, be goes in a wrong way, else had never been so given up
to the spoilers and robbers; but oh see ere thou judge, Judge. 20. 21, 25.

Thirdly, they who are sensible of, and affected with the cross and trouble,
not the sin.

Fourthly, they that make it appear they are not affected with our miseries and
sins, no not upon our humiliation, fasting and mourning days; for first, some
come not, cannot spare time from work; secondly, other game, card, sport this
day, which is much more needless then work; thirdly, others feast this day
purposely, set up an anti-fast, as well as an antiparliament, see Isa. 22. 12,
13, 14.

Fifthly, others take occasion this day, while you are shut up here mourning
and weeping, and praying, to haunt Alehouses, and whordome, and pour more oaths
out, and more cups in, then we pour out tears, like brazen-faced Zimri, when
all the Congregation was weeping, Number. 25. 6.

Sixthly, they that come hither and sit here, but are not affected, mourn not;
fasting days should be weeping days, fasting and weeping used to be joined
together, Neh. 1. 4. Est. 43. 1 Samuel 7. 6. Joel 2. 12. many are very eager and
earnest in buying, in selling, trading, hunting, coursing, only mighty
careless, mindlesse, in hearing, praying, and when they should be weeping.

Seventhly, others weep and mourn for a day, but hold not out, are not like
wrestling Jacob, or the importunate widow, or like mourning Jeremy, Lam. 3. 50.
till God look down and heal his Church: Now this insensiblenesse in these sad
days, this not laying these things to heart, is, first, a walking contrary to
God, Isa. 22. 12. Levit. 26. 40. secondly, it argues much folly and blindness
of mind, Jer. 5. 3, 4. thirdly, much hardness of heart, worse then Pharaoh,
Manasses, Prodigal, they in times of crosses relented, Exodus 9. 27, 28. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. Luke 15. fourthly, it is a despising God; let him smite and do
what he will, says the sinner, I will not yield, like Balaam, will not turn
back for all sword and miracle, Numb. 22. fifthly, it argues a mervailous love
of sin, as the child that is whipping for playing with rattles, will still play
with them while he is on the knee whipping, sure he loves them dearly, as
Balaam did the wages of unrighteousness, so as word and sword could not turn
him, 2 Pet. 2. 15. sixthly, it argues want of love to Christ, 1 John. 3. 17. and
4. 20. seventhly, want of love and zeal to Gods Cause, Psalm. 74. 18, 19. and
79. 10, 11.

Use. 2. The second Use should have been for trial, whether we are rightly
affected with Jacobs troubles; first, are we as much affected with them now, as
we were at the beginning of these wars? secondly, how are we afflicted on days
of humiliation, Levit. 23. 27. Ezekiel. 7. 16. thirdly, are we affected with sin,
the cause of all these troubles? fourthly, do we turn from our evil vvays and
reform, Jonah 3. 10.

Use 3. But to end, lastly, be exhorted this mourning day, to consider and lay
to heart Jacobs troubles; as first, the scattered dry bones of Germany;
secondly, the Acheldema and tortures of Ireland; thirdly, the divisions of
Scotland; fourthly, the plunderings in England: fifthly, the fury of battle and
sword, hacking and hewing amongst us; sixthly, the destroying Angel, the noisome
pestilence in many places of our Land and Country; seventhly, the scisms,
rents, old, new errors in the Church; eighthly the increase of sin daily, of
all kinds, as light increases; there was light and knowledge in King Edward
the fixed his days, more in Queen Elizabeth's, more still in King James his,
most in King Charles his days, yet still sin increases, yet some do not see,
some will not see, some pretend to see that which is not to be seen; ninthly,
God draws nearer and nearer with his judgments and warnings, begins now to
make his approaches, entrench and make his batteries; he began in Germany, came
on to Ireland, then to Scotland, then to England, then to Yorkshire, then to
the gates of Hull; and that first, mildlier, when the King came to the gates
in April 1642. then sharplier in the first siege, then more terribly in the
second siege, from which you were delivered October. 11. 1643. bevvare the
fourth time; now God knocks at the gates with a fear of the plague the King
called in Anno 1642. the King of Kings knocks now in 1645. tenthly, the danger
of continuing these troubles, till all be dashed in pieces, and many such like
evils.

Qu. What should we do? Ans. first, ponder sadly, the lands miseries, the
particulars, the quantity, the quality of them, Psalm. 41. 1. secondly, ponder
thy own evil vvays, as sadly, Psalm. 4. 4. Ezekiel. 36. 31. Lam. 3. 40. sift thy
self for thy sins (as the word is Zeph. 2. 12.) when God sifts the Land, Amos
9. 9. do as the Prodigal, return to thy self, Luke 15. 17. thirdly, clear God
in all this, and condemn thyself, Ezra 9. 13. though thou art no rebel against
the King, yet against the Kings King thou have been; fourthly, have a fellow
feeling of thy brethrens miseries Heb. 13. 3. so as to pity them in thy heart,
Jer. 4. 19, 20. Lam. 3. 51. and pray for them with thy heart and tongue, Isa.
62. 3. help them in thy life, mourn for them, Neh. 1. 4. and look not only on
them, as Priest and Levite did, but to thy power be a good Samaritan; thirdly,
you that have power, punish wickedness and vice, let it not be now when the
Kingdom bleeds (as a godly Divine says) as hard to pull down a base Alehouse,
Mast. Bol.
as to win Dunkirk, etc.

Motives might be many, but I will only hint at one or two and conclude: First,
to lay to heart Jacobs troubles, with the cause thereof, is the way to save us
in time of danger, Ezekiel. 9. 4. when King Zedekiah would juggle on all sides,
mourning Jeremy speaks home and plain, yet finds more favor from the Chaldeans
heathen Army, then Zedekiah and all the Nobles, Jer. 39. 6, 7, 11, 12. so Ester
4. 14. Secondly, we have set apart this day to lay to heart Jacobs troubles,
let us do the work that we came for: Thirdly, consider how Jesus Christ was
and is affected with the churches miseries, Luke 19. 41. Acts 9. 4, 5.
Fourthly, how great things now lie at stake, not an Army only new moulding, but
Kingdom, etc. but I to case you, and myself, break off with the sad complaint
of mourning Jeremy Lam. 3. 48, 49, 50, 51. Mine eye runs down with rivers of
water for the destruction of the daughter of my people; mine eye trickleth down
and cease not, without any intermission, till the Lord look down and behold
from Heaven; mine eye affects my heart, because of all the daughters of my
people.

FINIS.
December. 26. 1645.
Impri.

JOSEPH CARYL.


