THE COMMITTEE-MAN CURRIED.

A COMEDY presented to the view of all Men.

Written by S. SHEPPARD.

A piece discovering the corruption of Committee Men, and Excise-men; the
unjust sufferings of the Royal party, the divellish hypocrisy of some
Roundheads, the revolt for gain of some Ministers.

Not without pleasant mirth, and variety.

Nil erit ulterius, quod nostris moribus addat
Posteritas, eadem cupient, facient que minores
Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit --
Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

The Prologue.
SInce it is held a crime, that on the Stage
Wit should present it self (since that the Age)
Degenerates so far, that nothing may
Be countenanc't, that shows but like a Play;
How shall these Scenes escape free (ye wiser few)
That are not retrograded with the crew
OF the reforming ones, since it is enacted
That naught but fiery Faction shall be acted;
And since the prudent now have ordered so,
Fools only speak Cum privilegio.
We in obedience, so as we can,
Have given words to a Committee-man.
Dramatis Personae.
SUck-dry, a Committee-man, a lover of Horns wife. Sneake, his Clearke.
Common-curse, an Excize-man. Shallow-braines, his Clearke. Loyalty, a
Cavaliere. Rebellion, a Roundhead, Uncle to Loyalty. Horn, a contented
Citizen. Light-heele, his Wife. Da-mee, a Ruffian, her Lemman. Time-server, a
Priest. A Servant. A Drawer. Fiddlers.
The Scene LONDON.

THE COMMITTEE-MAN CURRIED.
ACTVS 1.
SCENA 1.
Enter SUCK-DRY, as in the morning dressing himself. SUCK-DRY. THe Sun was
up too soon; Phoebus is
Grown as rash as Phaaeton, and drives his
Waine too fast; how pass the hours? Looks on a Watch.
Bless me my Genius, on the stroke of nine.
Sure some saucy Client mingled some Seeds of
Poppy in my drink -- I slept so sure and long,
-- Body a me, -- by this they are all met --
And my chair empty stands. -- What ho SNEAK. Knocks.
Thou sleepst as if thou were on Patmus top;
Thou art as drowsy as a Dormouse ever, the
Tortoise marches swift to thee.

Enter SNEAKE, stretching himself. SNEAK. Hei, ho.


SUCK. Thou dull and sordid lump, unweildy as the bulk Prometheus framed ere
he infusd life in it; open thy closed eyes.


SNEAK. Hei, ho.


SUCK. I shall be quite undone, and loose my place; -- Slave -- I Will kick thee
into sense. Kicks him.


SNEAK. This room so swarms with Fleas, I near can sleep in quiet.


SUCK. O Rogue -- is this a time to kill 'um, -- when all my brethren in full
assembly met expect my presence -- and ere I come, perhaps may share the Gold
that is due to me -- villain rowse thy self -- not yet -- Beats him:


SNEAK. ^old sir -- this sitting up a nights -- hei, ho.


SUCK. Shake thy self Rogue -- where is my Gown -- 'sdeath be nimble in thy
motion -- bring me that Parchment bundle -- those blankes to sign on all
occasions; -- I had almost forgot -- bring me those Orders too were coined
yesterday to leavy moneys for the relief of Ireland. -- Let Us away,

I Will pocket up the Commons Coin to day. Exeunt.


SCEAN 2.
Enter LOYALTY a Cavaliere. LOYALTY. How do I walk despisd, distressed,
forlorn,
Fair LOYALTY is vile REBELLION'S scorn.
There Is a strange change of things; what late
Was styled strict devotion is termed now horrid
Impiety -- it is decreed above -- who shall
Control the Fates, or strive with saucy will, to
Race those evils out to which men are prescribed.
Charles, like a huge Pyramid, has overthrown
Himself with his own weight -- and in his fall
Has crushed his props to nothing -- he may take
Root again, and bear his Kingdom up -- firm
As the mighty Atlas does his heaven Fortunes wheel
Ever turns, -- nor may the blood of those most
Loyal subjects, whose Ghosts now wander in the vacant
Air, be spilt as water on the ground, and not
Have drop for drop, and ounce for ounce repayd;
My wounds whose scarres yet remain vissible, the
Noble Characters of Loyalty, taken for Gods
Anointed, and the Churches safety, I esteem of
Them each one as Trophies of my fame -- and
You where ere you wander, Loyal Spirits, and are
On wi lfull exile, fear not but we ere long
May captive the unconstant Queen of chance,
And lead her bound in chains -- this my Unkles
House -- a warm furd sir, one that leanes on
His bags as on his staff, and commits Sodomy
With Mammon; -- he has pretended zeal
For Church and State, has set out horse and man
Against his Sovereign, whom he now dreads ere
Long will visit London, -- and force him to
Disburse anew. Knocks at the door.

Enter a Servant. SERVE. How now sir --


LOY. How now sir -- slave I would see thy Master; -- I must have --


SERVE. What sir, -- his Purse?


LOY. Do rich men keep such Curs to snarle at strangers? -- It Is fit I do
chastise thy sauciness; Learn manners for the future.

Strikes him.
SERVE. O help, help.


Enter REBELLION a Roundhead. REB. What rash intruder's this? -- ha my nephew!
Betwixt his name and I
There is a very vast antipathy.
Sir, you mistake your self. You are not now in
Ruperts Camp, you may not swagger here with
Safety; our laws give bounds to Roysters, such as you;
We have Committees close and sub, and grand,
That make strict Inquisition after those, who have
Presumed to fight for Royalty.

LOYAL. Suspend your wrath sir, till you hear my plea; your servants language
'twas that drew a danger from my arm.

After expense of time, of blood, of sweat, I come to see you Uncle and expect
-- at least a verbal welcome.


REBEL. He hath's damnation sealed that harbors thee -- thou enemy to
goodness; thou that have dared to aid thy Sovereign Lord, and fight against
those that do seek his welfare, who have a Nation before dull, and lumpish,
now made expert and prompt in active war, have taught the people for to know
the worth of gentle peace, the horrors wait on war, have learnt them how to
pine themselves with want; while they do pamper those that do reform them,
have sold them precious wisdom which they have gained, only with loss of LIFE,
of GOODS, of FAME.


LOYAL. By Jive he speaks all Oracle; and may they have no other Trumpet for
to noise out their Fame then thy unwary tongue. -- Sir I had thoughts did
prompt me to make known my wants and penury unto you; but in persuading you to
bounty, I shall but imitate a foolish wave, that seeks to penetrate a Rock.
-- God buy sir, -- May you and all your Tribe find the like comfort from the
rigid Judge, whenas you will stand pleading to live yet longer. All Climates are
alike unto a generous soul, he is CIVIS MUNDI. France, I come into thy arms,
thou spreadst them wide to entertain those loyal Subjects fly to thee for
shelter.

England farewell, with sin and Neptune bounded,
Nile nere produced a monster like a Roundhead.
Exit.
ACT. 2.
Enter COMMON-CURSE an Excise-man, and SHALLOW-BRAINES his Clerk. COMMON-CURSE.
Say thou the Butchers threaten to knock down who ere shall rate their Cattle.


SHALL. Yes sir, and they add it is great injustice their Bullocks should bring
in so great a gain into Guild Hall, due unto them, purchased with pain and
sweat: and yet the Shee-sellers of Mutton in Turnball-street, Spring-garden,
and Crosse-lane, pass without paying tole for Maydenheads, sell flesh at
dearer rates then they, and yet pay no Excise.


COM. It were not for the credit of the State thou fool to make a gain of
sin, and like Romes Bishop receive tithes from the Brothels.


Enter SUCK-DRY, SNEAKE. SUCK. Come along SNEAKE, -- thou must fill up those
blankes to night


SNEAK Very like sir, would nature had produced Geese without quils, -- I
should not have --


SUCK. Mr COMMON-CURSE, happily met, and how, and how goes squares; -- does thy
bags strut like to the udder of a Cow? -- these times will make us all. -- Pray
Heaven they hold the name of peace sounds in my ears like to the Ravens
croaking -- it sings my Dirge. -- But stay I heard sad news this evening.


COM CUR. What news?


SUCK. That the Cow-killers of Cowlane, and Smithfieldbars have burnt down the
Excise house.


COM Were that news true, 'twould scorch my heart to tind r. -- I ever feared
those masty knaves would muteny; it is a sad OMEN, and prognosticates the Excise
is not long lived.


SUCK. The foolish Commons now 'gin to wax wise, they are wak't out of their
dream, and find their fancy has deluded them, -- they do begin to think
of the days of yore, when as their coin, and children were their own. Shouting
within.


COM. Ha -- what noise is that, run SHALLOW-BRAINES, and learn the cause.
Exit SHALLOW.


SUCK. Thou tremblest as if thy sins had met thee, or thy fathers ghost.


COM. I fear the rage of the incensed multitude, whose malice is inveterate
against me. -- Pray heaven they make not this way. Enter SHALLOW-BRAINES.


SHALL. The occasion of the shout was this sir; the Butchers are releast from
the burden of the Excize, and to express their joy they rend the air with
clamor; this night they do intend to have the Bells ring merrily, each where
Bonefires made; and on a pile of wood they have tide the picture of an Excise
man, shapt with reeds; and him they sacrifice to the God of fire.


COM. Methinks the fire does parch my limbs; so would they serve me, had they
what they would.

O SUCKDRY, this is the first day of my ruin.


SUCK Cheer up man, thou shall not fall alone; we two, like Hypocrates twins,
must live and die together: the Excise is the Committees prop, and but drawn
with desire of that sweet gain the Excize does daily bring us, would we so
venture, think thou; and privately hoord up the coin is lent upon the
public Faith, casting behind our backs the thought of fear? -- Good fellows
still envy the drink they swallow, Beer and Tobacco still bring in Excise,
with all things else of worth, and vendible.


COM. Had I not met thee, I had sure ere this dissolved into a Jelly, -- this
harsh news astonished so my senses; -- This is Algate, -- lets to the Sun and
taste a pint of Sack, -- it is Wine alone can mitigate my fears.


SUCK. Nere doubt it sir.

Sack has the power all cares for to expel,
And had the damned Sack, Hell were not Hell.
Exeunt.
ACT. 3.
A Curtain drawn, COMMON-CURSE, SUCK-DRY, discovered sitting as in a Tavern
taking Tobacco, Wine before them, SNEAKE and SHALLOW steal off. SUCK. THis is
legitimate blood of the rich corsick Grape; fill me a boule, that I may bathe
my head in 't, and rise like Phoebus from the East, shaking my dewy locks. -- I
now could rarely Poetize; -- No marvel the hungry Poets talk of Tantalus, of
Jaion, and of Titius; of fell Maegera, Tisiphone, and Alecto, when Sack does
shape Chimeras in their brains -- Methinks I could create a second Hell, and
place blessed souls in an Elysium, the ancient Bards nere dreampt of.


COM. He Is inspired.


SUCK. Boy, some Wine.


DRAW. I come, I come sir.


Enter Fiddlers. Fid. Gentlemen will you have a strain of mirth?


Suck; I am all ayrie now -- Come all at once, and let your mellodie in
discords please, to which we I foot it, as those loose quarries, that
o're-heard Orpheus, and his harp. They dance.


COM: -- More wine, I now begin for to have merry thoughts, -- more wine, --
the newest air you have.

A SONG.
Monopolists are damned now
By order of the state,
And yet we in their room I vow.
Have ten for one of late.
The taking of them hence,
Under a good pretense,
Have made this Monarchy
But one Monopoly.
Committees do Monopolize
Our coin, and all that is ours
And when the're wanting (the Excise)
Supplies their vacant hours
Commanders in the Battle
They do enjoy our cattle.
Nor want their some that strives,
To Monopolize our wives.
While one King did the Scepter weild.
and many did obey,
Then we joys flowing in beheld
Nor under pressures lay.
But now that many be,
Kings of our Anarchy.
Our troubles do increase,
Nor know we when they cease.

Suck. We are in an excellent humor -- lets have the the other quart,


Com. Rare rogue in Buckram -- thou shall go out a wit, and vie with Martin
Parker, or John Tailor.


Suck. Shall I so -- then let the money I have gained to day; buy Sack, and
Music, -- throws down money ha, ha, ha,

May we still have Domestic Jarres,
Live still in fear of future Wars.
That thee and I, (my Bullie) may,
Each get our hundred pounds a day.

Com. A round -- a round -- a round -- some bodies at door (knocking within)
prithee -- prithee -- sir try thy skill.


Suck. Whose there, Edward, one Mr. Rebellion a Roundhead, and one Time-server
a Priest.


Com. Let um in, let um in.

Enter Rebellion and Time-server. Master Rebellion, and Master Time-server,
welcome, welcome I faith now -- some wine boy.


Reb. What Circe has with murmuring charms, thus Metamorphos'd seeming civil
men to beastly swine, O Mr. Time-Server -- with weeping eyes, behold those
sins here Acted, for which a Nation mournes. --


Time-Serv. My eyes are ready to drop out, and fall like bullets at my feet,
for to behold this object.


Com. Come Mr. Rebellion, and Mr. Time-Server, this stern Socratick garb does
not become you, leave it, faith it is scurvie; -- what Planet struck -- desperate
wounds must have desperate cures -- shut the door -- nay gentlemen -- you
shall drink -- sit down and tipple -- so -- Mr. Rebellion a health to king Pims
Ghost -- can you deny the honored shade that courtesy, -- nay, I will be
pledged --

(sings a catch.) -- Some drink -- what boy -- some drink
Fill it up, fill it up to the brink,
When the Pots cry clink
And the pockets chink,
Then it is a merry world.
To the best, to the best, have at her
And a pox take the woman-hater.
-- Thanks Mr Rebellion, nay, it must go round, Mr. Time-Server you will not
affront our triumph.


Time-Ser. Alas this sack agrees not with my constitution -- so deep a
draught, will put me to the charge of physic: besides it is a sin, to guzzel
down the creature thus in waste, a crime which heaven abhorres -- sir I dare
not.


Com. How? -- dare not -- thou art not then a friend unto the cause, and so I
will inform -- pox on him -- if you love me Suckdrie, lets stiff him, and say
it was a sudden judgment upon him for his obstinacy; the posture will confirm
it.


Suck. You must drink sir --


Time. hold, sir i will drink -- he drinks --


Suck. So, so, so.


Rebel. This is good sack gentlemen, i will spend my pint -- so please you --


Suck. I Will gi'thee a quart (my Bullie) to morrow, I le be thrifty, and share
the Commons coin with frugall skill -- Nay Master Time-server, sit not so
far of, each man join foot to foot, and tipple in an Orb. Some wine boy


Draw. I come, I come Sir, (brings wine.)


Com. Here Master Time-Server, -- you are too Stoicall -- a draught of this,
will give you the Anallysis of your text, without mediums or nocturnall
watchings -- here, he drinks.


Time-Ser. This is enticing liquor -- drinks


Suck. Mr. Rebellion, this blood of the ripe grape, will add unto your
numerous pious thoughts, in this bowl full to the brimme I memorize your
health --


Rebel. I thank you sir, and by my fathers head, this sack is very warm, and
comfortable, give me measure sir, -- drinks.


Time-Ser. I now begin to be strangely transported; gentlemen, shalls be merry
for troth to say, it is that I most effect; how ere I counterfeit, -- to please
the rising Roundheads -- when as the Bishops ruled I was for them, I wore my
Cassock most canonical; but now the tide is turned, 'twere simple policy to
swim against the stream, to be so nice of conscience, for making scruple to
revile my Prince, to cherish and confirm base men, in hope of that nere was,
nor is, nor ere shall be to loose vast sums of gold, thanksgiving dinners and
repute --


Rebel. Drink deep, my fingers itch, until they seize the bowl -- I laugh to
think how when I counterfeit a whining passion, and talk of God and goodness,
walk with a sad, and mortified countenance, how I Am admired, amongst the
Brethren, and stild a man of God --


Suck. Excellent, here is to thee for that conceit; we four should have made
rare Statesmen, we are so witty in our mischief.

Master Time-Server, You have occupied with the nine girls -- lets hear, lets
hear. --


Time-Server sings A health to the nut brown Less,
With the hazell eyes, let it pass,
She that has good eyes
Has good thighs,
Let it pass -- Let it pass.
As much to the lively gray,
It Is as good ith night as the day,
She that has good eyes
Has good thighs,
Drink away -- Drink away.
I pledge, I pledge, what be some wine,
Here Is to thine -- and to thine
The colors are divine,
But O the black, the black
Give me as much again, and let be sack
She that has good eyes
Has good thighs,
And it may be, a better knack.

Suck, A reckoning boy -- call thy Master. (Enter Master)


Master, Your will gentlemen


Suck. Our will sir is to pay, gentlemen deposite -- they pay -- do hear,
here is a friend of ours has forgotten himself. -- Com. Cur. -- a little as they
call it -- the wine has got a sleep into his head -- as frost into a hand --
he is benumbed and has no use of himself for present. Exeunt


Mast. You Would need gentlemen, be all wafted home in a Sedan, you are so light,
you hardly feel your selves; and yet so weighty, that you reele under your
burdens thus must we thrive by sin -- it must be so, this is the last of ages.

Nor can posterity, new vices frame,
Our children will but wish, and act the same.
Exit.
ACT. 4.
The curtain pinned up, Enter HORN a Citizen, as in his Shop. Horn. What dee
lack Gentlemen, pray what dee lack?


Enter Light-heeles, his wife. Light. Sweetheart, where have you disposed the
velvet slippers, the Shoemaker brought home last night. --


Horn. They are in the matted-chamber, close by the role of (...)


Enter Suck-dry. Suck: Mr. Horn, I joy to see you healthy, and in so fair a
way to thrive. --


Mr. Horn, my humblest service; I shall make bold Sir, to spend an hour or
two with your fair wise. --


Horn. With all my heart Sir. James. -- Show worshipful Mr. Suck-dry into the
painted chamber. Sir there is a quilt of worth in 't. -- Sweetheart be not too
nice, -- refuse not to be open to him, -- thou know hes bountiful. --


Light. I shall observe your charge Sir. Exeunt.


Scene 2.
Enter again Suck-dry, Light-heeles. Suck: I Will lock the door Sweet -- [Locks
the door.] So -- Now we are alone -- no envious eyes can gaze upon our actions.
-- Dearest Mistress, have thou not wanted my society, the tedious term of
three whole days? --


Light. No Sir, Love will subsist a while with ruminating of those joys have
bin, as well as those that are to come. --


Suck. Look here my Mistress, since I saw you, I have invokt Apollo, and the
Nine, to aid my quill in some apt meeter for to sing thy praise.


Light. Verses, -- are they your own Sir, -- I do not think but you Poets,
that can so manifest your loves in blanke verse, not leave or god or goddess
in spacious heaven, but call them down for witnesses, if you were mounted on a
cowle-staffe, and tossed something high, you would imagine you backed Pegasus.
-- Or if you were placed knee-deepe in a great tub of water, you dabling there
would count it Helicon. --


Suck. Your wit's too sharp Sweet Mistress, you talk like a second Sapho,
hear my Minerva speak.


Light. Willingly Sir.

He reads his verses. Bright star ot'h lower orb, twinkling inviter,
Which draw'st as well as eyes, but sett'st men righter,
For who at thee begins, comes to the place
Sooner then he, that sets out at the face:
Eyes are seducing Lights, that the good women know,
And hang out these, a nearer way to show.
How like you these? --

Light. Troth Sir the sense ot'h lines puzzels my capacity, -- I want your
meaning Sir.


Suck. I will unfold my self, when I told thee,

-- Let us turn day to night,
Too much fruition bates my appetite;
For who so amourous, but his Love he may
Abhor, and justly too, seven times a day.
Exeunt.
ACT. 5.
Enter DAMMEE, a Ruffian. Dam. This day I Will sacrifice to Venus, Mars shall
claim the next, the third I Will consecrate to Jupiter, the fourth I Will be a
wit, and Mercury shall be my Clearke: Thus will I drive my days to weeks, my
weeks to months, my months to years, and lavish out my life in lust, in
wounds, in arts; I Will make the milke-sops of this age for to do homage to my
shadow. Stay -- this is Horns house, -- and his fair wife, I now must give a
visit; -- there is fever in my blood, I shall dissolve with heat unless -- a
cooler -- knocks. Enter Horn.


Horn. Mr. Dammee, your radiant sublimitie does illustrate this habitation,
please you Sir draw near my poor mansion, -- my self and all are in it, at
your disposal.


Dam. Thou do but do me justice, my merrits do deserve thy low submission.
Where is thy wife?


Horn. Sir she is a little busy, the time will not be long ere she will wait on
you.


Dam. I Will wait on her. --


Dammee I Will see who it is that now imployes her, I think my gifts, have been as
large and liberal -- as any that survives. --


Horn. Sir I confess your bounty, -- you will further yet oblige my gratitude,
if you but please to take a turn in the garden till she comes down.


Dam. I Will cut thee into attomes, if thou prescribe my will. -- Where Is this
creature? rushes in.


Dam. What are you pounded (within)


Horn. Within You will undo me Sir. A noise of the breaking of a door.


Scene 2.
Enter Dammee with a Battoone in his hand driving before him naked Suck-dry and
Light-heele. Light. For heavens sake hold Sir.


Suck. Oh, oh, the splinters of my bones start out and pierce holes in my skin
--


Dam. Slave I Will beat thy brains out at thy nose.


Suck. O hold Sir, I am one of the Committee.


Dam. Nay then thou shall not live, if I kill thee, the fact will never be
odious in the sight of heaven; the Commons prayers will expiate my crimes. How
many men have been undone by thee thou art insatiate as death and hell.

Shortly then Procula, Bradshaw had a Bed,
Six little pitchers crowned his cupboards-head;
And under it there lay a two-eared pot,
With Gerards Herball; Item he had got
A chest with some Greek Authors, where the fierce
And barbarous mice, gnawed never-dying verse.
That Bradshaw was worth nothing who but knows,
Yet he poor wretch did all that nothing lose
By such as thee. O ye are moths of State!
The other rob within door, you at gate.

Suck. O fatal day, lust has betrayed me unto death!


Dam. There lie and groan thy soul out.


Light. Sir I repent that ere I entertained you, and were not that I hate my
husbands baseness, I would repent and be an honest woman. -- You not content
for to enjoy his wife -- but to abuse his house.

If that he can with all these wrongs sit down,
In time he will let you shave, and crack his crown.
And take a good sound whipping in the end,
Worthy of such a wife, and such a friend.

Exeunt. FINIS.

