The Several SPEECHES Made to the Honorable Sir Richard Brown Lord Mayor of the
City of LONDON: ON Monday the Twenty Ninth Day of October, in the Twelfth Year
of His Majesty's most happy Reign, ANNO DOM. 1660.

With the manner of the Celebration of this Triumphant Day; And the various
Scenes, Figures, and Pageants; Representing the Royal Oak, and its Pendant
Leaves, that preserved and enshadow'd our Gracious Lord and Sovereign King
Charles, from the hands of his Blood-thirsty Enemies.

London, Printed by R. WOOD, 1660.

Several Speeches made to the Honorable Sir Richard Brown, Lord Mayor of the
City of London on Monday the 9th day of October, in the 12th year of his
Majesty's most happy Reign, etc.
ON Monday the 29th of October, sundry various and delightful Scenes were
presented on the Water and the Land, being celebrated in honor of the
deservedly honored Sir Richard Brown Baronet, Lord Mayor of the City of
London; and performed at the Costs and Charges of the Right Worshipful Company
of Merchant-Taylors; who meeting at their Hall in the morning, in their several
Formalities, as Gowns, Hoods, Plush coats, sky-colored Scarffs, attended by 8
of his Majesty's Trumpeters, and Kettle-Drums; as also his Majesty's Drum Ma^or
with a like colored Scarff about his Waste, with his Maj. other Drums. Being
so met, they marched from thence in several Ranks, two Gentlemen carrying his
Majesty's, and the Duke of Yorks Banners, his Majesty's Sergeant Trumpeter, and
8 other Trumpets in the Front of them. In this manner they marched toward his
Lordships house; and from thence to their Barges laid at the accustomed place;
where the several Companies, adorned with Streamers and Banners, and fitted
with Hoe-boyes, Cornets, Drums and Trumpets, moved by Water toward
Westminster, his Lordship by the way being saluted with 20 pieces of Ordnance,
as peals of entertainment and joy: Against White Hall was placed a large
Fabric, at the one end whereof a ship floating, rigged and manned; at the other
end a Rock with various Figures; one representing Oceanus, who is said to be
God of Seas; and the Father of the Rivers. Upon his Lordships approach, he
addressed himself in these words:

I Oceanus of old Coelums race,
That like a Ring does circle and embrace
The spacious Universe, God of the Main,
And unto Rivers Lord and Sovereign
Am come to grace my Daughter, Silver Thames,
So much admired and loved by Royal James:
Whose peaceful reign did make her murmures sweet
Not harsh her Tide run with harmonious feet:
It Is Peace that barbs the Billows scums the foam,
Inviteth Trade abroad, and brings it home:
My Lord, You are a Royal Substitute,
Your clear Election is without dispute;
Employ your Interest, Trade may now increase,
And be envolv'd within the Arms of Peace.
Then shall my Grand-Girles Syriens.
not betray, but sing,
And drink Carouses to Great Britains King

The Speech ended, his Lordship, Aldermen, and Companies, landed at
Westminster, and the accustomed Ceremonies being performed, they returned to
Baynards Castle, and from thence the whole body moved toward the East end of
St. Paul's, in the Front of which the Gentlemen of the Artillery marched to show
their affection and loyalty, being led by Sir John Robinson, President of the
said Fraternity, and Lieutenant of the Tower, in his Scarlet Gown and Sword.
His Lordship being come to the East end of Paul's, he was entertained by a
Pageant or Scene (representing a Pavillion or Tent-Royal,) with a most elegant
Speech from the Senator; which being ended, his Lordship moved toward
Cheapside, and drawing near the Nags-head Tavern was received by another Scene,
seated like a Wood, in the midst whereof was a formal building like a house,
where several persons in the habit of Wood-men and Wood-Nymphs disported
themselves, dancing about the Royal Oak. And upon the Companies approach, one
of the Wood-men calls to the rest of his Companions, saying; Mass, Gotheard,
Mass, Logred, zen ye, zen ye, what a warren a gay voke are yonden, Zibb, Tib,
Trot, Zquot, Wab, Win, Nab Gin, what done to mean wullo beezen the vine zight,
ho ho, what pestilent gay vellow's you: 'Twas answered, the Lord Mayor. Che
vears en not vor all that cham resolved to zay zomething toll en: And so he
proceeded in this following Rustic Dialect.

A Meezle take thee, Neame cham glad to zee thee,
Give me thoy hond, how don mine Aunt I prithee?
Had Iche but known o this zame gaudy Noon,
Chad dond on viner Clothes and viner Shoon;
The One we but Rusticks are, and Woods done keep,
Ich know there is vine Wool elongs to Sheep,
And zome there are now wear the vinest thread
In zimple Russet ha bin zheltered,
We Woodmen ha bin honest Chil zay that,
And a vart vort, cham sure that ^^he know what
The sturdy Oak ha bin a vrend to zome
It wud no bow, no more o that but Mum
Iche hope your Lordship takes all in good part
Cham sure Ich love a Woodman wi mine heart,
In downright English, Sir, you are welcome to
That place of Honor has been long your due.

The Speech ended, Silvanus the Rural God, attyred like a Huntsman, accosts the
Lord Mayor in these words:

NO more of noise as you respect our Care,
Forsake your Natures, and be still as Air;
Er'e Time had laid his Iron Coat aside,
And Peace was rather ravished then a Bride:
Whilst that the subtle Eye of Tyranny
Greedily hunted after Majesty,
The Close Trunck of the Oak did entertain,
And so secured your Royal Sovereign.
Twice she received him in her happy Womb,
At his conveying hence, and coming home;
As though a greater Knot had been t'untie,
Then e're was twisted in the Prophecy.
The pendant Leaves his head enshadow'd round,
Not only to conceal, but to be crowned;
The Bark that brought him, flew as though it meant
To steal upon Us without Times consent.
Thus does the Oak draw a fresh breath from Fame
By the instinctive Virtue of his Name;
And consecrated ought to be to Jove,
Producing both the effects of Peace and Love.
The Rusticks shall be civilized, and now
Embrace what heretofore they would not allow,
About the Royal Oak the Nymphs shall sing,
And dance a measure to their Lord the King:
The Woodmen so refused shall on each Tree
Inscription make of their quit slavery,
And for a Girdle in a Garter sense
'Bout th'Oke write Honey soit qui maly Pence.

Which done, his Lordship passed toward the East end of Cheadside, where he
was entertained by another Scean, being a Chariot drawn by a Lion and a Lamb;
in the Chariot was placed three Figures, Peace, Truth, and Plenty: the Chariot
was driven by Time, who saluted his Lordship in these words:

MY LORD,

TIME is the Register of all men's Acts
Or good, or bad, their virtue and their facts.
Although by Violence he has been made
A property unto the Traitors Trade:
Yet Time (that every secret brings to light)
At last (you see) their Treacheries requites,
Pays them in their own Coin, the bloody stamp,
Dun has turned Surgeon cured them of the Cramp.
Treason may flourish for a little space,
But Time at length writes Villain in its face.
Whilst Julius Caesar's death Revengless past
Rome never was free from Sword Fire Plague and Wast,
Till Time revealed the Murderers; and then
Their better Genius did return again,
And closed up Janus Temple. Though Time has
Been cursed by those had neither Wit nor Faith,
But rashly did conclude he would never mend,
And therefore in Despair did wish his End.
Yet he for every sore and malady
Has brought you home a Sovereign Remedy,
Occasion is his fore-top, which had some
Long since taken hold of, bad days had not come:
'Twas not Times fault, but theirs that let him go,
He Is swift of foot, their Courage was but slow:
You have been wise in this (Sir) to your praise,
Oretak'n Time, renewed the Alchion Days,
With such A lacrity, that poreing on
with serious eye, my Enchyridion
That monstrous Murder that out-fac'd the Sun
Appears to me as yesterday but done:
So home has Justice followed them, their heels
Are now tript up, each his own horror feels.
This was Times work, though Wisdom was the Scout,
Without Time nothing could be brought about:
Peace is restored, Truth does in Triumph ride,
Not long since scorned, forsaken, and denied.
Plenty their Handmaid follows to maintain
The Majesty of the Heroic Train:
It is a Maxim ( Trayters bitter Cup)
Wars makes Thieves, but Peace does hang them up.
Since Time has done such Cures by Providence,
Let him not be abused under pretense
Of this, or that, Seeds of Phanatick brains;
But while you govern ( Sir) hold in the Reins:
And while the glorious Star-bestudy'd Sky
Retains a light your Fame shall never die.

The Speech ended, his Lordship and the whole Attendance passed down the old
Jury through Catt-eaten street, and Lad-Lane, Maiden-lane, from which place to
his Lord-ships house, a Gallery was made by the Company of Merchant-Taylors on
the North; and on the South by the Gentlemen of the Artillery and their
Attendants, where another Scene or Rock was placed, on the top whereof a
Figure, representing Peace, and upon his Lordships entering into his house,
Peace saluted him from the top of the Rock, as follows:

AFter so many various Sceans of strife,
Horror and mischief acted to the life,
By those that seemed to own the shapes of men,
But Monsters rather were of Cau^us Denn,
Whole sulphurous Nostrels breathed intestine Jars,
Sword, Fire, and Famine, the effect of Wars:
Peace (that their hate and fury did exile)
Is once again returned unto this Isle.
And with her brought Truth to Illuminate,
Your hearts to nourish Love, and banish Hate.
Truth is the Center wherein all things meet,
The Chard by which Wisdom directs her feet,
The ground of Science; Seal to Charity,
The unmoved Rock: tip of Eternity.
While Peace and truth do flourish in the Land,
Plenty shall wait on it with a full hand:
Ceres shall cram your Barns, and Bacchus crown
Your Boles, no more of Penury be known:
Trade long since dead, revived shall be again
By th'vertual Influence of your Sovereign,
Whose gracious Beams, like to the Sun does shine,
Upon his subjects by a Power Divine;
Whose Immence, Majesty, and Glory shall
Out-last Times Age, vnd the Worlds Funeral.
Blessed be the happy minute of his birth
That elevates our Joys above the Earth:
Flora the Queen of May shall honored be
By all the Sons of Lyrick Poesy:
And you my Lord whose prudent care has bin
Employed in the great Work to bring Him in,
Keep Faction down, suppress Seditions seed,
The bag being broke did the Imposthume breed:
Let it not gather to a head again,
Infectious matter dwells in a bad brain:
So shall your years and happiness increase,
Live in your Countries love, and die in Peace.

The Speech being ended, the Companies went to their respective Halls; and the
Gentlemen of the Artillery took leave, and marched into the Artillery Ground,
taking leave of the truly honored Sir John Robi^son by their several Vollies.

FINIS.
MERCVRIVS CALEDONIVS. COMPRISING The Affairs now in Agitation in SCOTLAND:
WITH A Survey of Foreign Intelligence.
Conamur Tenues Grandia.
From Tuesday 8th. Jan. to Wednesday 16. January. 1661.
HOw vast a difference there is twixt a true Representative of a Nation, and
that which is carried on by Faction, may appear by the Firstlings of this
entire Parliament, which through His Majesty's favor we now enjoy, who to
efface the transcendent enormities engendered by the corruption of the late
Commotions under the Heathnish pretexts of a Glorious Reformation, have
vindicate themselves and the Nation of being Antimonarchical, which will
shortly appear by their Acts to be published in due time: However, this zeal of
our Repentance, though vigorous, yet with such discretion it is managed, as it
derogateth nothing from the Loyalty and Wisdom of our Ancestors; for we
find in our Records so many convincing Laws of Duty and Obedience, as are able
(without the help of new decrees) to secure the Interest of a Sovereign
Propriator, who is as we fi^mly acknowledge His present Sacred Majesty Charles
the Second.

That severe sentence of Omne Malum ab Aquilone, must not be laid at our doors,
for where such Heroic Ministers of State (as the renowned Earl of Middleton
His Majesty's Lord High Commissioner: The Noble and Learned Earl of Glencardin
Lord Chancellor: And the generous Earl of Crawford Lord Theasurer; a
Parliament of so excellent a constitution, as shows it self by the
uprightness of the Peers, the ingenuity of the Barrons kindness and and
affection of our Borroughs) are, may be expected, all which is eminently
virtuous, especially in restoring the Ancient affection to Parliaments, whose
misdemeanors these 20 years past, had almost Shipwrack't their reputation.
Especially one thing wherewith our Nation is charged by the rash Act of a
pretended Parliament, for the late Kings delivery at Newcastle: I confess, the
reproach is great, though performed by a perverse part of the Nation, yet even
they had the solemn Oaths and Engagements of the Lords and Commons in England
(Assembled then in Parliament, though rebellious) for all imaginable security
of His Majesty's Authority and Person, in Honor, Freedom and Safety; as is
visible in all the Printed Transanctions of the Time: and if the same Lords and
Commons had not mincingly and snakingly gone about to fetter the Royal
Prerogative at the Isle of Wight, the English rigid Presbyterian, and bloody
Anabaptist, durst not have Covenanted to bave murtherd the best of Kings, and
ranverst the happiest of Governments. But now (blessed be God) the misled
people of all the three Nations, is as Brisk in their loyalty, as is the most
spotless soul that is free of the Original guilt of both Coooovaenants.

Before I proceed to this Weeks Intelligence, take along the last Weeks
omissions, occasioned by a cheerful celebrating of our happy Restoration.

That whereas it was mentioned the Funerals of the late great Marquess of
Montrose, was to be remitted to his Noble Son, is a mistake; for our Dread
Sovereign, who wants not bounty to the meanest of His Servants, has likewise
gratitude to His best; and therefore amongst other signal Tokens of His favor,
he has appointed the Solemnity of his Funerals at His Majesty's own expense,
and to be accompanied by the Lord High Commissione^, the whole Peers and all
the Members of Parliament, when he and they shall think expedient.

All places belonging to Archibald Johnstoun of Wariston declared void,
especially that of Lord Register, in regard he was declared Fugitive and Rebel
by the Committee of Estates before the sitting down of Parliament. This same
place is conferred by His Majesty on Sir Archibald Primrose, a person, who
besides his constancy to the Royal Interest in the greatest times of defection,
his natural induments being accompanied with so large experiences in the
greatest intrigue of State, might justly have commended him.

Now that I am speaking of literati, I must not forget His Majesty's Lord
Advocate, Sir John Fletcher, a person of so know integrity, that his loyalty
could not be confined to the Cabinet or Bar, his sword being ever ready to
plead His Majesty's Interest in all honorable occasions. There is likewise a
third Secretary to His Majesty's Privy Council, Sir Peter Wedderburn, who (I
may say without vanity) may be a Member of the most serious junto. And as His
Majesty has discovered His excellent choice in His other Officers of State, so
His Judgment appears in that of these three Gown-men, well known to the
world it is, that in the foggiest of the Times, the skilfullest cheat either in
Law or Gospel, could never brangle the reasons of these intelligent souls.

The Parliament being met, the day was spent in the debate of passing two Acts,
the one for establishing the Lords of the Articles and and Process; the other
appointing Commissiners for advancing of Trade, and hearing Bills of complaints.

The Names of the Lords, Commissioners of the Articles and Process.
Duke Hamilton, Marquess of Montrose, Earl of Erroll, Earl Marshall, Earl of
Mar: Earl of Rothesse: Earl of Athole, Earl of Home, Earl of Hadington, Earl
of Dumfreis, Earl of Callendar; Earl of Hartfield. Sir John Gilmure, Sir Peter
Wedderburn, The Barons of Preston, Lee, Polmais, Carden, Durie, Tarbet,
Collington, Garfe, Ardrosse, Balmayne: Sir Robert Murray Provest of Edinburgh,
Mr. John Paterson Provest of Perth, Alexander Wedderburn Provest of Dundee,
William Gray Commissioner for Aberdene, Duncan Nairn Provest of Stirling,
Andrew Glen Provest of Linlithgow, John Bell Commissioner for Glasgow, William
Cunningham Provest of Air, William Seaton Provest of Hadingtoun, John Irvine
Provest of Dumfriese, John Orcharton Provest of Arbroth, Hew Sinclare
Commissioner for Annan.

Lords Commissioners for Trade, Navigation, Manufactories, Bills, and
Complaints.
The Earls of Sutherland, Murray, Linlithgow, Wigton, Weems, Tillibarden,
Roxbrough, Seaforth: The Lords, Cardrosse, Frazer, Hackerton, Cochran: The
Barons of Lusse, Innes, Cromarty, Broughten, St. Leonards, Philorth, Birkenboy,
Blackbarronry, Silvertonhill, Pliscarden, Rossy, Ricarton: Andrew Castares
Commissioner for St. Andrews, William Simpson for Dysart, John Williamson for
Kirkcaldy, John Ronald for Monrosse, Alexander Black for the East Enstruther,
Alexander Cuthbert for Innernes, George Gairns for Burnt-Island, Allan Dunlap
for Irving, John Ewart for Kirkcudbright, Walter Watson for Dunbarton,
Alexander Burnet for Culrose, James Lawder for Dumbar.

The establishing these two Courts makes our Laws run in the Old Channel, and
sweeps away the unhallowed Names of Committees, which so long had committed our
Liberties: They are composed of twelve of each State; there Work is to prepare
matters for the Parliament, and though they be not all Peers, yet our Laws and
Customs provideth them the Titles of Lords of the Articles, and Lords of the
Bills; it is a most admirable expedient for the prevention of unnecessary
Disputs, and yet with a reservation, to have matters fairly debated before the
Parliament, when businesses so prepared by them are brought to the House.

The Lord Commissioners Grace adjourned the Parliament till the Friday
following, which was the 11th. of January 1661. where these followed Acts
passed.

An Act asserting His Majesty's Royal Prerogative in Calling and Dissolving
Parliaments and Convention of Estates hy himself, or his Commissioner, and
declaring no Laws nor Acts to be binding, but such as have the assent of His
Majesty or Commissioner, and rescinding all the Acts made since the Year 1640.
in the contrary: As likewise, repelling all Acts Establishing Triennial
Parliaments.

An Act declaring it to belong to his Majesty's Royal Prerogative, to Elect the
Officers of Estate, Lords of Privy Consel and Session, and repelling all Acts
in the contrary.

An Act in favors of Christian Fletcher, Spouse to Master James Granger,
ordaining her a notable reward for being so instrumental in the preserving the
Honors of the Crown, and the thanks of the House given her.

Then the Lord Commissioner adjourned the House till Wednesday next at two a
cloak, in regard of the weighty Affairs that are preparing by the Lords of the
Articles for that days Work.

An extract out of the Kingdom of Englands Intelligencer.
WE must begin this New-year with the last day of the Old, if it be but to tell
the Reader, that the Parliamentary Intelligencer (as he has good reason) has
changed his name; the Parliament it self (from whom he borrowed that
Compellation) being now dissolved, though it is not in the power of Malice or
Folly to mis-name that Parliament, since his Majesty has pleased with his own
Sacred Lips, to bid us call it the Healing and the Blessed Parliament.

Jan. 1. 1660.
And while we mention names it is our duty to observe that this day (New Years
day) will not lose its precedence; not only because 'twas the day of His
Majesty's Coronation in Scotland; but also in regard that CHARLES Son of his
Royal Highness JAMES Duke of York (only Brother to our Lord the KING) was
this day Christeed by Gilbert Lord Bishop of London at Worcester-House: Where
were present His Majesty Himself, who with the Duke of Albemarle were the two
Godfathers, and the Marchioness of Ormond Godmother, there being also present
his Highness Prince RVPERT, the Lord High Treasurer, the Lord Steward and Lord
Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, with many other Personages of Honor,
besides the Lord High Chancellor himself, Father to her Highness ANNE Duchess
of York, who the same Night Supped with the Queen, and the next day Dined with
His Majesty and His Highness the Duke of York (her Husband) in the presence
Chamber at Whitehall. And now the good people of England have their wishes,
since they see a Grandchild of that virtuous King ( CHARLES the Confessor and
Martyr) born in England, whom it has pleased his Majesty to create Duke of
Cambridge, and a Duchess of York of their own Country and of their own
Religion.

From Stockholm, December. 4.
You have questionless already heard of those proposals the Queen Christiana
made to the States of this Kingdom, desiring that after the decease of the
young King, she might be readmitted to the Crown and Government of Sweden, in
regard her former resignation had relation only to the late King for life and
no longer; which has been the occasion that the States, who were then upon
dissembling their Assembly, continued their consultations by some Commissioners
deputed to consider of the premises, who returned back to the Queen her
proposals, and obliged her to subscribe a Paper, wherein she renounceth all
pretenses to the Crown of Sweden for ever, and contents her self with that
revenew settled upon her for her maintenance during life; she seemed at first to
be somewhat unwilling, but upon second thoughts, and seeing that all the
Country was against her, yielded to what was not to be avoided. Which affair
being determined, it is thought that all the States will depart suddenly.

From Hamburgh, December. 15.
The Count of Shippenbach, taking shipping at Stockholm to go for Poland, there
to reside as Ambassador in ordinary for this Crown, the ship that carried him
was cast away at Sea, on the 3. instant, himself with 36 persons being drowned,
and 24. saved. There is no certainty of the Queen Christina her return from
Sweden, some are apt to believe that she intends to stay there all the Winter.
The Swedes have lately mustered their Forces in the Dukedom of Bremen, but upon
what design they are to be employed, is not yet known.

Some aver, that they are to be sent to assist the Bishop of Munster against
the City, which if so, a short time will discover it.

His Majesty passed several Acts at the dissolution of the Parliament, but
because most of them relates to private businesses and Naturalizing Stranger,
I Will only set down the most considerable.

An Act for the restoring of Henry Lord Arundel of Warder to the possession of
his Estate.

An Act for restitution of Thhomas Earl of Arundel, Surrey and Norfolk, to the
Dignity and Title of Duke of Norfolk.

An Act to restore to Wentworth Earl of Roscomon, of the Kingdom of Ireland,
all the Honors, Castles, Lordships, Lands, Tenaments, and Hereditaments in
Ireland, whereof James Earl of Roscomon his Great Grandfather, or James Earl
of Roscomon his Father, etc.

An Act for restoring of Sir George Hamilton unto his Lands and Estate in
Ireland.

An Act for the Attainder of several persons guilty of the horrid Murder of
his late sacred Majesty King CHARLES the First.

An Act for prohibiting the planting, setting or sowing of Tobacco in England
and Ireland.

An Act for the levying of certain Moneys due upon the collection for the
Protestants of Piedmont.

An Act for confirmation of Marriages.

An Act for confirmation of Leases and Grants from Colleges and Hospitals.

An Act for the further supplying and explaining certain defects in an Act for
the speedy provision of money for disbanding and paying off the Forces of this
Kingdom, both by Land and Sea.

An Act for the leavying of the Arrears of the Twelve months Assessment,
commencing 24. of June 1659. and the Six months Assessement commencing the 25.
of December, 1659.

An Act for granting unto the King's Majesty 420000. l. by Assessment of 70000
l. by the month, for Six months, for disbanding of the Army and paying off the
Navy.

An Act for erecting and establishing a Post Office.

An Act for the better ordering the selling of Wines by retail, and for
preventing abuses in the mingling, corrupting, and vitiating of Wines, and for
settling and limiting the prizes of the same.

An Act for making the Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial.

An Act for raising of 70000 l. for a further supply of His Majesty.

An Act for prohibiting the exportation of Wool, Wool-Fells, Fullers-earth, or
any kind of scouring earth.

At the passing of these Acts, after Sir Harbotle Grimston (Master of the
Rolls and Speaker of the House of Commons) had made a Speech to His Majesty
setting forth the unparalleled goodness of His Najesty to His People, and their
Loyalty to His Majesty) it pleased His Majesty himself to make a most Gracious
Speech to both Houses, wherein He was pleased to fix a name on this Parliament
to live to all posterity, viz. The Healing and the blessed Parliament;
declaring, That it should be a Rule to His Actions and Councils, to consider,
What is a Parliament like to think of this Action, or this Council? Adding, how
religiously He himself would observe the Act of Indemnity, and would exact the
observation of it from all others. After which and other most Gracious
Expressions, he referred the rest to be spoken by the Lord High Chancellor, who
(according to his custom) excellently set forth the happiness of His Majesty
and His people, which only strive which should express most affection to each
other; to the joy of all good men, and the Terror of all that refuse their own
happiness by thoughts of embroyling the Kingdom in Blood, whose Designs and
Plots are particularly mentioned in his Lordships Speech, which concluded with
the Parliament, for then it was dissolved, but will never be forgotten for the
good it has done (by the mercies of God) to this late most wretched Nation.

And since we mention Plots, we cannot but acquaint you, that (besides the
prisoners in our last) there are diverse others secured, as Colonel Pain, Mr.
Knight, (there are many Knights, but that none may mistake him for a better
man, this is Knight the Potter, who after turned preacher, and reprobated all
that kept their Allegiance) Allen, Courtney, (two who are not unknown to their
Brethren of that army;) besides that faithful man of Reckoning, Mr. Cook of the
Bear at London Bridge, whom we must not remember to have come from the
Bridge-foot to fit upon Peers in a High Court of Justice.

On Saturday last, December. 29. (which we should have told you sooner, but that
we had no pleasure to mention so sad and universal a Loss, the chiefest of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom met in the House of Peers to attend the
Royal Corpse of Mary Princess of Orange, which being brought about 9 at night
from Denmark-House to Westminster, they proceeded through a Lane of Guards of
the Duke of Albemarl's Regiment of Foot. First, went several Gentlemen and
Knights, next, the Servants of his Highness the Duke of York; then the
Servants of the Queen; after whom came His Majesty's Servants, and next the
Servants of the deceased Princess; then two Heralds before James Marquess of
Ormond, Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household, and Edward Earl of Manchester
Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household; after whom went Edward Lord Hyde,
Lord High Chancellor of England, with the Purse and Mace born before him; after
whom came another Herald with a Coronet upon black Velvet, and then the Royal
Corpse carried by her own Servants, the Pall being supported by six Earls, and
the Canopy born over it by several Baronets, His Highness the Duke of York
following the Corpse with an Herald before him, and diverse persons of Quality
bearing his Train. Thus they proceeded till they came to King Henry the 7ths
Chapel, where the Corpse were Interred in a Vault particularly set a part for
the Royal Line.

From Rome December. 11.
Concerning the affairs of Modena, Parma and France nothing as yet is
determined, much may be expected, but little is feared, the Court of his
Holiness seeming to be assured that hardly a Horse will be sadled by the two
Potentates of France and Spain, in favor of the Princes who pretend great
matters from the Pope, and by themselves are not so much to be regarded. There
is a talk here of a certain Duke who has negotiated with the Constable Colonna
touching a match with his Sister, notwithstanding the Dukes Lady is yet living:
whence some Pamphleteer has taken occasion to publish a Paper, wherein he
shows how necessary an evil woman is, that even this day men are found who
look about for a second wife, when as the first is yet alive. The Pope moved by
his paternal care for the universal Church, has resolved to lay a general
Subsidy on all Christendom, so far as it acknowledges his Authority,
therewith to assist not only the Emperor (who is sending the Marquess Matthei
hither, and to the other Italian Princes for that purpose) but also the
Republic of Venice; which done for so many years, has stood as a Bulwark for
Christendom against the common Enemy. The Cavalier Barnino tendered a design
for making of a new Ditch before the river of Tyber, that it should not
overrun its Banks for the time to come, but the charges amounting to 300000.
Crowns, it is thought more expedient to keep the money, then to spend it that
way. From Naples we are informed that the late Storm has not only there done
much hurt, but that the Town of Taranto by the last flood is likewise quite
overflown.

Dito.
The Cardinals d'Este, and Anthonio Barberini have many conferences with the
Ambassadors of Spain. It is thought, that they are contriving of means to
hinder the Turks from prosecuting their designs against the Christians. From
Civita Vecchia we are advertised that the Popes Galleys, which have been in the
Levant to assist the Venetians, are returned thither. It is said, that this
next spring his Holiness will assist the Republic of Venice with a more
considerable succor then before, to which all other Christian Princes are to
be desposed to contribute their shares.

Sunday, Jan. 13. By the Lord Commissioners appointment, Mr. Robert Lowrie and
Mr. James Chambers Minister of Cullen Preached before the Parliament, at their
own House; the first, Mr. Lowrie in the forenoon acquit himself both Piously,
Learnedly and Cautelously, the other indeed, though a young man, made appear
that he was very old in Learning, and learned in old Learning, which without
all doubt produced the effects of such Orthodox principles as he discovered,
and if such be the general abilities and disposition of the young Divines of
our Nation, it is not to be feared hereafter that the most Artificial spirits
of Ambition can ever corrupt them to be Evangelical bray-hounds, to turn the
affections of their Congregations from their true Allegiance, as many of the
old ones has done: and now since they have preached themselves out of credit,
there little crazed nodls is employed in composing Latin Ballads of praise
upon his Majesty, and till such time as we have Organs in our Cathedrals, to
have them sung to the Tune of Penitential Hymns, let them even cant them on to
the Are of Hog-ma-nay.

We are advertised from London, that the Fanatics upon the 7th. instant at
night, appeared in some small Bodies at the Royal Exchange, Bishops-gate, and
St. Paul's, but being surprised by the Train Bands before their number was
considerable; after some change of shot, where three fell upon the Lord Major's
side, some say more, the Blasphemers quickly threw down Arms and fled several
ways; the night befriended them that there were not so many prisoners as
otherwise might have been: diverse are taken, and scandalous treasonable papers
found in their pockets; the Allarm was hot and universal, and much of Courage
and Loyalty discovered by people of all Stations, the vigilance of a stout Lord
Major and brave Citizens, was highly displayed. And blessed be God for it, His
Majesty possesses in this our City of Edinburgh, such cordial affections as may
vye with any in His Majesty's three Dominions; for at present, as it is
governed by the careful and provident Sir Robert Murray Lord Provest, the
admirable discretion of John Jousie, William Waucbab, Thomas Calderwood and
John Boyd their Bailies, Edward Edgar their judicious Dean of Gild, and Thomas
Murray their faithful Treasurer accompanied with a prudent Counsel of honest
Burgesses, and the diligence of their trusty and experimented Servant Sir
William Thomson: it is not to be doubted but that remarkable Epithet of the
Good Town, so frequent in their Charters, and given by the best of Kings for
their Fidelity, shall with Addition if needful, be Ratified by our now Dread
Sovereign: for among other things, they have established so upright a Militia
under such resolute Commanders, that if all our Fanatics were united as one
man, and durst p^ out in their precincts, they could not shun their deserved
chastisements, their demonstrations of love has been so signal in these our
late glorious Changes, that if it were possible, to blot them out of the
Calendars of time, there is not a child of the least reason that breaths their
air, but has them so registrate in their memories, as by tradition they must
needs be bequeathed to Eternity, and that God multiply his blessings upon them
both Spiritual and Temporal, so long as they persist in these Loyal principles
shall be wrapped up in the daily prayers of their Affectionate and faithful
Townsman.

As we was ready to close this weeks Intelligence, this following Narration of
the Rebels proceedings in England, was last night being the 15. Jan. extracted
from the English Mercurius Publicus.

London, Jan. 6.
We must desire the Reader to take notice, that those who till now denied there
was a PLOT, were themselves guilty of it; who, though their number (thanks be
to God) be very small, yet their malice and blood-thirstynesse is not easy to
be equaled, which is legible enough in their Sermons and Declarations; For
this morning (before they fell to their bloody work) they had a Sermon preached
by Venner (heretofore a Wine-cooper; who stirred them up to fight for King
Jesus; assuring them, that One should chase ten, and ten should chase a
thousand. And in their Declaration they tell us (page 2.) That their enemies
(which are all good men that love Peace and Authority) should not be able to
touch one hair of their heads (though now they find both Head and Neck may be
touched) That they were cut out for this work; That they will never sheath
their swords again, until Babylon (so they call Monarchy) become a hissing and
a curse, and their be left neither Remnant, Son, nor Nephew: That when they
have led Captivity captive in England, they will go on to France, Spain,
Germany, etc. and rather die then take the wicked Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance: That they will incite and provock all their brethren in all
Countries to a General Rendezvous: That they will not make any League, or join
any Affinity with Monarchists, but will rise up against the Carnal, to possess
the GATE (that is the word) to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in
fetters of iron.

After this Sermon and Declaration (whereof many Copies were found in one
house) those bloody Zelots prepare themselves for Execution this Twelf-day at
night; (who can forget the day, since Twelf-day at night 1641. when this
desperate Faction drew down upon White Hall, and forced His late Majesty of
glorious memory to leave both Parliament and City) in the interim a Friend of
their own (touched it seems in conscience) came to the most vigilant Sir
Richard Brown Lord Major of the City of London, and privately gave him notice of
their design: After this, came another for the same purpose, (for how can they
think that so much villainy should pass unrevealed, which requires so many
hands and heads so scalding hot?) whereupon his Lordship consulting more the
public than his own safety, adventured forth with only four Harberdeers; and
six other persons with Swords to give a timely Alarm to the City, and
suppress these wild Rebels, before they grew too numerous and formed, though
they had all armed themselves with Back, Breast, and Headpiece, in
Coleman-street at the Meeting House (that old nest of Sedition) and several
other places. This early appearance of the resolute Lord Major kept them from
embodying, his Lordship chasing them from place to place, till after eleven at
night. About 12. of Clock twixt thirty and forty of these were met by two
Files of the Trained Bands sent forth by the Lord Major; These bade the Rebels
stand, and the Rebels asked the Trained Band, Who they were for; who answered,
For God and King Charles; and the Rebels replied, And we are for King Jesus;
(this is the very answer given of old by the Rebels in King John's time, who
called themselves the Army of God, and said, They fought for King Jesus) at the
same instant the Rebels spoke, they fired upon the Citizens, who gave them the
same reply, whereby two men were killed, at which some retired, and the Rebels
suspecting or Perceiving relief coming to the Trained Band) retreated toward
Aldersgate, where having forced the Watch at the Gate, they went to
White-crossstreet, where being interrupted, they killed the Constable, wounded
the poor Bell-man and several others there, as well as in other places where
they passed; but whether they fled, or what became of them, we have no
certainty.

About this time another Party of these Rebels appeared near Bishops-gate,
where they were met by two Files sent from the Guard at that Gate. There passed
few words, but (as before) they fired upon each other, where diverse were
wounded, one since dead of his wounds, and one taken, who was so hurt he could
not get off; These few Citizens finding themselves much overpowered by the
Rebels, retired back toward their Guard, where receiving no Relief from their
Commander (the Gate being shut) they diverted their course, and the Rebels in
the interim found opportunity to escape.

By this time, the Londoners were all alarmed, and grew so numerous, that they
needed no assistance from Westminster, who could have lent them an Army of
Horse and Foot had there been occasion; the Nobility and Gentry all flocking in
to attend his Royal Highness the Duke of York, who with the Lord General the
Duke of Albemarle were ready to mount, upon the least notice form the Lord
Major, who now had so dispersed the Rebels, that not one of them was to be
found.

The next day, the Lord General sent forth Colonel Sir Thomas Sandys, with a
Troop of Horse, and 200. of his Grace's own Regiment of Foot, to scour
Cane-wood (twixt Highgate and Hampsted) where these savage Rebels (as many as
were left) were said to be together. Sir Thomas found this Remnant lining a
Hedge nigh a Gravel pit, where by night (the Moon not yet shining) himself and
some of his men were in more danger of the pit, then of the Rebels; who
notwithstanding fired from the Hedge upon the Lord Generals Foot, without doing
any execution, save one soldier hurt: They had too long served in that
excellent Regiment, to fire at such a distance, and therefore swiftly made up
to the Rebels, who after the first fire, fled into the Wood, which with help of
night gave them leave to creep away, so as but few of them were taken. Sir
Thomas surrounded the Wood, and searched diligently the next morning, but no
more were to be found.

You would now conclude these Phanatick Rebels totally suppressed; and yet this
Wednesday morning ( Jan. 9.) they are again in Arms. One party were discovered
in a Lane beyond Leaden Hall, where they made their first stand, twixt five and
six this morning. The Lord Mayor (though he had been in no bed of two nights
before) yet was up, and upon the Rebels before they could effect any part of
their design. After some firing on both sides, they made a second stand in
Little Eastcheap, which they made with more vigor then before; and then
retired to London-stone, where (though their numbers were augmented) they all
dispersed.

This passed, the Lord Mayor came down from Wood-street, to another Party of
Rebels; and these had been at his Lordships House in Maiden-Lane to surprise
him in his bed, where they knew he had not slept in two nights before, where
they knew he had not slept in two nights before, saying aloud as they marched,
Now for BROWN, Now for BROWN, At that instant, his Lordship being up, and
engaged with the other Party, they lost their design upon his Lordship, but
were by some of the Trained-bands and part of His Majesty's Lifeguard. And
here (to give the Rebels their due) they disputed as if they had a greater
number and a better cause; but after his Lordship came, Major Henshaw made
another fresh Charge, those of the Lifeguard and the Train'd-bands joining
with him, whereby the Phanatick Rebels were broken, five or six killed, and
diverse wounded, amongst whom was their spiritual Capt. Venner, whose wounds
are supposed mortal, The rest were pursued to the Postern-gate in London-wall,
where seven of them unable to fly further, betook themselves to an House, where
though they were summoned, they stood out till five of the seven were killed,
the other two crying for Quarter, which was granted, but as soon as the Officer
entered, one of these desperate Rebels stabbed at him, which falling upon his
Corsset took no effect.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York hearing of the resistance of these
Rebellious Phanaticks, came up into London with the Duke of Albemarle, the Earl
of Oxon, the Earl of Northampton, the Lord Farfax, and very many more Peers and
Noble Gentlemen, with part of the Lifeguard, and diverse Officers of the Army,
ready to serve his Majesty and his Highness, if there had been occasion. The
people at the sight of his Royal Highness, made many great Shouts and
Acclamations for joy, his Highness returning thanks to the several Officers
and Trained Bands, after his Discourse with the Lord Major, who acquainted his
Highness how well Lieutenant Colonel Cox, Major Henshaw, Capt. Clark, and
other Officers had behaved themselves in this service, there being not one
Rebel (how mad and desperate soever) but is either killed, fled, or prisoner,
whilst there are now so many, that several prisons are too full, for whose
particular names we here want room.

Yesternight ( Jan. 8.) Sir Arthur Hasilrig died in the Tower of London.

London, Thursday, the 10th. Jan. His Majesty safely returned from conducting
his Royal Mother to Portsmouth, besides his own Guards the affections of the
Gentry appeared highly in Rendezvouzing wherever His Sacred Person was: since
his coming to Whitehal, there is fifty Noblemen and Gentlemen of each of the
three Nations to keep Guard at the Court.

Edinburgh, Printed by a Society of Stationers, 1661.


