THE HISTORY OF THE Propagation and Improvement OF VEGETABLES By the
concurrence of Art and Nature:

Showing the several ways for the Propagation of Plants usually cultivated in
England, as they are increased by Seed, Off-sets, Suckers, Truncheons,
Cuttings, Slips, Laying, Circumposition, the several ways of Graftings and
Inoculations; as likewise the methods for Improvement and best Culture of
Field, Orchard, and Garden Plants, the means used for remedy of Annoyances
incident to them; with the effect of Nature, and her manner of working upon the
several Endeavors and Operations of the ARTIST.

Written according to OBSERVATIONS made from Experience and Practice:

By Robert Sharrock, Fellow of New College.

Oxford: Printed by A. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Tho: Robinson.
1660.

TO THE HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL Esquire The most worthy pattern of true Honor. AND
Learned Promoter of true Science.
SIR,
IT is a saying in the Civil Law, That a thing which is any Man's own, cannot be
made more his by any new Act or Deed: The consequence of which, is, that the
Dedication of this Piece to you will be merely nugatory, since by all right it
is already yours. For it is not long since I imagined no more being either
Author, or Compiler of any matter on this subject, then of doing any other
thing which I have neither fancy nor fitness to. But you were pleased to judge
me able, and (which obliged me to this task) to propose it unto me as your
desire that I should make an essay of that ability, in writing somewhat even on
this subject, that might be of Philosophical and common use. To have questioned
your judgment herein, might have stained me with too much arrogance, and to
have been careless of your pleasure, with unworthiness and want of good
Manners. Remembering therefore those respects I owe to Honor, Learning, and such
persons as study its advancement and promotion, I could not deny this poor
endeavor, the product of which arising originally from your own act, I thought
fit should be delivered over to your pleasure, since to you, as its primary
cause (which is its prime commendation) it ought to belong.

And Sir, If it may not be troublesome unto you to receive some brief account
of this action, and the Fortunes which happened to me in pursuance of your
satisfaction therein, you will give me leave to acquaint you, that it having
been your Honors express desire, that this Piece might extend as far, and be as
comprehensive and full, as my present Experience, Knowledge, and Recollection
of the matter of Vegetable Propagation should permit: I gave my self the
trouble to run over with my eye, all Books I could precure of these subjects,
not intending to trust any, but thereby to be put in mind of the particulars,
concerning which, I had no reason to have a Register ready in my head. Here
first my fortune was to find a multitude of monstrous untruths, and prodigies
of lies, in both Latin and English old and new Writers, worse in their kind
then the stories in Sir John Mandevel's Travels, or in the History of Friar
Bacon and his Man Miles; or else what may be more ridiculously removed not
only from truth, but from any semblance thereof. And which moved me most at
this very season, when we esteemed the World to be now awaked, I found in the
Shops Authors newly set forth (I hope against their own wills) who seriously
professed to have made a select choice of Experiments of this nature, and to
report nothing, but what from observation and experience they have certainly
found true, yet deserving not to have the credit of Wecker and Porta,
Professions in such Papers, which seem to me at no time proper, but when the
persons credits, together with their Books, are jointly to be set to sale. You
easily believe that I am not free to follow these Examples, for then, first, I
must abuse your Noble Name, by inscribing it to a most unworthy Discourse, and
then (which is too common a fault) traduce as many Readers, as ignorance and
simpleness of nature has made credulous.

But as to those Authors, in whose relations I found any thing of truth, I have
done them this right, That where ever I could relate an Operation or Experiment
in their words, with truth and fitness, I spared to coin new (desiring to
supplant no Author in his credit, nor to purloyn his reputation) though I had
learned the truth of the same thing from the testimony of my eyes: Having
indeed some quarrel at the fashion of ordinary Writers, who study in nothing to
benefit Learning, but by giving new words to old matter.

I have left out none of the Heads proposed in the Catalogue, which I presented
you with, a year since, except the last, which you desired might show the
methods and ways of keeping useful Vegetables without putrefaction, and the
preparing them with their several parts and products for humane use. This at
present I thought necessary to forbear, for I found the matter too much for one
Chapter, and my leisure too little to make a Book thereon: nor durst I esteem
my Observations such, as might enable me to write an adequate Treatise on that
subject, which reaches in compass the largest, and as I firmly believe (however
the Animal and Mineral Kingdom abound with great and potent Medicines) not the
worst. Part of the Pharmacopoea, and many particulars beyond; but rather think
fit to employ my self some more years in the Experience and Practice of
Preparations, and take the pains of collecting and trying such intelligible and
probable processes as shall come to my hand, either reported heretofore, or
used now, especially in our Nation, for fitting matters to Alimental, Medical,
and Mechanical use, before I shall imagine to have the least hand in that
History, which may as well be learned by such as are concerned to know it, from
Modern Dispensatories, and other novel Writers. But the perfection of that
History, with correction of processes capable of amendment, is, in my
estimation, a design and work worthy of the Care, Patronage, and Governance,
and fit to be carried on by the interest, if too tedious, for the Pen and Pains
of your Honor.

As to the form and composure of matter under those Heads, I must make it a
particular business to beg your pardon; for I find it even in my own judgment
exceeding rude, and it could be no otherwise, when the Revise of the Press,
was, for a great part, the first review made of my own Writing; and indeed, the
whole piece in every part seems destitute of beauty, and without any thing of
great worth, value, or nobleness. For I find, that the operations themselves,
and other matters that do belong to the subject in hand, and so capable to come
under this History, are for the most part common, and devoid of curiosity: Nor
durst I embellish their plainness with Stories taken from our Learned and
Profound Writers of Natural Magic, because I intended, as no very imperfect,
so likewise a true Inventary of what the power of man, at this present time, on
this subject, is, with the Cooperation of Nature, able to produce: For these
reasons, and perchance because of another piece then under my hand, to which I
had more propense affections. I was exercised in this writing, not without some
reluctance and untowardness of mind; and it surely had proved to me a piece of
mere drudgery, had not the hope of giving you satisfaction, and making this a
testimony of my obeisance and humble submission to your Judgment and desires
inspirited me, and let a lightsomness into my thoughts. What I have written, I
shall not commend, by any Prefaces, to any Reader, though I shall give him here
some things new, and of my proper Observation: I know that many, by their own
Interest and (that great power) Temporal Profit, will be tempted to give it the
reading. Neither shall I, in imitation of some Modern Alchymists, for
ostentation, bid them go; and by the improvement (which I hope may be some to
most Readers) be charitable to the poor: Hoping, that for Gods sake, they will
rather (as they are bound by Obligations infinitely more high) be thereto
moved; nor need I excuse my self to them for any deficiency in this Writing,
you having engaged your self to be the Proprieter thereof, and by your
acceptance of this poor Piece, greatly obliging,

SIR, Your Honors unfeignedly Devoted in all humble and affectionate
observance. R. SHARROCK.

To the Author on his two late published Pieces, The Hypothesis of the Law of
Nature, and, The History of Propagation.
SIR,
OF late to the privy Chambers of the mind
You led's, to which a glimmering ray had shined
From God th'Abyss of light; but much ado
There had been made to stop that ray out too.
Here 'twas you drew a Curtain, and we saw
The sacred Tables of our Natures Law;
The frame of which was made of polisht glass,
Where each Soul, fair and foul, might see its face:
And there hung Justice Scale, ready to weigh
All actions, good and bad, just as they lay:
Justice her self we saw not, for 'twas sed,
That long ago her Ladyship was fled.
But Duties way-marks, up and down there stood,
And the forgotten bounds of Ill and Good.
Much Furniture besides; all by the abuse
Of new invented fashions, out of use.
Now Sir, you are walked abroad, you teach to Sow,
And Plant, and Graft, and show how all things grow
By the best improvements; how to harness Art
With Nature, and to make her draw her part:
How Nature varies all her Scenes, and makes
Things orderly and useful for our sakes.
You trace her steps, and make us plainly see it,
To be great Providence that guides her feet:
Thus when at home, and when abroad, you can
Contrive to honor God, and pleasure Man.
Will: Parker, Scholl: of New Coll.

A Gratulation unto the Author, upon his History of the Propagation of
Vegetables.
We Will blame Antiquity no more, that she
Has swallowed Solomon's Phytology;
Those long-lost sacred Relicts you revive,
Limning the nature of each Vegetive.
Natures most hidden store, you open set,
As if y'were keeper to her Cabinet.
Midst Plants and Trees you muse, thence we confess,
England again has got her Druides:
Your Garden, a new Academy; can
Be made Lycaeum, or turned Vatican.
So the famed Epicure, long since did try
To make his Garden teach Philosophy;
Where he, by shufling Atoms, represents
All changes; a Cator of Elements
He then laid out, and (what was yet more high)
Boldly discarded Heavens Deity.
You slight that play, and show there is no sequence,
No suit of things, without a Providence.
Each Herb's engraven'd with a Heavenly Frame,
Like the Hyacinth enstamp'd with Ajax's name:
As a mysterious Rabbin's wont to spell
The name of God, from a dark Syllable:
So you read him in's secrets works; Each clod
Speaks the God of Nature, makes not Nature God.
May these your Vegetives, thus ordered, prove
A Vocal Forest, or Dodona's Grove.
To speak your worth, that so our non-plus'd cry
May be assisted by Dendrology.
Ed: Spencer Fell: of N. C.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of Propagation by Seed.
Number. 1. Of propagation of Vegetables in general, with a Preface to the
Discourse. Page 1 Number. 2. A Catalogue of Plants that may be increased by Seeds:
with a question touching Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue, and Plants of like nature.
Page 4 N. 3. The Seasons of sowing particular Plants, with proper
Animadversions to this head. Page 10 N. 4. Examples of Sowing, with some
particular directions for some choice Vegetables; with general Observations for
the manner of sowing. Page 16 Examp. 1. From Mr. Parkinson, directing skilfully
the ordering of Tulips, in their propagation by Seed. ibid. Examp. 2. Of
Anemones. Page 18 Examp. 3. Of Clover-grass. Page 19 General Observations for
the manner of Sowing. Page 23 Number. 5. Of variety of kinds, different in
color, taste, smell, and other sensible qualities, proceeding from some seeds,
and what Plants they are that bring seeds yielding such variety, whence the
beauty of Flowers chiefly arises. Page 25 Number. 6. Some other relations touching
transmutation, and the possibility of a change of one Species into another,
examined in particulars of the Vegetable, Animal and Mineral Kingdoms. Page 28
N. 7. Of preservation for Seed, with advantageous directions therein. Page 33
N. 8. The manner of growing by Seed, Historically set down, with some
Philosophical conceits thereabouts. Page 35 Number. 9. Of the cause of greenness
in the Leaves of Vegetables. Page 40
CHAP. II. Of Propagation by Off-sets.
Number. 1. A Catalogue of Plants which may be propagated by Off-sets and Suckers
arising with Roots from the Stool and Root of the Mother Plant. Page 43 N. 2.
The way of making Off-sets by Art. Page 45 N. 3. Rules for direction in taking
off Suckers, or Offsets. Page 46 N. 4. Examples of planting by Off-sets in
Licorice, Hops and Saffron. Page 47, 48 N. 5. Variety of colors, in what
flowers, from what Off-sets. Page 49
CHAP. III. Of Propagation by Stems, Cuttings or Slips.
N. 1. A Catalogue of Plants this way propagable. Page 50 N. 2. Explication of
the manner of propagation by stems cut off from the Mother-plant, or slipped, by
Examples and Rules for particular direction. Page 51 N. 3. Experiments made of
the success of the cuttings off diverse Plants set in Water. Page 53 N. 4. The
manner of growing by cuttings. Page 55 N. 5. Of propagation by the sowing small
and almost insensible parts of Vegetables. Page 56
CHAP. IV. Of Propagation by laying.
Number. 1. What Plants are this way increased. Page 57 N. 2. The example of this
manner of propagation. ib. N. 3. Requisites for the manner of laying. Page 58
N. 4. Of propagation by Circumposition. Page 59 N. 5. Of the manner of growth
by circumposition, and whether thence an argument may be made for the
descension of Sap. Page 60
CHAP. V. Of Insitions.
N. 1. Of grafting in general, and particularly of shoulder-grafting,
Whip-grafting, Grafting in the cleft, and Ablactation; showing the manner of
doing these several operations. Page 61 N. 2. What Plants take on different
kinds, with diverse Experiments and Stories on this subject. Page 66 N. 3.
Rules for Grafting. Page 68 N. 4 Kirkers Experiments concerning Insitions
examined, and opposed by new Experiments. Page 73 N. 5. The manner of growing
by Grafts, Historically set down, with addition of some Philosophical
considerations. Page 74
CHAP. VI. Of the ways for, and Seasons of setting Plants.
Number. 1. Of cultivated Plants. Page 79 N. 2. Of the setting of Woods,
Fruit Trees, and Plants uncultivated. Page 81 N. 3. Whether any Vegetables may
be set so as to grow in the Air. Page 84
CHAP. VII. Of the means for the Improvement and best culture of Corn, Grass,
and other Vegetables belonging to Husbandry; and of the ways for removing the
several annoyances that usually hinder such advantage.
Number. 1. Of the annoyances to Land, and the Impediments that usually distemper
it, to the disadvantage of ohe Husbandman. Page 86 N. 2. Of the remedies proper
to cure the excessive coldness and moisture in Lands, and the ways of
improvement thereby, in grounds subject to these distempers, by dreining,
Pigeons and Poultrey dung, Urine, Soot, Ashes, Horse and Sheep dung: O Ground
cold and dry, and how these Soyls may be applyable thereto. Page 87 N. 3. The
ways of improvement of dry, light, sandy, gravelly, flinty Land, by floating,
Marl, Chalk, Lime. Page 92 Number. 4. Remedies for accidental annoyances and
hindrances of Improvement, particularly the ways to destroy Fern, Heath,
Ant-hills, Moss, Rushes, Rest-harrow, Broom, or any such Weed or Shrubs, that
infect the ground: Whether liming of Corn prevents blasting, the effects of
that and Brine in Improvement: Concerning Moles, and the ways to destroy them
or drown them; a way of Antipathy, as to this effect, in Animals and Vogetables
to the Bodies of their own kind, when they are in the way of corruption: of
the change of Seed; and Mr. Blith's way of preserving Corn from C^, Rooks, etc.
Page 97
CHAP. VIII. Of the Means of Improvement and best culture of of such Plants or
Flowers as are usually cultivated in Gardens or Orchards, and of the ways used
for the removing such annoyances as are commonly incident to them.
Number. 1. Of the annoyances in general incident to Garden Plants. Page 103 Number.
2. Of defenses of choice Plants from cold. Page 104 N. 3. Of shade requisite to
sundry Plants, especially when young, for their defense from the Sun and Wind;
and of watering, necessary to cultivated Plants. Page 107, 108 N. 4. 1.
Examples of the best Culture of Hops, and ways of ordering them after they are
first set, taken out of Mr. Blithe. Page 109 2. Mr. Parkinsons way of ordering
the Seedlings of Tulips grown. Page 111 N. 5. Of annoyances by Plants growing
too thick and near together, and of the remedy thereof, and improvement by
pruning Trees, and setting them at great distances; plucking off the young
Germens of Garden-flowers, to make the rest more fair; of the sizing of
Turnips, Carrots, Parsneps; of Weeding. Page 114 N. 6. Of Pismires, Earwigs,
Canker and rottenness in choice Plants, Catterpillars, Mossiness, Bark-binding,
Bursting of Gilly-flowers. Page 122 Number. 7. Of improvement and melioration of
diverse Sallad Herbs, by blanching or whiting, from the French Gardener, and Mr.
P's Observations. Page 125 N. 7. Of Acceleration and Retardation of Plants, in
respect to their Germination and maturity. Page 129 Number. 8. Of melioration by
Richness, or other convenient Minera in the Soil, for the feeding and better
nourishment of several Plants: Of artificial Begs, and the change of Seed, as a
means to bring fair Flowers: Of Exossation of Fruit, or making it grow without
Stones. Page 134 N. 9. The conclusion of the Treatise, with one or two choice
observations of the wise and good Providence of God, which may be seen in the
admirable make of Vegetables, and fitness to their ends, which are not
generally taken notice of, but are, with many more, overseen by men busy in
the affairs of the world. Page 139
ERRATA.
Page 8. col. 2. l. 17, r. Scorzonera. p. 10. l. 5. are but young p. 11. l. 15.
properata satio, p. 27. l. 6, 8, 9. r. Serotine, p. 33. l. 21. r. so that to
bear Seed yearly, is general to all, unless p. 61. l. 3. and I am well
contented, p. 94. l. 22. as possible p. 117. l. 20. adapted p. 149. l. 18.
Vestments.

THE HISTORY OF Artificial propagation of Plants.
CAP. I. Of Propagation by Seed.
Number. 1. Of Propagation of Vegetables in general, with a Preface to the
Discourse.
THe Illustrious and Renowned Lord Bacon, in his Discourse concerning the
advancement of Learning, reckons it among the Deficients of Natural History,
That the Cooperation of Man, with Nature in particulars, has not been
observed; and that in those Collections which are made of Agriculture, and
other manual Arts, there is commonly a neglect and rejection of Experiments,
familiar and vulgar, which yet to the interpretation of Nature, and which I
shall add, general profit, do as much, if not more conduce, then Experiments
of a higher quality. The same noble Person, in his partition of Philosophy,
complains of the want of an Inventary of what in any subjects by Nature and Art
is certainly, and may be undoubtedly wrought. I believe his Lordship has had
many of his mind in former, has now, and is likely to have in future ages; for
amongst those few Writings extant on these Subjects, some prove altogether
useless, as being so full of their natural Magic and Romantic Stories, that
we know no more what to credit in those Relations, in the Natural, then what in
civil History we may believe of King Arthur; Guy of Warwick in ours; or of
Hector and Priam in the Trojan Story: Others elevated in their Fancies, write
in a Language of their own, addressing their Discourse to the Sens of Art,
speaking rather to amuse, than instruct, and prove like blazing Stars, that
distract many, and direct few.

Many of those who would write for Universal Instruction, either know the
things that might make up the matter of their History, but want the skill to
draw up such an Inventary, as his Lordship requires, as common Tradesmen and
Artisans; or else indeed are learned enough to draw up the writing, but stand
aloof from the knowledge of most of the particulars therein to be ingrost;
which is the ordinary case of us, such of us as have pretensions to Scholarship.

I being necessitated by my obligations and respect to a Person truly Noble, to
give some account of the particular effects of Man, cooperating with nature,
in the matter of our English Vegetables, as they are improved by Husbandmen and
Gardiners, desire to undertake no more, but to give a sincere endeavor, That
the way of the Artist be set down, and the effect of Nature thereon; in the
first of which, I intend my directions so plain, as if appointed for the
instruction of some Artists rude and untaught Apprentice: and the second's, if
not so homely, yet as easy and evident, being a little disgusted with any
thing intended for the use of Philosophy, when overgarnished with Rhetorical
Tropes, which like Flowers stuck in a Window for whatsoever intended (either
cheat or ornament) certainly create a darkness in the place. Behemenical,
Paracelsian, and such Phrase as many Alchimists use, I must for the same reason
avoid.

In the drawing up the Inventary, I will study that it may be true in all
parts, and not to mingle, according to the example of Pliny, Weeker, Porta, and
many more, both Latin and English Writers, any false relation, without its
distinguishing Character; and if it be not perfect, it shall be for want of
skill, or present remembrance of particulars.

The end of the Artist is to Propagate and Improve: To propagate, is to
multiply the individuals of each kind: And to improve, is to bring them, being
propagated, to a more then ordinary excellency and goodness. The ways of
increasing the particulars of each kind, are, 1. By Seed, 2. By off-set, taken
from a Mother-Plant. 3. By laying the Branch of a growing Plant down into the
Earth. 4. By bearing up a Soil to it. 5. By Stems set without roots. And
lastly, By the various ways of grafting and insitions.

Concerning all these, as likewise the preservation and melioration of things
propagated, I shall endeavor to enumerate what Plants may be increased by each
of these ways, and to show how the operation in each may be performed, and what
the product is that by nature thence ordinarily ensues: Definitions are
hopeless in this matter, useless too, and it might be harmful: If I should
define Sowing, to be the casting of Seed into the Earth, in such manner, and at
such time, when in the surface of the bed the earth would so ferment, as might
be proper to the explication and further germination of the Seed and increase
of the Plant, there might a world of controversies arise about the particulars
therein contained; and yet all that is there would be useless, till the
particular Plants, and the manner of the operation, and time required to the
sowing of their Seeds be first declared: I shall therefore wave all such
endeavors, and hasten to what may rather prove for use than pomp.

N. 2. A Catalogue of Plants that may be increased by Seeds.
Aconite. F. Adonis. Allissanders. Alkanet. Alaternus. Alliaria. Almonds, the
bitter from our English Fruit, serving for his own kind, or to make stocks for
Aprecots and Peaches. Ammi. Amaranthus. Angelica. Anemones. Aprecots. Aparine.
Apple Trees of all sorts. Apples of Love. Arsemart. Armerias. Archangels.
Aristolochia. Ash. Asparagus. Asphodels. Avens of all sorts. Balm Apple.
Balsamina. Basil. Balm. Barberies. Bay-Trees. Beech. Beans. Bears-cars. Betony.
Bell-flowers. Beets. Bistort. Bitter Almonds. Blite. Blew-bottle. Bloodwort.
Bryonies. Bulbous Violets. Burrage. Buglosse. Burdock. Burnet Saxafrage.
Burnet. Burrs. Buckthorn. Bullets of all sorts. Cabbage Plants. Campions.
Carnations. Calamint. Camomile. Caucalis. Carrots wild. Carrots. Caraway.
Carduus Benedictus. Centory Celandine. Chickweeds. Chondrillas. Chervil.
Cherries. Chestnuts. The Cornelian Cherry. Cichory. Citrulls. Ciches. Claries.
Coleworts. The Seed of Clematis, but it comes not up till the second year.
Coleflower. Corn of all sorts. Coronopus Ruellii. Comfrey. Corianders.
Columbines. Convolvulus major, minor, and other Bind weeds. Cornsallet.
Coronopus. Most sorts of Cowslips. Crown Imperial. Cranes-Bills. Crowfoot of
most sorts. Cucumbers. Cumin. Cyclamens. Cypres from outlandish seed.
Dandelion. Dames Violet. Some Daysies. Diers Weed. Dittaender. Devils bit.
Dittany. Dill. Docks. Dogs-bane. Earth-nut. Egrimony. Elecampane. Endive.
Epatioa's. Eupatorium cannabinum. Evergreen Privet. Ewe. Feverfew. Eennel
flowers. Fennel. Fenugreek. Figwort. Fig Trees. Fibberds. The Firre-Tree. Some
Flags. Flowers-de-Luce. Flos Adonis. Flaxes. Fleabane. Fluellens. Foxgloves.
Frittelaries. French Mallows. Fumitery. Garlic. Garden cresses. Germanders.
Ginny. Gilly-flowers. Gourds. Most of our English Grass; to this end,
Husbandmen use Hay-dust (as they call it, in which lie the Seeds of their
grass) to sow upon such Grounds as they mean to turn from Fallow into Pasture,
or where they would have the Grass grow thicker. Grain of all sorts. Groundsel.
Groundpine. Gromwell. Hawkweeds. Hartwort. Hawthorn. Haselnuts. Henbane. Hemp.
Hellebores. Hereules his all heal. Hyacinths. Horseradish. Horned-Poppy.
Hony-wort. Horehounds. Hounds Toungues. Holyoke. Honysuckles. Holly or Holme.
Hypericum. all Hyssopes. Indian Pepper. Ironworte. Juniper. Kidney-beans.
Knapweed. Knot-grasse. Ladysmocks. Lamb-lettuce. Lark-spurs. Lavander.
Langdebeefe. Leeks. Some Lillyes, though but few. Lychnis Calcedonica. Linum
umbella^um. Lovage. Lupines. Marioranes of all kinds. Mandrakes. Mastique.
Common Marygolds. Mallows. French and African Marigolds. Marshmallowes.
Masterwort. Maple. Malacotones. Melons. Melilot, and its kinds. Medlars.
Mercuries. Molyes. Motherworte. Mustard. Muscipula. Mulleines. Mulberries by
seed from hotter climates than our own; for our heat ripens not the seed.
Mirtles likewise. Narcisses. Dead-Nettles. Stinging Nettles. Noli-me-tangere.
Night shades. Nigella. Oak. Onions. Some of the Orchis or stones. Orach.
Orpines. Paronychia. Pancies. Peucedanum. Parsley. Parsnips. Panax Herculeus.
Pellitory. Pennyworts. Peonyes. Pease. Pease everlasting. Pears. Peaches.
Periclimenum. Pinks. Pimpernel. The Pitch-tree. Plums. Plantains. Wild and
garden Poppyes. Pondweed. Pompions. Primroses. Ever green Privet. Pulsatillas.
Purslane. Quinces. Radish. Ragworte. Rampions. Radix-cava. Reeds. Ribwort.
Rosemary by Outlandish seed, sometimes by our own. Roman Nettles. Some Roses,
the Flower being not gathered, but left to seed. Rocket. Rushes of many sorts.
Rue of all sorts. Some of the Saffrons, and Mede Saffrons, whose seed lies
under the earth. Satyrions. Savory. Sabina baccifera. Scorpion grasses. Scurvey
grass. Scorodonia. Scabiouse. Scorzoneca, but it comes up with some
difficulty. Seseli aethiopicum, or Hartwort. Sesamoides, Shepherds purse.
Skirrets. Sloes. Smalladge. Sneezewort. Snapdragon. Sowth istle. Sorrels.
Spiderwort. Spinach. Spurges of many kinds. Spignel. Stitchwort. Starreflowers.
Stock gilliflowers. Starrewort. Flowers of the Sun. Sword-flags. Swine-cresse.
Swallow-wort. Sycamores. Tarragon. Teasels. Terrae-glandes. Thorney Apples.
Thorough-wax. Thyme, both the Winter and Summer sort. Thistles. Tobacco.
Thlaspies. Toad-flaxes. Tragopogon. Trefoile, and its kinds. Tulips. Turnips,
and all its wild kinds. Tutsan. Venus Looking-glass. Vervain. Vetches.
Violets. Vipers-grasse. Virgine-bower. Umbilicus-Veneris. Vines from outlandish
seed. Water-betony. Water-lilly. Wallnuts. Winter-cresse. Winter-cherries.
Willow-weeds. Woolfs-bane. Wormwood. Woodroof. Wood Sorrel. Woad.
There is a great controversy concerning Hartstongue, Maydenhair of diverse
sorts, Scolopendrium, Fernes, and other Plants, whose property is to have the
back of the leaf lined with a brown dusty substance, whether this be a seed, or
only particular mole, and character of Plants of that nature.

I dare not disbelieve this, when perfectly ripe, to be a true seed, because
diverse, very experienced persons (as Mr. Bobart particularly) affirm, that they
have seen the small Plants, or Seedlings at a distance all round the
Mother-plant grow up as is ordinary from shed seed of other plants, and by
Miscroscopes, the likeness of this dust to other seeds is apparently seen.

N. 3. The Seasons of Sowing.
First, the most natural time of Sowing is that which Nature it self follows
(viz.) when the seeds of their own accord fall into the ground.

At this season may be sown all stony seeds that can endure the Winter, as
Cherries, Plums, Peaches, Apples, Pears, likewise all Nuts, Buckthorne, Ash,
Oak, and most wild English Plants, though they may as well be sowed any time
before the Spring.

The seed of hot, and sweet herbs, as Thyme, Savory, Marjerome of some kinds,
and other hot herbs, if they get any reasonable strength and growth before the
frosts, do well enough; also Angelica seed, Scurvey-grasse, and the seed of
Bears-ears, Aniseed, Fritellary, Crocus; and, for ought I know, all the rest of
Bulbous-rooted flowers: So Tulips and Anemones thrive best, and come soonest,
being sowed after the seeds are gathered, or in Autumn: For many October does
well, but care must be had to keep tender Plants from Frosts and the violence
of Winter weather, when they but young from the seedlings. If you doubt the
nature of any seed, divide your quantity, and sow some of it in the Spring,
some before the Winter.

At this time also must be sowed diverse Plants, for that by experience it is
found, that being sowed in the Spring they will not grow at least not that
year: Of this kind Myrrhis, or sweet Chervill, and all Rubarbs, which easily
grow then, but fail being sown in the Spring.

The mistake of the time has made some admire, that when they with care had
sown Angelica seeds several times together, this never grew; on the contrary,
the Seed being shed would grow in any place, never so uncouth or stony; nay
even carried away by the water, would grow wherever it was lodged in the banks,
and that well and lustily; whereas the reason of the difference was in the
season, for the laborious Artist kept the seeds till Spring was his hindrance,
whereas better instructed Nature would have committed them to the earth many
months sooner. It Is a true Proverb, properata satio solet saepe decipere, sera
semper.

Some seeds are sown at the breaking of the Frost, and the very first
beginning of Spring, and that upon a hot bed, for the greater security and
speed of the Plant to be propagated: So the early Radish, the Sensitive Plant,
Maracoc, Balm Apples, French Marygolds, Muskmelons, all Cucumbers, African
Marygolds, the Marvail of the world, the Indian Cresse, or yellow Larksheel,
Lettices that they may be had early.

The hot Bed is made with horse-dung laid four, five, or six foot high, and of
the same breadth commonly, increasing or diminishing the quantity of the dung
(which uses to be fresh, as it comes from the stable, mingled with stale
Litter, Hay, etc.) according as you would have the heat greater or less, upon
which bed of dung you lay fine mould, five fingers breadth in deepnesse or
thereabouts, compassing it round with hay-bands which keep the dung together,
and hinder the steaming out of the heat by the sides; then staking it up with
stakes, and putting bended sticks in the manner of a very low roof to hold up
tilts that are put to secure the Plants, the hot bed is perfectly finished.
Those that use Capglasses, or Casements made to lie upon a frame over their
beds, nevertheless must use, though not tilts, yet covering with straw,
litter, or the like.

Asparagus and Chervil are best sown in Winter before Christmasse, or shortly
after, and in the beginning of Spring without any hot bed. In February, or
afterward, are sown Parsnips, Leeks, Onions, Aniseeds, Carrets, Radish,
Spinach, Larks-spurs, Marygolds, Caerefolium, Corn-sallet, and with the first
of these the Rounseval pease.

Colliflowers and Cabbages in the middle of February, Muskmelons somewhat
after, or then for a venture. It Is observed by all I have enquired of, that the
less of the Winter the Cabbage or Collyflowers feels, the more subject it is to
Caterpillars. In March or April (or according to some with us, from the
beginning of February; or, if the Frosts break, any time in January) Carrot,
Radish, Tobacco, Fennel, Cresses, Skirrets are ordinarily sown.

In April, Marjerome, Basil, Coleflowers; for by often transplanting and care
you may have Coleflowers from seed, sown in the Spring, though it be very far
gone even to June or July the same year, Pincks, Armeriaes, Convolvulus,
Kidney-beans, Lupins, Hyssope, Lavander, Stock-gillyflowers, Thyme, Hemp.

About the latter end of April, Purslane, Clovegilliflowers, Carnations, Basil,
Rosemary.

About Midsummer sow the early Pease; to be ripe six weeks after Michaelmasse.

Note that our Gardiners, though there be some peril, choose to sow early,
because they have much advantage by all sorts of forward commodities; so
Turnips sowed early, many run to seed, yet one good then, is worth three at
another season. The same may be said of Pease and Carrets, which by cold are
spoiled many times; yet it is observed by some, that oftentimes, whether by
difference of ground, or other accident, the Bean latter sowed will overtake the
former, and so in some sorts of Pease.

Many seeds are best sown about August, so Turnips, and the black Radish, for
a peculiar reason; which is, being sown sooner, they are apt to run up to seed
before Winter, and not to fill the root at all. Onions for winter provision,
Lettice and Corn-sallet for the same occasion; Spinach too, always upon that
account, though otherwise they may be sown with the first. Nay, our Gardiners
here in Oxford sow Turnips in April, and so forward till the Winter.

Cabbage plants are sowed commonly about August; and the first Coleflowers,
that they may before Winter be so grown, as to be transplanted at greater
distance, so to abide till the Spring. I have known some, when frost has
spoiled the winter Cabbage-plants, to have furnished themselves from plants
raised in the Spring upon a hot bed.

Many seeds must be gathered a little before they are thoroughly ripe with the
stalks on which they grow; for should it abide until the full maturitie in the
Garden, by wind and weather great part of the seed would be shed, which will
easily perfect its ripeness as it lies cut upon its stalk, being laid any
where within door upon a cloth or mat where the Sun comes. Of this kind is
Lettice, and most of those seeds that arise from the stock with a woolinesse.

There are many Plants that will grow in all times of sowing, and therefore are
sown many months, one after another; so Radishes, and Spinach, and Pease,
which are sown with the first in the Spring; and so month after month till
Autumn. Those Lettice which abide the winter are wont to be transplanted to
Cabbage in the Spring, even as Cabbages are with admirable success.

Our Gardiners, that they may have Cucumbers to sell one under another, plant
them in hot beds from February even till May.

Pease are sown from the beginning of November (or by some a fortnight before,
though with some danger of the biting frost) and so forward til after
Shrovetide.

Rounsevals, if sowed never so early, will scarce come before the latter part
of the Month of June.

Husbandmen generally use to sow Wheat under furrow in the Autumn; but I have
seen it with good success sown in the Spring, and harrowed in after the manner
of sowing Barley; the crop being as good as any other times upon the same
ground, after the usual country procedure.

Some seeds must be sown dry, not after rain or watering: Of this kind is
Myrrhis seed, Basil, Scorzonera, and all such as being wet run to a Muscilage.

Many times they sow diverse seeds in a Bed together, as Radishes and Carrots,
that by such time as the Carrots come up, the Radishes may be gone. Upon beds
newly set with Licorice they sow Onions or Radish, or Lettice if their Licorice
plants or ground be but weak, so as not quickly to cause a shadow with their
leaves. London Gardiners sow Radish, Lettice, Parsley, Carrots, on the same
bed, gathering each in their seasons, and leaving the Parsnips till the Winter;
before which time they are not esteemed good, or wholesome.

Note, that where your grounds are very warm by reason of hedges, hot beds,
dunghils, etc. that may abate the power of the frost, seeds may be ventured
into the ground much sooner than otherwise in ordinary places.

Cabbage seeds and Coleflowers are sowed in August, or so timely as to be
exactly well rooted plants before winter; and this is the best way: Or are
sowed after, so that they are transplanted in the time of cold. This way is
hazardous in the winter, by reason of the nipping Frosts, and chargeable, in
that they require much attendance, and covering, and uncovering, which those
plants that are confirmed before winter do not. Secondly, they are more
subject to Caterpillars in the Summer; but the way of raising of them by hot
beds in the Spring for Cabbages is the worst way of all, and most subject to
the peril of that vermin.

Those Plants of the Spring sowing, that you sow later than ordinary, require
to be the more watered and shadowed from the heat.

Those in the Spring that are sowed earlyer than ordinary, require the more to
be defended from the cold.

Those in the Autumn, that you prematurely sow, are to be watered and shadowed
the more. Those which you sow late are to be better defended from the Winter
till they have gotten strength.

N. 4. Examples of Sowing with some particular directions for some choice
Vegetables.
Examp. 1. From Mr. Parkinson; directing skillfully the ordering of Tulips in
their propagation by seed.
The first example I shall give you out of Mr. Parkinson: The time (says he)
and manner of Sowing Tulipseed is thus, you may not sow them in the Spring of
the year, if you hope to have any good of them, but in the Autumn, or
presently after they be through ripe and dry; yet if you sow them not until
the end of October. they will come forward never the worse, but rather the
better: for it is often seen, that over-early sowing causes them to spring out
of the ground over-early, so that if a sharp spring chance to follow, it may
go near to spoil all, or most of the seed: We usually sow the same years
seed, yet if you chance to keep of your own, or have of others, such seed as is
two years old, they will thrive and do well enough; Especially if they were
ripe and well gathered: you must not sow them too thick, for so doing has lost
many a Peck of seed; for if the seed lie one upon another, that it has not
room upon the sprouting to enter or take root in the earth, it perishes by
and by; Some use to tread down the ground where they mean to sow their seed,
and having sown them thereon, do cover them over the thickness of a man's
Thumb, with fine fifted earth, and they think they do well, and have good
reason for it: For considering the nature of young Tulip roots is to run down
deeper into the ground, every year more then other, they think to hinder their
quick descent by the fastness of the ground, that so they may increase the
better. This way may please some, but I do not use it, nor can find the reason
sufficient; for they do not consider that the stifness of the earth does cause
the roots of the young Tulips to be long before they grow great, in that the
stiff ground does more hinder the well thriving of the Roots then a loose
does: and although the roots do run down deeper in a loose earth, yet they
may easily by transplanting be helped and raised up high enough. I have also
seen some Tulips not once removed from their sowing to their flowering; but if
you will not loose them you must take them up while their leaf or stalk be
fresh and not withered: for if you do not follow the stalk down to the root,
be it never so deep you will leave them behind you.

The ground also must be respected, for the finer, softer and richer the mould
is, wherein you sow the seed, the greater shall be your increase and variety.
Sift it therefore from stones and rubbish, and let it be either fat natural
ground of it self, or being muckt, let it be thoroughly rotten: some I know to
mend their ground do make such a mixture of grounds, that they mar it in the
making.

Ferrarius bids that the seed be sown in September. (as soon as rain shall make
the ground fit) half a fingers breadth in good Garden mould, not to be removed
in two years after, at which time they are to be removed and placed in several
beds, according to their seve^all bigness, where in 4 or 5 years they will bear
their flowers.

Example 2. Of Anemone's
Within a month after the seed of Anemone's is gathered and prepared, (in
August, says Ferrarius, or three days before the full Moon in September.) it
must be sown, for by that means you shall gain a year in the growing, over that
you should do if you sowed it the next spring: If there remain any Wooliness
in the seed, pull it asunder as well as you can, and then sow your seed
reasonably thin upon a plain smooth bed of fine earth, or rather in pots or
tubs, and after the sowing sift or gently strew over them some fine good fresh
mould, about one fingers thickness at the most for the first time; and about a
month after their springing up, sift, or strew over them in like manner (this
is a necessary circumstance) another fingers thickness of fine earth, and in
the mean time if the weather prove dry, you must water them gently and often,
and thus doing you shall have them spring up before winter and grow pretty
strong, able to abide the sharp winter, in their Nonage, in using some little
care to cover them loosly with Fearne, furze, or Bean-straw or any such things,
which must neitherly close to, nor too far from them.

The next Spring after the sowing, or which is better the next August you may
remove them, and set them in order by Rows with sufficient distance one from
another, where they may abide, until you see what manner of flower they will
bear.

Many of them being thus ordered, if your mould be fine, loose and fresh, not
stony, clayish, or from a middin, will bear flowers the second year after the
sowing, and most or all of them the third year, if your ground be free from
smoaks and other annoyances. Nay Mr. Austen of Wadham Coll. a skillfull
florist, assured me that he has had Anemones from the seed sowed in summer,
that were in flower within ten months of the time of their sowing.

N. 3. Clovergrasse being esteemed as great an improvement as any our ground is
capable of: I shall add such special directions as are given for the ordering
thereof: Sir Richard Westons observations and rules are as falloweth.
Clovergrasse-seed thrives best when you sow it in the worst and barrennest
ground. Such as our worst heath ground in England. The ground is thus prepared
for seed.

First pare of the heath; then make the paring into little hills: you may put
to one hill as much paring as comes off from a Rod or Pole of ground, which is
the square of sixteen feet and a half. The hill being sufficiently made and
prepared (as they do in Devonshiring as we call it) are to be fired and burnt
into ashes. And unto the ashes of every hill you must put a peck of unslake
Lime; the Lime is to be covered over with the ashes, and so to stand til Rain
comes and slakes the lime. After that mingle your ashes and Lime together, and
so spread it over your land. This done; either against, or shortly after rain,
plough and sow; ploughing not above four inches deep and not in furrows, but
as plain as you can, and to make it yet plainer, harrow afterward, and that
with bushes under your Harrowes.

The ground being thus prepared you may sow your seeds. An Acre of ground will
take about ten pounds of Clover-grasse-seed, which is in measure somewhat more
then half a Peck. The chief season for sowing it is April or the latter end of
March.

About the fifth of June it will be ready to be cut. It yields excellent hay.
The time of cutting it will be more exactly known, by observing when it begins
to knot: for that is the time: And ere the year be done, it will yield you
three of those crops, all of them very good hay; and after you have thus cut it
the third time, you may then feed the ground with Cattle all the winter, as you
do other ground.

But if you intend to preserve seed, then must you expect but two crops that
year, and you must cut the first according to the foresaid directions, but the
second growth must be let stand, till the seed of it be come to a full and dead
ripeness, and then must you cut it, and thresh the tops, and so preserve the
seed, you shall have at least five bushells of seed from every Acre.

This seed thus threshed off, there will be left long stalks, these your Cattle
will eat; but when they grow old and hard, you are to boil those stalks and
make a mash of them, and it will be very nourishing either for Hogs, or any
thing that eat thereof.

After the second cutting for seed, you must cut that year no more; but as it
springs again, feed it with Cattle. One Acre of it will feed you as many Cowes
as six ordinary Acres, and you will find your milk much richer; which induces
some not to cut it at all, but only to graze it for their Dayry.

Being once sowed, it will last five years, and then being plowed, it will
yield three or four years together rich crops of wheat, and after that a crop
of Oats.

And as the Oats begin to come up, then sow it with Clover-seed (which is in it
self excellent Manure) for your need not bestow any new dressing upon the
ground, and by that time you have cut your Oats, you will find a delicare
grass grown up underneath, upon which if you please, you may graze with Cattle
or Horse all that year after, and the next year take your crop as before at
pleasure.

To prevent mistake, I must give this advertisement, that whereas Sir Richard
Weston commends heathy ground, he is not to be understood, of such dry and
barren ground without its best Manure by chalk, lime, and the like artifices of
husbandry. For otherwise it has failed in the growth and improvement thereby
expected. Mr. Blithe commends ground naturally good, betwixt ten and twenty
shillings an Acre: giving this general Rule, that no land can be too good for
Clover that is not too good for Corn.

Hemp and Flax are used to have the same culture, and the best husbandry that
I have observed of them has been in Staffordshire, where this procedure is
generally observed. About the beginning or middle of April the flax seed is
sown upon new broken ground, immediately upon its being broken up. The seed
they either have from their own Crop, or buy it from a warmer Country: Mr.
Blithe reports the true East-Country seed to be far the best, who for trial
of both, sowed on the same land, the Ridge or Middle with our Country seed, and
both the furrows, with Dutch or east-country seed, (such as is bought in the
seedsmens shops at Billingsgate in London) the effect was that our seed, though
on the ridge it had the advantage of the ground, was encompassed with the
Dutch, as with a wall about it, so much the Eastern seed did out grow it, He
likewise for warmer parts, as Essex and Kent thinks mid-March a convenient
feason for sowing it: If weeds grow therein they carefully weed their crop and
pull it in dry weather when it looks yellow, lest growing over ripe it blacken
and mildew, and tie it up in handfulls that it may perfectly dry. Then they
ripple it, is, that they get out the seeds by drawing it through an ^ngine like
an iron double tooth comb, which they call a Ripple: the boles of seed pulled
off, they lay on a boarded or playsterd floor to dry, it being dried they lay
it up and thresh it not out of the boles till March, when they winnow it clean
from the husks.

The watering of it is thus: The Flax being well dried, they bind up about 20
handfulls in a bundle and putting many of these bundles together they stake
them down in the water, that they may not be carried away by the Stream. The
flax abides in water 4 or 5 days and nights, then they spread it on the grass
that it may dry, turning it every 3 days, and when it is full dried they lay
it up and house it, and when they see their occasion they use their Brake and
Crack, instruments devised for the purpose to bring the Tow from the Flax. The
whole Government and husbandry of hemp from the seed to the distaffe is so like
this of Flax that the same example and rule may very well serve for both.

Woad, according to Mr. Bliths directions, is best sowed where you sow your
Barley or Oats, upon that very husbandry or tilth, about the middle of March,
and may grow up among the Corn because it grows not fast the first summer,
but after the Corn is cut it must be preserved; it requires a rich and warm
soil. This plant is of great use to Dyars, and colors the bright yellow or
lemon color, It abates the strength and superrichnesse of land, and may
prepare for Corn in land of its own Nature too rich, which is, as Mr. Blithe
observes, sometimes a fault, though not so frequently as the contrary extreme.

Beans require a low deep ground and Waterish, not dry, sandy or gravelly
soil: This is true of field beans, though I first Took notice of the great
difference in our London Gardens, where the laborers for their own eating
would give one part in three more for a measure of beans from the former than
from the latter soil, who assured me that from the same seed and care garden
beans have much more meal, pulpe, or kernel and thinner skins in the moist
than in the dryer and less waterish ground.

N. 4. The General observations for the manner of sowing.
Besides the Examples aforesaid, I shall add some rules such as by Gardiners
are usually observed.

This is general that all seeds must be covered with the earth, which is done,
either by sowing the ground and turning the seed in under the furrow, or by
drawing trenches in the soil, and then drawing the earth over them with a hoe,
or sowing the beds ready dressed, and hacking in the seed with the same
instrument, or by harrowing, raking with a rake or drawing bushes over the
sowed ground to cover the seed, or to set the single seeds with a stick, or
lastly to sow the ground and afterward to sift or strew fine mould thereon.

The two last ways are for choice seeds when the workman desires to loose
none for want of burying the sowing under furrow is for such seeds as must
endure the winter, the depth of ground being part of their security against the
winter colds: nor are all seeds of strength to shoot their germen through so so
much earth. The sowing intrenches is used for Pease, there being thereby spaces
left between the rows, of half a yard more or less, to gather them as they
ripen, and room whence to draw mould to the roots, which frequently done, is
very advantageous to them. It is likewise handsome for Spinach, Endive, Thyme,
Savory or other garden herbs to grow in rows after this manner of sowing.

Moisture is absolutely necessary for the growth of all plants, two or three
days after a great rain is accounted a good season; in dry weather two days
after rain say the London Gardiners, agreably to that of Ferrarius, Nec tamen
simulac magnis imbribus terra permaduit seres, sed tantisper expectabis, dum
pluvius ille mador modice exsiccetur, ne madenti limosoque in solo statutae
radices exputrescant de Fl. cult. l. 3. c. 1. Seeds that are apt to run to a
Muscilage are unfit to endure moisture upon that account, as else where I noted.

I prescribe nothing concerning the observation of the faces of the moon,
because I much doubt of any effect therefrom. Neither do Gardiners that work,
nor Authors that write, prescribe alike rules; but contradict each other in
their direction, for the particular observation of this Planet, as to any
intended production. Nor is it agreeable to my reason, that the moons being in
the full at the first explication of the two dissimilar leaves, or germination
of the plant, should cause a double flower, this germination according to this
present History, differing little from other augmentations of the same plant,
in opposite quarters immediately ensuing: so that if a full moon be proper, I
see no reason why it may not be effectual, by virtue of the same phasis the
third, as the first or the twelveth, as the sixth day of the seedlings
augmentation.

The meliorating of ground belongs to the head of Improvement; here I shall
only observe that where ground is very light, as in some London and Kentish
gardens, it is found profitable after sowing to tread in the seed.

Some steep all garden seed before they sow them to make the germination the
more speedy, but seeing there be no better ways of infusion than in Farth and
Water, why the same bosom of a well watered ground should not be most fit for
this operation I see not.

In seeds that are long in coming up, the seed bed is not to be dug up the
first winter: For I know diverse seeds that will for a great part of them ly
under ground the first, year and come up the second: of this Nature is the
Ash-key sometimes, the Peach, Malecotone and some Plums.

N. 5. Of variety of kinds, different in color, taste, smell, and other
sensible qualities, proceeding from some seeds, and what plonts they are that
bring seeds yeild-such va riety.
In Carnations you have seeds that give admirable Variety from the Orange-tawny
Carnation and all his stripped kinds that are double and keep their tawny in
them in any measure. The white, Tawny and Carnations darkly spotted, Ferrarius
commends for producing variety of colors and stripes. Kernells of diverse
Apples and Pears bring variety of kinds, different in taste, smell, color,
and hardness, and are as often promoted to better, as the degenerate to worst,
as I am very credibly informed, by persons that profess themselves to have
seen the experience. The kernells of the Burgundy Pear has brought a noble
alteration and produces a pear far beyond that excellent kind: Peaches and
Malecotones do ordinarity the like, so that by seed is thought to be their
best propagation.

Our Gardiners in choosing the seed of stock-Gylli-flowers to make them bring
double stocks, take their seed from such tops as bring fine leaves in their
flower, of ecially if it be one stripped; but Mr. P. says those that bear
double seeds, cannot be distinguished from the other, and I have reason to
believe him, for such as choose their seed this way, do not find that it
answers their expectation.

For Tulips that are early, or Praecoces, the purple says Mr. Parkinson, I have
found to be the best, next thereto is the purple with white edges, and so
likewise the red, with yellow edges; but each of them will bring most of their
own Colors. For the Media's, take those colors that are light, rather white
then yellow, and purple, then red, yea white, not yellow, purple, not red: but
these again to be spotted is the best, and the more the better; but withal or
aboveall, in these respect the bottom of the flower (which in the precox
Tulipa you cannot, because you shall find no other ground in them but yellow)
for if the flower be white or whitish, sported, or edged and straked, and the
bottom blew or purple (which is found in the Holias, and in the Cloth of
Silver, this is beyond all other the most excellent, and out of question the
choicest of an hundred, to beget the greatest and most pleasant variety, and
raritie, and so in degree the meaner in beauty you sow, the lesser shall your
ple sure in varieties be: Bestow not your time in sowing red or yellow
Tulipa-seed, or the diverse mixtures of them, they will (as I have found by
experience) seldom be worth your pains. The Serolina being not beautiful,
brings forth no special varietye: Ferrarius lib. 3, chap. 7. commends the
Serolina for seed, (but I find he makes but two sorts; Praecoces and Serolin's)
and among them the white, with the black purple, or blew bottomes or Scarlet
with skycoloured bottom inclining to purple; for both them will (says he)
bring Tulips marked with varietye and handsomnesse: But Tulips without a
blackish bottom are noe good breeders of various colored flowers.

The two lesser Spanish bastard Daffodills, the leaves of which are of a
whitish green color, one alittle broader then the other, and the flowers pure
white, bending down their their heads, that they almost touch the Stalk again,
give Seed from which springs much varietye, few or none keeping either color
or height with their mother plant.

The seeds of diverse Son breads, by name the Roman Sowbred with round leaves,
the Autumnall Ivy leaved Sowbread, some flowers-de-lis, and many sorts of
Bears-eares do the like in produceing admirable variety.

As for Anemones, take it from Mr. P. and our common daily experience that there
is not so great variety of double flowers raised from the seeds of thin
leave'd Anemones as from the broad leaved ones. Of the Latifolias, the double
Orange-rawny seed being sown, yeildeth pretty varietyes, but the purples, or
reds, or crimsons, yield small varietyes, but such as draw nearest to their
original, although some be a little deeper or lighter then others: But the
light colors are they that are chief for choice, as white, ash color, blush
or Carnation, light Orange, Simple, or party-colored, single (or double if
they bear seed) which must be carefully gathered, and that not before it be
fully ripe, which you shall know by the head, for when the seed with the
woollinesse begins a little to rise of it self at the lower end, then must
it be quickly gathered, lest the wind carry it all away, after it is thus
carefully gathered it must be laid to dry for a week or more, which then being
gently rubbed with a little dry sand, or earth will cause the seed to be better
separated, although not thoroughly, from the wooliness or down that compasses
it.

In the seed of the Mervayle-of-the-world, take notice, that if you would have
variable flowers, you must choose out such flowers as be variable while they
blow, that you may have their seed! for in this plant if the flower be of a
single color, the seed will likely bring the same.

N. 6. Some other relations of transmutation, and the possibility of a change
of ones species into another examined.
I have often heard persons affirm, that they have sowed Barley, or some other
grain, and in the ground the seed has been so altered as to send forth Oats
instead of corn, according to its own species. I am as yet far from giving
any assent to this their History. The Reasons why I disbeleive them are, first,
because the Relators affirm whole fields to be thus varied, and that to one
species (viz) of Oats, which is different from Barley in the straw, ear and
grain it self. Whereas in the variation of seed, in those vegetables, in which
the change is undoubted, the color only or some other easily alterable
accidents, such as the sensible qualities are generally found are transmuted,
and this transmutation ends not at all in another diverse kind; but in several
small diversities of the same kind; The stories of Wheat turned to Mustard Seed
were as likely to be true, and is a fit parallel to create a right belief of
the true cause of the mentioned effect. Secondly, I knew a Gentleman who plowed
a piece of land in the spring, and then sowed it not, but after it was harrowed
and prepared for seed left it to its own Genius and nature to produce what it
was inclined to: The Ground was off its own Nature apt to bring forth
wild-Oates amidst the Corn, now in defect of Corn there grew as many wild-Oates
unmixt from any other weeds, as the land could carry. This was tried in a great
piece of land, and much proffit was made of the Oats, the Gentleman having cut
them green for Fodder Anno 1657.

My judgment therefore is, That the fallacy which befell my above named
Relators was, that they mistook the cause of the production of the Oats
mentioned; for to me it is much more easy to conceive, that by some evil
accident, as it often happens (the seed corn being corrupted and perish't in
the ground) the ground it is self from its own Seminary, sent out the
supposititious Crop of Oats or Mustard, than that there should be a variety of
so strange a Nature, and declension from its property, in the issue of any
species.

It is indeed grown to be a great question, whether the transmutation of a
species be possible either in the vegetable, Animal, or Mineral kingdom. For
the possibility of it in the vegetable: I have heard Mr. Bobart and his Son
often report it, and proffer to make oath that the Crocus and Sladiolus, as
likewise the Leucoium, and Hyacinths by a long standing without replanting have
in his garden changed from one kind to the other: and for satisfaction about
the curiosity in the presence of Mr. Boil I took up some bulbs of the very
numericall roots whereof the relation was made, though the alteration was
perfected before, where we saw the diverse bulbs growing as it were on the same
stool, close together, but no bulb half of the one kind, and the other half of
the other: But the change-time being past it was reason we should believe the
report of good artists in matters of their own faculty.

Mr. Wrench a skillful, and industrious gardener for fruit and kitching-plants
told me that the last year there was a change betwixt the kinds of the
Coleflower, and the cabbage. Others I know who as from their experience most
confidently affirm that they have prime-roses of the milk white color, the
root whereof before in another ground bare Oxelips: and it is usually believed
that diverse single flowers may be changed into double by frequent
transplantations, made into better grounds. I knew those that have had the wood
Anemonies, and Colchiums double, who affirm that they took them into their
garden wild, and fingle, and that that change was made by the soil, and
culrure of the place.

For the animal Kingdom the instances of transmutation are in silkwormes,
cadiz, and all caterpillars, which after a long sleep from the reptile turn
into the volatile kind.

The mineral Kingdom is supposed to be famous and fruitful in these changes,
the hope of the Philosophers stone, or perfecting medicine requiring this
belief: Yet I am persuaded that in many of their changes they rather separate,
and bring to appearance a latent mineral, than produce it by the transmutation
of another into that nature. Sennertus recants those writtings of his, that
affirmed iron to have been turned into copper by natural, and artificial
waters of Vitrioll. The effect only in his second, and more mature judgment
being the separation of a copper before latent in the Vitrioll, and the
precipitation of it by the parts of the iron: and I have seen some experiments
made by the honorable Person, for whom I am now writing, that have added
strength to my former persuasion, particularly the supposed transmutation of
quicksilver into lead, published as real by the learned Vintzerus and others,
and to be made by dissolving the quicksilver in aqua fortis, and precipitating
it by the tincture of Minium, proved but sophistical, the Lead produced that
way being indeed not made of the Mercury, but only reduced out of the tincture
of Minium, wherein it lurck't, as that Gentleman does more circumstantially set
down in his own papers, and others of the like nature, which it were not proper
here further to insist on.

It is a question, whether there be any real transmutation, from the vegetable
to the mineral kingdom, in petrifaction of any sort of wood: those
petrifactions, which I have seen in England, are made thus, some particles of
stone, that impregnate the body of water, make a crust about the stick that is
to be petrified, and enter into the pores thereof, as fast as they are laid
open by the water, washing through the stick, wherein there interceeds, noe
change of the same parts, but by addition of some, and substraction of others,
if I imagine aright, the new effect is wrought. The proof whereof may be, that
the fibers of wood appear visible and to the touch and taste amidst the body of
the stone.

In Ireland there is a Lake wherein (as that Noble Person I but now mentioned,
has related to me) there is so great a petrifying faculty that the best
wherstones used in that nation, are made of wood, cast therein to be petrified.
In which stones though all the lineaments of the woody fibers remain, yet they
are endued with the hardness, and other qualities of an exact stone. And
Coral, the entire stonynesse thereof noe man can doubt, may well be imagined
to be originally a vegetable bearing root, stalk, and leaf; and that afterward
it is turned into its hardness by the peculiar property of the water: whether
these operations of nature are likewise perfected by addition and substraction
of parts only, or whether it be required that some parts for the production of
this effect be transmuted I shall not determine.

And for the deciding the whole question, if the form be specificall, and so
made by the aggregation of a certain number of accidents, those accidents and
that number must be assigned that are thought enough to complete a new form,
before we may begin to judge in this matter for that very many accidents maybe
changed it appears by the above named instances in vegetables and in other
bodies many more: Vinegerand Wine, are the same parts transposed and yet there
seems to be more difference between them than between Endive and Cichory,
Maidenhaire and Scolopendrium, Rubarb and Dockes, which are in Vegetables
esteemed for diverse species formally or specifically distinguished.

N. 7. Of Provision for seed.
Many Roots are to be transplanted at the latter end of the year, and will
bring forth perfect seeds: as, Carrets, Parsneps, Turnips. Cabbages are to be
laid in Cellars all winter, the root and Cabbage being replanted in the
spring, or the seed may be got, though not in so plentiful a manner, from the
stalks of Cabbages, whence in the season the Cabbage was taken either
replanted, or standing in their old places: Coleflowers give their seed from
the like care that is bestowed on the Cabbage.

I have seen Gardiners that provide Cabbage-seed in great quantity for the
shops in London upon their course ground, to sow Cabbage seed which without
transplantation shall bring forth Coleworts for boiling herbs, and then a crop
of seed: many plants that bear fruit bring their seed every year in their
fruits, so Apples, Pears, Plumes, Peaches, Aprecots, Wheat, Barley, Rye,
Pease, Beans, and many that bear no fruit do the like, so Lettuce, Radish
all grasses, so that unless some peculiar plants which require to be excepted:
Yucca Indica, bears neither flower nor seed in less than four years time: it is
general that each seed will ripen every year, and the best general token of
maturity is its looseness from the pedall by which its joined to the stock, so
as kernells in ripe Apples grow loose from the core.

Those persons that make Verjuce or Cider can best furnish him that intends a
Nursery, for notwithstanding both the violence of Mill or Press, the kernells
escape entire enough for Vegetation; but care must be had that they be
immediately sown after the pressing lest being laid on a heap they heat, in
the manner of wet Hay, and burn the germen of the seed, which in the moisture
of the bruised fruit by that heat will prematurely sprout forth to its own
perishing.

In providing Lettuce seed, mark the plants that you see strongest for seed,
and after they have begun to shoot stalks, strip away the lowest leaves, for
two or three h^nds breadth above the ground, that by them the stalk be not
rotted.

Let Carnation and Gilly flower-Cods of seed stand upon the Root so long as
you may, for danger of frost, then cut the stems off with the Cods on them and
dry them so, as not to loose the seeds; The dryness of the Cods and blackness
of the seed is an Argument of ripeness: Ferrarius Lib. 3. Cap. 15. Reports,
that the bottom of every Cod brings the best seed: and the largest flowers.

The seed of Crocus's are only, or at least, best taken from the ordinary
stripped vernall Crocus, the great purple Crocus, the great blew Crocus of
Naples, the stripped purple, the less purple, flame colored, the purple with
small leaves, the yellow stripped, the cloth of Gold. Clovergrasse and seeds of
that nature, are provided by letting the grass run timely to seed,
particularly by moving it about May and thence abstaining till theseed is
through ripe.

Such seeds as are weighty and sink in water are best; the contrary are
usually languid and unfit for propagation.

Outlandish seeds are used for such plants, whose seeds cannot be got here for
want of Maturity, or any other reason.

The Spanish-Muske-Melon-seed is accounted best, though we use our own with
good success: few Gardiners here will use their own Onion-seed, for they find
it runs to Scallions: Myrtle with us comes not to seed, nor Mulbery. For the
sensitive plant, the Amaracoc or Passion flower etc. we send for seed to the
Barbado's.

What advantage our Nation might have by propagation of exotique plants by seed
brought new from several Countries beyond the Seas, it is hard to guess that
the^e would be advantage it is certain. I remember that Bellonius a man very
diligent, and much employed about knowing the nature of plants, growing in
other Countries than his own, which was France, wrote a whole book to show the
possibility and advantage of this improvement, to persuade Merchants to furnish
gentlemen with seed, and them to use it. It Is known that Peaches, Aprecots,
Nectarins were lately not only strangers to England, but to France likewise.
Mulbery is likewise on Exotique plant, and by King James his Command sent for
over and propagated by seed.

^xotique Seeds are good not only to propagate plants yet not with us, but
likewise to make a more plentiful production then can with ease be made from
any other way of propagation of such we already have.

Care must be had in sowing seed, or at least in setting them, where you intend
that they shall thrive, that the ground bear the best proportion may be to the
places and the particular Minera of the places where such plants in other parts
use to grow, not to put mountainous plants in low and moist grounds. Why the
Taurick Cedars, were they planted in Walls, should not grow I know no reason.

It were worth the while to consider in all seeds, whether there be noe
distinguishable difference in the seed, that may be of use, as to sooner, or
greater growth. In the same bed diverse seeds being sowed of one kind,
particularly Apples, Pears, Plummes, Cherrys, or Peaches, some Apple seedlings
will in the same mould, and distances, much outshoot the rest of the same kind,
and so in the Pears, and other kernels: it might here be enquired, whether the
great or less, send bigger plants, and of speedier growth? as it is by some
observed in buds, that the fairer the bud is upon the shield and stronger, the
better thrives the inoculation, and not only grows more certainly but more
lustily.

2. Whether the Canker in pippins, arise not from an incongruous grafting, and
it were not better to bring them up from kernells, or graft them on a more mild
stock than that of a Crab.

Whether there might not be gotten diverse years sooner trees of stature from
kernells of great bodyed and quick growing Apple trees, and such whose kernells
vary not much their kinds, than from Crabbs, which is a wood of a slow growth
and harsh Nature.

N. 8. The manner of growing by seed.
The seed is considered either as already made, or as it is under the hands of
Nature, imperfect, yet in the way to be made.

In it made, there are considerable, first, the Coats and cotton that cover it
about, and preserve it from injuries; secondly, the essential and proper parts
of the seed it self.

Many seeds have two Coats above the Cotton, and one thin one under, next
investing the seed, such are Sicamores.

All seeds that I know have within their Covers actually a Neb, which answers
to a root, which is joined to leaves more or less in number: betwixt the
stalks of, or amidst these leaves there is a bud, eye or Germen, just opposite
to the Neb, or initiall Root, but by reason of its smallness it is scarce
discernable in many seeds till it begins to spring.

1. Most plants have only two leaves actually joined to the Neb, which are
commonly very unlike the proper leaves of the plant: of this sort are the
flowers of the Sun, Ediffarum Clypeatum, Cucumbers, Melons, Amaranthus,
Thistles, Thlaspyes, Mallows of diverse kinds, Arch-angells Spurges, Nettles,
Clary, Orach, Dill, Parsely has two leaves dissimilar, but not much so,
Melilot two dissimilar, and one, if I mistake not, similar. 2. Many plants have
more Leaves in the arising from the Neb, as Cresses have six. 3. Some plants
have but one dissimilar leaf as Anemones, Tulips, Fritellaryes and all bulbous
spring flowers that I have observed. Wheat, Barley, Rye, all grain and grasses
that I know have a germen wrap ^ped up at one end of the grain in a hose or
sheath which germen consists of leaves wrapped about the bud by a plica, or
folding made the long way of the leaf, not overthwart as in Sicamores, Maples
and other complicated leaves of seeds, Nor does the whole corn divide it self
into leaves, and coats or husk as in those examples, but the greater part
thereof contains a meal which by the heat and moisture of the soil is turned
into a pappy substance not unlike the Chyle found in the lacteals of animal
bodies, and may, be as I suppose, reposed nourishment for the young blade at
such time as the earth would prove but a dry Nurse. I have taken notice that
Carriations come up sometimes with three, sometimes with four leaves, though
the most have but two: and it is Mr. Bobarts observation, that such as come up
with more leaves than two, prove double flowers, which if it generally holds
true, it were a compendious way to weed out all the rest at the first coming
up, to avoid the labor of culture of such plants as in the end will not prove
advantageous for profit or pleasure.
Beans, Pease, Kidney-beanes, Lupined, have this peculiarity, that the grain
being clert, each half is as one of these dissimular leaves, which is usually
contained in every seed, and between these thick leaves are contained other
similar leaves, or such as differ but in growth o^ bigness from the true
leaves of the Plant. It Is to be observed in all these great seeds, that though
the pulse, or thick part of the grain perish, yet if the Neb and small leaves
are entire, the seed may prosper; as I have seen Feild-beanes that have been
eaten through with worms, prove good thriveing seed. But it is reported, that
Pismires have learned the wit to spoil the seed from growing in their
storehouses, by biting off the very Neb before they repose the grain.

The growth of the plant from the seed is thus by convenient moisture and heat,
the Neb stricks through the Covers, and goes directly down, if not impeded, in
earth or water, (...) convenient way, ordinarily, two or three inches, in which
time the leaves either rolled up, or otherwise enclosed, break their bonds, and
expl^te themselves (...) being lifted commonly a little higher by the growth of
the stalk, or lengthned Neb and you may observe, that the growth above ground,
at the first motion upward, is nothing proportionable to the motion downward.
After the root is well made and fastened betwixt the leaves that were, actually
contained in the seed, there arises into more plain sight and appearance, that
little ^ermen before, in many plants scarce-seen, like to that bud, which is
left on plants in winter, which springing, brings forth the true leaves and
Branche, of the plant sown.

If I am enquired of, whether each seed has a complete essence and distinct
form of its own. Nay further, whether it be a true and perfect plant? I must
say that I have found it so to be, even more than an egg, a liveing thing, and
immediately nourishable It has root to grow, body to bear the port of the
plant, Bark to direct the Sap into all its parts, and germen or bud to secure
the means of future growth, and to boot leaves, which is all and somewhat
more than in the winter the sturdiest Oak can boast of.

It has been accounted an Interest in Philosophy heretofore, and that in our
Schools, that seed should not be esteemed an actual and formal plant, because
of diverse absurdities, that if seed were animal, would happen in their School
doctrine; as that there would be pluralities of forms in the same trees; The
Soul might be divisible into parts; The same thing might be agent and patient;
Nay some have said, that it may be of dangerous consequence in Divinity, if it
were granted, that seeds had the actual forms and essence of that thing whose
Seeds they were.

I am glad it is noe Heresy now, to appeal to sense from a Doctors opinion, and
that I may freely in this matter require, to be tried by my garden, though it
be against the sentence and Judgment of the Doctors Conimbra, Suarez, Ruvio,
Pererius, Bonamicue, Fonseca; and that we begin to lay aside the fear, that
from a certain truth, ill consequences may arise: That Canon will certainly
hold longe^t which is best built in the bottom.

It is conceived by some that the immediate cause of the Growth of the seed, is
the Spirit working upon the Salt and Sulphur, Earth and other constituent parts
or Elements of the Seed: For the Spirit is supposed to be made Volatile by the
heat of the earth and water, which in Spring and Autumn, (the chief times of
germination) is of a proper temperature for formentation; and then the spirit
being so Volatized, and riseing up and expanding it self every way augments the
whole plant, and distends the sides of the seed, whereby the growth of the seed
plant is effected.

But how it comes to pass, that the conveiance of these expanded particles is
ordered to proceed, according to the lineaments of each Vegetable, noe person
to my knowledge has yet made any conceit; and it being beyond any ocular
discovery of the most acute Searchers, to find out the Conduits or Trunckes
serving to so intricate a carriage, and how it comes to pass, that a seed
first, has its Neb thrust down without dilatation of the sides, and then, how
the upper part of the Neb or germen orderly frames the Vegetable above ground
in so trim a body, rather then a confused mass, I take it not for any part of
my task to enquire.

I shall likewise leave it to the imaginations of Philosophers to determine,
whether upon the distention made, it be by an elective faculty in the Seedling,
filled up with similar parts drawn from the Earth, and so by Nature originally
fitted specifically for that plant: or whether there being a continual motion
of particles from the earth, pressing upon the plant, those only get entrance
whose shapes and figures are such, as correspond to the pores in the young
Vegetable; which meeting in the body of the plant with its constituent parts in
nature not unlike themselves, they easily are joined thereto, and so cause an
augmentation in the whole: or whether dissimilar parts, either to fill up the
Vacuum made by distention, or for other reasons, got up into the plant, do
obtain there a change of nature, and from the form, Soul, Archeus, or other
principle, are altered from their first being, into a likeness of nature with
the Seedling, and become homogeneous to it; These are Questions, in the
determination of which, till I am better informed, I desire to take no side.

N. 9. Of the cause of Greenness in the leaves of Vegetables.
It has been made a question by some what it is that causes greenness in all
Herbs, especially such whose seed, and the stalk, and Leaf, contained therein
are white, and whether the cold beating of air and water upon Vegetables may
not have some influence in the production of this effect.

I truly have been tempted to think the affirmative, which is that the
coldness and brisknesse of the free air, in plants that grow in the land, and
the like quality of the water, in water plants produces the verdure or
greenness, that is generally the beauteous Vestment of all Vegetables, or at
the least has some considerable influence as to this production: for by
experience I have proved that plants being in a close room, brought up from
seeds in pot, or otherwise, the leaves and stalks prove to be white, or pale,
and not green, which is according to the Lord Bacons experiment, who Cent. 5.
Exp. 47. setting a Standard Damask-Rose-Tree etc. in an earthen pan of water,
where bearing leaves in the winter, in a chamber where no fire was, the leaves
were found (as his Lordship relates) more pale and light colored, then leaves
use to be abroad; which palenesse, I suppose to be greater or less,
proportionably to the freshness and freeness of the air that the plant
enjoyes. Grass will likewise change its color, if by any weighty body, or
other lying upon it in the field, it be kept from the air: The truth is, all
plants have peculiar delight in the air, which I have proved by this
Experiment; I have taken young seedlings in a pot, and put them in a window
where there was a quarry out, the seedling would immediately leave its upright
growth; and direct its body straight to the hole, and so become almost flat and
level with the earth in the pot: Then turning the pot so, that the inclination
of the stalk might be from the hole, the plant has then crook't it self in form
of a horn, or the letter C. to the air again. Upon the Second turn of the pot,
the upper horn being placed from the air, the plant would, with its upper
part, return to the open place, and leave the stalk now in the form of an S.
Nay, sometimes I have bid persons tell me, which way they would have such a
plant grow; they have marked the place in the brime of the Pot, that mark I
have turned to the hole in the window, by which means the plant without any
force, and that in not many hours space, has inclined its stalks to the mark
made.

That the air has great influence in producing the verdure of plants, may
likewise not improbably be argued from the Experiments of Planching, or whiting
the leaves of Artichockes, Endive, Mirrh is, Cichory, Alexanders, and other
plants, which is done by warm keeping of them, without the approach or
sentiment of the Cool and fresh air; whereby all plants that otherwise would
bear a green color, become exactly white.

Hence it may likewise be, that tho roots of most Vegetables that are under
ground, and covered from the air, are white generally, whereas the stem, and
upper parts of them are ordinarily green, and many roots that are by nature of
a peculiar color, as Radishes, yet the point of the root that is deepest in
the ground, retains a whiteness, as well as otherroots, being in that part of
the root removed from the air, the red part commonly standing above or just
in the furface of the earth.

Hence also it may be, that those leaves of Cabbages and Lettuce that are
expanded in the free air are green, those that being covered with their
fellows: and secluded from the blasts of wind and weather, and kept in a warm
Covert, become as white as any thing that is artificially blanch't.

True it is that, there be plants that grow in the bottom of waters, and so
cannot be supposed to have this help from the air, otherwise than as the air
chills the water, and the water having received this quality from the air,
makes the like impression upon its domestique plants.

Chap. 2. Of Propagation by offsets.
N. 1. A Catalogue of Plants which may be propagated by offsets and suckers
arising with Roots from the stool and Root of the Mother Plant.
Aconite or Wolfes-bane. Adders-tongue. Alexanders. Anemones. Angelica.
Aristolochias. Artichockes. Asphodels. Asarum. Asparagus. Avens. Barberies.
Barrenworth. Bawme. Bears-eares. water and wood Betony. Bistort. Spanish
Broom. Butchers Broom. Brooklime. Briony. Burts, and such like Apples.
Buglosse. Burdocke. Burnet. Calamus aromaticus, which requires moisture.
Camomill. Caltha or March Marigold. Cherryes where the stock is not grafted.
Chives. Cinquefoyle. Clownes all-heal. Costmary. Cowslips. Comfrey. Cowslips of
Jerusalem. Coltsfoote. Columbines. The Crown imperial. Crowfoot. Cuckowpints.
Dames violet. Daysyes. Dens Leonis bulbosus. Dittander. Dockstooth. Dockes.
Dorias his wound wort. Dragons. Dulcamara, or woody nightshade. Egrimony.
Elmes. Elic ampane. Everlasting Vetch. Ewe. Fernes. Feverfew. Figtrees.
Filbeards. Filipendula. Flowers-de-Luct. Fleuellen or Speedwell. Galingall.
Garliques Gentianella. Germander. Goosberryes. Golden-rod. Ground Jvy.
Haselnuts. Hearts tongue. Herbaparis. Helleborine. Hellebores. Hercules all
heal. Hyacinths. Horsradish. Houseleeke. Horsemints. Hops. Horsetaile. Jasmine.
Jerusalem Artichoke. Kontish Codlings. Knapweed. Lovage. Lady's bed straw.
Lilyes. Lilium convallium. Lunaria. Lungwoort. Mandrakes, for often there may
be taken from them particles of their roots, which will grow well, though the
usual way of their propagation is by seed. Marshmallowes. Masterwort. Madder.
Mints. Moly. Monkshood. Mulberryes. Mugwort. Nurse-gardens. All sorts of
Orchis, or Docks-stone. Petasitis. Periwincle. Peony. Pease. Pilewort. Poplars.
Potatoes. Prunella. Primroses. Pulsatillas. Raspes. Radix cava. Reeds. Roses of
most kinds. Ruscus or Butchers broom. Rubarbs. Satyrions. Saponoria. Sanicle.
Scabious. Sedum. Serpillum. Setfoyle. Skirrets though seeds will produce
better. Smallage. Sorrells. Solidago Saracenica. Solomon's Seal. Some Spurges.
Stitchwort. Strawberryes. Sword flags. Tarragon. Tansey. Tnistles. All so^ts of
Tulips. Valerians. Some Vetches. Vervaine. Times. Violets except the yellow.
Water mints. Water Lillyes and most of the other water plants. Winter Cherryes.
Willow weeds. Woolfes bane. Wormwood. Yarrow.
N. 2. The way of making Offsets by Art.
Nature usually provides this help of propagation, without the wit or industry
of men, called to her assistance, but that not generally in all plants, nor
always in any one: and therefore I esteem it well deserving any man's learning
who delight in Gardeus, to know any means to enlarge this way of propagation
beyond the bounds it is carried to by natures course, There is a pretty way
(which in truth I first learned from Mr. Bobart our Physique Gardener) for the
making Offsets where nature never intended them; which is done by bareing the
root of plants of woody substance, and then making a cut of the same fashion
with that which is made in laying: Into this cleft a stone must be put, or
something that will make the root gape, then cover the root over three inches
with mould, and the lip that is lifted up will sprout into branches, the root
of the old tree nourishing it. When the branches are grown, cut off this plant
with its Root to live of its self.

If you can, leave an eye on the lip of your root, which you after the
incition lift up; for the branches will then more speedily and certainly issue
out of the root so cut.

In Bulbous Roots, Ferrarius makes offsets thus: If (says he) a Bulbous roor
is barren of Offsets: either put it in better earth, or cut it upon the bottom
in the crown of the root whence the fibers spring, and that but lightly with
your nail, and sprinkle some drydust as a medicine to the wound; and the
effect he affirms to be this, that so many wounds as you shall make, into so
many offsets shall the genitall virtue dispose it self.

N. 3. Rules for direction in taking off Suckers, or Offsets.
Care must be had, that the Damme be not destroyed in her delivery from her new
brood, which may easily be done, if too great a wound be made upon the stool,
or mother-plant, by tearing off the Suckers. It Is Ferrarius his peculiar precept
about Anemonyes: That they be sure as to take off such Offsets that will scarce
hang on, so not to tear off such as hold fast to the mother-plant, for that
would be to the peril both of the offset and motherplant. Yet I have seen the
very substance of Sowbreads to have been divided with a knife through the
heart, and yet grow well on either part, when they have not afterward been over
glutted with wet. Flaggs. Bears ears, Primroses and Cowslips, and generally
all roots, that are not Bulbous or tuberous must have, and do require a
violent separation, but the less the wound is, the better shall your plant
thrive, and be less subject to corrupt by the moisture in the earth.

In the replantation there is required the general care of young sets, all
plants of fibrous roots are assured in their growth, by convenient watering,
but for bulbous and tuberous the Gatdiners hand is, and ought to be more
sparing, because that moisture is a peculiar enemy to these plants, and often
rots them, if it get into any crany of their roots.

N. 4. Examples of planting by Offsets.
Licorice requires the richest and most forced ground, very deep, that there
may be room for the downright root, light, without stones or gravel, and dry
from moisture: The sets are made either from the runners that creep along the
upper part of the ground from the root, or else are taken from the Crown of
the master-roote, and are set at a foot distance or less in February, or
March, according to custom, though I suppose any time in the winter might as
well serve the turn, the richer the ground is, the further they may be set
apart.

Hoppes require to be planted in a very rich well soyled land, and not moorish,
unless the bog be first well dreyned, the stronger the setts are, the more
immediately will proffit arise from the Garden, if three or four inches about,
they are so much the better, let the center of the hills be ten foot removed
each from other, that you may put the more poleson a hill, and both the sun and
plow may have free passage between them: those that have less ground make less
distances, and toil their garden with the spade, and put but three poles to a
hill, whereas such as plant 9 or 10 foot distance, use four at the least, if
not five: In planting, which is thought to be best done, when the frosts are
past, (some prescribe April for the season) there is nothing required but that
they be set about the center of the place, intended for the Hill upon the plain
surface of the ground in good mould, about three, four, or five in number
according to the bigness of the Hill intended, and ordered with the usual care
of offsets: besides this particular that as the sets grow the hill must be
raised to their heads.

Saffron delights in a reasonable good and dry light ground, not extremely
soyled or moist, it is planted chiefly in some parts of Essex, Suffolk, and
between that and Cambridge, at Saffron-Walden. They are set in the manner of
bulbous roots, being taken when the bulbe is at the fullest, commonly about
Midsummer, the bulbs are set by a line, (that the beds may be weeded with a
hoe) and that either with a setting stick or by trenches made in the manner of
those wherein garden pease are usually sowed. This bears in the middle of the
flower three chives, which is the Saffron, to be gathered every morning early
and dried for use, every second or third year at the furthest the beds must be
replanted, and the offsets drawn away.

The general way of this propagation is to take the offsets that rise from the
bulbous and tuberous rooted plants, as Tulips, Anemones, Narcisses, Crocus's,
etc. and the suckers which from the roots of poplars, Elmes, Nuttrees, Pears,
Burts, Nursgardens, Kentish Codlings, Gooseberryes, Roses, Ruscus, Calamus
Aromaticus are very plentifully are drawn, and more, or less from all mentioned
in the Catalogue. N. 1. Chap. 2. and to replant them in the seasons of setting,
which are related in the proper chapter for that operation, into proper beds,
and in convenient distances for their future education and growth.

N. 3. Variety of colors, in what flowers, from what offsets.
Our Gardiners respect most the roots of widows, for that they find by
experience that they multiply the variety of Tulips not only from seeds, but
from the offsets of these widows: I my self have seen admirable declensions of
them from their natural purple and white.

The royal Crocus striped gives now and then very pretty variety from its
offsets, as sometimes I have seen on the same root an ordinary striped Crocus
and another of a perfect flame color, though the variery here be not so great
as in Tulips.

Concerning the manner of growth by Offsets there is little to be spoken
particularly, their roots being actually made while they remain upon the
mother plant, and their growth being like that of other well rooted vegetables.

CHAP. 3. Of propagations by stemmes, cuttings or slippes.
N. 1. A Catalogue of plants this way propagable.
Abrotonum Vnguentarium. Balsamita. Barberyes. Basil. Basilmint. Bay. Baume.
Box. Brooklime. Burts. and generally all such plants as break out into
protuberances like warts upon the bark. Bugle. Cornelian Cherry. Many
Crowfootes. Donas his woodwort being cut off near the root. Elder.
Evergreen-Privet. Germanders. Gilliflowers. Hyssope. Jasmine. Kentish Codlings.
Knotgrasse. Lavander. Laurel. Marjerome. Marsh-mallowes. being taken up near
the root. Mastique. Mulberyes. Nursgardens. Penny-royall. Periwincle. Pincks.
Polium monstanum. Prunella or Self heal. Quinces. Some Roses, as the
evergreen Rose. Rosemary. Rue. Sage, both English and French. Savory. Savin. in
moist ground, and shadowy Scordium. Southernwood. Spearmints. Strawberies, and
generally all plants that have joints upon creeping strings. Thime. Tripolium.
Veronica erecta. Vines. Violets. Wall flowers. Watercresse in water. Withy.
Willow. Woodbine.
N. 1. Explication of the Manner of propagation by stemmes cut off from the
Mother-plant, or slip't by example and Rules for particular direction.
For example, I shall choose to instance in Gilliflowers or Carnations, for
which flowers observe this order, Seek out from the stemmes such shoots only
as are reasonable strong, but yet young and not either too small or slender, or
having any second shoots from the joints of them, or run up into a spindle, cut
these slips off from the stem or root with a knife either close to the maine
branch, if it be short, or leaving a joint or two behind, if it be long enough,
at which it may shoot anew: when you have cut off your slips you may either
set them by and by, or else (as the best Gardiners use to do) cast them into a
tub of water for a day or two, then in a bed of rich and fine mould, first
cutting off your slip close at the joint, and having cut away the lowest leaves
close to the stalk, and the uppermost even at the top, with a little stick,
make a little hole in the earth, and put your slip therein so deep that the
upper lease may be wholly above the ground (some use to cleave the stalk in the
middle, and put a little earth or clay or chickweed, which we more use, within
the cleft, this is Mr. Hills way in Sir Hugh Plat, but many good and skilful
Gardiners do not use it; then close the ground unto the stem of the plant.

As for the time, If you slip and set them in September, as many use to do, or
yet in August, as some may think will do well, yet (unless they be the most
ordinary sorts which are likely to grow at any time and in any place) the most
of them, if not all, will either assuredly perish or never prosper well: the
season indeed is from the beginning of May to the middle of June at furthest.

Ferrarius Lib. 2. c. 15. says, that from the month of February to the middle
of March (viz) in the time of their germination, is the best time to slip this
flower. He neither will have them slipped, nor twisted in the Root, nor Barley
put under them to raise adulterous fibers, but only advises that they be cut
off in a joint. The truth is, both the Spring and Autumn are good Seasons for
making out Roots, the latter requires that the slip be so early set as that
they may have time enough to take Root, before the coldness of winter: The
former, that the plant set in the spring, may have taken Root before the Sun
rises to emit violent and parching heats, which are general Rules for Vernall
and Autumnall settings.

Woody plants that bear leaves must be taken off, and planted some time between
the fall of the leaf and the spring, some prefer the planting them in the
beginning, some at the going out of the winter about the beginning of February,
Immediately when the great frosts break, at the first towardness to spring is
a good season according to general belief.

Experiments made of the succcsse of the cuttings off dive^s plants set in
water.
Because in some disquisitions of natural Philosophy, there may some matter of
argument arise from experiments of the conversion of water into nutriment and
substance of various and very different plants, whereof some are hot, others
cold, some esteemed of a fresh, others of a salt nature, some in regard of man's
body of healing, others of excoriating and blistring qualityes, some
specifiques for the head, and the diseases thereof, others for the heart, and
others for the womb: I shall set down the truth of some few trialls concerning
the growth or corruption of such cuttings, of diverse Vegetables as without
roots I kept in my chamber, in Vialls of water. Not willing thence to make any
motion toward the restoration of the ancient doctrine concerning the
production of all things out of water, or to rake up the scattered judgments of
the once renowned Thales, which he made from the observation of the generation
of fishes, and petrifaction by this element; as likewise from the influence
(for he was aware thereof) and causalitie it has in the production and
norishment of vegetable, and (if not immediately) by consequence of animal
bodies. Nor desiring to make from these experiments (though I believe the
instance may be as well proper as specious) any argument for the more
fashionable opinion of Epicurus, by showing the various productions that may be
made by the diverse shufflings and positions of that which has the repute of the
most pure and defecated element, but clearly intending to keep to my task,
which is History, and rather to serve, than to be the Philosopher: I in short
give the Reader this account: That May 1658, in Glasses of water the plants
following grew from cutings, and made themselves roots in the water, by name,
they were Balsamira minor, Mints, Sedum multifudum, Penny-royall, Bugle,
Prunella, water cresse, Purple-grasse, Periwincle, Dorias his wound-wort,
Crow-foot, Brooklime, Marshmallows, Laurel, Scordium, Tripolium, Knot-grasse,
Nummularia, minima, Basil-Mint, Curl-mint, Hors-mint, Panax-coloni, Feverfew,
and some others which I kept no account of, I have had at other times.

Plants that upon trial made by cuttings May 1658, did not grow being placed
in Vialls of water were Mugwort, Rosemary, Stock-gilly-flowers, Alaternus,
Lavander-cotten, Sage, Armeria's, Camomill, Rosemary, Polium montanum.

Stock-gilly-flowers, Bawne, Tansy, Groundsel, Lavander-cotton, Sage, Majorane,
being likewise set in glasses of water dissolved into a muscilage, and so
corrupted before they attained to any roots.

Plants that were corrupted by the water in some part of the stems and so dyed
after leaves sent forth and roots shot, were, Basil, Mint, Marsnmallows after
it had grown a span, Panax-coloni, Balsamita minor, after six weeks growing,
which made me doubt whether there were not the same reason of the dying of
these plants that there is of grasts of Pears upon Apples, or Apples upon
thorns, which grow for a while, it may be some years but surely dye before they
arrive to any Maturitye: and secondly whether this reason was not the
unlikenesse and diversity of parts between the stock to be nourished, and the
nourishment apposed thereunto, for though some dyed after leaf and growth
made, as purplewort pareticularly by running into a Muscilage; yet generally
there appeared noe such evident cause of their failing.

Plants that increased in weight, being planted in the water, were these, and
the quantity thus much.

Sedum multifidum in a month increased in weight, half a Scruple: Scordium as
much in a fortnight. Donas his woundwort, grew in 6 weeks, gr. 13. Bugula in
some what less time gr. 15. Watercresse gr. 25 in a month. Ranunculus half a
Scruple in 6 weeks, and Periwinckle as much. Prunella, Brooklime, Scordium,
and most of the sorts of mints got weight proportionably.

N. 2. The manner of growing by cuttings.
Such who desire to observe the working of Bees, get Casements to their Hives,
that their eyes may not suffer impediment from the darkness of the place, for
prevention of the same hinderance the use of beds of a Diaphanous soil, in as
Diaphanous bounds, or plainly of water in a glass, I have found a proper
remedy: and shall therefore from my observation of the growth of these
particulars desire the reader will imagine the rest, or judge them alike, as
truly for what I remember I have always found them.

For the manner of plants growing by water, I observed that those plants that
had many joints easily grew and put forth roots only just at the joint.
Knotgrasse, Crow-foot, Panax-Coloni, all sorts of Mints, Penny-royall,
Scordium, Bugle, Prooklime, Periwincle, which I conceive to be the reason why
in setting them the practice is to cut of the plant just in a joint, for so the
roots immediately spring thence and no part of the stem corrupts, which it
would, if it were cut of at greater distance.

In those herbs where there were no exact joints, the roots sprung forth under
some buds, as in Tripolium, Donas his woundwort, Marshmallows.

Every root that was made came forth first very white and single, but afterward
in very handsome order and proportions, from thence arose other fibers striking
every way in the water, where the side of the Wialls made no impediment to the
growth of the spurs issueing from the first and original root.

N. 3. Of propagation by the sowing small and almost insensible parts of
Vegetables.
It Is a generally received truth from common experience, that if the water
wherein mushrooms have been steeped or washed, be powered forth upon an old hot
bed, or the parts and offalls of Mushroms broken to piece; be strawed thereon,
that from these parts as from a seed, there will speedily arise store of
Mushroomes, every small particle of that imperfect plant being rather believed
seminall in the same manner as the boughs of Quinces etc. than that as in
Adianthum, and diverse fernes, nature has disguised any particular seed
clancularly to be the mean of Propagation in it.

Kircher the Jesuit affirms that if you take an herb and shred it small, or
reduce it into Ashes, these being sowed an herb will spring thence of the same
species with the Ashes or shreds sown: I thought that news upon my first
reading was too good to be true, and upon trial made in very many sorts, could
never make this way of propagation hold effectual to the producing of any
plant, and if it were true it were an ill Custom the Gardiners use to sow
their seeds with a great quantity of ashes which are made from the wood or
straw and leaves of Vegetables generally and a wonder that they never should
come up amidst the seeds most seasonably sowed.

Chap. 4. Of Propagation by laying.
N. 1. What plants are this way increased.
The plants that are usually propagated this way, are Vines, Woodbines,
Jasmines, Mulberies, Savin: Evergreen privet in Woods all sorts of Willoves and
Sallowes to fill up bare places Carnations, Gilliflowers, roses, Hors-chesnut
and all those plants that will grow by Cuttings will this way grow with much
more ease, by care and good watering gardiners do apply this way with profit
to such plants as cannot well by any other means be increased for want of
seeds and offsets, and by reason of the repugnancy of their nature to grow
either by cuttings or insition.

The example of this manner of Propagation.
The most usual flower to be laid in Gardens, is the Gilliflower which every
Gardener here uses, and is thus performed; Take those slips yon intend to lay,
and cut the stalk just under that joint of the slip, which is next the root or
middle stem, or under the 2d joint half way through the stalk: then slit it
upward to the next joint from that under which you made your first incision,
and put the top of a Carnation-leafe, or any other thing to hold open the slit,
(though that be not altogether so needful, for the cut being made on the lower
side, and the Slip being toward the root bent down gently, as the manner is
and the top of the slip raised with mould, the slip will be open of its own
accord and remain so if you place it well) at the first some peg down the
middle of the slip with sticks, that it may not rise from the positure in which
it is first laid, you must remember to put good earth, enough to mould up yout
new Nursery, and to water it upon all occasions, and then in 7 or 8 weeks you
may expect Roots.

Requisites for the manner of laying.
1. To Laying, it is prositable if not necessary, that you (in the season of
doing this operation) cut the thing you lay, much in the manner you cut
Gillyflowers, in laying them, unless in some plants that take any way as
Vines, and it is so much the better if in Roses and other Layers of a woody
substance, with an Awie you prick the stock at the place laid, as it is done in
propagation by Circumposition.

2. Another Requisite is, that dureing the time of drought they be continually
watered, and kept moist, otherwise they will make no exact roots perchance only
a kind of knob or button full of fresh sap upon the tongue of the cut in the
branch laid down, yet I have found these branches cut off with watering in the
summer to grow well enough after their transplantation.

3. The seasons most fit for this operation, is, in the beginning of the spring
or declension of the torrid heat of summer, that they may enjoy the moistness
of such seasons most proper for the enticeing forth of roots, and most safe
from excessive hear or cold.

N. 1. Of propagation by Circumposition.
Circumposition is a kind of laying, the difference is, that in this the mould
is born up to the bough which is to be taken off: in laying the bough is to be
depressed into the mould. We use this most in Apples afrer this manner, first
break the bough a little above the place where it is separated from the main
stock or arm, so that the hat or other Vessel that holds up the Mould to the
incision or disbarked place may rest upon the stock, then slit an hat, an old
boot, or take any strong piece of old course cloth, tying or sowing it so
strongly that it may be able to hold up the mould to the incision, sometime
before you fill this cap with mould, remember with an awle or point of a
penknife, to bore two rows of holes upon the upside of the cut about half an
inch or more, one from another, then fill it with good mould, or such as is
agreeable to the tree you work upon, and in the heat of summer, water it now
and then, The time of this operation is not in the summer, as Mr. P. supposes
(which mistake was sufficient cause why he should not like the experiment) but
in the spring before the sap rises, particularly in Febr. or the beginning of
March.

Such plants are propagable this way that might take by laying, but that the
branches are too far risen from the ground to be laid along therein; and
therefore it becomes necessary, since they cannot stoop to the earth, that the
earth should be lifted up to them.

The Exemplification of the Operations by the Figure.
a Denotes the ordinary cutting of the Bark for Inoculation. b b The sides of
the Bark, lifted up for the putting in of the Shield. c The Shield taken off
with the Bud, which lies under the Stalk of the Leaf cut off. ln The Shield put
into the Stock to be bound up. d The Bark cut out in an oblong square,
according to another usual way of Inoculation. e The Shield cut out for the
fitting the dis-barked square. m The same Shield put into the Stock. f A
variation of the forementioned way, by cutting off the upper part of the
oblique square, and binding the lower part down upon the Shield. ^ ^ The Shield
so put in to be bound up. c Another variation by slitting the Bark, that the
Bud and Leaf may stand forth at c, and the Bark slit be bound down upon the
Shield. h A cross cut for Inoculation. i The same cross cut lifted up in this
Figure, somewhat to big k The Shield cut off to be put therein. p The Shield
put in. g or q The cut of the Cyon or Stock for whip-grafting. r 7 The cut of
Cyon and Stock for Shoulder grafting. s The cut of the Cyons, and slit of the
Stock for Grafting in the cleft. x The Stock set for Ablactation or approach. u
The Cyon of the Branch for the same operation. 1 2 The Branch that is to be
taken off by Circumposition. 3 The Branch that bears up the mould to the
dis-barked place. 4. The Branch of a Carnation to be laid. 5. The joint where
the slit begins. 6. The next joint where the slit is propped open: with a piece
of a Carnation Leaf put in.
Add this at the 60th Page.

Section of a tree trunk, showing various grafts

N. 5. Of the manner of growth by Circumposition, and whether thence an
argument may be made for the descention of Sap.
Concerning the manner of growth by Circumposition I shall only make this
remark, whereas it is supposed by some, that the roots are made above the
disbarked place, by the descention of the sap, which is supposed to be at the
fall of the leaf, I have found experience very contradictory to their
supposalls; for the leaves fall not till after Michaelmasse; and nature
proceeds to the germination, and increase of roots from the spring all the
summer long, so that nothing can be argued rightly from this operation, or from
the effect and product of nature thereupon for that opinion, which makes the
sap to be every winter reposed in the root, as in a large receptacle, and of
its descention thither after every Autumn. If it were there as in a
repository, it were a wonder that roots should be drier in December. then in May,
or June, and sensibly more devoid of juice. And if it did descend after
Autumn; how could it ascend at the same time? That it does then ascend is
plain from this experiment; Take up a tree, or other vegetable, in the fall of
the leaf; the leaves will wither, and the bark begin in a little time to
wrinkle; then set it again in a proper soil, well watered; the effect will be
that the leaves will recover freshness, and the bark wax plump and the body
frime, and full as before, which could not be but by a fresh supply of
ascending sap, which might fill up the pores made by the weather, and
exhalation of the sun. I am contented to believe that the sap is in winter
where I see it to be, (viz) on the body of the tree coagulated, or crusted into
a new coat, encompassing the whole, which was not extant the year before, and
on the top fashioned into new shuits which visibly appear the product of that
matter the place of which is asserted to be elsewhere and not I am as well
contented not to suppose it abideing where upon the most sedulous inquest it
cannot be found.

Chap. 5 Of Insitions.
N. 1. Of Grafting in general and particularly of shoulder-grafting,
Whippe-Grafting, Grafting in the cleft and Ablactation.
Grafting is an Art of so placeing, the Cyon upon a stock that the sap may
pass from the stock to the Cyon without impediment. For the right operation of
which it is a chief remarke, that the space which is between the bark and the
stock is the great Channel for conveiance and keeping of sap, so that every
one that grafts, well so orders the manner, that these spaces be so laid that
the passage may be easy and direct from the space under the bark of the stock,
to the space under the bark of the Cyon

This may be done several ways.

First by shoulder grafting, the operation of which Mr. Austin does well
describe thus: Cut off the top of the stock in some smooth straight place that
may answerable to the streightness of the graft when set on; then prepare the
graft thus, observe which side is straightest at the bottom, or bigest end, so
that it may fit the straight part of the graft when set on, then cut one side
only of the graft down aslope about an inch long or little more, and cut
through the bark at the top of the cut place: and make it like a shoulder, that
it may rest just upon the top of the stock, but cut not this shoulder to deep,
(only through the bark or little more, and the less the better) but cut the
graft thin at the lower end of the cut, so that it may decline in one
continued direct smoothness, without dints, ridges, spaces or windings all
along the slope, from on side of the Cyon to the other, otherwise it cannot
join in all places to the stock. The graft being thus prepared, Lay the cut
part of the graft upon the straight side of the stock and measure just the
length of the cut part or slope of the Graft, and with your knife take off so
much of the bark of the stock, (but cut not away the wood of the stock) then
lay the cut side of the graft upon the cutside of the stock, and let the
shoulder of the graft rest directly upon the top of the stock, so that the cut
parts may join even and smooth all along the inside of the bark of the graft,
being placed upon the inside of the bark of the stock, and so join them fast
together with some strong Rushes or flags, and clay them on every side that noe
Rain get in.

If the stock be very little the way of Grafting is the same, only excepted,
that in this case there must some of the substance of the wood be taken away,
that the graft in it is slope be not too big for the cut in the stock, in which
operation so much there must be taken from the stock, that the inside of the
bark of the graft may answer the inside of the bark of the stock, which being
done, all things else are the former way performed. This is called
whip-grafting, and is apposed to the former, when no wood is cut from the
stock: for shoulder-grafting it is required, that the stock exceed not in
bigness, for then the bark being taken from it there will not be a right
application of the sap-channells of Cyon and stock required in the definition
of grafting, the disbarked place in the stock necessarily being much greater
then that in the graft. Yet if the stock be not 3 inches circumference it will
do very well. The one of these ways is called shoulder-grafting; because the
upper end of the downright cut is intended and made fit to lean as it were
upon the shoulder of the stock: The other Whip-grafting, because the operator
only makes his streight-down right cut and tarryes not to indent it at all.

Some think this way fit only for great stocks: but I have grafted seedlings
this way, so small that the Cyon was put in like a Wedg, and was very even to
the stock on each side, neither stocks nor Cyons being near an inch round: but
if small plants are this way grafted, they must be tied about after the former
manner used in shoulder-grafting; the wound made by cleaving is very quickly
made up, and cemented by the sap in grafting a young stock, whereas in old it
is quite contrary,

The way of grafting in the cleft, has been of long use, and is generally known
to all gardiners, The stock must be cleft in an even place, and the cleft so
prepared with your knife, in the cleaving, that the sides be not ragg'd, both
sides of the graft are to be cut down slopewise, and shoulders made or not made
at pleasure; M. Austin well advises that the outside of the graft be bigger
then the inside, unless the tree be big, but if it be so great as to pinch the
graft much, then to make the inner side thicker a very little, that so it may
preserve the outside from being so pinch't, as to make the bark of the Cyon sit
loose, and not receive the sap from the stock into the common channel, in such
manner as is requisite for the begetting of a continuation between them.

There are other ways of grafting very excellent; as in a great tree, to
prepare your Cyon as for the shoulder-graft, and then to take off so much of
the bark, the head being before cut off as that the slope may just fit the
disbarked place, as in some of the figures of Inoculation. Sometimes the Cyon
being so prepared we raise up the bark, as in the other figures of Inoculation;
but to cut it off fit, I count the best way, and have often practiced with
universal success.

Ablactation is the same with grafting, saving that in that way the Cyon
remains on its own stock, and on the stock you gr^ft together. For the stock
you graft, being planted by the tree from which you have your Cyon, you
disbarke and cut the Cyon, so that the inward part of its bark may answer the
like disbarked place in the stock, so they being bound up together, and not
separated till you are sure they are surely incorporated, at which time the
Cyon is cut from its own, and lives only by the other stock.

It is an ordinary imagination that by this way of Ablactation, Heterogeneous
conjunctions may be made to prosper, but those that consider that the cause of
the impossibility of dissimilar plants thriveing by any way of Insition, is not
the difficulty of their first uniting, but the disability of the root and stock
to nourish the head with convenient nourishment, will not easily admit such a
fancy; Pears upon Apples, and Services; Apples upon Thorns, and the like plants
will with ease take, and continue in good growth longer then such time as is
required that the Cyon should depend upon the mother plant in Ablactation for
the fastening of it till cementation be made; But after a perfect conjunction,
and great shoots spring out, they (almost constantly notwithstanding the
greatest care) will dye, which is an evident sign that this way can administer
no help, it only providing that nourishment be not wanting to the first
months, and not securing them from the danger of wanting for the future, fit
and wholesome Nutriment for their maintenance and growth.

N. 6. What Plants take on different kinds.
This is a general rule for grafting, Inoculation, Ablactation, and
conjunction by penetration, or any such way of propagation, that the Cyon or
thing implanted be of like nature to the stock, to tell what neernesse in every
kind is enough, is matter of great Art; It Is known that Plums will not grow
upon Cherries, nor Pears upon Apples for many years, though for a while they
may prosper.

I find that diverse plants will take by enarching or Ablactation, that will not
take by grafting; so Grapes, as the early red upon the great Fox-Grape;
Apricots also and Peaches, which being secured upon their own stocks, will
admit implantation unto another also, and take unto it, which by grafting I
could never bring them to.

The strangest conjunctions that we observe to agree, are the Whitethorn with
the Pear, Quinces with the Pear, the Pear with the Quinces, the Medlar with the
Whitethorn, the Apricots with Plums that are of full sap, and sometimes upon
hard scurvy Plums, most use the White-Pear-Plums for that purpose; I find not
but some other are as good (viz) the Primordian, Muscle, Violet. And it is
true, that all roses cement and continue well upon briars, as on the
sweet-bryer, dogrose, I have Cherryes that grow upon Plum-stocks which is Sir
Hugh Plat's experiment from Mr. Hill. p. 113. and Currants upon Gooseberries:
what duration they may be of I expect to learn. I am not convinced by
experience that Pears upon White-thorn are worse in their fruit but if so I
shall prefer Apple-kernells before Crabs for a Nursery. I have tasted very
excellent Katherine Pears without stone or hardness, that came from a
Thorn-stock: nor were they smaller or harder (which Mr. Taverner asserts) then
ordinary fruit upon the proper stock, however I advise that such as shall for
want of Pear, use Thorn-stocks, that they graft very low, for otherwise the
Thorn not growing proportionably to the graft, will cause the graft to decay,
being never able to grow thereon, unto the bigness usual in Pear trees.

There are almost infinite stories of strange conjunctions which urge earnestly
for credit, some of incisions made upon animal bodies: The Lord of Pieresch
had a present made him of a Plum-tree branch which bore blossoms and leaves,
which sprang from a thorn that grew in the breast of a Shepherd, this
Shepherd having got this Thorn by falling upon a plumtree. Raw silk has grown
on the eye brow of a Lady, mentioned by Borellus, observe. 10 cent. 1. being
drawn through the flesh to stitch up the lips of a wound there, and the growth
was so considerable that it required frequent cutting; and there was a Spaniard
lately had a bramble that grew out of his belly. The improvement that from
these and the like stories, the Author in the cited place proposes, is, That
with the blistering plaster the bodies of diverse beasts be excoriated and
planted anew with silk, woole, or the like, where it may likely grow to the
great advantage of the owners. When this has well succeeded, I shall propose
another raritie from the first story (viz) That such who live about Glassenbury
plant upon them selves some of that famed thorn that bears leaves on Christmas
day; for if the button moulds, according to the story, made from the wood, kept
their time of blowing upon the doublet, through the silk of the button,
doubtless the plant grafted upon the flesh may grow through the very doublet
too. Or in the mean time I shall wage on the success of my improvement, as much
as the observator shall do on his.

N. 2. Rules for Grafting.
The time of grafting, possibly is any time of the winter; I have seen Apples
grafted in November, and at Christmas, and yet thrive very well; but the best
time is, that which immediately precedes the spring: if possible let the Cyons
be gathered before the trees shoot their buds though some will grow now and
then, notwithstanding they be sprouted, It Is no matter though the stocks are
budded; I have at Easter grafted above an hundred Apples and Pears without any
fail.

The best way to keep grafts a long time, especially in pretty hot spring
weather, is to wrap them all in wet moss, or cover them with earth.

Lute is made with horse-dung and stiff clay well mixed together; Mr. Austin
advises, that in shoulder-grafting the Cyon may be put upon the West or
Southside of the stock, because if so, those winds which are most dangerous
cannot so soon break off the grafts as on the other sides.

If you would have a spreading tree, put in a long Cyon; if a straight tree,
put on a short one, or let but one bud thrive.

Good bearing trees are made from Cyons of the like fruitfullnesse. Unbind
grafts when they have shot great shoots, that the binding eat not into the
tree, strengthen those that are weak with a stick tied above and below the
grafted place, like Splinters to a broken bone, till the cementation be made
and confirmed.

If you would have store of any fruit quickly, cut off the head of an old
stock, and graft thereon.

To Trees that bear great heads, and are of a fast and binding bark, such as
Cherrie trees, some hard Apples, and other kinds of great fruit-bearing, and
other plants, it is esteemed necessary by some to put in more grafts than one,
least the sap finding not way enough, the tree receive a check and perish by
the disappointment of the sap. However this reason may hold, certainly it is
prudence to put in more Cyons than one in such trees, least that one failing,
the stock likewise dye, being bark-bound and not able to put out a germen.

Cyons are best chosen from the fairest, strongest, not under-shoots or
suckers, which will be long ere they bear fruit, which is contrary to the
intention of grafting; the prime use of which I believe rather to be the
expediting, than the improvement of fruit.

N. 2. Of Inoculation
Inoculation is performed by taking off that eye or little bud which contains
the beginning of a bough provided for growth in the next spring, and planting
it so upon another stock that the sap of the stock may without impediment or
interrupt course pass unto the little eye (as I may call it) imperfect or
inchoate bough, and serve it for Nutriment: For which operation the Bark must
be cut either downright, with a cross cut on the top; the downright cut being
about an inch long, and the cross cut only big enough to serve for the easy
lifting up the Bark: and then the sides being lifted up with a Knife or Quill,
the Shield is to be put in, and the lips or sides of the Bark before lifted up,
are to be bound down upon the shield: Or the cross cut may be in the middle,
and then the shield is to be made picked at both ends (otherwise in the
forementioned way, the lower end only is made picked) and the four lips are to
be lifted up for the letting in the shield. Others cut the Bark clean out in an
oblong square, and cutting the shield exactly in the same dimensions and
figure, apply it to the disbarked place in the Stock. Others cut their shield
in the mentioned Figure, but take not off all the Bark answering the oblong
square shield, but leave the lower part on the stock, under which they put the
lower end of the Shield, and bind it down thereon. Other varieties there may
be, and are used, some more of which are delineated in the annexed Figures: To
take off the Bud clean from the Cyon, the best way is, to draw the lines of
your shield through the Bark with your Knife, and to take off the rest of the
Bark thereabouts, leaving only the intended Shield thereon.

Having so far prepared your Bud before you take it off, remember to open the
Bark of the Stock, for otherwise the shield will take hurt by the Air, which
must be placed upon the Stock with all speed, and bound with something that may
be of a yielding nature. The best way of taking off Buds, is with a Quill which
is cut like a scoop, the one half, or two thirds, taken away for about an inch
in length at the end: In taking the Bud off, be sure not to leave the Root
behind; for bindings, use any sorts of soft Rushes that will hold tying, long
slipes of Linen or Yarn.

I prefer such binding as need not be taken off till I expect the springing of
the Bud, for there is much peril in premature loosing the bonds, yet it is
necessary to unbinde whenever the Stock swells about the place of
Inoculation. The time of Inoculating is, from the first time you can get strong
Buds that will come off after the frosts are gone in the Spring, till such time
as that the Buds then implanted may be fast cemented before Frosts return in
the Winter. You may Inoculate with the last years Buds, which are strong
commonly, and fit to be put in at Easter.

Other Rules for Inoculation are, That the Cyon from whence you take the Bud be
not weak, for then the shield will be so too, and likely bow or double in the
putting in, which is a great reason why the double yellow Provence Rose is so
hardly propagated by this means; other Roses, as the Rosa Mundi, Velvet,
Marble, and Apples, Aprecotes, and the like, very easily, that the Bud be not
sprung out much before it be taken off.

If you carry Buds far, expose them not to the Sun, but cut off the leaves, or
some part of them, and wrap them up in wet Moss or fresh leaves, to keep them
cool.

If the Bud take, in the March after cut off all that grows above it,
stripping away all the Buds that come forth elsewhere, or at the least all save
one: some conceive one necessary for the drawing up the sap.

Choose strong Buds for Inoculation, and strong Cyons for grafting, and put
them always on a smooth place of the stock.

Any thing may be propagated by Inoculation, unless the slenderness and
weakness of the Shield hinder, that can be by grafting. Apples and Pears,
though seldon Inoculated, certainly take. I have sometimes used to cut off the
shield with a sharp knife flat, with part of the Wood thereto adjoining, and
put it in so; But this way, though many take, especially in Apples, yet the
ordinary way seems better and more certain. Some take off Shields without a
Quill, slipping them off with their fingers; but this is the ready way to leave
the root of the Bud behind on the Cyon, which being wanting, the other part of
the Shield is unprofitable.

A pair of Compasses made flat at the ends, and sharp with edges, is an apt
Instrument to cut away Bark for Inoculation, both for a true breadth and
distance all at once; and so likewise with the same you may take off the bud
truly to fit the same place again in the stock, Sir H. P. p. 113.

N. 3. Kirckers Experiments concerning Insitions examined.
Kircker, a Learned man, the Pliny of his time, after he had reproved the
falsities in Wecker, Alexius, and Porta, who had asserted a change of colors
and rare variety of flowers, by steeping those roots in juices whose colors
were desired, seems to me as much to be blamed, in that he writes so
confidently of things which are as much like Paradoxes, and equally gainsaid by
experience.

He says, that he doubts not, but has from experience these effects; That a
white Rose, grafted upon a red, will bring that Rose we call Rosa Mundi, or a
Flower both red and white. This I have often proved false by mine own trial:
That a Gelsimine grafted on a Broom, will bring yellow flowers like those of
the Broom; That I tried, and could not make to grow, so far it was from bearing
any Flowers, v. Kircher: ars Magn. p. 13. C. 6. But that Jasmine upon Jasmine
will grow and thrive, my own and others experience can attest.

The same Doctor, in another Book of his, De Magnete, where he has many good
Eperiments about that Stone, yet as to his (...), either he is out, or there is
greater difference betwixt the Country where he tried his experiments, and
England, then I can imagine; I have tried Mulberies on Beech, Quinces, Apples,
Pears, Elms, Poplars, and by grafting they would not take, yet he affirms they
take easily; and more, that Mulberies are by conjunction with white Poplars,
made to be of a white kind, and bear white Mulberies; That Pears being grafted
on a Mulbery, being a red colored Pear, such I suppose we call the Bloody
Pear, and that a Peach being Inoculated on it, it sends forth a bloody Peach,
are his assertions, which conjunctions I see will not with us take, but if they
would, I could promise my self no greater alteration of color thereby, then I
find in the Flowers of Roses, which I have tried in very many different sorts,
and experienced to follow the Cyon without any participation of color from the
stock.

I having heard the same relation made of changing the colors of Tulips, by
Artificial grafting the Bulbs of the white and red, and other colors, by
proportionable indentments in each Bulb, tried it this year in diverse Roots,
and made the Insitions, and put together the parts as artificially as I could,
according to the rules here given; but the event is, that the Bulbs come not up
at all, but die upon the operation.

Number. 4. The manner of growing by Grafts.
It Is proved by experience, that there is every year a new coat of Wood made to
every thriving Tree, by apposition of sap hardened into a thin Board (as I may
call it) insomuch that I have known diverse Woodmen, that would boldly assert
the determinate number of years, that any Oak, or other Wood, has thrived in,
by the number of those several distinct Rings of Wood that are to be counted
from the middle or center of the Tree, to the outside of it, it being credited,
and that I think with reason, that every one of these Rings arose from the
apposed and hardened sap of every several year.

Now in grafting upon a frim stock, it comes to pass, that the sap of the stock
is apposed to the body of the Cyon, and so incloseth the Cyon with the last
coat of the whole Tree, that there is, as it were, one and the same past of new
Wood, that does closely encompass the whole, both Stock and Cyon, which when
hardened, grows to be strong, and of the same use that splinters are to a
broken Bone; and Gardners wisely provide for the strengthening of the
compagination of the Cyon and Stock, until this sap be incrusted to a hardness;
when the first year of their grafting, they do not only bind up the Cyon to
the Stock, but use splinters of old Wood, that neither the wind, or other
accidents, may dislocate what with Art was joined together. This first, for the
manner of conjunction and fastening of the Woods: Nor do I make any difference
between Grafting and Inoculation, because I am persuaded, that as there is in
every Seed an actual Plant, so there is in every Bud an actual Bough, and that
a Cyon and a Bud differ but as a greater and lesset branch.

But how the sap of the Stock; suppose White Thorn can serve to make the Wood,
Bark, Leaves, and Fruit of its Cyon, suppose a Pear, is a difficult question:
For grant there be an elective attraction of sap from the earth; yet how shall
a white Thorn choose that which is fit for a Pear? My thoughts are, that for
those who maintain election of similar parts, it were best to suppose a great
likeness in all Grafts and Stocks, as to their inward nature and parts, though
not outward figuration; and there being this likeness in the substance, it will
not be hard to conclude, that the Cyon, by altering the position of the same
substantial parts, may make to the sight, smell, touch, taste, a thing of
another fashion.

For those qualities that affect the senses vary often in one and the same
thing: The Apple in the beginning that is without smell, of sour taste, green
color, hard to the touch, shall in a little space be fragrant to the Nose,
sweet to the Palate, of a golden or ruddy color, and soft to the feeling: And
in a thousand instances it is found, that several positures of the same parts,
shall produce several opposite colors, and other sensible appearances in the
same thing: There is no inherent color, either in the infusion of Galls or
Vitriol (though limpid they are not) so dark or deep as to come near the
blackness of Inck, which notwithstanding, being mixed, they produce it. Two
other infusions of like color, would not upon mixture arise to such an effect,
because not able to dispose each others particles into such positures. Spirit
of Vitriol, though without color, disposes the parts of this Inck so as to
destroy the blackness; Oil of Tartar restores both position of parts and
pristine color; and that it arises from different positures, may be argued,
because there is a visible motion, striving, and local mutation in them, before
these last effects are produced; and it is plain, that when the Inck, by reason
of the spirit of Vitriol, disappeared, yet all the parts were there, for else
it will not be imaginable how a limpid Liquor, as Oil of Tartar, should reduce
the colors which it does not by it self generate, as it is plain, because
restoring Letters written with Inck, and taken off with Spirit of Vitriol, it
makes no blackness on the Paper, save only upon the Lines of the Letters:
These two limpid Liquors likewise, being put together, turn into a good
consistence and milky color.

But he that desires more instances of this kind and matter, that, according
to this Doctrine, may much help the Theory of Colors, and particularly the
force both of Sulphurous and Volatile, as likewise of Alkalizat and acid salts,
and in what particulars Colors likely depend not in their causation from any
salt at all, may beg his information from that Noble person (in order to whose
command, for all his intimations to me are such I am now writing) who has some
while since honored me with the sight of his Papers concerning this subject,
containing many excellent Experiments made by his Honor for the elucidation of
this Doctrine; or otherwise, for the present, may see very good instances
hereof in Dr. Willis his Treatise De Ferment, cap. 11. And truly, if Tastes,
Colors, Smells, were not easily alterable, it would not be that we should from
the seed of the same Plant attain to such change and variety of Flowers and
Fruits as are mentioned above, nor of Flowers from the same off-set.

But if there be supposed in the world, and all several Bodies, but one Element
or material principle, from which by Natures undescryed Wisdom, in appointing
it into several motions and changes of situation, and giving different
Measures and Figurations to its smallest Particles, there arise all the
varieties in the world, then there will be no difficulty how the same sort of
matter should give substance both to the Stock and Graff, though Plants of
different nature, and bearing different Boughs, Leaves, Fruits, Seeds, each
from other; for if from any matter, any thing may be made without difference,
then particularly the wildest stock may afford Elements fit to nourish the
Boughs of any Plant, of how gentle and noble nature soever.

But lastly, If all these Considerations be too troublesome, I can help a lazy
Naturalist to an admirable expedient for the resolving this appearance; let him
be content to believe, that when the Sap, gathered in the Root, comes to the
place of conjuncture, it is there forced to undergo a total corruption and
lapse into the Bed of its first matter, from whence, by a new generation, there
arises a new sap, begot in the Tree by a specific faculty, which in a Pear
graff may be called a Pear-sap-making-power, and so in all the rest: And for
the commendation of this last way of Resolution, I must express this its
excellency, that it is equally applyable to all things in the world, each thing
being made (and the cause as easily believed) by some such thing-making power.

Or it might not be amiss to entitle Diva Colchodea, the grand-general
form-making-intelligence, to the production of all these effects, and in
Romantic guise, to place her, as it were, in a non-erring chair, sitting in
the very place of conjuncture of Cyon and Stock, and working by ways and arts
belonging to her own Trade (and therefore, as her proper mysteries, not to be
revealed) to the forming in most occult and admirable manner of the appearing
effect.

CHAP. VI. Of the ways for, and Seasons of setting Plants.
ALl Trees and Shrubs of Woody substance, that have Bodies able to endure the
cold, are best set before the Winter, as soon as the Leaves begin to fall: A
Quickset of this season, will far outgrow the like planted in the Spring.
Artichocks and Asparagus Roots do exceeding well, being planted at this Season,
if set in a rich warm mould, and well defended in the ensuing Winter from the
violence of the frosts: Artichokes are with us set above an Ell distance, and
thereby in the Winter, a Trench being made between the rows, the Mould is cast
up on ridges for the defense of the Roots; and in the Summer, Cole-flowers, or
other Garden-stuff is set in the distances. For Herbs and choice Plants,
especially those that are set without Roots, it is most fit and usual that they
be set in the Spring, as Hysope, Time, Savory, Marjerome, Wall-flowers, Pincks,
Gillyflowers and Carnations, with this Caution; That by how much more tender
each Plant is, in regard of cold, the later it requires to be set, and in the
warmer place.

For all bulbous and tuberous rooted Plants, it is accounted the best way for
their preservation and improvement, that they be taken up every year out of the
ground, and kept some time out of the ground. The Universal and Catholic order
of all Bulbous Plants, says Laurembergius, is, that about St. James cyde they
be taken out of the ground, and put in a place cold and dry, of a free air, not
in the Sun, nor covered with Sand or Earth, or accessible to Mice; let them
abide so a Month, or thereabluts, then set them again, when they are taken up,
cut off the Fibers that grow from under the head: nor need any thus take them
up every year (unless it be for the transplantation of the off-sets) by which
forbearance, the stock of Tulips is very much increased. Ferrarius more
particularly forbids the abiding of Anemones in the Earth all the Summer, as
being found prejudicial to them by his experience. But Fritellaries, and
Peonies, and the Crown Imperial, he will not have removed from their Beds,
unless into a Cellar, in a pot of Earth.

Nor are all taken at the same time, as he seems to intimate; for Narcisses and
Crocusses are commonly taken up first, generally when the flower is gone, the
leaf withered, and the Bulb full, it is the best season to take them up; some
keep them out of the ground longer, as till Christmas, or after; as this year,
being in London, my best Tulips, Anemones and Ranunculus's, were in the House
till the beginning of February, and yet did well enough: But commonly we
re-plant them about Michaelmass, or thereabouts: some great Florists keep them
out of the ground no longer than till they grow dry; some replant them in June,
some in July or August; some take not up their Ranunculus Roots at all. Those
Gardiners, whose Beds are apt to be over-flowed or soaked with cold water in
the Winter, the later they set, I believe their Bulbous and Tuberous Roots will
prove the better.

The ordinary time to plant Anemones, says Mr. Parkinson, is most commonly in
August, which will bear Flowers, some peradventure before Winter, but usually
in February, March, and April, few or none abiding until May: But if you will
keep some Roots out of the ground un-planted till Febr. March and April, and
plant some at one time, and some at another, you shall have them bear Flowers
according to their planting; those that are planted in Febr. will flower about
the middle or end of May, and so the rest accordingly, and thus you have the
pleasure of these Plants out of their seasons, which is not permitted to be
enjoyed by any other that I know, Nature not being so prone to be furthered by
Art in other things, as in this, yet regard is to be had, that in keeping your
Anemones out of the ground for this purpose, you neither keep them too dry nor
too moist, for sprouting or rotting, and in planting them, you set them not in
too open a Sunny place, but where they may be somewhat shadowed.

N. 2. Of the setting of Woods Fruit Trees, and Plants uncultivated.
Concerning Plants that are ordinarily set abroad, and are not cultivated in
Gardens or Orchards, few observations can be made that are not very vulgar;
it is greatly his interest that minds the thriving of his Trees, that they be
set that the Roots may run just under the Turf, in the surface of the Earth,
the higher the better, if they are kept moist at the root with wet straw, or
the like, and defended from injuries the first year. I have seen soom plants so
buried in a depth of thick clay or gravel, that they could not shoot for many
years a sprig of a Span long, whereas others set orderly in the same place did
thrive abundantly: And those that think to amend the matter by digging a hole a
yard deep, or more, and putting in the Tree with a little good earth, do but
cheat themselves; for the Tree would thrive as well upon a Stone Wall, that is
washed with rain Water, as in that hole, when once the Root is come to the
sides thereof: This I speak generally and not of such particular Trees as
delight in a fingular Minera of Earth.

And for Orchards, it is a very necessary requisite, that the Roots of
Fruit Trees stand above the Gravel, Clay, or Rock, if any such be, provision
for which I have known made two ways, the usual and most common is, to plant
with such Standards which have no downright Roots, which may be gotten in any
well ordered Nurseries, for in such, the Seedling Plants are taken up the
second year, and the downright Roots being cut off short, they are set in beds
for grafting, and by this means shoot their Root rather in compass, then
directly downwards. The second way is a more unusual experiment (viz.) To set
the Fruit-Tree on the top of the ground, without any hole dig'd, and to lay a
load of such dirt as is found in streets to the root, upon the Turf; yet so,
that the rain may abide, and not by reason of the banck, run from the root of
the new set fruit-tree.

For Wall-Trees, it is convenient the Roots be set at such distance from the
foundation of the Walls, that they may have room in the Earth for their roots;
a foot is a convenient space generally, for then the heads will without
difficulty be drawn to the Wall, and the Roots not be prejudiced.

Those Wall-Fruits that are set abroad, as Vines, etc. being-kept shorn in
their Branches, and not suffered to climb, become good bearers, especially if
they are set near the reflection of Gravel-Walks, or upon other Ground kept
bare from Weeds.

For the planting of Woods in general, for increase of under Wood, Mr. Blith's
way is generally approved; to cast up double Dirches, and plant any sorts of
Wood in the form of a Quick-set: Some sow seed on the Bancks in orderly rows,
and set likewise on the top, as well as both sides of the Bank. The time is,
as soon as the Leaf is fallen, in any Weather or Season. The Plants in a more
sound ground, are Ash, Oak, Elm, Sycamore, Maples, Crabs, Thorns; in a more
moist Ground, as a drained Bog, Poplar, Willow, Sallow, Osier, which grow by
Truncheons. In which watery soils, the way of raising Ditches is most
necessary: For neither Willow, Sallow, Osier, nor any other Plant, will grow in
a Bog, without soundness of ground: What Plants grow by cuttings, what by
laying for the more ready thickning of Woods, may be seen above in the proper
Chapter.

There is a story freely defended and frequently, both in discourses Printed
and spoken, that the chips of Elm, being sowed, will grow; but that is somewhat
like Kirchers experiments, beforementioned in the Chapter of cuttings, and not
a whit more true; otherwise, to sow those Chips would be a good profitable and
frugal way for thickning Woods. The cause of the Country man's mistake (for I
suppose not that this error arose from Philosophers) I imagine to be this: At
the felling of great Elms many chips must needs be scattered, and fly round
about the Tree, and be covered in Grass thereabouts; now the next year, after
the fall, there arise generally great numbers of Suckers from the Toots of the
old Tree, which roots, must emit all the sap they gather up into these Suckers,
the great Trunck being removed. And these Suckers are easily mistaken to arise
from the chips, because they always come upon the felling of Elms where chips
are found, and grow at such distance as chips are ordinarily scattered.

N. 3. Whether any Vegetables may be set so as to grow in the Air.
There is a question now-adays frequently proposed, Whether there be more Soils
then the ordinary Turf or surface of the Earth, tempered with some water, soil
being meant for the ground, in which things may be set to grow. I need not
speak much upon it, as to Water, which by Experiments related in the Chapter
concerning Propagation by cuttings, appears to have a property to elicite
Roots, and make them where they were not, and nourish the Plants by them after
they were made; to which, I must add this circumstance, not before mentioned,
that Periwinckle, and diverse others, continued their growth by this nourishment
alone, from year to year, not dying in the Winter: How long they might have
continued, I cannot assert, for being absent this Winter, and no fires being
kept near, the water in the Glasses, was so raryfied by the Frost, that the
sides could not contain it, but were forced asunder thereby, and so the Plants
perished; whereas otherwise, they being set in a ^oom over my Laboratory, I
question not, had many of them continued till now.

Some put forward, that the Air might have the faculty of nourishing Vegetables
ascribed to it: And no wonder, when Paracelsus makes it a sufficient
nourishment for men, and brings instances for the proof of his assertion. But I
find, That Onions, Tulips, and all Bulbous Roots, though they shoot out a
green leaf, yet do very much lessen in their weight, and it appears, that this
growth is but the motion of the same parts, or some few of them, to settle and
gather in another place, and another order or situation in relation to each
other; for the Onion particularly has the thicker coverings of the Bulb very
much stretched out, and each covering, as it increases in length and breadth,
by rising into a leaf, so the thickness considerable while it covered the Bulb
only, decreaseth proportionably and is molden into a thinner, and more largely
extended Vestment.

I have hung up diverse Sedums, Orpines, Tithymalls, and other such Plants,
which I imagined most likely to grow by the Air only, and to increase and be
augmented thereby, and found, that by all my endeavors, though the Plant grew
well, yet they always lost weight, and never got the fourth part of a grain.

Aloes likewise, though being hanged up in the air with a cloth dipped in
Sallat Oil, it sends forth for many years new leaves, yet it always grows less
and less in weight, till at last the oldest leaves falling off, and new coming
up, it grows to nothing.

CHAP. VII. Of the means for the Improvement and best culture of Corn, Grass,
and other Vegetables belonging to Husbandry; and of the ways for removing the
several annoyances that usually hinder such advantage.
Number. 1. Of the Annoyances to Land, and the Impediments that usually distemper
it, to the disadvantage of the Husbandman.
THe Impediments that with us hinder the Husbandmen from making the greatest
advantage of their ground, are either the distempers of the ground it self, or
some evil accidents that occasionally happen thereto, or to the vegetables
growing thereon. The distempers are generally caused, either by the abounding
of water, above all other principles, which causes coldness, and a Dropsical
disposition in the Earth; or by the abounding of a dry Earth or Mineral, and
the want of moisture and saltness, and that Spirit which should cause that
motion in the insensible particles of the Earth, which is proper for the
exciting the Seeds of all things, and so stirring the ground, that the several
particles may be at liberty to enter the Bodies of Vegetables fit for them; the
accidents come by blasting Winds, rapacious Fowls, Vermin, and Weeds, Fearn,
Heath, Broom, and other improfitable Vegetables; of these, and the usual
remedies against them, somewhat, and the best that at the present occurs, I
shall speak in this Chapter.

N. 2. Of the remedies proper to cure the excessive coldness and moisture in
Lands, and the ways of Improvement thereby, in Grounds subject to these
distempers, by draining, Pigeons and Poultry dung, Urine, Soot, Ashes, Horse
and Sheep dung: Of Ground cold and dry, and how these Soyls may be applyable
thereto.
Bogginess and obstruction of Springs more or less, is generally the cause of
the chill or coldness that lies upon Lands, and breeds the Rush and other
incommodities, and therefore the foundation of the cure, and improvement
thereby, must be to remove this internal cause, by laying the ground dry, and
dreining the Bog: In the relation of which operation, and many more of this
Chapter, I shall ease my self, by giving you Mr. Blith's observations and
directions thereabouts, who was both a Practicer himself, and questionless a
very faithful and true Reporter of his experience.

In cold, rushy land, says he, the moisture, or cold hungry water, is found
between the first and second swarth of the Land; and then oft-times you come
immediately unto a little Gravel, or Stonyness, in which this water is, and
sometimes below this, in an hungry Gravel, and many times this Gravel or
Stonyness lies lower: But in boggy Land it usually lies deeper then in rushy;
but to the bottom, where the spewing Spring lies, you must go, and one spades
depth, or graft beneath, how deep soever it be, if you will drain the Land to
purpose.

And for the matter or Bog-maker, that is most easily discover d, for sometimes
it lies within two foot of the top of the ground, and sometimes, and very
usually within three or four foot, yet some lie far deeper, six, eight, or nine
foot, and all these are feazable to be wrought, and the Bog to be disovered;
but until thou come past the black Earth, or Turf, which usually is two or
three foot thick, unto another sort of earth, and sometimes unto old Wood, and
Trees, (I mean the proportion and form thereof, but the nature is turned as
soft and tender as the Earth it self) which have lain there no man knows how
long; and then to a white Earth many times, like Lime, which the Tanner and
White-Tawer takes out of their Lime-pits, and then to a Gravel, or Sand where
the water lies, and then one Spades depth clearly under this, which is indeed
nothing else but a Spring, that would fain burst forth at some certain place,
which if it did clearly break out, and ran quick and lively, as other Springs
do, your Bog would die, but being held down by the power and weight of the
Earth, that opposes the Spring, which boils and works up into the earth, as it
were, blows it up, and fills the earth with wind, as I may call it, and
makes it swell and rise like a Puff-Ball, as seldom or never you shall find
any Fog, but it lies higher, and rising from the adjacent Land to it, so that
I believe, could you possibly light of the very place where the Spring
naturally lies, you need but open that very place to your Quick-Spring, and
give it a clear vent, and certainly your Bog would decay; by reason whereof, it
has so corrupted and swollen the earth, as a Dropsy does Man's Body; for if you
observe the mould, it is very light and hollow, and three foot square thereof,
is not above the weight of one sollid foot of natural Earth, Clay, or Land,
whereby I conceive, that how much soever this mould is forced from the natural
weight or hardness of solid Earth or Clay, so much it is corrupted, swollen, or
increased and blown up, and so much it must be taken down, or let forth, before
ever it be reduced; I therefore prescribe this direction: Go to the bottom of
the Bog, and there make a Trench in the sound ground, or else in some old
Ditch, so low as you verily conceive your self assuredly under the level of the
Spring or spewing water, and then carry up your Trench into your Bog straight
through the middle of it, one foot under that Spring or spewing water, upon
your level, unless it rise higher; as many times the Water or Spring rises, as
the Land rises, and sometimes lies very level unto the head of the Bog, unto
which you must carry your Drain, or within two or three yards of the very head
of it, and then strike another Trench overthwart the very head both ways, from
that middle Trench, as far your Bog goes, all along to the very end of it,
still continuing one foot at least under the same, and possibly this may work a
strange change in the ground of it self, without any more Trenching.

Or thus you may work it somewhat a more certain way, but more chargeable,
(viz.) After you have brought a Trench to the bottom of the Bog, then cut a
good substantial Trench about the Bog, I mean, according to the form of your
Bog, whether round, square, or long, or three or four yards within your Boggy
ground; for so far, I do verily believe, it will drain that which you leave
without your Trench, at the depth aforesaid, that is underneath the Springwater
round; And when you have so done, make one work or two just overthwart it,
upwards and downwards, all under the matter of the Bog, as is aforesaid, and in
one years patience, through Gods blessing, expect your desired Issue: And if it
be in such a place as will occasion great danger to your Cattle; then having
wrought your works and drains as aforesaid, all upon straight lines (by all
means prevent as many Angles, Crooks and Turnings, as is possible, for those
will occasion but stoppages of the Water, and filling up of Trenches, and loss
of ground, and much more trouble then otherwise.) Then you must take good green
Faggots, Willow, Alder, Elm, or Thorn, and lay in the bottom of your Works,
then take your Turf you took up in the top of your Trench, and plant them
thereupon with the Soard downward, and then fill up your works level again,
until you come to the bottom or neither end of your work, where your Trench is
so shallow, that it will not endanger your Cattle; or rather take great pibble
Stones, or Flint Stones, and so fill up the bottom of your Trench, about
fifteen Inches high, and take your Turf and Plant it as aforesaid, being cut
very fit for your Trench, that it may ly close as it is laid down; and then
having covered it all over with Earth, and made it even as the other ground,
wait and expect a wonderful effect, through the blessing of God; but if you
may, without eminent danger, leave your works open, that is most certain of all.

Other and second remedies for all cold Land, are Figeons Dung, Dung of
Poultry, which abound in heat and volatile salt; these are only sowed by the
hand, for fear of burning the Com in the chitting of the Grain: I have
observed, where these Dungs have been over plentifully laid, that the place
bare no Corn at all, when as in other places, where it was moderately strawed,
the Crop was exceeding great. The same effect there is in Urine and Soot, from
the same principles, (viz.) much eager spirit and volatile salt, and therefore
the same caution is to be had in their use. I have seen half the Trees in a
Codlinghedge killed, by watering them overmuch with Chamber-lye. Horse-dung,
if not rotten, lying thick, will do the same, but rather by an actual heat
which it creates by its fermentation, than by the power of single principles,
as in the former instances, but the excess of it is harmful, being laid in such
quantities as it may heat, and certainly burns the root of any ordinary
Vegerables that grow near it. Sheep-dung, Fog-dung likewise, and all Soil and
Litters of Cattle, by reason of their Dung, Urine, and heat of their Bodies,
lying thereon, have a warmth in them, and are fit for cold Lands on that
account; and by reason of their moisture, for dry Lands also; for it is to be
observed, that many Grounds are dry and cold too, in all parts of the North and
North-west, as England lies, and in England many of our Wood-lands especially;
and so all hot and moist soils are most proper for them: Burning and beaking is
in many places very successfully used to this effect; The actual fire heating
the ground, and the ashes of Fern, Brake, Heath, etc. of like nature, yielding
a salt, very profitable for, and expedient to join with the other principles in
the ground, to cause a fermentation and fruitfulness.

It Is a general rule, that there is nothing in animal Bodies, but will turn to
excellent Manure: Their Horns, Bones, Hair, Hesh, both of Beasts, Fish, and
Fowl, are very rich; and those that know the virtue of them, buy at Cities for
the purpose, rags which are made of Wool, Sheep-trotters, stinking Fish, or
other Offal of Animals, which must either be mixed with other Dung, or not laid
over thick.

But it is to be observed, That where moisture is rather required then heat,
there floating by Landfloods, the dirt and mud of Ponds and Highways is most
proper: where warmth and heat, is a greater need; there soil that is made by a
mixture of the Offal of Animals, will be more to the purpose and advantage of
the Husbandman.

Lastly, It Is probable that any thing that has active parts in it, if it be not
just of the nature of the ground, will raise improvement: Heterogeneous things,
upon their meeting, ordinarily causing than stir, which is thought, by most
Naturalists now, to have great influence upon Vegeration.

N. 3. The ways of Improvement of dry, light, sandy, gravelly, flinty Lands, by
floating, Marl, Chalk, Lime.
Dryness is generally a great cause of barrenness, and is an usual annoyance
in Sandy and gravelly grounds, more especially, in regard that they retein not
the rainwater so well as clay, or Land of a mixed soil: The proper remedy for
this defect, is artificial watering, which tempers the ground most properly for
the improvement of the growth of the most useful Plants, Grain and Grass: For
first, Water in its own nature and property is a soil, and has an exceeding
agreeableness with the Bodies of most Vegetables, as appears by the experiments
of their growth in water only. And secondly, There is a very considerable
accrewment to dry, sandy, and gravelly Earth, by the fatty soil and wash that
is carried both in Land-floods, and other Water, that having passed through
Cities, Roads, or other places of like nature, are drawn over the ground, for
the salt, and other the mixed earth, that was carried in the Flood, being apt to
reside to the bottom, is left generally behind upon the Land; and the salt
diluted in the Water, easily enters the Turf, and carries with it other
Particles thither, where, by the heat of the Sun, (they being in conjunction
with the Sand, Gravel, or other Bodies Heterogeneous, and unlike to themselves)
they cause by their mutual fermentation, as is supposed, or some other way,
that temper of ground which is most fit for the growth of all Grain, Grasses,
and other Vegetables of general use.

For drawing the water over Land, the use is, that by the eye or level which is
easily made to help the eye: First, Discovery be made where the water may be
conveyed over the most Land: Then Mr. Blithe advises, to cut our the Master
Trench or Watercourse, to such a bigness, as may contain all the Land-flood,
or at least, be able to bring it within the Land intended for this improvement:
When the water is brought thither, carry it along in a foot broad Trench, or
lesser, all along the level: If the level be too dead, the lesser stream will
follow, so that a convenient descent must be minded, to give the water a fair
passage. If there be discovered in this lesser Trench, any mistake or failing,
it may with ease be amended, by going higher to, or lower from the level, and
the first Trench be stopped up again, for this Trench need be no deeper then the
thickness of the upper Turf: This done, the Watercourse must be cut out, which
must be large enough to contain the whole Water which is intended for the
enrichment of the Land, which largeness ought to consist in breadth, and not in
deepness, for a shallow Trench, about a foot deep, is best for this work: When
the Trench is brought near to the end of the Land, it is to be drawn narrower
and narrower.

Further directions the Author gives the Improver, in these words.

As soon, says he, as thou have brought the Water upon the Land, and turned it
over, or upon it, be sure thou take it off as speedily as possibly, and so fail
not to cut thy work; so as unless thy Land be very sound, and thy Land-flood
very rich, thou must take it off the sooner by a deep draining Trench.
Therefore I prescribe no certain breadth, betwixt floating and draining
Trenches; but if the Land be sounder and dryer, or lies more descending, thou
may let it run the broader; and as the Land is moist, sad, rushy, or level,
let it run the lesser breadth or compass; and for the draining Trench, it must
be made so deep, that it go to the bottom of the cold, spewing, moist Water,
that feeds the Flag and Rush; for the wideness of it, use thine own liberty,
but be sure to make it so wide, as thou may go to the bottom of it, which
must be so low as any moisture lies, which moisture, usually lies under the
upper and second swarth of the Earth, in some Gravel or Sand, or else, where
some greater Stones are mixed with Clay, under which thou must go half one
Spades graft deep, at the least: Yea, suppose the corruption that feeds and
nourishes the Rush or Flag, should be a yard, or four foot deep, to the bottom
of it, thou must go, if ever thou will drain it to purpose, or make the utmost
advantage of either floating or draining, without which, thy Water cannot have
its kindly operation: The truth is, otherwise the benefit might happen to be
no greater then the Patients, who incurred a Dropsy in his cure from a Fever;
whereas by this means there is a double benefit, the first whereof comes by the
commodity of watering, the second, by the dreining Trenches necessarily annexed
thereunto: And whereas the aforesaid Author commends watering or floating as an
help to boggy, rushy, quagmiry Land, I suppose no benefit, but hurt would arise
thereby to such Lands, if these dreining Trenches did not open the passages of
the obstructed Springs original causes of the Bog or Rushiness, as well as let
out the Water newly introduced by the floating.

The time of the operation for this improvement, must be when the Grass is all
off the ground, for else the soil will stain it that comes along with the
Flood: Often watering is good, but to keep it long in a place, breeds the Rush.
By this very Husbandry, Mr. Blithe brings precedents of improvement of Land,
from Eighteen pence, to Thirty shillings an Acre; and Mr. Plat, from One
shilling to Five pounds.

Another remedy for dry and light ground, such as abound in Sand and Gravel, is
Marl, an Earth most commonly slippery, or greasy to the touch, sometimes blew,
sometimes gray, otherwhiles yellow, now and then red, always fryable, so that
it will slack after a shower, and not grow afterward hard or crusty, as Clay
does, but easily resolves to a dust or powder: It saddens Land naturally, and
so will turn Rye Land as to make it fit for Wheat, Barley and Pease, and
therefore must not be used twice or thrice together, without some other more
rarifying compost to intervene, such as ordinary Dung is; if you lay it down
from Tillage, it is requisite that all Marled Land be first well dunged.

Chalk also I have seen used with very good success in Hampshire, upon the
Downs there, which are of so dry a nature, that it is grown Proverbial there,
that their Ground requires a shower every day in the Week, and on the Sunday
two; and Mr. Blithe affirms, that in Hertfordshire, by Chalk, the Improvement is
made on Barren, Gravelly, and Flinty Lands.

Mr. Blithe reports thus of Lime, that it is a suitabler Soil for light sandy
Earth, then for a warm Gravel; it is improper for a wet and cold Gravel, but for
a cold hungry Clay worst of all; for, says he, Lime being once slacked and
melted, is of a cold nature, and will sadden exceedingly, contrary to its
nature, in the Stone, for it turns light Land into such a capacity, that it
will bear exceeding good Lammas Wheat, or mixed Corn: About twelve or fourteen
Quarter of Lime serves an Acre, it may as well be over, as under-limed; after
Liming, till not long, but return to Pasture.

Number. 4. Remedies for accidental annoyances and hindrances of Improvement,
particularly the ways to destroy Fern, Heath, Ant-hills, Moss, Rushes,
Rest-harrow, Broom, or any such Weed or Shrubs that infect the ground: Whether
liming of Corn prevents blashing, the effects of that and Brine in Improvement:
Concerning Moles, and the ways to destroy them or drown them; a way of
Antipathy, as to this effect, in Animals and Vegetables to the Bodies of their
own kind, when they are in the way of corruption: Mr. Blith's way of
preserving Corn from Crows, Rooks, etc.
When any Land runs to Fearn, Heath, or Anthills, Mossiness, Rushes, coldness,
or any other Weeds or Shrubs, as Goss, Broom, Furz, etc. The most proper and
improving remedy, is, to plow it three or four year, and then lay it down in
good heart. In which operation, care must be had to plow up the Weeds clean,
and burn the Roots of them in heaps, which warms the ground, and to give it
convenient dunging every year, for so the greater shall the improvement be.
This Land must be cast into Furlongs, that the Furrows may convey the Water one
to another into a general Trench, that it lie not upon the Land.

If the Land be cold and moist, lay it the higher on ridges; if hot and dry,
sandy, or the like, let it lic flat, that it may better retain the Rain water.

Be sure you Plow up the Rushes, Brakes, or other annoying Weeds, and for fail
let some body, with a Spade, follow the Plough, to root up such as are left
after the Culter and Plow-share.

Harrow this new broken ground with weighty, sharp, and long tined Harrows,
such as it is a Teems work to draw, that uneven places may be torn up, and good
store of mould raised. Cover your Seed with two or three sorts of Harrows, each
Harrow having tines thicker then the other: some put weights upon the Harrows
in the first, and a Thorn under them in the last operation.

After four years Tilth, lay down your Land, and that upon a Crop of Wheat or
Rye, not on a Summer Corn, for so the Soard will come the sooner, especially if
the Crop be sowed thin, and as early as may be: If you will double or treble
the Improvement, the Husbandry of sowing Clover-grass, spoken of in the first
Chapter, will here come in most properly. This last Plowing, regard that the
Ground be laid down smooth, yet on ridges if the Land be cold, and unless the
Land be of exceeding strength, fail not to manure it, by dung, or otherwise,
this last season of plowing.

Mr. Blithe reports, and Mr. Hartlip likewise, That the natural helps to
preserve Corn from blasting, is the steeping of it in thick fat water, or Lime
water, Urine or Brine, or the mixing of Lime or Ashes, with Corn well wet and
moist, that so it may cloth it self with the finest of the Lime or Ashes, etc.
so as it may fall clothed all over to the Earth, and so be covered therewith;
But I believe he was mistaken in the applying of the Medicine to the prevention
of the right and proper disease: I have heard such who practiced these
Medicines, affirm, that they have generally, and with reasonable good success,
used those remedies to prevent smootiness; but the very last year it was
observed, that where those means were used, the blast did as much harm, as on
the adjoining Lands, where there were no such Applications made to the Seed.
And blasting being the perishing of the tender Kernel, by reason of a Wind
(which from the effect is sometimes called a red Wind) that too sharply, and it
may be with some Venom breathes on it at its first beginning; I see no reason
that such infusions or applications should be any defense, for it comes from an
outward violence, and therefore it is most usually seen, that not half a Tree
only, but half a bough shall be blasted, while the other half of the same,
that grows by one and the same nourishment, remains free, sound, and well
colored.

There is a procedure mentioned among Mr. Speeds notes, for Liming Corn that
carries a good probability of advantage with it. First, The Grain was steeped
in strong Brine of Salt, that would bear an Egg twenty four hours, and then
being laid S. S. S. with Lime that is there, was laid a layer of Corn first,
and then a layer of Lime, and then again a layer of Corn, etc. the Lime cleaved
to the Wheat, and was sowed on Ground not worth Two shillings an Acre; the
effect was, That it bare as good a crop of Wheat as ever was seen in England,
and afterward three Crops a year of Clover, exceeding good, one whereof was
equal in value to a Crop of Wheat: This being matter of Fact, I believe it, as
to improvement by fertility, because the Brine works very considerably in small
proportion, and Lime in this juncture may do well, both to fertility, and
defense of the Grain against Grubs, and Insects, and Worms, that abide in the
Earth; but surely as to blasting, and Crows and Birds that spoil the Corn in
the Ear, it has no influence.

Moles by watering are drowned, or driven up to so narrow a compass, that they
may be easily taken; I have known them to have been forced to leave their holes
to run upon the Turf, to save their lives from the Water-flood. Mr. Blithe
relates, That one Spring, about March, one Mole-catcher and his Boy, in about
ten days time, in a ground of ninety Acres, being just laid down from Tillage,
took about three Bushels, old and young; they were not to be numbered, most of
them being young and naked, and this he only did, by casting up their Nests,
which are always built in a great heap, of double bigness to the rest, most
easily discerned, and then the old ones would come to look their young, which he
would snap up presently also: At another Season then March, which is their time
of breeding, such success is not to be expected. In other times the best way
is, if there be any Hedges near, to set the Gins or Traps there, for their
ordinary roads are in such Hedges, and other places they cast up, are but of
uncertain use; as when they intend forage for one time, though it may be that
they mind the use of that passage no more at all. Bellonius advises to bury
Moles in those places, whence you would drive the rest of that Vermin; and
there may be somewhat in that remedy: For many living Bodies have a great
dislike to, and antipathy against the putrified Bodies of their own kind: Thus
Worms, putrified at the Belly of a Child outwardly, and the powder given
inwardly, are esteemed as Medicines destructive to the Worm in the Belly,
though the latter way is by some thought to breed more then it kills. Nay, in
Vegetables it is agreed, That a young Orchard will not thrive among the Roots of
an old rotten Orchard, the reason whereof, some suppose to be the antipathy of
the young, against the old putrefying Roots; but of this effect, other reasons
may be as probable.

There be some other remedies for the same annoyances, as, particularly, for
the destruction of Fearn, the Author named gives this prescription: In the
Spring, when the Fearn begins to grow a little above the Grass, while it is
young and tender, take a crooked Pole, or piece of Wood about six foot long
coming in at one end like a Bow, or made like a blunt Sith; with this strike
off all the heads of the Fearn, as low as you can, even to the ground, if
possible; do this the second or third time, and it proves generally a certain
remedy. The reason, as I suppose, is the putrefaction of the Fearn, it being a
very moist Muscilaginous Plant, by its own juice, and the moisture of the
Earth, by which the very Roots themselves come to be corrupted, or else the
deprivation of all the Buds that germinate from the Root, by cutting off the
Sprouts so unseasonably.

For Ant-hills, to destroy the Insects, and take the hills down, this manner is
prescribed; Divide the upper Turf into five or six parts, then take it down
with a turfing Spade to the bottom of the Banck, the Turf being cut as thin as
can be under the roots of the grass; then take out the Core of the Bank, that
when the Turf is returned to its place, it may lie there lower somewhat than
the surface of the Earth, that the moisture, which will be a certain
destruction of the Ants, may a little reside there: This must be done in
November, December, or January, that the Roots of the Grass may the better take
to the ground, before hot weather comes in the Spring.

Among Mr. Speeds notes, there are these Recipts, take red Herrings, and
cutting them in pieces, burn the pieces on the Mole-hills; or you may put
Garlic or Leeks in the Mouths of their Hills, and the Moles will leave the
ground. I have not tried these ways, and therefore refer the Reader to his own
trial, belief, or doubt.

I had almost forgot to mention the change of Seed from grounds of a contrary
nature, which by the experience of Husbandmen is found very advantageous, and
is thought to prevent smootiness. It Is the custom in Buckinghamshire, for those
of the Vale to buy their Seed from the Chiltern, on this account; and this
experiment is found profitable in Wheat, Barley, Pease, and all Field Grains;
and not so only, but also in Garden Plants.

For the preserving early or late sowed Corn, or the same when it begins to
corn in the Ear, from Crows, Rooks, or Jack-Dows, Mr. Blithe has invented this
Scarecrow: You must, says he, kill a Crow or two, and take them into the Field
where they haunt, and in the most obvious, plain, perspicuous places, make a
great hole of two foot over, and about twenty Inches deep, on the highest
ground in the Field, which hole must be stuck round about the edges with the
longest Feathers; the bottom must be covered with the shortest, and some part
of the Carcass; and that Turf or Earth that is dug out of the hole, being
laid round upon a heap, you may stick round with Feathers also. One Crows
Feathers will dress two or three holes, and about six or eight holes will serve
for a Field of ten or twelve Acres. The Feathers will remain fresh a Month,
unless store of Rain or Weather beat them much; and then (if needful) they must
be renewed.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Means of Improvement and best culture of such Plants or
Flowers as are usually cultivated in Gardens or Orchards, and of the ways used
for the removing of such annoyances as are commonly incident to them.
Number. 1. Of the annoyances in general incident to Garden Plants.
THe Politician speaks it to be a part of as great skill and prowess to defend
a place already gotten, and to improve it to the benefit of the Prince and
Inhabitants, as it was at the first to arrive at the Conquest; this is alike
true in the Gardinets Province: It is no easy thing with him to raise a stock
of choice Plants, by the several ways of propagation above mentioned, and as
hard to preserve them, being propagated, from destruction by foreign and
intestine violence. For either the sharpness of cold, the torridness of the
Sun, Vermin, or other accident from without, or want of convenient and
nourishable soil of earth and water, and other Elements proportionable to the
plant, will be such internal de^^ciencies, as to cause utter destruction: or
the nastiness and premature, or on the contrary, the tardy and slow germination
thereof will hinder its excellency; or weeds, or other vegetables, may grow up
to its hinderance: and many other impediments there are, which with their
several remedies, as they shall suggest themselves to my thoughts, I shall
propose in the present Chapter, the last of this discourse.

N. 2. Of defenses for choice plants from cold.
One great annoyance to all choice flowers and tender plants, arises from the
violence of the Winter cold, the defense against which you shall have as far as
I am able to give you, and can think of in the following directions.

Let those Bulbous Roots that are tender, such as the great double white
Daffodill of Constantinople, and other fine Daffodills that come from hot
Countries, the Ornithagolum Arabicum, purple Montain, Moly, etc. be planted in
a large Tub or pot of earth and housed all the Winter, that so they may be
defended from the frosts, or else, (which is the easier way) keep the Roots out
of the ground every year from September after the leaves and stalks are past
until February, in some dry but not hot or windy place; and then plant them in
the ground under a South-wall, which are Mr. Parkinsons directions.

Also the late Pine-aple Moly, the Civet Moly of Mompelier, the little hollow
white Asphodill, which though its roots are not glandulous as to be capable of
the last way, yet they are well preserved many years if by housing they shall
be defended from the winter wett and cold.

Rose-bay Mirtles, the Indian Gelsimines, Jucca Indica, Orange trees, must be
housed in the Winter, so likewise, the Cypress, Bay, Piracantha, Myrtle,
Pine Tree, Rose-bay with Spanish seed, or at the least must be covered with
straw, or Fern, or bean-hame, or such like thing laid upon crosse-sticks to
bear it up from the plants till they are two or three years growth and fit to
be removed to their places, Arbutus, or the Strawberry tree, Sea-Ragwort, the
Pomegranate, and the Indian Fig require the same care.

Ferrarius commends a Garden house with Walls of thick moss as good, and so
without question it is, against the Winter cold and Summer heat.

Some defend their Mirtles, Pomegranates, and such other tender plants, either
by houses made of straw like Bee-hives, or of boards (with inlets for the Sun
by casements, or without them) Litter of Horse-stables being laid in very cold
weather about the houses of defense.

It was a custom in Italy, to make such fences for Myrtles (especially when
young) as appears by Virgills Verse.

Dum teneras defendo a frigore Myrtos. The Roots of the Marvel of the World,
Mr. Park. has preserved by art a Winter, two or three, (for they will perish being
let out in a garden, unless it be under a house side or such dry place)
because many times the year not falling out kindly, the plants give no ripe
seed, and so Gardiners would be to seek for seed to sow, and Roots to set, if
this or the like art to keep them were not used: It Is thus, Within a while after
the Frosts have taken the plants that the leaves wither and fall, dig up the
Roots whole, and lay them in a dry place for three or four days, that the
superfluous moisture on the outside may be withered and dried; which done, wrap
them up severally in two or three brown papers, and lay them by in a box,
chest, or tub, in some convenient place of the house all the winter time, where
no wind or moist air may come unto them, and thus shall you have these Roots to
spring afresh the next year, if you plant them in the beginning of March, as
Mr. P. has by his own relation sufficiently tried, but some have tried to put
them up in a barrel or firkin of sand and ashes, which also is good if the
sand and ashes be thoroughly dry, but if it be any thing moist, or if they give
again in the Winter, as it is usual, they have found the moisture of the
Roots, or of the sand, or both, to putrify the Roots.

The same Author takes notice that it is one great hurt to Gilly-slowers in the
Winter, and to all other herbs, to suffer the Snow to lie upon them any time
after it is fallen; for it does so chill them, that the Sun does (though in
Winter) scorch them up, shake therefore off your snow gently, not suffering it
to lie on a day if you can; There is the like inconvenience from Frosts which
corrupt the Roots, and cause them to rot and break, for prevention, take
straw, or Litter of an horse stable, and lay some thereof about every Root of
your Gilly-flowers, especially the best sorts, close unto them upon the ground,
being careful that none lie upon the green leaves, or as little as may be: Let
it lie till March (with its winds) is past. The general Remedy for these and
all flowers, is to be covered with mats, which are removeable at pleasure. The
choicest of all are put in pots and housed.

Number. 3. Of shades requisite to sundry Plants, especially when young, for their
defense from the Sun and Wind.
All sorts of Carnations, Gilly-flowers, and Plants that are tender and young,
especially your April and May Seedlings, are to be preserved and defended from
the violent heat of the Sun, and blasting Winds: I have seen whole Beds of
diverse sorts of young Seedlings, utterly burnt up at their first appearing, by
the violence of two or three hot days. Nor do Seedlings only require this, but
all Plants that are not altogether wild, of how woody substance soever, that
are newly growing, from cuttings, or parts without actual Roots.

Shades are commodious, if not absolutely necessary to many Plants, even when
they are well rooted, as Bays, Laurel, Savin, and most Wood-plants, a mixture
of Shade and Sun to Straw-berries; so that the Lord Bacon wittily advises, to
sprinkle a little ^orrage-seed on the Strawberry-bed, for that the
Straw-berries, under those Leaves, grow far more large then their fellows.

The best shades are made by thin well pruned Hedges drawn through the Garden
or Nursery, or by Mats laid over them, and underpropt by a frame of light
Poles: But all Seedlings, Flowers, or other Plants that are kept in Pots, are
readily removed into convenient shade at pleasure.

Of watering.
Watering with water that has stood two or three days in the Sun, is absolutely
necessary for all Stringy Roots that I know, at their first removals; and at
any time, when any Trees or Plants are weak, by reason of Drought: All manner
of Layers must be specially regarded for matter of watering; and those Plants
which are to be propagated by the circumposition of a Basket of Mould, (to make
Dwarf Plants, as they call them) are specially to be watered in dry times: All
manner of Gourds, Melons, Cucumbers, even in ordinary weather, require this
help, although already firmly rooted.

But there is this difference in Plants, Those that require an hungry ground,
shall well be content with thin water Sun'd: But Kitchen ground is best
improved by fat water, wherein Ordure has been washed.

And some caution is to be had, that by too much water you do not chill or
over-glut the ground, often and little is the best use, and in the Spring and
Autumn when Frosts are feared, it is better watering in the Morning then at
Night; in Summer, the Night I esteem the better Season.

There is a pretty way of watering choice Plants, by wetting a streiner, and so
letting one end of it hang over a Vessel of water, which will draw up the
moisture from the Basin, and let it gently fall down the streiner to the Root
of the Plant.

N. 4. Examples of the best Culture of Hops, and ways of ordering them after
they are first set, taken out of Mr. Blithe.
When, says he, your Hops are grown two foot high, bind up with a Rush or
Grass, your springs to the Poles, as does not of it self, winding them as often
about the Poles as you can, and wind them according to the course of the Sun,
but not when the dew is upon them; your Rushes lying in the Sun will toughen,
says he, but surely better in the shade.

And now you must begin to make your Hills, and for that purpose get a strong
Hoe, of a good broad bit, and cut or hoe up all the Grass in the borders
between your Hills, and therewith make your Hills, with a little of your Mould
with them, but not with strong Weeds; and the more your Hills are raised, the
better, the larger, and stronger grows your Root, and bigger will be your
fruit; and from this time you must be painful in your Garden, and be ever and
anon, till the time of gathering, in raising your Hills, and clearing your
Ground from Weeds.

In the first year suppress not one Cyon, but suffer them all to climb up the
Poles, for should you bury the Springs of any of your Roots, it would die, so
that the more Poles are required to nourish the Spring. But after the first
year, you must not suffer above two or three stalks to grow up to one Pole, but
pull down and bury all the rest. Yet you may let them grow four or five foot
long, and then choose out the best for use. As soon as your Pole is set, you
may make a circle how broad your Hill shall be, and then hollow it, that it may
receive the moisture, and not long after, proceed to the building of your Hills.

And where you began, or where your Hops are highest, there begin again, and
pare again, and lay them to your Hops, but lay the out circle highest to
receive moisture; be always paring up, and laying it to the heap, and that with
some Mould, until the heap comes to be near a yard high, but the first year
make it not too high; and as you pass through your Garden, have a forked Wand
in your hand to help the Hops that hang not right.

Now these Hills must the next year be pulled down, and dressed again every
year. Some, when their Hop bind is eleven or twelve foot high, break off the
tops, which is better then they that have their Poles so long as the Hop runs:
But if that your Hop, by the midst of July, attain not to the top of your Pole,
then break off the top of the same Hop, for the rest of the time will nourish
the branches, which otherwise will loose all, it being no advantage in running
up, to the sto^k or increase of the Hop.

In April, help every Hill with a handful or two of good Earth, when the Hop is
wound about the Pole; but in March you will find, unless it has been tilled,
all Weeds; but if you have pulled down your Hills, and laid your ground, as it
were, level, it will serve to maintain your Hills for ever; but if you have not
pulled down your Hills, you should, with your Hoe, as it were, undermine them
round, till you come near the Principal Root, and take the upper or younger
Roots in your hand, and discerning where the new Roots grow out of the old
sets, of which be careful, but spare not the other; but in the first year,
uncover no more but the tops of the old sets, but cut no Roots before the end
of March, or beginning of April. The first year of dressing, you must cut off
all such as grew the year before, within one inch of the same: and every year
after, cut them as close to the old Roots; those that grow downward, are not to
be cut, they be those that grow outward, which will incumber your Garden, the
difference between old and new easily appears; you will find your old sets not
increased in length, but a little in bigness, and in few years, all your sets
will be grown into one; and by the color also, the main Root being red, the
other white; but if this be not early done, then they will not be perceived:
And if your sets be small, and placed in good ground, the Hill well maintained,
the new Roots will be greater then the old; if they grow to wild Hops, the
stalks will wax red, pluck them up and plant new in their places.

N. 4. Mr. Parkinsons way of ordering the seedlings of Tulips grown.
After the Tulip seed is sown, the first years springing brings leaves
little bigger then the ordinary grass leaves; The second year bigger, and so
by degrees, every year bigger then other. The leaves of the praecoces, while
they be young, may be discerned from the Media's, by this note which I have
observed, ^he leaves of them do stand above ground, showing the small
foot-stalkes whereby every leaf does stand; but the leaves of the Media's or
Serotines do never wholly appear out of the ground, but the lower part which is
broad abides under the upper face of the Earth.

Those Tulips now growing to be three years old (yet some at the second year,
if the ground and air be correspondent) are to be taken up out of the ground
(wherein you shall find they have run deep) and be new planted after they have
been a little dried and cleansed either in the same or another ground, again
placing them reasonable near one to another, according to their greatness,
which being planted and covered over with earth again, of about an inch or two
thickness, may be left untaken up again two years longer, if you will, or
else removed every year after, as you please, and thus by transplanting them
in their due season (which is still at the end of July, or at the beginning of
August, or thereabouts) you shall according to the seed and soil, have some
come to bearing in the first ye^^ after their flowering, some have had them in
the fourth: (but that has been but few and none of the best, or in a rich
ground) some in the sixth and seventh, and some peradventure not until the
eighth or tenth year. But remember that as the roots grow greater that in the
planting you give them the more room to be distant one from another, or else
the one will hinder (if not rot) the other.

The seed of the Precoces do not thrive and come forward so fast as the Media's
or Serotines, nor do give any off-sets in their running down, as the Media's
do, which usually leave a small Root at the head of the other that is run down
every year; and besides are more tender and require more care and attendance
then Media's, and therefore they are the more respected.

This is a general Rule in all Tulips, that all the while they bear bud or
leaf, they will not bear flower, whether they be seedlings, or the off-sets
of elder Roots, or the Roots themselves, that have heretofore borne flowers;
but when they bear a second leaf breaking out of the first, it is a certain
sign that it will then bear a flower, unless some casualty hinder it; as
Frost or Rain, to spoil or nip the bud, or other untimely accident befall it.

To set or plant the best and bearing Tulips some what deeper then other Roots,
I hold it the best way; For if the ground be either cold or lie too openly in
the cold Northern air, they will be the better defended therein, and not
suffer the frost or cold to pierce them so soon, for the deep frosts and snowes
do pinch the Precoces chiefly, if they be too near the uppe most crust of the
earth, and therefore many with good success cover over their ground before
winter with either fresh or old rotten dung, and that will marvellously
preserve them. The like course you may hold with seedlings, to cause them to
come on the forwarder, so that it be after the first years sowing, and not
till then.

To remove Tulips after they have shot forth their Fibers or small springs
which grow under the greater round Roots (that is from September until they be
in flower) is very dangerous, for by removing them when they have taken fast
hold in the ground, you do hinder them in the bearing out their flower, and
besides put them in hazard to perish, at least to be put back from bearing a
while after, as often I have proved by experience, but when they are now risen
to flower, and so for any time after, you may safely take them up if you will,
and remove them without danger, if you have any good regard to them unless it
be a young bearing Root, which you shall in so doing much hinder, because it is
yet tender by reason it bears now the first flower, but all Tulip Roots when
their stalk and leaves are dry, may most safely then be taken out of the
ground, and be so kept (so that they lie in a dry, and not in a moist place)
for six months without any great harm, yea I have known them that have had
them nine months out of the ground, and have done reasonable well, but this
you must understand withal, that they have not been young but elder Roots,
and have been orderly taken up and preserved; the dryer you keep a Tulip Root
the better, so as you let it not lie in the Sun or the Wind, which will pierce
and spoil it.

Number. 5. Of annoyance by Plants growing too thick and near together, and of the
remedy thereof, and improvement by pruning Trees, and setting them at great
distances; plucking off the young Germens of Garden-flowers, to make the rest
more fair; of the sizing of Turnips, Carrots, Parsneps; of Weeding.
There is no greater hindrance to the growth and thriving of all Vegetables,
than to be so crowded together, that their Roots, Branches and Leaves,
interfere one with another; and therefore in all Orchard and Garden-plants,
whose Fruit and Flowers you require fair, and whose growth you would have
considerable, provide that they keep their distances: Apple Trees, Pear Trees,
Plum-Trees, Cherries, and other Plants, are of diverse statures, both in regard
of one another, and of their own kind: Some Apple Trees grow to much greater
growth than some other, Pears to a greater growth then Apples, so that it is
hard to appoint a certain distance for Trees in an Orchard, twenty Foot is
space little enough for Standards of common Apples or Pears; but a certain rule
is, to provide that one Tree shade not another, and therefore let the lowest
Trees, if you intend to make the most of your ground, be set South, and the
highest Pear Trees stand to the North; for should the higher Trees stand South,
they would cast their shade over the rest of the Orchard.

This Doctrine of setting Trees at such distances, the Husbandman hates, for
two reasons; one is, Because it takes too much of his pasture from his Cattle;
and the other is, That by this means he can have but little Fruit in his
Orchard for many years: Therefore to gratify his covetousness, I shall propose
him this practicable way of following and prosecuting my intention to the
utmost profit, without putting him to the mentioned grievances. For first, I
shall order that he plant his Orchard full of Trees, within three yards
distance one of another, or somewhat nearer, if he please; these shall bear him
after a year or two, as many apples as a well grown Orchard usually carries:
then let him set this ground to a gardener, that it may be dug and dunged
seasonably, to bring Kitchen Plants, for from this Culture the Trees will
receive great advantage. When the Trees are big enough, with the defense of a
strong stake, and some Bushes, to be secured from Cattle, let him transplant
them into Pastures of the best Soil, where they may stand at great distances to
be shelter to Cattle, and no prejudice to the Grass: One Tree at such distance,
shall bear as much as ten in some Orchards, and thus continue removing, as your
Trees grow big enough. I count five or six inches about to be a good Size, the
bigger they are, the more care must be taken in their removal, that the Root be
transplanted entire as may be, without much dis-branching it, or cutting away
the spurs. And it is convenient, that in the heat of the first Summer, wet
Straw be laid upon the ground about the Root.

If you have no pasture to transplant into, sell your Trees to those that have,
or set your Standards of strong Trees at twenty foot distance, and fill up the
rest of the ground with Kentish Codlings, Nurse Gardens, Burts, which are cheap
Plants, being propagated by Suckers, or with dwarf Trees, made by
Circumposition, which may be cut down when the other Orchard thickens too much,
and in the mean time are very plentiful bearers.

Pruning Trees is used likewise chiefly to this intent, that the Rays of the
Sun may have passage to all parts of the Tree, so that it is a good way for the
Pruner to look upward from the North side of the Tree, upon the South and East,
and to cut off, or rather make thin, such boughs which he finds so thick as to
obstruct the Sun: All Boughs likewise that gall others, and that are actually
dead; providing always, that the Boughs taken off be as little as may be,
though the more in number, that so the sap may make up the Bark, and the Tree
be not decayed by lopping of the greater stems: Which is very perversely done by
most Gardiners, who think that to Prune a Tree, is to cut off the lower B^ughs
bigger or less, because they see small watery Fruit grow on them; whereas if
the Sun was let in upon them, their Fruit would be rather more, than less
forward, than that which grows in the middle of the Tree: I count it general,
that the under-Boughs ought never to be cut off, but when you have respect to
grass Roots, or other Garden-stuff, which grows under the Trees, or for the
security of the Trees from the browsing of Cattle, so that to bare the Trunck
of the Tree, for four, five, or six yards, as some do, and nourish it to no
profit, but to bear and carry up the head to another Region, that Rooks may the
better build therein, is a common folly, and ridiculous, if well considered.

And for lopping off great Boughs, I may here add an observation touching
Elms, which is, That if the top of an Elm of any bigness be cut off, the rot
will immediately begin there, and by wet, and other accidents, run downward,
and cause that hallowness which is ordinarily seen in Trees of this kind.

Another Rule of pruning, is, That the Gardener never cut off those Boughs
which are set and adopted for bearing, which is easily known for Roses
particularly: Rasps and Vines always bear upon a fresh sprout, shot forth the
same Spring, so that the more you prune a Rose, Rasp, or Vine, the more fresh
sprouts of that Springs growth are emitted, and the more such sprouts, the
greater number of Roses, Rasps and Grapes succeed, unless some particular
accident destroys them. Many Fruits bear from the shoots of the antecedent
Spring, as the generallity of Apples, Pears, Peaches, Nectarins, Aprecots: Many
seem to grow from Wood of longer growth, but in that a man may be easily
mistaken, because a very little, and a Spring of scarce discernable growth, may
be enough to serve as a foundation to the pedal of the Blossom or Fruit, which
standing on the old Wood, it may be thought that the pedal or stalk of the
Fruit, stands immediately on the Wood, and that there was no Spring
interceding. Sometimes the Blossoms of the same Tree, stand both on the Wood of
the present and antecedent Spring, as it is frequently seen in Kentish
Codlings, Nurse Gardens, great bearing Cherries. But where ever the Blossoms
are, and there are many Buds fitted and prepared for bearing, they are
discerned by the skilful Gardener, and may be seen by any person, for those are
more full in their shutting up than other Buds are, and stand not so close made
to the stem of the Branch whereon they grow, and contain more small leaves in
their Body then other Buds, being, as I apprehend, the actual rudiment of the
ensuing Blossom: Such Boughs therefore, whereon plenty of these full made Buds,
or inchoate Blossoms are seen, the Gardener spares, if he is wise, for the
present year, and (where he may) prunes off such whereon he sees no such
propension to fruitfulness.

The fairness and largeness of Flowers and Fruits are very much augmented, by
preventing the running up a multitude of Stalks from the same Root: The
Gardener observes this precisely in his Carnations and Gilly-flowers, not
suffering above one, two, or three Spindles upon such Roots or Stools where he
intends a greater fullness and largeness in the Flowers; and in Anemones the
observation is, That if any of the Latifolia's bring a single Flower, on the
same Root with the double, then the cause usually is, the standing of too many
Eyes or Germens, and their depending from the same Root; and the remedy in like
manner, nothing else but the taking off those Off-sets or Suckers, and parting
them from the principal Root, which otherwise is robbed of that matter which
might raise in each Flower, both fairness and multiplicity of leaves.

Shrubs likewise that bear either Fruits or Flowers, are to be governed in like
manner; Goos-berries and Currants degenerate to smalness, or bear not at all,
without this care and provision, that the Suckers be taken away: This
observance is likewise absolutely necessary to Damask Roses, for when they grow
up to thick Bushes they scarce bear, whereas being kept to grow in one single
great stem, being orderly cut, and not growing in the shade, they bear
exceedingly.

For Vines, it is a Proverb, make your Vine poor, and it will make you rich:
The fewer principal Stems are left, the more it bears, and the reason is,
because the Grapes are borne upon shoots of the same Spring; and those shoots
then most plentifully arise, when the head of the Vine, in proportion to the
Roots, is least, as it is seen in all Trees, which shoot out more immediately
after their heads are lopt, than any other year. Pompions follow the nature of
Vines, and as two or three stems is enough for the Vine, so two or three
runners, and no more, ought to be permitted by him that intends the greatest
fairness of this fruit.

It may be proper enough here to speak of Weeding and Sising: The latter
operation is, the plucking up Roots or Plants that are of use in themelves, but
offensive to others in the same Beds, by reason of their nearness: Thus Turnips
are howed up when they stand within a foot distance each of other; for it is
best, when at their full growth their leaves touch not one another: Carrots are
plucked up, when they are an inch Diameter at the head, for then they are of
use, or sooner, if the thickness of their standing require it; and this is
general for all Roots, Parsneps, Radish, Skirrets, that grow by Seed: Some sow
(as I mentioned above) Parsneps, Carrots, Radish, and Sallad Herbs in the same
Bed, first Sising out the Sallad Herbs and Radish, then the Carrots as they
grow, leaving the Parsneps till Winter, by which means their ground is always
full, yet by reason of the Sising in due times, never over-burthened.

The culture of Straw-berries requires somewhat like sizing, (viz.) The cutting
off, immediately after bearing, the spires and strings, which would multiply
unto too many Roots and Branches, to have plenty of fair Straw-berries: Nor is
this once only to be done, but as often as they spring anew, so often are they
to be taken off, until the time of the Blossoms draws on; I have seen some that
were not over curious to tear off the strings by harrowing up and down their
Beds of Straw-berries with an Iron Rake.

Some make a question, Whether Plants of the same kind, by reason of a
supposal that they require the same parts for nourishment; or Weeds and
Grasses, by their too great vicinity, may create more annoyance to their
Neighbors, I decide not the question, nor can reconcile the Gardener to Weeds,
whilst he finds his strongest Plants destroyed by them: I have seen many
Trees in a well grown Nursery, spoiled by the Grass that grew amidst them; and
as I remember, the very Bark of the Trees themselves was rotted, by a dew cast
upon them from the Grass: I have likewise observed, a strongly grown Quickset
of White Thorn, to have been destroyed by Alexanders, which it is at the
Readers choice to account as a Weed or cultivated Plant.

The time of pruning generally is the dead of Winter, for such Plants as
consist of a Woody substance: Pompions are deprived of their superfluous
creepers, and other Gourds likewise, at their first time of springing and
divarication of their Branches. The season of pruning for acceleration of
ripeness, is when the fruit is made, and begins to grow to some bigness, as
generally they are, about Mid-Summer: Some have a third time of pruning
Wall-Fruit, viz. at the time when the Fruit is taken off, as they do Roses
likewise, when the Flowers are newly gone.

To cut the Branches or Sprigs of a Flower or Tree quite off, cannot properly
be called pruning, yet sometimes it proves an useful operation for such Plants
as are stunted, as they call it, in their growth; Trees that are crooked, or
have been bitten with Cattle, or are grown old: Thus Wood-men count it best to
cut those Stools of under-Wood down to the Root, that it may begin to shoot
afresh, that have been much browsed by Cattle; and cut down their hedges to the
Roots when they grow old and Mossy.

Gardiners likewise, if by reason of a sharp Winter their Anemone's are pinched
with cold, and starved, let them not immediately run to flower, but cut off the
first Springs to the ground, that in a better Season they may lay a stronger
Foundation for the bearing of fuller and fairer Flowers.

N. 6. Of Pismires, Earwigs, Canker and rottenness in choice Plants,
Catterpillars, Mossiness, Barkbinding, Bursting of Gilly-flowers.
There are many other annoyances to Vegetables, and generally sooner reckoned
than remedyed, a word or two I shall speak of as many of them as come into my
mind: Pismires, especially those of the black kind, are exceeding troublesome
in some Gardens, for they climb the highest Trees, and spoil the Fruit, are
commonly esteemed remediless. Bellonius, who took exceeding pains for
improvement by Vegetables, commends the decoction of Broth made of any sort of
Spurge, as very efficacious for this purpose: Some draw them to one place, by
burying Carryon where they most resort, and then scalld them with seething
liquor.

To diverse choice Flowers, but Carnations and Gilly-flowers especially,
Ear-wigs are a great annoyance: Mr. P's way of setting Beasts Hoofs among the
Flowers, upon sticks, to take them, is used of every Body here, and generally
liked: Some that set their Flowers in Pots, set the Pots in Earthen Plates,
with double Verges, containing water, or water mingled with soot in the outward
verge, to drown the Vermin that shall attempt the pots, and rain water in the
second, which may pass through the holes of the pots to water the earth therein
contained.

The rottenness and hollowness, that through age and too much moisture bulbous
and tuberous roots, and the best Anemones especially, are subject too, is thus
provided for; the disease must be laid open, and the rottenness cut out so,
that in the root there be no capacity left to hold water, which I have often
mentioned to be a great Enemy both to them and Tulips. Ferrarius, and some
others, prescribe Plasters of Rosin, Turpentine, and Wax, to apply to the
Cicatrices of the wounded Root, which notwithstanding, I have no great regard
for. The same Author says, that in moist Winters Anemones do best in pots, in
dry, better in beds: With us they are seldom potted, but the borders for these
Plants are usually laid on pretty high ridges, as Husbandmen lay their Corn
Land in deep and moist ground, to prevent the mischiefs that usually happens by
too much wet.

Mr. Parkinson says, That if you perceive that your Gilly-flower leaves change
any of their Natural fresh color, and turn yellowish, or begin to wither in
any part, it is a sure sign that the Root is infected with some canker or
rottenness, which will soon show it self in all the rest of its branches, and
therefore betime, (else it is in vain) advises that you cover all, or most of
the Branches, with fresh Earth, or else take the fairest slips from it, or
according to Art lay it: This way of Mr. P. may be applied unto other
Vegetables.

I know no better way to destroy Catterpillars, Palmer worms, and other Vermin
of that kind, then by crushing their Eggs; as soon as they are laid upon the
leaf by the Fly, some brush them off with wet clothes: It Is observed, that the
little Fly that usually blows upon the Cabbage, chooses such Plants as are
youngest, and especially those that were raised in hot beds, or endured least of
cold in the Winter preceding.

Mossiness of Trees, comes generally either from the barrenness or coldness of
the ground, and therefore I count it vain to attempt the removal of it, without
taking away the cause, and making the ground better; which being done, it will
be proper enough to rub down the Trees in a wet day with an hair cloth.

Trees likewise are sometimes Bark-bound, especially such, the grain of whose
Bark runs round the body of the Tree, as in Cherry-trees, and not straight
upward, according to the grain of the Tree, as in Apples, Pears, etc.

For the Bark is not generally, as I suppose, nourished by apposition of a new
rind to it, as the substance of the Tree is, but by interposition of
particles, amidst the particles of the rind already made, which if it be so
hard as not to admit other Particles for its enlargement, there can be no new
addition of a new coat of wood, which ought to accrue every year to the Tree,
for there will be no space wherein the sap may ascend, which is to be hardened
into such new wood, unless by renting the whole coat of Bark, which sometimes
happens.

The remedy for this disease, both in Cherry-trees, and other Trees, those
chiefly whose Barks are hardened and gro^n crusty by long standing in shadowy
places or barren ground, is, that the year after their removal, or upon
addition of better soil in straight grained Barks; and without either removal
or addition of soil in Cherry-trees, and other cross grained Barks, or in any
Trees whose Barks rend of their own accord, the Barks be slit from the top of
the Tree to the bottom of the stock, and that according to the bigness of the
Tree, in one, two, or three places: This is a Chyrurgical remedy that never
fails, and is easily performed.

Carnations and Gilly-flowers, happen to be often deformed, especially those
which are of the largest sorts, by bursting the Calyx, Cellar, or Case wherein
they are set, and the usual remedy is, to enlarge the five incisions
proportionably, by cutting them deeper with a Knife; or to steep ordinary Beans
in Water, and then slipping off the outward coat of the Bean, to put it (the
end being taken off) upon the head of the Carnation, which will keep the five
lips together, and preserve the Flowers from breaking; nor will these Hoops,
made of the coats of Beans, shrink with the heat of the Sun, as those made of
the rind of Willow, slipped off for the same purpose, usually do: One Bean is
long enough to make two hoops, for they need not be above a quarter of an inch
in breadth.

Number. 7. Of improvement and melioration of diverse Sallad Herbs, by blanching or
whiting, from the French Gardener, and Mr. P's Observations.
The Lettuce-Royal, being, upon removal, set at a foot or more distance, when
you perceive that the Plants have covered all the ground, then in some fair
day, and when the morning dew is vanished, you shall tie them in two or three
several places one above another, which you may do with any long straw, or raw
hemp, and this at several times, (viz.) Not promiscuously, as they stand, but
choosing the fairest Plants first, to give room and air to the more feeble, and
by this means they will last you the longer: The first being blanched, and
ready before the other are fit to bind.

If you would blanch them with more expedition, you may cover every Plant with
a small earthen pot, fashioned like a Goldsmiths Crucible, and then lay some
hot soil upon them, and they will quickly become white.

Concerning Succories, Thus,

There are several kinds of Garden Succories, different in leaf and bigness,
but resembling in taste, and which are to be ordered alike.

Sow it in the Spring upon the Borders, and when it has six leaves, replant it
in rich ground, about eighteen inches distance, paring them at the tops: when
they are grown so large, as to cover the ground, tie them up, as I instructed
you before, where I treated of the Roman Lettuce; not to bind them up by
handfuls, as they grow promiscuously, but the strongest and forwardest first,
letting the other fortify.

There is yet another fashion of blanching it: In the great heats, when instead
of heading, you perceive it would run to Seed, hollow the Earth at the one end
of the Plant, and couch it down without violating any of the leaves, and so
cover it, leaving out only the tops and extremity of the leaves, and thus it
will become white in a little time, and be hindered from running to Seed.

Those who are very curious, bind the leaves gently, before they interre them,
to keep out the Grit from entering between them, which is very troublesome to
wash out, when you would dress it.

Remember to couch them all at one side, one upon another, as they grew being
planted, beginning with that which is nearest the end of the Bed, and
continuing to lay them, the second upon the first, and the third upon the
second, till you have finished all the Ranges.

I find likewise two other manners of blanching them for the Winter; the first
is, at the first Frosts, that you tie them after the ordinary way, and then at
the end of eight or ten days, plucking them up, couch them in the Bed where you
raised them from Seeds, making a small Trench cross the Bed the height of your
Plant, which will be about eight Inches, beginning at one end. In this you
shall range your Plants side by side, so as they may gently touch, and a little
shelving; this done, cover them with small rotten dung of the same bed: Then
make another furrow for a second range, in which order, lay your plants as
before, continuing this order till you have finished: And last of all, cover
the whole Bed four Fingers thick, with hot soil fresh drawn out of the Stable,
and in a short time they will be blanched. If you will afterward cover the bed
with some Mats placed aslant, like the ridge of a House, to preserve them from
the Rain, they will last a very long time without rotting: When you would have
any of them for use, begin at the last which you buried, and taking them as
they come, draw them out of the range, and break off what you shall find
rotten upon the place, or that which has contracted any blackness from the
dung, before you put it into your Basket for the Kitchen.

A second manner of preserving it, is, to interre it, as before, in furrows of
Sand in the Cellar, placing the Root upmost, least the Sand run in between the
leaves, and you find it in the dish when they serve it. You need not here
bestow any dung upon them, it is sufficient that the Sand cover the Plant four
fingers high; and when you take it out for use, before you dress it, shake it
well, the Root upmost, that all the Sand may fall out from the Leaves. Take
them likewise as they happen to lie in the Ranges.

His directions for blanching Endive, are, that you cover it only with
reasenable warm dung, and drawing it out at the first appearance of Frost, that
you keep it under Sand in your Cellar, as you do other Roots, but first it must
be almost white of it self.

The whiting of Endive, Mr. Parkinson commends, when done in another manner:
After, says he, that they are grown to some reasonable greatness, but in any
case before they shoot out a stalk in the midst for Seed, take them up, and the
Roots being cut away, lay them to wither for three or four hours, and then bury
them in the Sand, so as none of them may lie one upon another, or if you can,
touch one another, which by this means will change whitish, and thereby become
very tender, and is a Sallet for Autumn and Winter. Fennel is whited by some in
the same manner, for the same use.

To procure the Chard of the Artichocks (which is that which grows from the
Roots of old Plants) you shall make use of the old Stems which you do not
account of. For it will be fit to renew your whole Plantation of the Artichocks
every five years, because the Plant impoverishes the Earth, and produces but
small fruit.

The first Fruits gathered, you shall pare the Plant within half a foot of the
ground, and cut off the stem as low as you can possible; and thus you will have
lusty slips, which grown about a yard high, you shall bind up with a wreath of
long Straw, but not too close, and then environ them with dung to blanch them.

Thus you may leave them till the great Frosts, before you gather them, and
then reserve them for your use in some Cellar, or other place less cold.

N. Of Acceleration and Retardation of Plants, in respect to their Germination
and maturity.
Acceleration of Plants in their Germination and Maturity, is ranked, by the
Lord Verulam, among the Magnalia Naturae, and is an operation that all Artists
can do something in: though I know not any that arrive to the performance of
those grand proposals of some Writers, as that of raising Sallads within an
hour or two, whiles a Joint of Mutton is rosting: The late King of France, has
been reported to have known a secret process that would produce this effect,
and to have esteemed it at a high rate: Cichory was the Seed, as I was informed
by Monsieur Gissonius, which he was wont to raise so soon into his most famed
Sallad.

I have tried diverse of the Experiments proposed for procuring those wonderful
speedy Germinations, and that by long infusions in Milk, strong Muck-water, and
sometimes have added unquenched Lime unto the infusions, according to the
Experiments set down by a late Writer, who asserts, that by these usuages,
Beans, Pease and Parsley Seed would grow up in few hours, and can only give the
Reader this fruit of my pains, that without any further trial, he may from my
experience be ascertained, that the advantage in acceleration is exceeding
inconsiderable by any of these means. It was, by my trial, found much less than
I imagined could have been by any infusion, for none of the Seeds (of which I
tried many sorts) came up the first three or four days; and except Radish, none
came up in a fortnights time, though they were sown in August, and watered.

I have likewise tried the Experiment of Ashes of Moss: First, burning a great
quantity of Moss to ashes, and then taking some of the richest Garden mould I
could procure from a rotten hot Bed, and mixing it with the ashes, I moistened
it with exceeding good Muck-water several times, and let it as often dry in the
Sun; this I did in glazed pans, that the Salt might not be washed from the
Earth; then I sowed Seeds, some unsteeped, some steeped, and in the beginning
of September set the Pans upon the Leads of an House: But in effect, the Sallad
sprang not up that day, nor many days after.

The next day I set into some of the same kind of Soil, made up of Moss-ashes
and dung, watered as above, diverse Seeds steeped in Spirit of Urine alone,
Spirit of Urine with water mixed, Spirit of Urine mixed with phlegm of
Elder-berries, all withont success, though I set them in a Pan of Earth over a
gentle fire, to speed the Germination: Formerly I have seen Spirit of Nitre
tried, but to no purpose; some speak of working these sudden Germinations by
somewhat made of Salt, Spirit, and Oil, chymically united into one Body, which
when they shall discover unto us, or otherwise make us possessors of, we shall
have a better opinion of the related experiment.

As to ordinary Acceleration, hot Beds are the most general and catholic help,
and certainly forward Germination much: For Cabbage-seed sown in the Spring on
a hot Bed, I have seen, to bring Plants that have in their growth and bigness
overtaken such that were re-planted before the antecedent Winter, and so were
in the ground, at the least, half a year before them; and that in the same sort
of Soil. It is certainly true, that the Germination will be the more quick, the
hotter the weather is; and the larger the bed of Dung is made, and the more it
is helped by the reflection of Brick Walls, or other like advantages: The
manner to make these hot Beds, is mentioned in the first Chapter, and their use
there described.

Mr. Speed, Cap. 14. Of Musk-melons, Gives us from the testimony of two Noble
Men, this advertisement: The way, says he, to have as good Muskmelons as any
are in Italy, without the unwholesom use of the Muck-Beds here in London, is
confirmed by the Earl of Dorset. Plant them under a Wall, Pale, or Hedge, on
the Sunny side, with very good Mould purposely prepared, and underneath the
mould lay a quantity of fresh Barly-straw, and by this easy means, using the
seasonable covertures and necessary furtherance, you may attain to your
uttermost desire, without any further trouble. But if you do discern the Straw
to make the Earth too hot, thrust in a Stake through the mould to the straw,
that the vapor and heat may evaporate and pass forth.

For Acceleration of maturity in all Wall-fruits, the practice of Midsummer
pruning is every where almost observed, which is, the cutting off all parts of
the shoots that are grown out far beyond the Fruit, and do otherwise take away
both the sap that might advantage the Fruit, and the benefit of the Sun
likewise: This operation in Vines is called gelding, and is usually transferred
to Pompions, Musk-melons, and Cucumbers, and like Fruits, to accelerate their
ripeness: The Joint beyond the last Cluster of Gourd, is the place where the
Creepers or Shoots are to be nipt off in Vines or Gourds: In other Wall-Fruit
the Gardener clips them at a convenient distance from the Wall, so as not to
take away all the shade from the Fruit, which in some proportion is necessary
that the Fruit be not dried up, and burnt upon the Tree by the Torrid heat of
the Mid-summer Sun, in such places where his rays are reflected from a Wall or
Floor, or both.

It Is also observed that in Wall-Fruit, or any other that requires a reflected
heat, in order to the ripening of the Fruit; the lower the Boughs are spread,
the sooner the Fruit ripens on a Wall: And in Standards, the lower and nearer
the Earth any Plant is kept, the better shall it ripen, by reason of the
reflection made from the surface of the Earth; which if be bare from Weeds, is
equal to the reflection from some Walls. In France, Vines have no other
reflection but this, being tied to stakes, and not suffered to grow above a
yard high; and in many places of England this only advantage, without Walls,
brings Grapes to that maturity which is ordinary in our Island.

The twisting of the stalks, whereby the Bunches of Grapes are joined to the
body of the Vine, done at such time when the Grape is come to its full bigness,
is practiced by some for the accelerating maturity; and it may be, that by this
twisting, the Channels, that might otherwise carry more crude Sap into the
Grape, being broken, the heat of the Sun may more speedily reduce that which is
already possessed by the Grape into sweetness, then if sour and undigested
Juice were still supplied from the Vine.

Retardation, or hindering Plants from running to Seed, is likewise of use for
the preservation of the Root and Leaf; for there are many Plants, whose last
endeavor being to bear Seed, presently die in all parts of them as soon as the
Seed is perfected.

Of this kind are your best Carnations and Gillyflowers, the hope of whose
continuation is only by those Slips that are not like to bring Seed the
present year; to this kind also belong diverse Herbs, such as are Parsely,
Scurvy Grass, etc. The Spindles therefore of all such are timely to be cut off,
the younger the better, in choice Plants, for fear of killing the Root; and
hereby plenty of Branches and Off-sets, or side-Plants, will arise from the old
Stem, Stool or Root. Nay, it is observed by our Gardeners, as like wise by
Ferrarius, in his Chapter of the culture of Tulips, That if those Flowers are
suffered to grow to Seed, the Bulb thereby is certainly much emaciated, and
sometimes utterly perishes; and therefore, on all hands it is counted good to
gather Tulips as soon as may be.

Some of the ways of Retardation are generally known, as particularly the
experiment of plucking off Rose Buds as often as they spring, until the time
you intend they shall proceed to flower; or the making the Pranches of the Rose
Tree bare of Shoots once or twice in the Spring, for this purpose, are not
unfrequently practiced. And I have been informed by a Person of Credit, that at
Bristol he saw Raspes sold for four pence the quart at Michaelmas, which were
thus retarded, by setting the Plants late in moist ground the same year: All
which ways, I suppose, may well be transferred to other Plants of like nature,
and this last way is not so common. I have before mentioned its use for the
retardation of the Flowers of Anemonies.

There is some use of retardation to all such Plants which so prematurely
blossom, that they be subject to blasting by Spring-Frosts; I know nothing used
to prevent this annoyance, but the opening of the Root, and suffering the Snow,
and Snow-water, to lie thereon and chil the ground; but of the benefit or
danger of this remedy, I have no experience.

Number. 8. Of melioration by Richness, or other convenient Minera in the Soil,
for the feeding and better nourishment of several Plants: Of artificial Begs,
and the change of Seed, as a means to bring fair Flowers: Of Exossation of
Fruit, or making it grow without Stones.
The Lord Verulam reckons up the making of rich composts for the Earth, among
the Magnalia Naturae, and most advantageous projects for the use of Man; which
richness, if the modern Hypothesis of Chemists be right, consists in good
proportions of salt Spirit, and Oil; which are principles generally deficient
in barren places: Dry Earth, and cold crude water, or these two mixed together,
every where abounding: I say, good proportions, because it is most certain,
that no Vegetable will grow in too great abundance of Salt or Spirit, or other
violently hot and corrosive matter: Sut and Pidgeons-dung abound much with
volatile Salt; and I have this year, upon a cold moist Clay, seen excellent
advantage to the Grass thereby, it being only strewed thin on the Grass before
the Spring, but of the two, the Sut was best: upon a dry Sand I should not have
expected the like improvement by its mixture, and in these composts themselves
by reason of abundance of salt, without due proportions of other principles
mixed, nothing will grow, for there is no fermentation without mixture of
contrary parts or Elements; and all dunging is in order to fermentation: Hence
Columella commends Pidgeon-dung, because, says he, Prae caeteris terram facit
fermentare, the earth generally abounding in its own nature, with coldness and
moisture, so that the richness in Salt or Spirit, temper; a Soil well, which is
deficient in these principles, for those Vegetables that require in the ground
so sprightful a Fermentation. For diverse states of ground, and various
Fermentations are required to different Plants, nor can any one Soil
indifferently and equally agree with them all according to that of Virgil.

Nec vero terrae far omnes omnia possunt,
Fluminibus salices, crassisque paludibus alni
Nascuntur; steriles saxosis montibus orni,
Littora myrtetis laetissima: denique apertos
Bacchus amat colles, Aquilonem and frigora taxi.
Aspice and extremis domitum, cultoribus orbem
Eoasque domos Arabum, pictosque Gelonos
Divisae arboribus patriae: sola India nigrum
Fert ebenum, solis est thurea virga sabaeis, etc.
All Grounds cannot all things bear: The Alder Tree
Grows in thick Fens; with Sallows Brooks agree.
Ash craggy Mountains: Shores sweet Myrtle fills,
And lastly, Bacchus loves the Sunny Hills:
The Yew best prospers in the North, and cold,
The conquered Worlds remotest Swains behold:
See the Eastern Arabs, the Geloni, these
Countries are all distinguished by their Trees:
The blackest Ebony from India comes,
And from Sabaea Aromatic Gums, etc.
Saffron, Tulips, Anemones, and many other Plants which be propagated by
bulbous or tuberous off-sets, require for their melioration, to be planted in a
light Soil, that receives some mixture of fatty earth with it: some commend
Cow Dung rotted, above all other soil, to be mixed with other sandy earth for
these Plants.

Boggy Plants require, even when they be planted into Gardens, either a natural
or artificial Bog, or to be placed near some water, by which there is great
improvement to all sorts of Flags, and particularly, as I have observed to
Calamus Aromaticus.

The artificial Bog is made by digging a hole in any stiff Clay, and filling
it with Earth taken from a Bog; or in want of such clay ground, there may be
stiff Clay likewise brought in, and laid to line the hole or pit in the bottom
or floor, and the sides likewise, so thick, that the moisture may not be able
to get through: Of this sort, in our Physic Garden here in Oxford, we have one
artficially made by Mr. Bobart, for the preservation of Boggy Plants, where
being sometimes watered, they thrive as well as in their natural places.

However it is true, that there is variety of usuage for Plants of different
nature, yet for the generality of Plants, they are best improved by a fat,
rich, deep, moist, and feeding Soil; and it is highly his interest that intends
a flourishing Orchard, or Kitchin-garden, to improve his ground to the height;
diverse Flowers reap benefit by the same advantage; as particularly, Carnations
and Auricula's; though for these, and some other Plants, the rotten Earth that
is usually found in the Bodies of hollow Willow-Trees, is thought to be a soil
more specifically proper, especially when mixed with other rich Soil thoroughly
rotten.

That wild Plants may be meliorated by transplantation into better Soil, and
by being set at greater distances, is no more then what was before noted, and
agrees with that of Virgil, Georg. 2.

Sponte sua quae se tollunt in luminis auras
Infoecunda quidem, sed laeta and fortia surgunt
Quippe solo natura subest; tamen haec quoque si quis
Inserat, aut scrobibus mandet mutata subactis
Exuerint, Sylvestrem animum, cultuque frequenti,
In quascunque voces arts, haud tarda sequentur.
Nec non and sterilis quae stirpibus exit ab imis
Hoc faciet vacuos si sit digesta per agros.
Nunc altae frondes and Rami Matris opacant:
Gescentique adimunt foetus, uruntque ferentem.
Plants that advance themselves t'etherial Air
Unfruitful be, but strong they prove, and fair;
Because they draw their nature from the Soil:
But these, if any, graft; or shall with toil
Transplant, and then in cultured Furrows set
Their wilder disposition they forget:
By frequent culture, they not slowly will
Answer thy labor, and obey thy skill.
So they that spring from Poots, like profit yield,
If you transplant them to the open Field,
Which now the Boughs of th'Mother-plant do shade,
And th'Off-sets stop her growth, and make her fade.
The Seed of wild Cichory that grows every where in the Fields, being sowed in
rich Garden-soyl, is so improved, that we esteem it ordinarily another Plant,
and give it the name of Garden-Cichory, though indeed they are the same. But
besides the goodness of the ground, and greatness of the distances, there may
be some advantage to Field-Plants by changing the Seed, by which action the
fermentation is supposed to be augmented in the Ground: Now these changes are
either from one kind to another, as from Wheat and Barley, to Beans and Pease,
which is the usual Husbandry of common Fields, or in the same Seed: Of the
former way, Virgil gives this Precept.

-- ibi flava seres mutato sidere farra,
Vnde prius laetum siliqua quassante legumen,
Aut tenues faetus Viciae, tristisque Lupini
Sustuleris fragiles calamos, sylvamque sonantem.
Georg. 1. By Mr. Ogilby thus rendered.

-- There changing Seasons thou shall Barley sow
Where pleafant Pulse with dangling Cods did grow,
Where brittle stalks of bitter Lupines stood,
Or slender Vetches in a murmuring Wood.
Of changing the Seed of the same kind, besides Field Corn, which is generally
changed every third Season at the farthest, examples may be had in Carnations
and Gilly-flowers, the Seed of which, being taken from the best Flowers, are
much meliorated by alternation and change of Ground; and it is like this
Experiment may hold in the seeds of other Flowers.

Another Experiment, is the exossation of Fruit, or causing it to grew without
stones or core, for which effect, the grafting of the upper end of the Cyon
downwards, has been asserted to be a certain way: That the Cyon so grafted
will grow, I have experience; but whether in time they will produce the
forementioned effect, I greatly doubt: And if they should, I much mistrust
their expectations would not be answered, that intended melioration thereby:
For the Fruit, certainly by the loss of the natural Seed, would be very much
dispirited, and loose the generosity and nobleness of its nature, as Animals
do, and as Vegetables sometimes; as particularly I have observed in Barberries,
for I have seen a Tree that bare every year on most Bunches two sorts of
Barberries, the one full, and of a deep red; the other of a pale color, and
thin substance, and inquiring into the cause, I found the former to have Stones
in them, and the latter destitute, which were, as I supposed, thereby
emasculated.

N. 9. The conclusion of the Treatise, with one or two choice observations of
the wise and good Providence of God, which may be seen in the admirable make of
Vegetables, and fitness to their ends, which are not generally taken notice of,
but are, with many more, overseen by men busy in the affairs of the world.
It was the sin of the Heathen that they did not rise in their minds from the
contemplation of the beauty of the creatures, to consider how such lineaments
could be made, and to glorify thereby the wisdom of the Maker. The
particulars are infinite, that ordinarily to a man exercised in things and
thoughts, suggest themselves to avouch Providence, and consute the vanity of
the old Epicureans in the simplest of their Tenets concerning the framing of
this world, of things by a casual concurrence of small motes intricated in
their motion, by mere chance into such beautiful bodies.

It is no unusual Theme to treat of the admirable handsomeness and beauty in
the composure of diverse Vegetables, and to show how Nature does (...) in them,
and characterize out such variety of elegant figures, that every plant shall
seem to have more of Mathematical art, than the Knot wherein it is set: And
it is generally noted, that Gods Providence is exceeding good in appointing
Nature, and making it her end to continue some individual is of every Species
for the preservation of the kind. That likewise the same Providence has
approved to its self a most excellent wisdom in the choice of most certain
means, for the attainment of this end, it has been mine, and may be an easy
consideration to any other.

For what other end, thought I, are there so many coats, and such cotton
vestment to seeds, but to defend their tenderness? Why such hard stones to
other, but to hinder their premature springing, whereby the coldness of Winter
would kill (as in Aprecots, Peaches, Nectarines, etc.) their tender seedlings?
Why is the ground in Woods covered with Moss, but that Nature intended it as a
preservation to seeds fallen upon the Turfe in the violence of Winter Frosts?
Why has Nature beset shrubs with prickles, but to defend the tender buds in
which the hope of future growth is reposed from the browsing of cattle in the
Winter? and that this was the end of Providence in it may be conjectured from
hence, because those shrubs which are not all over thorny, have a guard of
Thorns directly upon the bud and not else where, as if singularly intended for
its security. So it is seen in the Gooseberry, Hawthorne, Barbery, Locust, all
Roses wild and cultivated that are not all over thorny, so that the thorns are
not useless excrescencies as some have supposed, but as profitable as boughs
or leaves.

Why have those plants that bear no seed with us, as Poplar and Willow, in
every bough of any bigness, a propensity of sending forth Roots, by the
occasion of which, each branch is made an entire tree or plant? or if that
faculty be wanting, why then is there so great disposition and forwardness to
propagate themelves by off-sets, as in the Elm, poplars etc. And where there
can be no off-sets, as in Mushroomes, wherefore else has Nature made the plants
propagable by the smallest of their shreds and inconsiderable parts? Why else
is the Indian Fig, that has no stalk, propagable by its leaf alone?

Why have plants such an eagerness to flower and seed, and such an impatience
of being disapointed? if you pull off the bud of the Rose it will spring
again, and not only the Rose, but most other fruits and flowers have the same
desire to produce their seeds, and have given occasion to Artists to make hence
Rules of Retardation.

Why do the Seeds stick close to the Pedall by which they are joined to the
stock until they are mature and fit for propagation, and then fall off in the
most fit season for due preparation to future growth?

Why do those plants that usually die every year yet if they are disappointed
of running to seed, continue to survive many years, even so long till they are
permitted to run up to leave seed behind them? But that they are appointed by
the universal Law of Nature, not to desert their order, till they have
produced others after their own kind.

Lastly, Why are many Seeds at their first ripening so exactly fledged with
wings, but that by the wind, they may be carried to such places as may be fit
wombs to receive and feed them, until they attain from the being of seeds the
measure and stature of perfect plants.

Another Specimen of the Wisdom of the God of Nature, may be seen in the
regular situation of Branches, and the orderly eruption of Buds, upon every
Vegetable; for, notwithstanding the report of my Lord Bacon, Not. Hist. Cent.
6. Observe. 588. That Trees and Herbs in the growing forth of their Boughs and
Branches, are not figured, and keep no order, but that when they make an
eruption, they break forth casually, where they find best way in their Bark
and Rind: I find my self necessitated to refer that to an exceeding Wisdom,
which his Lordship refers to chance and casualty: For if I observe aright both
Buds and Leaves, and all eruptions, stand so on every Vegetable, as to serve
most fitly for most necessary ends.

As to Leaves, the Learned Doctor Brown has made the Quincunx famous, which
may with as great aptness be applied, and, I think, more universally to the
situation of Buds, or Germens.

This Figure had its name from the numeral Letter V. because the points
therein, are the same with the points or Angles in the said Letter, and because
that as the Letter is capable of infinite multiplications, so is the Figure,
and both in not unlike fashions: The number thus, V. X.XX.XXX. the Figure thus,
three arrangements of dots signifying different arrangements of leaves

Of this Quincunx I shall propose three sorts. 1. The thicker, as in the Figure
a. The thinner and less full of points, are either obliquely set, as in the
Figure b. or more strait, as in the Figure c. three more arrangements of dots
signifying different arrangements of leaves

The most thick sort of Quincunx has its examples rather in Leaves then Buds,
for after this manner stand the Leaves upon most Martagons and Lilies, diverse
Spurges, and Sedums, on which it is most visible, when the Plants run up to
Seed. Trickmadam, Spurge-Laurel, Marshmallows, when the stock is exceeding
rank and big, for otherwise it is sufficed with the regulations of the third
Figure: The leaves of Firre-tree, Pine Tree, etc.

The second, or oblique and single Quincunx, may for the most part be observed,
both in the Buds and Leaves that arise from Trees, and such other Plants whose
Stalks are round; as in the Oak, Elm, Hasel, Apples, Plums, Cherries, Pears,
Willows, Sallows, Osiers, Black-thorn, White-thorn, Goos-berries, Currants,
Roses, Fenel, Cichory, Thistles of most sorts, Docks, But-docks, Sothern-wood,
Rue, Seseli-Aethiopicum, Sweet-maudlin, Common-mercury, Dulcamara.

The third direct and oblong Quincunx is most observed in Plants of a square
stalk, as Water-Betony, Fig-wort, Lavander, Mints, St. John's Wort,
Clowns-All-heal, Rhus-Myrtifolium, Mother-wort, Nep, Colus-Jovis.

Yet it is not unfrequently seen on other Stalks also, as the Sycamore, Elder,
Maple, Dog-tree, Ash, Hysope, Nettles, Hemp, Willow-weeds, Tree-Spurge,
French-Mercury, Scammony of Montpelier.

And it is to be observed, that in diverse of those Plants whose Stalks are set
with Joints, and those Joints with a beautiful Circle of Leaves, proper to each
Plant, contrary to the Quincuncial situation, the Germens, notwithstanding,
are found to follow the order of this lost mentioned Quincunx, as may be seen
in Madder, Goos-grass, Ladies-Bed-straw.

Or if that order be left, yet it is not left to the disadvantage of the Plant,
but generally it has in exchange some other handsome and proper method of
Leaves and Buds. Thus Linaria-Quadrifolia, has on each joint three, four, five
or six opposite Leaves, and under each Leaf a Germen, which arise to Branches,
uniformly set upon the same round Stalk.

And as to the particular make and frame of those Plants, which in the standing
of their Leaves cannot be said to follow the order of any Quincunx, yet they,
instead of those elegant Tessellations, are beautified otherwise in their site
with as great curiosity. I cannot think of a Plant, according to the ordinary
estimation of men, that is more contemptible then that which grows ordinarily
in Bogs, or miry Ditches, and is called Great-Horse-tail; yet if any man please
to disartuate the whole, and take particular view both of the parts and
conjuncture, they will find the frame exquisite enough to deserve a better
esteem; for both Stalks and Leaves are made up of diverse pieces, framed, as it
were, in joint work; all which pieces bear exact proportion each to other; and
each receives other by indented terminations, which form very beautiful
Coronets on the pieces so received; then at a convenient distance, above each
of these Coronets, there arises a very beautiful Circle of Leaves, and these
very Leaves are made up of hollow pieces articulately, and proportionably
joynted, in imitation of the elegancy of the joints of the Stalk it self.

And generally the Leaves that stand not according to the Quincunx, either
stand in joints, in the fashion of the Burgonion Cross, as on Cross-wort; or in
a Circle, as on most sorts of Madder, Ladys-bedstraws, Woodroofs; or in some
other profitable, fit and beautiful positure: And though in these creeping and
entangled Plants, irregularities are not unfrequently seen, yet even in these
irregularities themselves, there often seems to be a greater curiousness and
most proper order; as particularly, Madder is generally tetragonal, and
notwithstanding its circular border of Leaves, usually send; forth Buds,
according to the manner of Mints, and other Plants of a apiece Stalk: This
I have sometimes seen in many of its Branches to vary and turn hexagonal, or to
have a stalk with fix ribs, upon which declension the order of the Germens was
thus most fitly altered; upon each rib or angle there was always one leaf, and
upon every other rib, a germen under the leaf; which I found so placed, that no
one rib did bear the Bud in the two succeeding joints; so that if in the first
joint, the three Buds stood on the first, the third, and the fifth ribs, then
in the second joint, the Buds stood on the second, the fourth, and the sixth,
and so interchangably to the very top.

Now by these scituations of the Buds, according to these Observations, it
always is so found necessarily to be, that if two Buds stand on the same joint,
as in the third Quincunx; those that stand on the same height, keep always the
contrary sides; and further, if the two lowermost stand North and South, the
two next immediately above them stand East and West. And in the second, or
oblique and single Quincunx, when the Buds stand not two at the same height,
the second stands on the opposite side to the first, and the fourth to the
third; and then likewise, if the first and second stand East and West, the two
next above them stand North and South.

I may give notice that to find these methods, and to expose them to the eye,
a profitable way may be to clip off the stalks of the leaves near the Branch,
especially in the first and most thick sort of Quincunx; in the second more
single Quincunx, it may not be amiss to slit the Bark and take it off, for it
being laid plain and flat, the Quincuncial order will the better appear; the
third sort is visible to the eye, as the Plant grows.

Care also must be had, that observation be made on such Plants whose stalks
are not twisted, for the twisting of it brings the Leaves and Germens out of
order: There may besides these, some other methods appear not here mentioned,
but even in them, he that pleases to consider them, I doubt not, will find
constancy for the most part to their rule; or if they have no rule, there may
likewise a reason be found why it was good they should be without.

But it is most certain, that these are the general methods, and these
contrivances of the eruption of Buds, serve for diverse excellent ends exceeding
fitly, and so are arguments, (how poor and inconsiderable soever these
Observations may seem) that they came not out thus by the lucky justlings and
stumbling of blind chance, but by the Providence of a most Powerful, Skilful,
and Wise Artist and Author. For they serve first to procure a fit and
proportionable shade for the Stalk and Fruit; neither of which in their
tenderness, can endure the scorching Sunbeams, for by keeping this method and
order, they communicate their shade to all parts of the Tree or Plant; whereas,
should they break out in a disorderly fashion, some parts of the Plant, and
some Fruit would be exposed to all weather, where no Buds or Leaves come forth;
other parts would be too much shadowed by the two thick eruption of Buds. This
order likewise sets out the Boughs and Branches of each Tree into such
positions, that one may not easily fret upon another, or gall its neighbor, but
grow in a distinct room, every Branch having his proportionable allowance in
that circumference which the whole Tree takes up, whereby it may, without any
impediment to others, grow to a convenient bigness; otherwise came many Buds
out together without method, they could never arrive at any bigness in their
future growth, nor attain to good Fruit, or pleasant Leaves and Flowers, but
would run out into such thick Crows-Nests, as I have observed sometimes to
happen in Plum-Trees by an error or mischance of nature, in the parturition or
bringing forth of the Germens. The observation likewise of these methods must
needs be of use to the Equilibration and uprightness of Trees, for should all
the Boughs break out in one place, or on one side, the heaviness of that side
or part, would bend down the body into a crookedness, and deprive it of that
uprightness and straitness, which is the most useful site of most Plants; and
those that are without these regulations, are generally such as are made to
grow upon and twist about other things, and not to bear up themselves, as
Bind-weeds, and the like.

And now I am come thus far, there comes into my mind that excellent
Animadversion which the most wise King made, when he had considered the several
Purposes, Travels, Businesses, Changes and Overtures, which happen to us poor
men while we are under Heaven, in their several Seasons; as particularly, in
the days of our Birth, and the days of our Death, in the days of our Planting
or being Planted, and those of our Plucking, or being Plucked up: When Men get
and Increase their Estates, and when they Loose, grow Bankrupt and are undone;
in the days of their Jollities, Dancings, Lovings, Wooings and Embracings; as
likewise in those cloudy and dull Seasons, when satiety of Enjoyment,
indisposition of Body, or other unhappy accidents, has begot Peivishness and
Loathing; and when Tears and Mourning contristate all their glory and beauty:
Concerning the seasonableness and fitness of all the Estates of men, their
conditions, accidents and disasters in their several times, this is his
observation, Eccl. 3. That he had seen the travel which God had given the Sons
of men to be exercised therewith, and found, that God by his providence had
made every one of the things made, beautiful in its time: Moreover, that he had
set the age in the middle of them, yet so, that no man of them can find out
the work that God makes from the beginning to the end.

I shall not Apologize for translating (...) the age or (...) in the middle of
them, because I know the words, and methinks the sense and context bear it
best, but shall beg leave by a parallelism to apply it to the present matter;
the placing, not the timing of things, and to express my thoughts thus: That
God has made every thing beautiful in its place, order and situation, and
particularly every part of every Vegetable, and has also sot the world so
curiously wrought and modeled, in the middle of us, yet so, that by reason of
our various affairs and businesses, and other fancies, no man can find out the
work that God has made from the beginning to the end.

Lastly, I must beg leave to make the same conclusion and Appendix to the
Observation, that the King has there appos'd to his, (viz.) That the true and
only use that can be made of those elegancies and beauties which in every
aspect suggest themselves unto us, is no other, but that we Rejoice in them and
in their Maker, and do good in this life. I mean, that we puzzle not our selves
overmuch, nor discruciate our Spirits to resolve what are the causes, and what
the manner of causation of the apparent effects of Gods great power, any
further then as our labor may serve for those excellent and firmly together
interwoven ends of rejoicing and doing good, and the rather, because of the
experiment which this most wise Prince, who was helped by the great riches of
his then puissant Kingdom, (and so not impeded by those wants that usually
discomfit private persons in such enquiries) made himself and published
concerning his own fearch, Eccl. 1. That he gave his heart to seek and search
out by Wisdom concerning all things that are done under Heaven, and found this
to be a sore travel, that God had given the Sons of men to be exercised
therewith, And further, That with much wisdom there is much vexation, and he
that increases knowledge, increases sorrow.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by Tho: Robinson.
A Treatise of Fruit Trees, showing the manner of Grafting, setting, pruning,
and ordering them in all respects, by Ra: Austin, in 4o The spiritual use of an
Orchard or Garden of Fruit trees, set forth in diverse similitudes, according to
Scripture and experience, by R. Austin 4o Observations on some part of Sir
Francis Bacons Natural History, as it concerns Fruit Trees, Fruits and Flowers,
by Ra. Austin. in 4o An Answer to Mr. Hoards Book, entitled, Gods love to
mankind, by W. Twiss D. D. in Folio.
Books written by Dr. Owen.
THe Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance examined and confirmed, in Folio.
Socinianism examined, in the confutation of Biddle's, and the Racovian Catech.
in 4o A Review of the Annotations of H. Grotius, in reference to the Doctrine
of the Deity, and satisfaction of Christ, in Answer to D. Hamraond, in 4o Of
the mortification of sin in Believers, in 8o Of Temptation. in 8o Of the Divine
original Authority, self evidencing light and power of the Script. in 8o Of
Schism, in reference to the present differences in Religion. in 8o A Review of
the true nature of Schism, in Answer to Mr. Cawdrey, in 8o A Defense of Mr. Jo:
Cotton, and a Reply to Mr. Cawdrey about; the nature of Schism. in 8o Diatriba
de Justitia di vina. in 8o
Books written by Dr. Wallis.
MAthesis Vniversalis, sive Arithmeticum opu^s integrum. in 4o Adversus
Meibomii, de proportionibus. 4o De Angulo Contactus and semicirculus. 4o De
Sectionibus Corticis Tractatus. 4o Arithmetica Infiniterum. 4o Eclipseos
Soluris observatio. 4o Commercium Epistolicum de questionibus quibusdam
Mathematicis nuper habitum. 4o Men's sobria serio commendata, Conciolat: and
Expositio Epistolum ad Titae. 8o Grammatica Linguae Anglicanae. 8o Due
Correction for M. Hobbs. 8o Hobbiani Functi dispuncrio. 8o
Books written by Dr. Zouch.
CAses and questions resolved in the Civil Law. 8o Juris and Judicii Fecialis,
sive Juris inter Gentes. 4o Specimen Questionum Juris Civilis cum designatione
Authorum a quibus in utramque partem disruntur. 4o De Legati delinquentis
Judice competente dissertatio 12o Eruditionis Ingenuae specimina, scil. Artium
Logicae, Dialect: Rhetor: and Moralis Philosoph: 12o Questionum Juris Civilis
Centuria. Non minus ad Legum Genoralium Cegnitionem, quam ad studiosum
Exercitationem, accommoda, in 12o newly published.
HYpothesis de Officiis secundum human ae rationis dictata seu Naturae Jus,
unde Casus omnes Conscientiae quatenus notiones a Natura suppetunt dijudicari
possint. Ethnicorum simul and Jureperitorum consensus estenditur, Principia and
Rations Hobbesii Malmes: ad Ethicam and Politicam spectantes. in examen
veniunt. Aut. R. Sharrock. 8 COnciones Octo ad Academicos Oxon: Latin habitae.
Epistolarum Decas, Authore Hen: Wilkinson. S. Th.D 8o Rob: Baronii, Philos:
Theologiae Ancillans. 12o Rob: Baronii, Metaphysica Generalis and special:
omniaead usum Theologiae accomodata 12o Latium and Lycium, Graeca cum latinis,
sive Gram: Artis in utraque lingua lucidissima, Aut: To: Wickens. 8o Manuductio
ad Theol: Polemicam. Aut: Jo: Prideaux, S. Th. D. 8o Exercitatio Theolog. de
Insipientia rationis humanae, Gratia Christi destitutae, in rebus fidei-Aut. R.
Cross, Col. Linc. 4o Fur pro Tribunali, Examen Dialog: cui inscibitur Fur
Praedestinatus. Auth: Geo: Kendal, S. Th. D. 8o Miscellania, sive Meditat: and
orationes, etc. Auth: Ed: Ellis, 12o Homerus 'EPAI' ON: sive Comparation Homeri
cum Scriptoribus Sacres quoad normam loquendi. Auth: Zach: Bogan. 8o
Exercitationes a'iquot Metaphysicae. per Tho: Barlow 4o A complete Concordance
of the English Bible, by Rob: Wickens. 8o Immortality of humane Souls asserted,
in answer to a Tract, entitled, Man's mortality. 4o The want of Church
Government, no warrant for a total omission of the Lords Supper, by Hen: Jeans.
8o A Mixture of Scholastical and Practical Divinity, by Hen: Jeanes. 4o
FINIS.

