TARQVIN BANISHED: OR, THE REVVARD Of LUST.

Written by J. Q.

Quicquid boni cum discretione feceris, virtus est; quicquid sine discretione
gesseris, vitium est: virtus enim indiscreta pro vitio deputatur. LONDON.
Printed by J. G. for John Stafford at Fleet-bridge, and Will: Gilbertson in
Giltspur-street. 1655.

To the READER.
Kind Reader,
I Am confident when thou do seriously consider the unworthiness of the
Action, thou will not approve of the Actor; for, after he had received those
many civilities which the house of chaste Lucretia could afford, he with an
unheard of violence, requited her with a most barbarous rape, which cause not
only his banishment, but likewise cost the lives of many of the Nobility; nay,
and the King himself in defense of his son, the Ravisher, lost his life; and
that which wa^ more than all, was the loss of Lucretia's life: for the sense
of the fact, made her stab her self; so died poor Lucretia, blameable in
nothing but that she was the Author of her own death: So Reader, as thou have
before read Tarqiun^s offense, thou may now read his punishment.

And so farewell.
TARQVIN Banished: OR, The reward of Lust.
It Is seldom known that good effects attend
Upon bad causes; Tarquin, to befriend
His own desires, contaminates his will,
And blasts that virtue, which before did fill
The ears of Rome, and made it to proclaim
The future hopes of his increasing name.
May we not judge him wise that loves to spend
Ere he begins, some thoughts upon the end
Of his design, had Pha'ton done the same
He had not turned the world into a flame.
The acts of Catiline, were noble deeds
Compared to this, this horrid act exceeds
Horror it self; Oh what obdurate breast
Can read this story, and not be oppressed,
If ever mischief practiced to excel
It was in this, this Masterpiece of Hell.
Had chaste Lucretia followed the advice
Of lustful Tarquin, what a lavish price
Had she laid out for sin, and yet the shame
Had been far greater, and her death the same
If not much worse, for had she not revealed it,
TO had proved her death to think she had concealed it.
Ah poor Lucretia! what a fatal guest
Did thou receive, how was thy roof unblest
And thou mistook, how sadly did it prove
Thy table fed a Serpent, not a Dove:
It was thy face, Lucretia, that was spread
With lavish beauty, and there Tarquin fed.
'Twas not to take repose, he made such speed,
Nor was it the arrant of his mind to feed
Upon such Cates, his eye had chose a dish
Which pleased him, and awhile he fed by wish:
And then by force, Lucretia, thou did find
The raging stomach of his lustful mind.
But ah! the sad effect records the crime,
Unparalleld in any Age, or time;
For weeping Lucrece had no other shield
Than virtue, which denied her heart to yield:
And this all can be deduced from hence
That virtue was oppressed by violence.
But at the last, when violence had gained
The upper-hand, vile Tarquin was constrained
To fly, and leave Lucretia to lament,
Though not conceal her woeful banishment:
Judge Ladies her distress, poor heart, her grief
Inclined her more to death, than to relief.
She wished to see her Lord, yet knew not how
To look upon him with a steadfast brow;
But when she thought on his abused bed,
Ah then! ah then! her much dejected head:
Out streamed a fountain, nothing could prevent
The nimble current of her discontent.
At last he comes, and with a fearful have
In his expatiated arms embraced
His Lucrece, who being tutored by here fears,
^ke all in sighs, and answered him in tears:
Whilst gazing Colatine with raging speed,
Stamped out these words, I will revenge the deed.
So out he runs, but hark, a groan recalls
His hasty feet, for his Lucretia's fall,
Wounded by her own hand, whilst he in vain,
Lifts up her corpse, and lays it down again:
At last poor soul, she moved her dying head
And cried revenge, for thy Lucretia's dead.
Ah! who can grieve with Collatine, whose grief
Admits no equal, but transcends belief,
He now is fled, and ransacks all about,
Contrives and plots to find young Tarquin out;
At last arriving where the Army stayed,
The colors of his grief he thus displayed.
Dear friends, the liberality of my speech
Is humbly free, and fluent to beseech
Your joint assistance, to revenge a wrong
Whose intricacy neither pen, nor tongue
Is able to express: Alas! and I
Can only shadow forth my misery.
My dear Lucretia, In whose breast did lie
My life, is fled unto eternity;
She Is dead my Lords, and ah! if that were all
In time I might endeavor to recall
My grief, she is (my Lords) I speak what is true,
Ravished by death, nay, and by Tarquin too.
And if a worser fate than this can be,
I Will swear there is no grief, no misery;
But to be short dear friends, I cannot now
Dispose of so much time, as to utter how:
But the last sound of my Lucretia's breath
Was this, Revenge my rape, condole my death.
The frightened air had hardly cooled his words,
Before the Nobles with their soon-drawn swords
Vowed a complete revenge, and to effect
Their vowed designs, they suffered no neglect
To harbor in their breasts, but with a speed
Winged with affection they performed the deed.
If I should lavish time, and here relate
Their several battles, and their several fate,
I might perplex my Reader with a story
Of this man's ruin, and of that man's glory:
But at my period, I should only say,
Tarquins bad cause, not valor lost the day.
But let me say that in this fatal cloud
Of ruin, Tarquins father that did crowd
Into the arms of danger to maintain
His sons vile cause, deservedly was slain:
And when young Tarquin heard his fathers fall,
He grew more desperate, lost himself and all.
Thus captive to his foes, his sullen breast
Swelled more with malice, than it seemed oppressed;
For like a base Usurper, having thrust
Himself in power, his actions must be just:
Nay, though the sword decline him, yet would he
Make all Authentic by obduracie.
A brazen conscience finds a brazen face,
Tarquin, because he knew his foul disgrace
Could not receive addition, grew so bold,
So peremptory, that what others told
To him in grief, he in disdain, replied,
Lucretia's rape, is Tarquins only pride.
Since she is dead, the thing that grieves me most
Is this, to think my spirits cannot boast
Of more enjoyments; but I Will cease to crave,
For I am well content with what I have;
And if I die, I charge thee grief, forbear,
I am a Roman, and I scorn to fear.
Oh how I Will vex my foes! for when as I
Am brought to death, they shall not know I die;
He steal into a slumber, none shall say
They saw me die, although perhaps they may
Report they saw me dead; and Rome shall cry,
Tarquin has taught us how to scorn, and die.
Well then, where is their revenge? for I am sure
A Roman spirit never can endure
To triumph ore a corpse; when smiling death
Shall put a period to my yielding breath;
What then? Alas! they only can concur
In this one sense, he died a Ravisher.
Thus, thus insentiate Tarquin seems to show
More raging courage, than repentant woe;
His inconsiderate thoughts think all things good,
And slightly wade through poor Lucretia's blood:
Go forward Reader, and thou wilt quickly find
An altered Tarquin, and a changed mind.
The Consuls after serious debate
Concerning Tarquin, did agree, his fate
Should not be speedy death, but should be sent
Into a sad and lasting banishment,
That so his more deliberate thoughts might find
A way to call his villainy to mind.
This news arriving unto Tarquins ears,
He soon begins to argue with his fears:
Must I be sent, cries he, into a place
Of no society, and there embrace
Perpetual woe? Oh! how could Hell contrive
So great a plague to keep me still alive?
What shall I do in this extreme abyss
Of woe and torments? Death had been a bliss
Beyond expression; Ah! must wretched I
Be so accursed to offend, and yet not die?
Oh most prodigious fate! vile Ixions wheel
Had been a paradise to what I feel.
Methinks I feel a sudden fire that burns
My very soul, my former comfort turns
To present woe; methinks I grow, and swell
Into a larger Continent, sure Hell
Has changed his mansion, and intends to make
My troubled Tenement his fiery lake.
Since so it is, I Will labor to prevent
Their swelling laughter with a forced content.
I Will hide my sorrows from their gazing eyes,
I Will seem to slight their malice, and despise
Their scornful mocks, but yet my heart will tell
My heart, that all within me, is not well.
But stay, shall I forget my self, was I not born
A noble Roman, and shall I not scorn
Their impositions; shall I now relent
And prove a willing slave to discontent?
Fie Tarquin, fie; but hark, I hear the sum
Of my destruction, now my foes are come.
Courage my heart, be bold, and let them find,
Thou have an Army in thy strengthened mind,
And if a pressing sigh should chance to fly
Our of the prison of thy mind, deny
It to be thine, so shall thy prying eyes
See thou disown'st their lavish tyrannies.
Even as the boisterous Ocean, if denied
A present passage for her swelling tide
Swells and looks big, and with insulting waves
Assaults the immoving shore which stoutly staves
Its fury off; but if it proudly swell
Above the banks, it is time to bid farewell.
Even so our Tarquins passion, for a time
Found opposition, but at last did clime
Above his strength, and when it was too late,
He soon deplored his miserable state,
And being cast into a remote place,
He thus bewails his lamentable case.
Ah! what a sad Companion is a heart,
Burdened with guilt; Alas! I can impart
No comfort to my self, all things declare
My ruin, that is attended with despair:
Methinks I have a still continued flood
Before my eyes, of chaste Lucretia's blood.
Nor is my eye disturbed, but my ear
Is grown of late accustomed to hear
Strange dialects, methinks Lucretia cries,
Revenge, revenge my woeful injuries:
And thus my eyes, my ears sadly portend
A present woe, a miserable end.
Thus in a sad discourse vile Tarquin goes
He knows not where, being ushered by his woes;
At last arriving at a shadie grove,
Close by a wanton stream he sadly strove
To mitigate his sorrow, but his fire
Increased above the reach of his desire.
I am enflamed, he cries, could I devise
A way to quench my sorrows with my eyes;
My eye enflamed my heart, my heart combined
With my affections to corrupt my mind;
Thus mind, thus heart, obeyed a lustful call;
Thus lust procured my hate, and hate my fall.
Ah! how these silent fishes seem to sport,
And revel in their cool aquarian Court!
Ah! how they bathe themselves in their own flood,
Whilst I am parboyl'd in a sea of blood!
Lucretia, ah Lucretia! thou did find
A raped body, I a raped mind.
At last the Sylvane Choristers begun
Their warbling notes to the departing Sun,
Which Tarquin hearing with a deep-fetch'd groan
He cried, How more than happy's every one
Of these care-wanting creatures! they are free
From the rude hand of griping tyranny.
And now deploring Philomel begins
Her sad, and melancholy notes, and spins
Her tedious notes unto the smallest thread
As if she meant to strike poor Tarquin dead;
For he no sooner heard her, but he cries,
Sweet Philomel forbear thy tyrannies.
Tell me thou woeful wretch, do not deny
Who was most villain The Poets fain, that Philomel was a Lady of an
incomparable beauty, and being ravished by one Tereus, she importuned the Gods
that she might be turned into a Bird; since which time she sadly deplored her
misfortune, and is vulgarly called a Nightingale.
Tereus, or I;
Was it not he did perpetrate thy rape,
And made thee wish thy self into this shape?
Since which sad time having banished all delight,
Thy sham'd-fac'd sorrow shroud themselves in night.
Let me conjure thee Philomel to cease
Thy high strained notes, for they do much increase
My raging grief; and now, ah now! I find
Horror in sweetness, why art thou unkind,
And wilt not cease? thou shall not ring my knell,
For I Will be gone, so Philomel, farewell.
Away goes Tarquin, Philomel pursues;
The more he flies, she more and more renewes
Her ecchoing notes, he swears, she chants and rears
Her shriller accents to his tortured ears,
Enraged he cries, the Gods did do thee wrong
To take thy woman's shape, yet leave her tongue.
Will not entreaties move thee? will thou still
Send arrows to my soul, and be thus shrill?
Peace witch thou tempt'st my patience, every note
Derived from the Magic of thy throat
Strikes me to death, but ah, I will not hear;
For if thou find'st a tongue, I Will want an ear.
With that he stops his ears, but all in vain,
His fancy turns all Philomels, and strain
Far higher notes; so he, at length let fly
The portalls of his ears, and by and by
More then a flock of Nightingalls, being met,
They thus contrived to pay Lucretia's debt.
First, they encampe about his ears, and send
A party out of notes, which recommend
Themselves unto him, whilst affrightn'd he
Decays, and reels into an ecstasy.
Then they assault him with full bodied notes
Discharged from the Engines of their throats.
But Tarquin, not encouraged to abide
So hot a Charge, falls down, and falling died.
Which they perceiving presently arise
And flockt about him, and picked out his eyes;
From which sad story we may well infer,
That Philomel abhors a Ravisher.
FINIS.

